Brethren in Iniquity: OR, THE CONFEDERACY OF PAPISTS with SECTARIES, For the
Destroying of the True Religion, as by Law Established, plainly detected.
WHEREIN Is showed a farther Account of the Romish Snares and Intrigues for the
Destroying the True Reformed Religion, as Professed in the Church of England,
and Established by Law, and for the Introducing of Popery or Atheism among us;
clearly showing from very Authentic Writers and Testimonies, That the
principal Ways and Methods whereby the Papists have sought the Ruin of our
Religion and Church, from the Beginning of our Reformation, to the present
Times, and by which they are still in hopes of compassing it, are by promoting
of Toleration, or pretended Liberty of Conscience; and that for above these
Sixscore Years the Papists have so craftily Influenced our Dissenters, as to
make them the unhappy Instruments of effecting their most pernicious Designs,
which they contrived for the Subverting our Church and State.

Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation: and every
City or House divided against it self, cannot stand,

Matthew. xij. 25. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions
and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them:
For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly;
and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple,

Romans xvi. 17.18. These be they which separate themselves, sensual, having not
the Spirit,

Jude i. 19. LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, MDCXC.

THE CONTENTS.
TWO very remarkable Letters, the one from Sir Will. Boswell, the other from
Archbishop Bramhall; showing how much the Sectaries were Influenced by Papists,
to take off the Life of King Charles I. and to Embroil the Church, etc. page 1,
3. Dr. Peter du Moulin's Narrative, which confirms the Papists contriving the
Death of King Charles, and their putting Phanaticks upon the Execution page 6
Part of Father Sibthorp's (a Jesuit) Letter, showing their Intrigues with the
Sectaries, for the raising of Broils in Church and State page 12 Mr. Richard
Baxter's Discovery and Confession of the Papists insinuating themselves among
the Sectaries, for the restoring of Popery page 14 Several material Collections
to the same purpose, out of the Writings of the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet, now
the Right Reverend Bishop of W. page 17 Archbishop Whitgift's Opinion, That the
Papist's befriend the Puritans page 19 Archbishop Grindall's fear of Popery and
Atheism being promoted by them page 20 Campanella's and Father Young's Advice
of bringing in Popery, by means of Toleration, and help of Phanaticks page 22
Coleman's and the Lord Viscount Stafford's Confession of bringing in Popery by
Toleration, and the Phanaticks help page 23 Bishop Saunderson's Opinion how and
in what Phanaticks befriend Papists. page 26 Some Verses to the same purpose
ibid. The Judgment of Nine Learned Presbyterian Divines of Toleration page 31
The Votes and Reasons of the House of Commons, in 1662. against it. page 43 The
Letter of the Presbyterian Ministers to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
against Toleration page 46 Sir Francis Walsingham's Letter concerning
Severities used against Papists page 53 Lord Keeper Puckering's Speech to the
Parliament, concerning the Puritans preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion,
1588. page 59 What good Effects the Penal Laws wronght, and the Acts of
Uniformity, in bringing People to Church, when duly executed page 60 Bishop
Burnet's Reason why the Penal Law's wrought no more good, in making People
generally conformable to the Church page 62 Arshbishop Whitgift's Character of
the Puritans turbulent Spirits ibid. King Charles I. his Memorial of the great
Numbers of Papists in the Parliaments Army, and of the Papists and Phanaticks
Confederating page 63 An Ingenuous and very true Account of the Dissenters
combining with the Popish Party, in the late Reign of King James II. against
the Church of England page 64
Brethren in Iniquity: OR, The Confederacy of Papists with Sectaries, for the
destroying of the True Religion, as by Law Established, plainly detected.
A Letter from Sir William Boswell, to the most Reverend William Laud, late
Archbishop of Canterbury, remaining with Sir Robert Cotton's choice Papers.
Most Reverend,
AS I am here employed by our Sovereign Lord the King, your Grace can testify,
that I have left no stone unturned for his Majesty's Advancement; neither can I
omit (whenever I meet with Treacheries or Conspiracies against the Church and
State of England) the sending your Grace an account in General. I fear Matters
will not answer your Expectations, if your Grace do but seriously weigh them
with deliberation. For be you assured, the Romish Clergy have gulled the misled
party of our English Nation, and that under a Puritanical Dress; for which the
several Fraternities of that Church, have lately received Indulgence from the Sea of Rome, and Council of Cardinals, or to Educate several of the young
Friars of the Church of Rome, who be Natives of His Majesty's Realms and
Dominions, and instruct them in all manner of Principles and Tenants contrary
to the Episcopacy of the Church of England.

There be in the Town of Hague, to my certain knowledge, two dangerous
Impostors, of whom I have given notice to the Prince of Orange, who have large
Indulgences granted them, and known to be of the Church of Rome, although they
seem Puritans; and do converse with several of our English Factors.

The one, James Murray, a Scotch-man, and the other John Napper, a Yorkshire
Blade. The main drift of these Intentions is, to pull down the English
Episcopacy, as being the chief Support of the Imperial Crown of our Nation; for
which purpose above sixty Romish Clergymen are gone within these two Years out
of the Monesteries of the French King's Dominions, to Preach up the Scotch
Covenant, and Mr. Knox his Discipline and Rules within that Kirk, and to spread
the same about the Northern Coasts of England. Let therefore His Majesty have
an inkling of these Crotchets, that he might be persuaded, whenever Matters of
the Church come before you to reserr them to your Grace, and the Episcopal
Party of the Realm; for there be great Preparations making ready against the
Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church of England: And all evil Contrivances here
and in France, and in other Protestant Holdings, to make your Grace and the
Episcopacy odious to all Reformed Protestants abroad: it has wrought so much on
diverse of the Foreign Ministers of the Protestants, that they esteem our Clergy
little better than Papists. The main things that they hit in our Teeth are, our
Bishops being called Lords; the Service of the Church; the Cross in Baptism;
Confirmation; Bowing at the Name of Jesus; the Communion Table placed
Altar-ways; our manner of Consecrations; and several other Matters, which be of
late buzzed into the Heads of the Foreign Clergy, to make your Grievances the
less regarded, in case of a change; which is aimed at, if not speedily
prevented.

Your Grace's Letter is carefully delivered by my Gentleman's own Hands unto
the Prince.

Thus craving your Grace's hearty Prayers for my Undertakings abroad, as also
for my safe arrival, that I may have the Freedom to kiss your Grace's Hands,
and to tell you more at large of these things, I rest,

Your Grace's most Humble Servant, W. B.
Hague, June 12. 1640.
A Letter from the Right Reverend J. Bramhall, Bishop of Derry, (afterward
Primate of Jreland) to the most Reverend James Usher, Archbishop of Ardmagh.
Most Reverend,
I Thank God I do take my Pilgrimage patiently; yet I cannot but condole the
Change of the Church and State of England. And more in my Pilgrimage than ever,
because I dare not witness and declare to that straying Flock of our Brethren
in England, who have misled them, and who they are that seed them. But that
your Lordship may be more sensible of the Churches Calamities, and of the
dangers she is in of being Ruined, if God be not merciful unto her; I have
sent you a part of my Discoveries, and it from credible hands at this present,
having so sure a Messenger, and so fit an opportunity.

It plainly appears, That in the Year 1646. by Order from Rome, above 100 of
the Romish Clergy were sent into England, consisting of English, Scotch, and
Irish, who had been Educated in France, Italy, Germany and Spain; part of these
within the several Schools there appointed for their Instruction. In each of
these Romish Nurseries, these Scholars were Taught several Handicrast-Trades
and Callings, as their Ingenuities were most bending, besides their Orders, or
Functions of that Church.

They have many yet at Paris a fitting up to be sent over, who twice in the
Week oppose one the other; one pretending Presbytery, the other Independency;
some Anabaptism, and other contrary Tenants, dangerous and prejudicial to the
Church of England, and to all the Reformed Churches here abroad. But they are
wisely preparing to prevent these Designs, which I heartily wish were
considered in England among the Wise there.

When the Romish Orders do thus Argue Pro and Con, there is appointed one of
the Learned of those Convents to take Notes and to Judge; and as he finds their
Fancies, whether for Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, Atheism, or for any
new Tenants, so accordingly they be to act, and to exercise their Wits. Upon
their Permission when they be sent abroad, they enter their Names in the
Convent Registry, also their Licenses: If a Franciscan, if a Dominican, or
Jesuit, or any other Order, having several Names there Entered in their
License; in case of a discovery in one place, then to fly to another, and there
to change their Names or Habit.

For an assurance of their Constancy to their several Orders, they are to give
monthly Intelligence to their Fraternities, of all Affairs wherever they be
despersed; so that the English abroad, know News better than ye at home.

When they return into England, they are Taught their Lesson, to say (if any
enquire from whence they come) That they were poor Christians formerly that
fled beyond sea for their Religion-sake, and are now Returned, with glad News,
to enjoy their Liberty of Conscience.

The 100 Men that went over 1646. were most of them Soldiers in the
Parliament's Army, and were daily to correspond with those Romanists in our
late King's Army that were lately at Oxford, and pretended to Fight for His
Sacred Majesty: For at that time there were some Roman Catholics, who did not
know the design a contriving against our Church and State of England.

But the Year following, 1647. many of those Romish Orders, who came over the
Year before, were in consultation together, knowing each other. And those of
the King's Party asking some why they took with the Parliament's side, and
asking others whether they were Bewitched to turn Puritans, not knowing the
Design: But at last, secret Bulls, and Licenses being produced by those of the
Parliament's side; it was declared between them, There was no better Design to
Confound the Church of England, than by pretending Liberty of Conscience. It
was argued then, that England would be a second Holland, a Commonwealth; and
if so, what would become of the King? it was answered, Would to God it were
come to that point. It was again replied, Your selves have Preached so much
against Rome, and his Holiness, that Rome and her Romanists will be little the
better for that Change; But it was answered, You shall have Mass sufficient for
100000 in a short space, and the Governors never the wiser. Then some of the
mercifullest of the Romanists said, This cannot be done unless the King Die:
Upon which Argument, the Romish Orders thus Licensed, and in the Parliament
Army, wrote unto their several Convents, but especially to the Sorbonists,
whether it may be scrupled to make away our late Godly King, and His Majesty
His Son, our King and Master; who, Blessed be God, has escaped their Romish
Snares laid for him? It was returned from the Sorbonists, That it was lawful
for Roman Catholics to work Changes in Governments for the Mother-Church's
Advancement, and chiefly in an Heretical Kingdom, and so lawfully make away the
King.

Thus much, to my knowledge, have I seen and heard since my leaving your
Lordship, which I thought very requisite to inform your Grace; for my self
would hardly have credited these things, had not mine Eyes seen sure Evidence
of the same. Let these things Sleep within your Gracious Lordship's Breast, and
not awake but upon sure Grounds, for this Age can trust no Man, there being so
great Fallacy amongst Men. So the Lord preserve your Lordship in Health, for
the Nations Good, and the benefit of your Friends; which shall be the Prayers
of,

Your Humble Servant, J. Derensis.
July, 20. 1654:
These two Letters were taken out of the Treasury of choice Letters Published
by Dr. Parr, his Lordship's Chaplain, and Printed for Nathanael Ranew at the
King's-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1686.
Agreeable to this last Letter Bishop Bramhall in his excellent Answer to Mr.
Litire, a French Papist, when the Monsieur restected on the Brownists,
Independents, and Presbyterians, because of their Divisions, says, That he
wondered he should be so Choleric against them, for certainly they have done
you (viz. the Papists) more service in England, than ever you could have done
for your selves, page 43.

The like Account of the Papists contriving the Old King's Denth, together with
their underhand Dealings, and joining with the Phanaticks, for the bringing to
pass this Execrable Act, is given by Peter du Moulin, D. D. in his Answer to
Philanax Anglicus (a Popish Book) page 58, 59, etc. which well agrees with
Bishop Bramhall's Letter, and they mutually confirm each others Testimony.
Editio quarta, Anno Dom. 1679.
WHEN the Transactions of the late bad Times (says the Doctor) are ripe for
History and Time, the preserver of Truth has discovered the Mystery of
Iniquity, and the Depths of Satan which has wrought so much Mischief, it will
be found that the late Rebellion was raised and fostered by the Arts of the
Court of the Rome; that Jesuits professed themselves Independants, Fifth
Monarchy-men, etc. that they might pull down the English Monarchy and Church,
and that in their Committees, for the Destruction of the King and Church, they
had their Spies and Agents. The Roman Priest and Confessor is also known, who
when he saw thefatal stroke given to our Holy King and Martyr, brandished his
Sword, and said, Now the greatest Enemy we have in the World is gone.

When the News of that horrible Execution came to Roan, a Protestant Gentleman
of good Credit was present in a Company of Jesuited Persons; where, after great
expressions of Joy, the gravest of the Company spoke much after this sort,
touching the King's Promise, though it was false what he said: The King of
England (said he) at his Marriage promised us the re-establishing of the Roman
Catholic Religion in England, and when he delayed to fulfill his Promise, we
warned him from time to time to perform it; we came so far as to tell him, That
if he would not do it, we should bring him to his Destruction. We have given
him lawful warning, and when no warning would serve, we have kept our Word to
him, since he would not keep his Word to us.

That grave Rabbi's Sentence agrees with this certain Intelligence, which
shall be justified whenever Authority will require it, That the Year before
the King's Death a select number of English Jesuits were sent from their whole
Party into England; first to Paris to consult with the faculty of Sorbon, then
altogether Jesuited, to whom they put this Question in Writing, That seeing the
state of England was in a likely posture to change Government, whether it was
lawful for the Catholics to work that change, for the advantage and securing
of the Catholic Cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no
hope to turn away from his Heresy? Which was answered Affirmatively. After
which the same persons went to Rome, where the same Question being propounded
and debated, it was concluded by the Pope and his Council, That it was both
lawful and expedient for the Catholics to promote that Alteration of State.
What followed that Consultation and Sentence, all the World knows; and how
the Jesuits went to work, God knows; and Time the discoverer of Truth will
let us know. But when this horrible Parricide committed on the King's sacred
Person was so universally cried down, as the greatest Villainy that had been
committed in many Ages, the Pope commanded all the Papers about that Question
to be gathered up and burnt. In Obedience to which Order, a Roman Catholic in
Paris was demanded a Copy, which he had of those Papers; but the Gentleman who
had time to confider and detest the Wickedness of that Project, refused to give
it, but showed it to a Protestant Friend of his, and related to him the whole
carriage this Negotiation, with great abhorrency of the Jesuits Practices.

At the first appearing of this Charge, it struck such a terror among the
Gentlemen of Somerset House, (where a Man of great Note was much concerned in
it) that they cast themselves at the King's Feet to crave Justice against me;
yet, upon another pretense, which was the mention I had made (after Mr. Prin
and Mr. Foulis) of the Priest flourishing with his Sword when the King's head
was cut off, and saying, Now our greatest Enemy is cut off: But, upon soberer
thoughts, after Three or Four Days the great clamor was suddenly hushed, only
they won the Queen Mother to beseech the King, that I might be forbidden to
make any more Books, which was expressed to me in a Letter from the Secretary
of State (yet in a gracious counselling way) from my Great and Good Master,
that it was my wisest course to forbear writing Books in English, because it
was not my Native Language, which prohibition was taken away, when I caused the
same Book to be Reprinted, Anno Dom. 1668.

And such was the violent Distraction of these guilty persons, who were between
anger and fear, that when they seemed most fervent to fall upon me, they were
cowed by their own guiltiness; and they were so prudent as to take Order among
themselves, that none should provoke me (by writing against me) to write again:
For I heard nothing of them for Five or Six Years, till a young Nobleman, the
Earl of Castlemain, took the Field against me. Mr. Cressy seeing the ice
broken, followed him. The Earl added in a Third Edition, That I was defied by
Papists, and solicited by Protestants, to make good my words; and he says
true; but I have now defied the Papists Seventeen Years to call me in Question
before my Judges, and I do so still, but instead of calling me their Accuser,
to bring forth my Proofs, they labor to silence me, and chose to lie under the
Guilt, instead of taking the open legal way for their Justification.

As for the Solicitations of Protestants, my request to them is, that they
would consider the first line of my Charge; viz. This Intelligence shall be
justified whenever Authority shall require it, so that I cannot in Duty bring
forth the most essential Testimonies before I be bid by Authority. Should I do
otherwise the fault would be as great in point of Prudence, as in that of Duty;
for I should thereby make my Adversaries my Judges, who might detort the
Testimonies. This then being of so high a nature, I will stand to this
Resolution, to answer no Summons, but such as are backed by public Authority:
And here, for to give them farther satisfaction, he prints a Letter he received
from Sir William Morris; part of it, which relates to this concern, follows:

SIR.
-- Though I cannot give attestation to all the circumstances which you
mention, yet to the substance of that you desire me to bear witness to, I shall
say, That the King my Master gave me his Command soon upon the coming forth of
your Answer to Philanax Anglicus, to signify his pleasure, that you should
write no more in English, as, which being not vernacular to you, he said you
were not perfect Master -- You know in what trust and capacity I served His
Majesty, and what it was my duty to say, and whereof to be silent; but this I
may say safely, and will do it considently, that many Arguments did create a
violent suspicion, very near convincing Evidences, That the Irreligion of the
Papists was chiefly guilty of the Murder of that Excellent Prince -- I applaud
your pious Zeal and good Designs, and vote happy success to your Undertakings,
with reward proportionable, etc.

Mr. Pryn's Intelligence confirmed mine, who says (in his True and perfect
Narrative, page 46.) That our late Excellent King having assented in the Treaty
of the Isle of Wight, to pass Five strict Bills against Popery, The Jesuits in
France, at a general Meeting there, presently resolved to bring him to Justice,
and take off his Head, by the power of their Friends in the Army, as the King
himself was certified by an Express from thence, and wished to provide against
it but two days before his removal by the Army from the Isle of Wight to his
Execution.

It were worth the Enquiry upon what Ground the Author of Fair Warning
affirms, page 35, 36, 37. (in the Second Part of 120 Prophecies, concerning
the return of Popery) That Father Sibthorp, in a Letter to Father Medcalfe,
acknowledges the Jesuits to have contrived the Murder of the King, and that
Sarabras was present, and triumphing at the Murder of his sacred Majesty.

In pursuance of the Order from Rome, for the pulling down both the Monarch and
Monarchy of England, many Jesuits came over, who took several Shapes to go
about their Work, but most of them took party in the Army. About Thirty of
them, or their Disciples, were met by a Protestant Gentleman between Roan and
Diepe, to whom they said, (taking him for one of the Party) That they were
going into England, and would take Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavor
to be Agitators. (This agrees with the Account Bishop Bramhall gave in his
Letter to Bishop Usher.)

In the Year 1640 there was discovered to the Archbishop of Canterbury a
design, in which the Pope, Cardinal Richlieu, and many of the English Papists,
but especially the Jesuits, were concerned in stirring up those Divisions that
had just before broke out in Scotland for the Ruin of the King and of the
Archbishop. This may be seen at large in the Histories of those times, and the
very Papers themselves may be found in Mr. Rushworth's Collections, vol. 3. p.
1310. etc. Sir William Boswell likewise at the Hague, made the like Discovery
in his Letter to the Archbishop.

Father Salmonet declares in his History of our Civil Wars, printed in France
with the Allowance of the King, That after the Engagement at Egdehill, several
Romish Papists were found among the slain of the Parliament Army. And adds,
That the Parliament had two Companies of Walloons, besides others of that
Religion in their Army. Salmonet Hist. des troubles d'Angleterre, live. 3. page
165.

When the Rebellion also broke out in Ireland, it was we know blessed with His
Holiness's Letters, and assisted by his Nuntio, whom he sent on purpose thither
for that service.

And that the Papists had a flying Squadron in the Parliament Army. How boldly
soever this may be denied by some, there is another proof beyond Exception in a
Declaration of King Charles I. that he sent to the Kingdom of Scotland, dated
April 21. 1643. which has been several times Printed. And as an Author that
wrote the History of the late Civil Wars has assured us, the clean draught of
it, corrected in some places with the King's own hand, is yet extant, so that
it cannot be pretended that this was only a bold Assertion of some of the
King's Ministers, that might be ill affected to their Party. In that
Declaration the King studied to possess his Subjects of Scotland, with the
Justice of his Cause, and among other things to clear himself of the
imputation, that he had an Army of Papists about him. after many things said on
that Head, these Words are added, Great Numbers of that Religion have been with
alacrity entertained in that Rebellious Army against us, and others have been
seduced, to whom we had formerly denied Employments, as appears by the
Examination of many Prisoners, of whom we have taken Twenty or Thirty at a time
of that Religion in one Troop, or Company. The Credit of this Testimony is not
to be disputed; but no Discoveries, how evident soever they may be, can effect
some sort of Men, that have a secret against Blushing. This also plainly lets
us see, how that under the dissembled Disguise of being of their Parties, the
subtle Priests and Jesuits have crept in, and mixed themselves among our
dividing Sectaries, and cunningly made them the unhappy Tools and Instruments
to effect their most pernicious Designs and Contrivances, which otherwise,
without their aid, they would not be able to compass; and that the same Method,
not covertly but openly, is still practiced, is too palpable to be gainsaid.
God grant the Eyes of our Dissenting Brethren may be timely opened, for the
seasonable preventing the Miseries and Evils that threaten our Government, that
they may not only see, but follow the things that belong to the Peace and
Prosperity of our Church and State, before they are hid from their Eyes.

A Protestant Lady living in Paris in the time of our late Calamities, was
persuaded by a Jesuit, going in Scarlet, to turn Roman Catholic; and when the
dismal News of the King's Murder came to Paris, this Lady, as all other good
English Subjects, was most deeply afflicted with it; and when this Scarlet
Divine came to see her, and found her melted in Tears, about that heavy and
common Disaster, he told her with a smiling Countenance, That she had no reason
to lament, but rather to rejoice, seeing that the Catholics were rid of their
greatest Enemy, and that the Catholic Cause was much furthered by his Death.
Upon which the Lady put the Man down the Stairs in great Anger, saying, If that
be your Religion, I have done with it for ever: And God has given her the
Grace to make her Word good hitherto.

Many Intelligent Travelers can tell of the great Joy among the English
Convents and Seminaries for the King's Death, as having overcome their Enemy,
and done their main work for their Settlement in England, of which they made
themselves so sure, that the Benedictines were in great care that the Jesuits
should not get their Land, and the English Nuns were contending who should be
Abbesses in England.

An understanding Gentleman visiting the Friars of Dunkirk, put them upon the
Discourse of the King's Death, and to pump out their Sense about it, said, That
the Jesuits had labored very much to compass that great Work; to which they
answered, That the Jesuits would Engross to themselves the Glory of all great
and good Works, and of this among other Works; whereas they had labored as
diligently and effectually for it as they, so there was striving for the Glory
of that Achievement, and the Friars showed themselves as much Jesuited as the
Jesuits. The same Gentleman who in his Travels has found them in several
places jealous of the Glory, which the Jesuits ascribed to their only Order to
have promoted the King's Death, whereas other Orders had been as active as
they, in that great Achievement.

I cannot leave unobserved, that in the height of the late Usurpation and
Tyranny, two Heads of the Gunpowder Traitors that were set up upon the House
of Lords, were taken down, not by high Winds, but by the same Zeal which had
plotted that Treason, and with the leave of Traitors of another Feather, which
in time we may hear to be shrined up in Gold, as Holy Relics, and working
Miracles. By this we see, what a good Accord, and friendly Correspondence there
was between these two Parties, that seemed so contrary to each other.

That Jesuits and other Romanists were the Hatchers of those miserable Broils
and Troubles which befell our Church and State in the late Times of Confusion
and Usurpation, and were the chief Causers and Fomenters of the Persecutions
and Clamours against the King, Bishops, and the other Loyal Orthodox Clergy,
appears by Father Sibthorp's Letter to Father Medcalfe; part of which is as
follows.

And now (says he) they are pulling down that Wall which at once adorned and
defended their way, I mean their Government, their Vineyard (as they used to
say) is laid waste, that the wild Beasts of the Forest may come in, and upon
this Ground we proceed so sure, that however things happen we shall have the
Advantage; for either this Attempt will prevail against the Governors and
Government of the Church, or it will not: If it does, then all the ablest and
wisest Men are like to be removed, and their Places filled with weak, ignorant
Men, and ductile Worldings, that will always be on the stronger side, and their
Ends will be easily obtained. But if there be any Opposition, Murmuring and
Discontents, either it will provoke the Discontented to open Defense and
Resistance, or not: If not, then their Discontents will hurt none but
themselves; if it do, then either they will be crushed in the beginning, or be
able to bring it to a War: If the first, then we shall have the day, and this
to boot, That they shall lie under the Odium of Rebellion, and be trod the
lower, so as to be the less able ever to rise, and we shall with ease drive on
the Change to a higher degree in Opposition to so odious a Party. But if they
be able to make a War of it, either they will be conquered or conquer, or make
Peace: The last is the most unlikely, because Jealousies and Engagements will
presently be multiplied, so that an apparent Necessity will seem to lie on each
Party, not to trust the other, and the flames are easier to be kept in: But if
so unlikely a thing should come to pass, yet it must needs be to our Advantage;
for we will seem openly to appear for the King, and so in England and Ireland
we shall be considerable. He will remember that he was helped by us, and look
on the Puritans as Rebels, and take his next Advantage against them, or at
least be at a greater distance from them than before, for such a War will never
out of his mind, nor will he think himself safe till he has disabled them from
doing the like again. Again, if one Party Conquer, it will be the King or the
Puritans; if the King prevail, then will the Puritans be totally trod down, and
we, by whose help the Victory is got, shall certainly be incomparably better
than we are, if we have not presently all our will; for our Fidelity will be
cried up, the Rebels will be odious, so that their very Names will be a scorn,
and there will be no great resistance of us: But if the Puritans get the Day,
yet shall we make great advantage of it. For, First, They will be unsettled, and
all in pieces, and not know how to settle the Government. Secondly, We shall
necessitate the Puritans to keep the King a Prisoner, or else put him to Death;
if they keep him Prisoner, his Diligence, his Friends, and their own Divisions,
will either work his Deliverance, and give him the Day again by our help, or at
least will keep the State in a continued Unsetledness, and will be an Odium on
them. If they cut him off (which we will rather promote, least they should make
use of his Extremities to any Advantage) then, first, we shall procure the
Odium of King-killing to fall upon them, which they are wont to cast upon us,
and so we shall disburthen our selves. Secondly, we shall have them all to
pieces in Distractions; for, thirdly, either they will then set up a new King,
or the Parliament will keep the Power, changing the Government into a
Democracy; the first cannot be done without great Concussions and new Wars, and
we shall have an opportunity to have a hand in all; and when it it is done, it
may be much to our Advantage. The second will apparently by Factions and
Distractions give us footing for continual Attempts. But to make all sure, we
will secretly have our Party among the Puritans also, that we may be sure to
maintain our Interest, which way soever the World goes. This Politic Letter of
Father Sibthorp being written some little time before the late Civil Wars, the
Event and other Discoveries like this, shows to whom the contrivances of that
abominable Rebellion and Usurpation is owing, and how much the Papists love to
fish in our troubled Waters. This Letter was printed in the Year 1663. in the
Book called, A Word in Season, or the great Plot for restoring Popery, by
opposing Uniformity; a very useful Book, wherein several Discoveries are made
of the Papists Intreagues, how much they have tampered with our Dissenters,
fomented our Divisions, and thereby promoted the Growth of Popery in our Nation.

Mr. Richard Baxter's discovery and Confession, how much the Papists insinuated
themselves among the several sorts of Sectaries, for the restoring of Popery,
and the destroying our Church and State, in his Key for Catholics, page 326,
327, etc.
THE persecuted Nonconformists of the Protestant Party, though they were most
averse to Papists, yet had some of the Popish Brood at last crept in among
them; not only to spy out their Minds and Ways, but to head the Party, and sow
among them the Seed of further Discontent and Error, and to make them a
Nursery of various Sects. For every where, by their good Will, the Jesuits will
have some. If you ask me for proof of this, I shall at this time give you the
words of the Jesuit's Letter recited by Mr Pryn, Introd. page 90. I cannot
choose (says the Jesuit) but laugh to see how some of our own Coat have
reincounter'd themselves, you would scarce know them if you saw them, and it is
admirable how in Speech and Gesture they act the Puritans. The Cambridge
Scholars, to their woeful Experience, shall see we can better act the Puritans
then they have done the Jesuits. They have abused our sacred Patron St.
Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest; I hope you
will excuse my Merry digression, for I confess it to you, I am at this time
transported with Joy, to see how happily all Instruments and Means, as well
great as lesser, cooperate to our purposes, etc.

How far they crept into all Societies under the name of Independants is opened
by so many already in Print as there needs no more be added to it. And it is a
thing notorious, that they have crept in among the Anabaptists, and fomented
that Sect. The story of the Scottish Missionary that pretended himself a Jew,
and gave the Anabaptists the glory of his conversion and rebaptizing, who was
afterward discovered at New Castle, is published and commonly known; and too
many others have more neatly played their game. And though many of the more
sober Anabaptists, would not be so useful to the Papists as they have
expected, Yet multitudes of them too far answered their expectations. --

I shall tell you next, of some of those Heresies, or Parties among us, that
are the Papists own spawn, or progeny, either they laid the egg, or hatched it,
or both. And it is most certain that Libertinism, or Freedom for all Religions,
was spawned by the Jesuits, who hate it in Spain, Italy and France, but love it
in England. I have met with the masked Papists my self that have been very
zealous and busy to promote this Liberty of Conscience (as they deceitfully
call it;) for by this means they may have liberty for themselves, and liberty
to break us in pieces by Sects; and also liberty under the vizour of a Sectary
of any tolarated sort, to oppose the Ministry and Doctrine of Truth. --

There are also some juggling Papists, especially in our Councils, Civil and
Ecclesiastic, that play their game by over-doing, and making everything to be
Popish and Antichristian, to drive us into extremes, and into opinions, in
which we may be easily baffled, and its not a little that they have won of us
at this game. [In this book of Mr. Baxter a great deal more to this purpose may
be seen; how much the Papists work their designs by the means of our Sectaries,
whom they decoy.]

And farther Mr. Baxter in 1671. a little before the Indulgence then came
forth, was so sensible of the mischief of Separation, that he says in his
Preface to the defense of the cure of Church Divisions, p. 17. That our
Divisions gratify the Papists, and greatly hazard the Protestant Religion, and
that more than most of you seems to believe or regard, where he speaks to the
separating people; and among other great inconveniences which he mentions, this
is one; That Popery will get by it so great advantage as may hazard us all, and
we may lose that which the several Parties do contend about. And p. 52. etc. He
says, that two ways Popery will grow out of our divisions.

First, By the odium and scorn of our disagrements, in consistency and
multiplied Sects, they will persuade people, that we must come for unity to
them, or else run mad and crumble into dust and individuals. Thousands have
been drawn to Popery or confirmed in it by this argument already, and I am
persuaded that confirmed in it by this argument already, and I am persuaded
that all the arguments else in Bellarmine, and all other books that ever were
written, have not done so much to make Papists in England as the multitude of
Sects among our selves; yea, some Professors of Religious strictness, or great
esteem for Godliness, have turned Papists themselves when they were giddy and
wearied with turnings, and when they had run from Sect to Sect and found no
consistency in any.

Secondly, Either the Papists by increasing the divisions would make them be
accounted seditious, rebellious and dangerous to the public peace, or else
when so many parties are constrained to beg and wait for Liberty, the Papists
may not be shut out alone, but have toleration with the rest. And, says he,
shall they use our hands to do their works, and pull their freedom out of the
sire? We have already unspeakably served them both in this, and in abating the
Odium of the Gunpowder-plot, and their otehr Treasons, Insurrections and
Spanish-invasion.

Thus freely did Mr. Baxter write at that time, and even after that Indulgence,
he has these remarkable passages, concerning the separating and dividing
humor of their people in his sacrilegious desertion, etc. Page 103.

It shameth and grieveth us to see and hear from England and New England, this
common cry, We are endangered by Divisions, because the self-conceited part of
the Religious people will not be ruled by their Pastors, but must have their
way, and will needs be Rulers of the Church and them. And soon after, he says
to them, You have made more Papists, than ever you or we are like to recover.
Nothing is any whit considerable that a Papist has to say till he comes to
your case, and says, Does not experience tell you that without papal Unity and
Force, these people will never be ruled or united? It is you that tempt them to
use Fire and Faggot, that will not be ruled, nor kept in concord; And must you,
even you, that should be our confort, become our shame and break our hearts,
and make men Papists, by your Temptation? Woe to the World because of offenses,
and woe to some by whom they come. To show yet farther what Insluence the
Jesuitical Counsels have had upon some people, as to the course of Separation,
I shall produce the Testimony of a very considerable Man among them, who
understood these affairs as well as any Man; viz. Mr. Philip Nigh, who not long
before his Death, foreseeing the mischievous Consequence of these extravagant
heats the people were running into, wrote a Discourse on purpose to prove it
lawful, to hear the Conforming Ministers, and answers all the Objections
against it; and toward the Conclusion he wonders how the differing Parties
come to be so agreed, in thinking it unlawful to hear us preach; but he says,
He is persuaded, it is one constant design of Satan, in the v ariety of ways of
Religion he has set on foot by Jesuits among us; let us therefore be more
aware of whatsoever tends that way. Here we have a plain Confession of a very
leading Man among the Dissenters, that the Jesuits were very busy among them,
and that they and the Devil joined together in setting them at the greatest
distance possible from the Church of England; and that those who would
countermine the Jesuits, must avoid whatever tends to that height of Separation
the People were run into.

And as the Reverend and Learned Doctor Stilling fleet in the Preface to his
excellent Book Entitled, The unreasonableness of Separation, says, If we
trace the footsteps of our Separation, we shall sind the Jesuitical Party had
a great insluence on the very first beginnings of it, for which we must
consider, that when the Church of England was restored in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, there was no open Separation from the Communion of it for several years,
neither by Papists nor Nonconformists: At last the more zealous Party of the
Foreign Priests and Jesuits finding this compliance would in the end utterly
destroy the Popish interest in England, they began to draw off the secret
Papists from all Conformity with our Church, which the old Queen Mary's Priests
allowed them in. This raised some heat among themselves, but at last the way of
Separation prevailed as the more pure and perfect way. But this was not thought
sufficient bu these busy Factors for the Church of Rome, unless they could
under the same pretense of Purity and Perfection draw off Protestants from the
Communion of this Church too. To this purpose persons were employed under the
disguise of more zealous Protestants, to set up the way of more spiritual
prayer, and greater Purity of worship than was observed in the Church of
England, that so the people under these pretenses might be drawn into separat
meetings. Of this we have a considerable Evidence lately offered to the World,
in the Examination of a Priest, so employed, at the Council Table, in the ninth
Year of Queen Elizabeth, 1567, (published from the Lord Burleigh's Papers,
which were in the hands of Archbishop Usher, and from him came to the hands of
Sir James Ware, whose Son brought them into England, and caused them to be
Printed under the Title of Foxes and Firebrarnds, A. D. 1680.)

Two Years after the Examination of the said Priest, one Heath a Jesuit was
summoned before the Bishop of Rochester on a like account, for disparaging the
Prayers of the Church, and setting up extemporary or spiritual Prayers above
them; and he declared to the Bishop, That he had been six Years in England, and
that he had labored to resine the Protestants, and to take off all Smacks of
Ceremonies, and make the Church purer. When he was seized on, a Letter was
found about him from a Jesuit in Spain, wherein he takes notice how much he was
admired by his Flock, and tells him. They looked on this way of dividing
Protestants, as the most effectual to bring them all back to the Church of
Rome; and in his Chamber they found a Bull from Pope Pius the fifth, to follow
the instructions of the Society for the Dividing the Protestants in England, as
also a License from the Fraternity. There is one thing in the Jesuits Letter,
which the late Publisher of it did not understand, which is, that Hallingham,
Coleman and Benson. are there mentioned as persons employed to sow a Faction
among the German Heretics, which he takes to be spoken of the Sects in
Germany; but by the German Heretics, the English Protestants, that is,
Lutherans, are meant; and these very men are mentioned by our Historians,
without knowing of this Letter, as the most active and busy in the beginning
of the Separation. Of these (says Fuller) Coleman, Button, Benson, and
Hallingham, were the chief: And Heylin says, That Benson, Button, Hallingham,
Coleman and others, took upon them to be of more ardent Zeal than others, etc.
that time is 1568, which agrees exactly with the date of the Jesuits Letter
writ from Madrid, October 26,1568, and both these had it from Cambden, Who
says that while Harding, Saunders, and others, attacked our Church on one
Side, Coleman, Button, Benson and Hallingham were as busy on the other; who,
under pretense of a purer Reformation, opposed the Discipline, Liturgy and
Calling of our Bishops, as approaching too near the Church of Rome; and he
makes these the beginners of those quarrels, which afterward brake out with
great Violence. Now that there is no improbability in this account, will appear
by the suitableness of these pretenses about spiritual or extempore Prayer, to
the Doctrine and Practice of the Jesuits; for they are professed despisers of
the Cathedral service, and are excused from their Attendance on it, by the
Constitutions of their Order. And are as great admirers of Spiritual Prayer,
and an Enthusiastic way of preaching, as appears by the History of the first
Institution of their Order by Orlandinus and Maffeius. This is sufficient to
show there is no Improbability, that the Jesuits should be the first Setters up
of this way in England. And it is observable, that it was never known here, or
in any other reformed Church before this time, and therefore the beginning of
it is unjustly fathered on Thomas Cartwright; but by whomsoever it was begun,
it met with such great success in the zeal and warmth of Devotion, which seemed
to appear in it, that no charm has been more effectual to draw injudicious
people into a Contempt of our Liturgy, and admiring the way of Separation.

And, what is it, which the Papists have more envied and maligned than the
Church of England? What is it, they have wished more to see broken in piece,?
as the late Cardinal Barberini said, (in the bearing of a Gentleman who told it
to Dr. Stillingfleet) He could be contented, there were no Popish Priests in
England, so there were no Bishops; for then he supposed their work would do it
self. What is it they have used more Arts and Instruments to destroy, than the
Constitution of the Church of England and its Government? Did not Cranmer,
Ridly, Hooper, Farrar and Latimer, all Bishops of our Church, suffer Martyrdom
by their means? Had not they the same kind of Episcopacy which is now among us,
and which some are so busy in seeking to destroy, as unlawful and inconsistent
with the primitive Institution, as if it were Popish and Antichristian? Is all
this done for the honor of our Reformation? Is this the way to preserve the
Protestant Religion among us? to sill men's minds with such prejudices against
the first Settlement of it, as to go about to make the World believe, that the
Church Government then established, was repugnant to Christ's Institution; and
that our Martyred Bishops exercised an unlawful authority over Diocesan
Churches. But whither will not men's indiscreet Zeal, and love of their own
Fancies carry them? If such men are not set on by the Jesuits, they do their
work as effectually, by blasting the credit of the Reformation, as if they were.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, that Great and good Man, Archbishop
Whitgist, in his defense of the Answer against Cartwright, page 605. tells the
Puritans, That the Papists could not have not with better Proctors than they.
And Page 55. he tells them, That only did the Pope very good Service, and that
he would not miss them for any thing; for what is his desire, but to have this
Church of England, (which he has accursed) utterly defaced and discredited; to
have it by any means overthrown; if not by foreign means, yet by domestical
Dissension? and what fitter and apter instruments could he have had, for the
purpose, who under pretense of zeal, overthrow that which other men have
builded, under color of purity seek to bring in Deformity, and under the cloak
of Equality and Hamility would usurp as great Tyranny and losty Lordliness over
their Parishes, as ever the Pope did over the whole Church? And in another
place he says, They were made the Engines of the Roman Conclave, whereby they
intend to overthrow this Church, even by these men's folly, which they could not
compass by all their policy.

His worthy Predecessor also, Archbishop Grindall, expressed (in a Letter of
his) his great fear of two things, viz. Atheisin and Popery, and both arising
out of our needless Divilions and Differences. He doubts not by Satan the enemy
of mankind and the Pope the enemy of Christendom, by these means etc. the
enemies of our Religion gain this, That nothing can be established by Law in
the Protestant Religion, whose every part is not opposed by one or other of her
own Professors: So that things continuing loose and confused, the Papists have
their opportunity to urge their way which is attended with Order and
Government. And our Religion continuing thus distracted and divided; some vile
wretches lay hold on the Argument on one side to confute the other, and so hope
at last to destroy all. See this Letter in Fair Warning, second part, printed
1663.

Dr. Sutcliff, Dean of Exon, said also long ago, that wise men apprehended
these unhappy questions about indifferent things, to be managed by the subtle
Jesuits, thereby to disturb the peace and settlement of our Church, until at
last they enjoy their long expected opportunity to set up themselves, and
restore the exploded Tyranny and Idolatry of the Church of Rome.

Among Mr. Selden's Manuscripts there is mentioned an odd prophecy that Popery
should decay about the Year 1500, and be restored about the Year 1700, which is
there said to be most likely by means of our Divifions, which threaten the
Reformation upon the Interest of Religion, and open advantages to the enemies
of it; and nothing, is there said, more likely to prevent it, than a sirm
establishment of sound Doctrine, Discipline and Worship in this Church. -- And
had not some misguided Zealots, out of a too great Affection to those models
they had seen abroad, run into unreasonable Oppositions at home, which are
still as unreasonably continued by obstinate, headstrong People, the Church of
England would now be the most flourishing, as it is the most primitive and pure
Church in the World.

Who was it, but a St. Omer's Priest that confessed (as we are credibly
informed in Foxes and Firebrands, part. 1. p. 7.) That they were Twenty Years
in hammering out the Sect of the Quakers? And indeed (as a very learned and
good Man obseryes) the principle they go upon, to refuse all Oaths, is a neat
Contrivance for Priests and Jesuits to avoid the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, without a possibility of being discovered.

King Charles I. in the very first breaking out of the Wars, observed rightly,
that the Fanatics proceeded upon Popish Principles against him. Their Maxims
(says he) are the same with the Jesuits. Their Preachers Sermons have been
delivered in the very Phrase and Style of Becanus, Scioppius, and Eudaemon
Johannis. Their poor Arguments Printed or Written, are taken almost verbatim
out of Bellarmine and Suarez; and the means which they have used to induce a
Credit of their Conclusions with their Proselytes, are purely and merely
Jesuitical Fables, false Reports, false Prophecies, pretended Inspirations and
Divinations of the weaker Sex, as if Herod and Pilate were once again
reconciled, for the Ruin of Christ and of his true Religion and Worship. See
the King's large Declaration about the Scotch Troubles, p. 3, 4. and his
Declaration after the Battle of Edgehill, in the King's Works, Part II. p. 213.
And it is as observable, that the Arguments which President Bradshaw made use
of for the calling to an Account Sovereign Princes, and subjecting of them to
the People, were borrowed from Parsons and other Jesuits, who laid down these
republican and treasonous Principles.

Considerable Directions, for the Introducing Popery in Protestant Countries,
taken out of the Jesuit Contzen's Politic. lib. 2. cap. 8.. 6. and out of
Campanella.
1. THAT it be done under a Pretense of Ease to tender Consciences, which will
gain a Reputation to the Prince, as done out of Kindness to his People.

2. That when liberty is granted, then the Parties be forbid to contend with,
or Preach against each other, for that will make way the more easily for one
side to prevail, and the Prince will be commended for his Love of Peace.

3. That such as suspect the Design, and Preach against it, be traduced as Men
that Preach very Unseasonable Doctrine; that they are Proud, Self-opiniators,
and Enemies to Peace and Union.

4. Let no Prince, that is willing, despait, it being an easy thing for him to
change Religion; for when the Common People are awhile taken with Novelties
and Diversities of Religion, they will sit down and be weary, and give up
themselves to their Rulers Wills. But the special Advice he gives to a
Catholic Prince is.

5. To make as much use of the Divisions of the Enemies, as of the Agreement of
his Friends.

How much the Popish Party hero has followed these Counsels, will easily
appear by reflecting upon their Behavior these last Twenty-six Years, and how
far the same Policies have kept up our Divisions, and do still promote them, is
now no longer a Mystery.

But that which more particularly reaches to our own Case, is the Letter of
Advice given to Father Young by Seignior Ballarini, concerning the best way of
managing the Popish Interest in England, upon his Majesty's Restoration;
wherein are several remarkable Things: This Letter was found in Father Young's
Study after his Death, and was translated out of Italian, and Printed in the
Collection abovementioned.

1. The first Advice is to make the Obstruction of Settlement their great
Design, especially upon the fundamental Coustitutions of the Kingdom; whereunto
if things should fall, they would be more firm than ever.

2. To remove the Jealousies raised by Pryn, Baxter, etc. of their design upon
the late Factions, and to set up the prosperous way of Fears and Jealousies of
the King and Bishops.

3. To make it appear, underhand, how near the Doctrine, Worship, and
discipline of the Church of England comes to us, at how little distance their
Common Prayer is from our Mass, and that the wisest and ablest Men of that way,
are so moderate, that they would willingly come over to us, or, at least, meet
us half way. Hereby the more staid Men will become more Odious, and others will
run out of all Religion for fear of Popery.

4. Let there be an Indulgence promoted by the Factious, and seconded by you.

5. That the Trade and Treasure of the Nation may be Engrossed between
themselves, and other Discontented Parties.

6. That the Bishops and Ministers of the Church of England be aspersed, as
either worldly and careless on the one hand, or so factious on the other, that
it were well they were removed.

These are some of those excellent Advices then given; and how well they have
been followed, we all know; for, according to this Counsel, when they could not
hinder the Settlement, then the great thing they aimed at for many Years, was
the breaking in pieces the Constitution of our Churhc by a General Toleration.
This Coleman owned at his Trial, and after Sentence, declared, He was of
Opinion that Popery might come in, if Liberty of Conscience had been granted.
And in several of his Letters, it is to be seen, how earnest the Papists were
for Liberty of Conscience. And the Lord Viscount Stafford, That they designed
to bring in Popery by Toleration; as may be seen in his Trial.

And now let any impartial Person judge who did most effectually serve the
Papist Designs, those who kept to the Communion of the Church of England, or
those who fell into a course of Separation? I will allow what Mr. Baxter says,
That they might use their Endeavors to exasperate the several Parties against
each other, and might sometimes press the more rigorous Execution of Laws
against them; but then it was to set them at a greater distance from us, and to
make them more pliable to a General Toleration. And they sometimes complained,
That those who were most averse to this, found themselves under the Severity of
the Law, when more Tractable Men escaped, which they have weakly imputed to the
Bishops, when they might easily understand the true causo of such a
Discrimination.

But from the whole it appears, That the grand Design of the Papists for many
Years was to break in pieces the Constitution of the Church of England; which
being done, they flattered themselves with the hopes of great Accessions to
their Strength and Party; and in order to this they inflamed the Differences
among us, to the utmost height, on purpise to make all the dissenting Parties
to join with them for a General Toleration, which they did not question would
destroy this Church, and advance their Interest. And it is a most unfortunate
Condition our Church is in, That those who design to bring in Popery, and the
Dissenters who made so great bustles in the late King's Reign to keep it out,
should now both conspire toward the Destruction of our Church, and use all
their Art and Industry to undermine and blow up this strongest Bullwork of the
Protestant Religion.

This Reverend and most Learned Person has also well observed how subtly the
Romanists have managed our indiscreet Dissenters Zeal against the Church of
England, under a pretense of opposing Popery, to be one of the more likely ways
to bring it in. Many Instruments and Engines they made use of in this Design,
many ways and times they set about it; and although they met with several
Disappointments, yet they never gave it over. And is it not very strange, that
when they can scarce appear for themselves, others, out of mere Zeal against
Popery, should carry on their Work for them? This seems to be a great Paradox
to unthinking People, who are carried away with mere Noise and Pretenses, and
hope those will secure them most against the fears of Popery, who talk with
most Passion and least Understanding against it, whereas no persons do really
give them greater Advantages than these do. For where they meet with
intemperate Railings, and gross Understandings of the State of the
Controversies between them and us, the more subtle Romanists will let such
alone to spend their Rage and Fury, and when the heat is over, they will calmly
endeavor to let them see how grossly they have been deceived in some things,
and so will the more easily make them believe they are as much deceived in all
the rest. And thus the East and West may meet at last, and the most furious
Dissenters, who would be looked upon as the greatest Adversaries to Popery,
become the easiest Converts. This I do really fear will be the case of many
Thousands amongst us, who now pass for the most zealous Protestants, if ever
(which God forbid) that Religion should come to be uppermost in England.

It is therefore of mighty Consequence for preventing the return of Popery,
that people rightly understand what it is; for when they are as much afraid of
an innocent Ceremony as of real Idolatry, and think they can Worship and Adore
the Host on the same grounds, that they may use the Sign of the Cross, or Kneel
at the Communion; when they are brought to see their mistake in one Case, they
will suspect themselves deceived in the other also. For they who took that to
be Popery which is not, will be apt to think Popery it self not so bad as it
was represented, and so for want of right Understanding the Differences between
us may be carried from one extreme to the other. For when they find the
undoubted Practices of the Ancient Church condemned as Popish and Antichristian
by their Teachers, they must conclude Popery to be of much greater Antiquity
than really it is; and when they can trace it so very near the Apostles times,
they will soon believe it settled by the Apostles themselves. For it will be
very hard to persuade any considering Men, that the Christian Church should
degenerate so soon, so universally, as it must do, if Epsscopal Government, and
the use of some significant Ceremonies were any parts of that Apostasy. Will it
not seem strange to them, that when some humane Polities have preserved their
first Constitution so long without any considerable alteration, that the
Government instituted by Christ, and settled by his Apostles, should so soon
after be changed into another kind, and that so easily, so insensibly, that all
the Christian Churches believed they had still the very same Government which
the Apostles left them? Which is a matter so incredible, that those who can
believe such a part of Popery could prevail so soon in the Christian Church,
may be brought upon the like Grounds to belives that many others did, so mighty
a prejudice does the Principles of our Church's Enemies bring upon the Cause of
the Reformation. And those who forego the Testimony of Antiquity, (as all the
Opposers of the Church of England must do) must unavoidably run with the
Papists, which the Principles of our Church do lead us through.

For we can justly charge Popery as an unreasonable innovation, when we allow
the undoubted Practices and Government of the Church for many Ages after Christ.

And the Excellent, Learned, and most pious Prelate, Bishop Saunderson, has
observed, That those who reject the usages of our Church, as Popish and
Antichristian, when assaulted by Papists, will be apt to conclude Popery the
old Religion, which in the purest and primitive Times was professed in all
Christian Churches throughout the World: whereas the sober Church of England
Protestant is able, by the Grace of God, with clear Evidence of Truth, to
justify the Church of England from all imputation of Heresy or Schism, and
the Religion thereof, as it stood by Law established, from the like imputation
of Novelty. And in this he professes to lay open the inmost thoughts of his
Heart in this sad Business, before God and the World: And he further says, The
Dissenting Brethren were great promoters of the Roman Interest among us, in the
late Times of Usurpation, by putting their helping hand to the pulling down of
Episcopacy. And, says he, it is very well known to many what rejoicing that
Vote brought to the Romish Party, how even in Rome it self, they sung their
Io-Paeans upon the tidings thereof, and said triumphantly, Now the Day is ours,
now is the fatal blow given to the Protestant Religion in England. See this in
Bishop Saunderson's Preface to his first Volume of Sermons.

A great deal more to this purpose may be seen in Dr. Stillingfleet's Preface
to his Excellent Book, entitled, The Unreasonableness of Separation. And though
he Printed this Book in the Year 1681. yet, as if he had on him the Spirit of
Prophecy when he wrote it, he has fully discovered the Popish Intrigues, and
exposed to public View their Designs and ways of proceeding, as they are now
managed, against our Church, in Concurrence with the several Dissenting
Parties, who have been made, from the Infancy of the Reformation, the
Instruments to effect their Contrivings.

The Advice that the late Earl of Sh -- ry and the Lord Cl -- d gave the late
King, in Company with the Grand Cabal, in the Year 1671. which Cabal were Bu --
m, Sh -- ry, Ar -- ton, L -- dale, H -- is, and Cl -- d, taken out of the Dream
or Gambol.
WHilst a confused Chat in the Cabal
Had many moved, none heard, but speak did all;
A little Bobtail'd Lord, Vrchin of State,
A Praise-God-bare-bones Peer, whom all Men hate,
Amphibious Animal, half Fool, half Knave,
Begged Silence, and this pur-blind Counsel gave:
Blessed and best Monarch that ever Scepter bore,
Renowned for Honor, but for Virtue more:
The Lord spoke last, has well and wisely shown,
That Parliaments, nor new, nor old, nor none,
Can well be trusted longer, for your State
And Glory of your Crown hates all Check-mate:
That Monarchy, may from his Childhood grow
To Man's Estate, France has us shown. You know
Monarchy is Divine, Divinity it shows,
That he goes backward, that not forward goes:
Therefore go on, let other Kingdoms see,
Your Wit's their Law, that absolute Monarchy.
A mixed hodge-podge will now no longer bear,
Caesar or nothing, you are now brought here;
Strike then, Great Sir, for these Debates take Wind,
Remember that Occasion's bald behind.
For Gain is sure in this, if wisely played,
And sacred Votes to the Vulgar not betrayed.
But if the rumor once should get on Wing,
That we consult to make you absolute King,
The Plebeians Head, the Gentry forsooth,
Would streightway snore, and have an aching tooth;
Least they, I say, should your great Secret scent,
And you expose in nulling Parliament:
I think it safer, and a better skill,
To obviate than overcome an ill:
For those that head the Herd, are full as rude,
When the humor takes, as the following Multitude.
Wherefore be quick in your resolves, and when
You have resolved, execute quicker then.
Remember your Great Father lost the Game
By slow procedure, may not you do the same?
An unexpected, unregarded Blow
Wounds more than ten made by an open Foe.
Delays do danger breed, the Sword is yours
By Law declared, what need you other powers;
We may Impolitick be judged or worse,
If we cannot make the Sword command the purse.
No Art nor Courtship can your Rule so shape
Without a force, it must be done by Rape;
And when it is done, to say they cannot help,
Will satisfy enough the gentle Whelp.
Phanaticks they will to Providence impute
Their Thraldom, and immediately grow mute;
For they, poor silly Souls, think the Decree
From Heaven on them, although from Hell it be.
Wherefore to gull them, do their hopes fulfill
With Liberty, they are halter'd at your Will.
Give them but Conventicle room, and they
Will let you steal their English Man away,
And heedless be till you your Nets have spread,
And pulled down Conventicles on their Head.
Militia then, and Parliaments Casheer,
A formidable standing Army rear
To mount you up, and up you soon will be,
They Will fear who never would love your Monarchy:
And if they fear, no matter for their hate,
To Rule by Love becomes a sneaking State.
Lay by all Fears, care not what People say,
Regard to these will your Designs betray;
When bite they cannot, what hurt can barking do?
And in short time we'll spoil their barking too:
Make Coffee-Clubs talk more of humble things,
Than State Affairs, and Interest of Kings.
Thus spoke that ridgling Peer, when one more grave
That had much less of Fool, but more of Knave,
Cl -- d. Began. Great Sir, it gives no small content
To hear such Zeal from you against Parliament;
Wherefore, though I an Enemy no less
To Parliaments than they my self profess,
Yet let me tell you, it is a harder thing
Than they suggest, to make you absolute King.
Old Building to pluck down, believe it true,
More danger in it has, than building new:
And what shall prop your Superstructure till
Another you have raised, to suit your Will?
An Army shall, say they, content; but stay,
From whence shall this new Army have its Pay?
For easy and gentle Government awhile
Appear must to this Kingdom, to beguile
The Peoples Minds, and so to make them free
For raising old, and making better new;
For Taxes with new Government, all will blame,
And put the Kingdom sure into a Flame:
For Tyranny has no such lovely look
To take Men with, unless you hide the Hook.
And no Bait better bides, than present Ease,
Ease but their Taxes, and do what you please.
Wherefore all wild debates laid by, from whence
Shall Money rise to do this vast Expense?
Call our first thoughts, thus well resolved we
In other things much better shall agree.
Join then with Mother Church, whose Bosom stands
Open to receive you, stretching both her Hands.
Close but this Breach, and they will let you see
Her Purse as open as her Arms shall be:
For, Sacred Sir, by guess I do not speak,
Of poor she will make you rich, and strong of weak;
At Home, Abroad, no Money, no nor Men
She Will let you lack, turn but to her again.
And let me add, Great Sir, you know its Season
Salts all the Notions that we make in Reason;
And now a Season is afforded us,
The best ever came, and most propitious,
Besides the Sums the Catholics will advance;
You know what offers you are made by France:
And to have Money, and no Parliament,
Most fully Answers your designed intent.
And thus without tumultuous bruit or huff
Of Parliaments, you will Money have enough;
Which if neglected now, there is none knows when
Like opportunity may be again,
For to Extirpate what combined be,
Both Civil and Religious Liberty.
There Is Money enough you will have to exalt the Crown,
Not stooping Majesty to the Country Clown.
The triple League, I know, will be objected,
As if that ought to be by us respected.
But who to Heretic, or Rebel pay'th
The Truth, engaged by solemn Faith,
Debaucheth Virtue, by those sacred things
The Church profaneth, and abuses Kings;
Faith, Justice, Truth, Plebeian Virtues be,
Look well in them, but not in Majesty;
For public Faith is but a public Thief,
The greatest Cheat in Nature's vain Belief.
The Judgment of several eminent Presbyterian Divines, concerning the
usefulness of an established Uniformity in the Church, for the Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, and touching the Evils of Toleration, how pernicious
it is to the true Religion.
DOctor Cornelius Burgess, in a Sermon before the Commons Nov. 5. 1641. p. 63,
etc. thus Preached, I beseech you in the Name of the Great God, whom you serve,
to resume and pursue your first thoughts of setting up God and his Ordinances
as becomes you, in a regular way, that our Church, and the Government thereof,
may be no longer laid waste, and exposed to Confusion, under the plansible
pretense, Of not forcing Men's Consciences: To put all Men into a course of
Order and Uniformity in God's way, is not to force the Conscience, but to set
up God is his due place, and to bring all his People into the path of
Righteousness and Life.

Also in a Sermon before the Commons at a public Fast, March: 30. 1642. p. 35.
he thus speaks his mind; Be there none of you that foresee the fatal Mischief
of leaving all Men to their Liberties in the things of God, and yet want Hearts
to use your Skill and Interest, to make haste to settle Matters of Religion,
lest you come too late with a Remedy, when the Disease is grown incurable, and
the Kingdom grown to that pass (as the grave Historian Livy noted of Rome) that
it cannot bear the Malady, nor endure the Cure -- p. 46. Do you not see or hear
daily of the Disorders, Sects, Rents, and Schisms that every where bud forth
already, and threaten all Order, Unity and Government? Give the Water but a
passage without speedy making up the Banks, and you know how soon whole Seas
will break in upon us, and render all irrecoverable and incurable. If one
difficulty occurr to day, it will be doubled, yea multiplied to morrow. There
is no Hydra so fertile of heads, as Error and Schism, grown to some strength
and maturity. It will ask but a short time of Connivence, afterward there will
be no curbing nor shaming of it. Nothing is so confident as Ignorance, impudent
as Falsehood and catching as Error.

In another Sermon before the Commons at a Public Fast, April 30. 1645. page
51, 52. he exhorts them thus, Take heed of those spirits of Error, who with
fair specious words make Merchandice of you, beguiling unstable Souls. Beware
of those Compliances with, and Indulgences to all sorts of Sects and Schisms
now pleaded for, both by word and writing; as if it were part of Christ's
Legacy, and his peoples Liberty to be of what Religion they will. To be
tolerated in any Opinions never so erroneous and pernicious (until farther
light) that it is the Magistrates duty to protect them in that Liberty, and
that the contrary thereunto is to persecute Christ.

Has God inserted this as one main branch of his grand Covenant with his
people under the Gospel? I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may
fear me for ever, Jer. 32.39. that is, That they may all call upon the name of
the Lord to serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3.9. Did Christ ascend up on
high, and give Gifts unto men, and gave some Apostles, and some Prophets; some
Evangelists, and some Teachers, for the perfecting of Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come into the
unity of the Faith, and is it Persecution and Antichristianism to engage all to
Unity and Uniformity? Does Paul bid the Philippians to beware of the Concision?
Phil. 3.2. Does he beseech the Romans to mark those which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which they had received; and avoid them; and
that upon this ground, that they who are such, serve not the Lord Jesus but
their own bellies; however, by good words, and fair speeches, they deceive the
hearts of the simple? Romans 16.17, 18. Does he, writing to the Galatians, wish,
I would they were cut off that trouble you? Gal. 5.12. And is it such an
hanious Offense now for the faithful Servants of Christ, to advise you to the
same course? O Heavens! be astonished at this, and blush for the Ignorance of
some, and Ignorance of others, that dare so boldly press for such a Toleration,
which none but vain destructive Thoughts of Carnal men can look upon without
indignation and horror.

Beware how you hearken to these Empyricks and Sirens, who seek to charm the
World into a deep sleep, by presenting their Considence of a Necessity of
compliance with all sorts of Sectaries; yea, of trusting the sword in their
hands, for fear of losing the godly Party (as too many proudly style
themselves, by way of difference, from all that are not of their Opinions and
Ways.) What is this but to teach God a new Form of Politics, to proclaim that
it is not always safe to hold out the Truth of the Gospel, and to command all
men to embrace it, but much safer to halt between two Opinions? Belike King
Josiah, went beyond his bounds, when, after himself had sworn a solemn Covenant
to the Lord, He made all Judah and Benjamin to stand to it, and made all that
were present in Israel to serve the Lord their God? 2 Chronicles. 34.32, 33. And Asa
much more, when he drew all the people into a Covenant, That whosoever would
not seek the Lord God of Israel should be put to death, whether small or great,
man or woman. 2 Chronicles. 15.13. But the ample and transcendant Commendations,
which the Lord gives unto these pious Kings, especially in reference to their
Sincerity and Zeal of reforming and settling of Religion, in one uniform way,
may sufficiently warrant and encourage all Religious Magistrates to take care,
That all under their Government should serve the Lord with one shoulder; this
being not a Tyranny over men, but the Privilege of the Gospel. Settle this in
your hearts. God's truth, the true Worship and Discipline of Christ set up and
established in one uniform way, never prejudiced any Nation or State, (where it
had free passage) in any the least degree, but has ever been their Safety,
Happiness and Honor. It is error (how much soever cried up) not Truth, (how
much soever cried down and blasphemed) that makes and foments Factions and
Rents -- Let people enjoy their just Privileges and Liberties, wherewith Christ
has made them free, not such Licentiousness as is abused for a cloak of
Naughtiness.

Dr. William Good, in a Sermon before the Commons, March 26. 1645, declares his
mind thus. I doubt not but your Souls abhor that bloody tenet to the Souls of
men, That it is the duty of the Magistrate to tolerate all Religions? -- What
is it that shall be unlawful, if this be lawful for every Man, to make a Law
and Religion for himself? -- Such allowance would prove destructive to Holiness
both Personal and Domestical. Omnis Religio and nulla Religio; a Toleration of
all Religions, would soon dwindle into no Religion. (Much more to this purpose
may be seen in this Sermon.)

Mr. Thomas Case in his Sermon before the Commons May. 26. 1647. page 33. etc.
says, Liberty of Conscience (falsely so called) may in good time improve it
self into Liberty of Estates, Liberty of Houses, and Liberty of Wives, and in a
word, Liberty of Perdition of Souls and Bodies. This only would I know of you,
are Idolaters, Heretics, Blasphemers and Seducers, Evildoers? If so, then
look to your charge. Romans 13.4. Rulers must be a terror to Evildoers, unless
you mean to bear the Sword in vain. And if you will, God will not; and if God
take the Sword into his own hand once, he will smite to purpose, and execute
vengeance thoroughly both upon the Evildoers, and upon you that have not been a
terror to them. Oh therefore up and be doing, that you may deliver the Kingdom
out of the hand of the Lord, for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the Living God. O let not your Patience be interpreted a Connivence, and
your Connivence be taken for a Toleration; it may be the Kingdom's ruin, but
it will be your Sin.

Also in his Sermon before the Commons, February 19. 1645. page 25. he thus
addresseth to them. Fathers and Brethren, how will you call this keeping of
Covenant with God? had we a Parliament of Apostate Julians, of whom it is
reported, that at what time he opened the Temples of the Heathenish Gods, he
set open the Christian Churches, called home all the Christians that were
banished, both Orthodox and Heretic, and gave them (as we call it) Liberty of
Conscience, but as Austin more truly phraseth it, Libertatem perditionis,
Liberty to destroy themselves, for that was his policy and end, namely, by
Liberty of all Religions, to destroy the true, and the Professors of it too.
If we had a Parliament of careless Gallio's we should not wonder, etc.

Mr. George Hughes, late Minister of Plymouth, in his Sermon before the Commons
May 26. 1647. p. 34, preached thus, I must say that Toleration must be a
destructive Principle to the State or Church wherever it be allowed;
experience has showed us no less in Kingdoms and Churches called by God's
name. -- Ye Servants of Christ take heed of yielding to the pretenses of
Conscience; The Devil and not Christ has his throne there; and no stronger
hold for him than Conscience, if he once takeit; Christ will not suffer him to
shelter there; therefore you may not, so much as in you lies.

Object. Do not other States, and some of the united Provinces, tolerate all
these Heresies, and protect them, and yet they prosper, who more?

Answ. I desire not to meddle with other States, unless I might do them good.
But,

1. Can any Man say, that Prosperity is a sign peculiar to Truth? then let Rome
come in and speak more than any for outward Prosperity.

2. Are not spiritual Wickednesses as odious to God as carnal? and are not
these Heresies, such which God condemns as works of the Flesh inconsistent with
Christ's Kingdom?

3. Has God made an end of visiting Nations for the Sins of them? when God
has done judging, were a better time to urge this Example than now. I pray God
the evil day may not overtake these States, the good God cause the cup of
trembling to pass by them, and purge their inquities peaceably; but I am
pressed in Spirit to say, God has not spared such State polities which have
sought their own rise by the ruin of God's Truth. Witness Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat who made Israel to sin; and as Seneca says, Qui non vetat peccare cum
potest, jubet, he bids sin, that does not hinder it, when he can. -- God's
Truth, my beloved, and not Man's example must be the Rule. -- If Heresies yet
must be, let us mourn for what we cannot help. It is a miserable Necessity,
when not allowed. It will be rejoicing in Iniquity either for Church or State
wilfully to tolerate.

Mr. Edmund Calamy, in his Sermon before the Lord Mayor, January 14. 1645. page
3. makes this Lamentation. The Churches of Christ lie desolate,
Church-reformation is obstructed, Church Discipline unsettled, and
Church-divisions increased. The famous City of London is become an Amsterdam,
Separation from our Churches is countenanced, Toleration is cried up, Authority
lies asleep. And page 4. Divisions, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Political in Kingdoms, Cities or Families, are infallible causes of ruin to
them. See Mark 3.24, 25.

Again page 14. Hereby the hearts of people are mightily distracted, many are
hindered from Conversion, and even the Godly themselves have lost much of the
power of Godliness in their lives. I say the hearts of people are mightily
disturbed, while one Minister preaches one thing as a Truth of the Gospel, and
another Minister preaches the quite contrary with as much considence as the
former.

Page 17. If Divisions be so destructive to Kingdoms, Cities and Families, this
reproves those that are the Authors and Fomenters of these Divisions, that are
now among us. These are the Iincendiaries of England. If he that sets one house
a fire deserves hanging, much more they that set a whole Kingdom on fire. If
he that murders one Man, must be put to death, much more he that murders three
Kingdoms, mark them (says the Apostle Romans 16.17.) that cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, avoid
them as the greatest enemies of England; these are like the Salamander that
cannot live but in the fire of Contention, These are of a Jesuitical Spirit,
and no doubt the heads and hands of the Jesuits are in all our Divisions.

Page 33. Take heed of the Land-destroying opinion of those that plead for an
unlimited Toleration of all Religions, even of Turcism, Judaism, etc. the Lord
keep us from being poisoned with such an Error. Our Savior's saying in Matthew.
12.25. rises up against it, Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought
to desolation, for it will divide Kingdoms against it self, it will rend it in
a thousand pieces, it is a Doctrine that overthrows all Church Government,
brings in confusion, and opens a wide door unto all Irreligion and Atheism.
For at the same door that all false Religions came in, the true Religion-will
quickly get out, and if it be as good for a Man to live where nothing is lawful
as where all things are lawful, surely it is every way as uncomfortable to live
where there are all Religions, as where there is no Religion at all.

Page 37. It is your Duty, right Honorable, whom God has entrusted with great
Power, to suppress these Divisions and Differences in Religion, by your Civil
Authority, as far as you are able, least you are accessory unto them. For God
has made you, Custodes utriusque Tabulae, Keepers not of the Second Table only
(as some fondly imagine) but of the First Table also; and not only Keepers,
but, Vindices utriusque Tabulae, Punishers also of those that transgress
against either of them; For you are the Ministers of God for good, and
Revengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13.4. And God has
deputed you for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that
do well, 1 Pet. 2.19. There be some that would blot out half your Commission,
and restrain this good and evil to eivil good, and to evils only against Men:
But this is against that general Rule, Non est distinguendum, ubi lex non
distinguit, Where the Law does not distinguish, there must not we distinguish.
Tell me, I beseech you, shall it be lawful for Magistrates to punish those that
destroy Men's Souls? Shall they be blamed for suffering Men to draw away people
from Obedience to the Laws of the Land and to themselves, and not also for
suffering Men to draw away People from the Truth of the Gospel, and from the
ways of God; such as Hymineus and Philetus, who overthrew the Faith of some,
and their words eat as a Canker? Shall Christian Magistrates take up the Maxim
of Tiberius, Deorum injurias Diis curae esse; Let God himself take care to
vindicate himself from Injuries committed against God? as for me, I will (just
like Gallio) take care of none of these things. Can Christian Ears endure such
Language? Does not God Prophecy, Isaiah 49.23. That in the New Testament Kings
shall be our Nursing-fathers, and Queens our Nursing-mothers? And how can a
ChrisTain Magistrate discharge that Duty aright, if he has not Power from God
to punish those that would poison the Souls of his weak Children with Heresies
and soul-destroying Opinions?

Object. Will you allow the Magistrate to Tyrannize over Men's Consciences?

Answer. By no means; but I believe it is the Duty of Magistrates to keep Men
from infecting their Subjects with souldestroying Errors. If thou have an
heretical Opinion, have it to thy self, and the Magistrate will not, nay,
cannot meddle with thy private Conscience. But if thou labourest to Infect
others with thy grace-destroying Opinions, I doubt not but the Magistrate is
bound to keep thee from spreading thy Infection, to the undoing of the Souls of
his Subjects. If he may lawfully shut up a Man that has the Plague upon his
Body, that he may not Infect others; why not a Man that has the Plague of
heresy upon his Soul, that so he may not destroy the Souls of Thousands? Shall
a Master of a Family have nower to put away a Servant that is tainted with a
gross Opinion, and yet not be called a Tyrant over that Servants Conscience?
And shall not the Chief Magistrate of a Kingdom have power to put out of his
Kingdom (at least shut up from doing hurt) one that is his Subject, and
polluted with blasphemous, heretical, idolatrical Opinions? Is not the Kingdom
the Magistrates House and Family?

In another Sermon before the Commons, October. 22. 1644. Page 26. Mr. Calamy
preached thus; This is a certain Rule, That all the Sins of the Kingdom, which
are committed by your Connivence or Allowance, are the Parliament-Sins, and
they call for a Parliament Repentance; and therefore, I beseech you, search and
try your hearts, and consider how far you are accessory to the Sins of the
Kingdom, that so you may be wrought up, not only to a personal, but a
Parliament Humiliation -- If you do not labor according to your Duty and
Power, to suppress the Errors and Heresies that are spread in the Kingdom, all
these Errors are your Errors, and these Heresies are your Heresies, they are
your Sins, and God calls for a Parliamentary Repentance from you for them this
Day. You are the Anabaptists, you are the Antinomians, and it is you that hold,
That all Religions are to be Tolerated, etc. These are your Errors if they
spread by your Connivence; for the Sins of old Eli's Sons are imputed to Eli
himself: And when the Israelites had profaned the Sabbath, Nehemiah told the
Nobles of judah, That it was they that did profane it, because they suffered
the people to profane it, Nehem. 13.17.

Mr. Richard Baxter in his Holy Commonwealth, Addition to Pref. Prop. 6. (
London Printed for Tho. Underhill) says It was none of the old Cause that the
People should have Liberty, and the Magistrate should have no Power, in all
Matters of God's Worship, Faith and Conscience; and as it is not the old Cause,
so it is not a good cause; for, First, it contradicts the express Revelation
of the Will of God in the Holy Scriptures. Moses had to do in Matters of
Religion as a Magistrate, and so the Ruling Elder that assisted him, and so had
the Kings of Isruel and Judah, as it is well known; insomuch, that in Asa's
Days, they covenanted to put him to Death that would not seek the Lord God of
Israel -- Law and Providence are quite changed, if toleration of false Worship,
and other abuses of Religion, tend not to the Ruin of the Commonwealth. It
tends also to the destruction of the Church and Men's Souls, if all hae leave to
do their worst, to Preach up Infidelity, Mahometanism, Popery, or any other
false Doctrine or Worship, against the great and necessary Truths.

I leave it therefore to the Judgment of all Men, that are not fast asleep in
their security, and utterly unacquainted with the advantages of the Papists,
whether this design of engaging the Magistrate by a Fundamental Constitution,
not to meddle with Matters of Faith and Worship, but leave them all to Christ
alone, be not the present setting up of Popery in England, and the delivering
all the Fruit of our Labors, Prayers, and Victories into the Papists Hands.

'Object. But Liberty for Popery and Prelacy is still excepted.

Answ. By whom? -- But if there had been an exception against Popery, etc. put
in, it would have been to little purpose, as long as a general Rule is laid
down that condemns that Exception: For if it be the standing Rule, That
Matters of Religion and Faith, and all Matters of Worship, are out of the
Magistrates Power; to say then, that Popery shall be excepted from Liberty, is
to say, The Magistrate shall intrude into the proper Office of Christ to
restrain the Papists.

Mr. Matthew Newcomen, in a Sermon before the Parliament, Sept. 12. 1644. Page
31. says, No Reformation of Religion now, now nothing will satisfy some, but
a Toleration of all Religions, and all Opinions. Church Government and
Discipline is to some a Fiction, to others a Tyranny and Persecution. Ah
Brethren, this is a provocation, and will be a provocation; for this God may
turn us into the Wilderness again.

Page 36. -- We are come to downright Libertinism. There are two Opinions,
which, if encouraged, will open a Door to Turcism, Judaism, Atheism,
Polytheism, any monster of Opinion. The one is, That every Man is to be lest to
the Liberty of his own Religion, an Opinion most pernicious and destructive as
to the Souls of Men, so to the Commonweal of the Kingdom. -- That Liberty of
believing what Men will (or of holding what Faith they please) is no other than
a Liberty of Erring, and of erring in a matter that concerns the eternal
Salvation of the Soul, wherein to err cannot but be most dangerous and
destructive -- Diversity of Religion disjoints and distracts the minds of Men,
and is the seminary of perpetual Hatreds, Jealousies, Seditions, Wars, if any
thing in the World be, and in a little time; either a Schism in the State
begets a Schism in the Church, or a Schism in the Church begets a Schism in the
State; that is, either Religion and the Church is prejudiced by civil
Contentions, or Church Controversies and Disputes about Opinions, break out
into Civil Wars. Men will at last take up Swords and Spears instead of Pens,
and defend by Arms, what they cannot do by Arguments. Once for all, It is the
preservation of Religion, and Reformation of it, which you have covenanted to
endeavor, and not a Liberty of Opinion, that will consist with neither: It is
the Extirpation of Heresy and Schism that you have covenanted, which if it be
connived at, why does the Apostle reprove the Corinthians for their Schism so
much? and why does the Lord Jesus commend the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
for trying those which said they were Apostles, and were not? And why is the
Angel of the Church of Thyatira reproved for suffering that Woman jezebel, who
called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce? If once we come to this,
that any Man be suffered to teach what he pleases, to seduce whom he list, to
be of what Faith or Religion seems good in his own Eyes, farewell Covenant,
farewell reformed Religion, farewell the Peace and Glory of England, if that day
once come. -- It is not usual, nay, it is not possible, that they which love
God sincerely, should desire to cherish differing Religions: For it is most
certain, He that admits contrary Religions, believes neither of them.

In another Sermon at Paul's, Feb. 8. 1645. p. 12. Mr. Newcomen says, If it be
lawful for every Man to entertain and hold what Opinion he pleases, how
differing soever from the Opinion and Judgment of the rest of the Church; yet
because this is his Opinion and his Judgment is persuaded of it, he must follow
his own Judgment, and that this Liberty of practicing his Judgment, be as some
say Liberty of Conscience, part of the Liberty purchased by Jesus, and to
restrain it, is, in their Language, Persecution, Tyranny, etc. If this were
true, surely Paul did very ill to charge the Corinthians with so much
Authority, to be of the same mind, and of the same Judgment 2 Cor. 13.11. Might
not some among the Corinthians have said to Paul, This is a hard usage, this is
to rack a low Man to the same length with a taller, and to cut a tall Man to
the stature of one that is low? (as Procrustes did by his Guests to suit his
Bed.) What the same Judgment, and the same Mind? Will not Paul allow difference
of Lights and Sights? Might not some one among the Corinthians have said, What
if I am of Opinion that there is no Resurrection, what has Paul or any Man to
do with that? It is my Conscience, and it is my Liberty, what has any Man to
do with my Conscience, more than I with his? Might not Hymeneus have said, What
if it be my Opinion, That the Resurrection is past already, 2 Timothy 2.18. what
has Paul to do with that? Yes, says Paul, If ye persist obstinate I will
Excommunicate you, I will deliver you up to Satan, that you may learn not to
blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1.20. Certainly this shelter, this Asylum of Error, falsely
called Liberty of Conscience, was not thought of in former Times.

See more of the sinfulness and very mischievous Consequences of Toleration in
the Book of the Learned Presbyterian Minister, Mr. Thomas Edwards, entitled,
The casting down of the last and strongest hold of Satan, or a Treatise against
Toleration, and pretended Liberty of Conscience; wherein, by Scripture, sound
Reason, Fathers, Schoolmen, Casuists, Protestants, Divines of all Nations,
Confessions of Faith of the reformed Churches, Ecclesiastical Histories, and
constant Practice of the most pious and wisest Emperors, Princes, States, the
best Writers of Politics, the Experience of all Ages, yea, by diverse
Principles and Proceedings of Sectaries themselves, as Donatists, Anabaptists,
Brownists and Independants, the unlawfulness and mischief in a Christian State
or Kingdom, both of an universal Toleration of all Religions, and of a limited
or bounded, of some Sects only, are clearly proved and demonstrated, with all
the material Grounds and Reasons, brought for such Tolerations, fully answered.
Printed 1647.

Mr. Edmund Calamy his Opinion concerning the Sinfulness of Separating from the
public Assemblies.
Take heed of separating from the Public Assemblies of the Saints: I have
found by experience, that all our Church Calamities have sprung from this Root.
He that separates from the public Worship is like a man tumbling down a Hill,
and never leaving till he comes to the bottom of it. I could relate many sad
Stories of persons professing Godliness, who out of dislike to our
Church-meetings, began at first to separate from them, and after many Changes
and Alterations, were turned some of them Ranters, some Quakers, some
Anabaptists, some direct Atheists. But I forbear; you must hold Communion with
all those Churches with which Christ holds Communion; you must separate from
the Sins of Christians, but not from the Ordinances of Christ. Take heed of
Unchurching the Churches of Christ, least you prove Schismatics instead of
being true Christians. Mr. Edmund Calamy 's Godly Man's Ark, Epist. Dedic. to
the Parish of Aldermanbury, Direction Fourteenth.

A Sentence of Mr. Richard Baxter concerning the evils and great danger of
leaving Parish Churches.
Consider this; It Is the Judgment of some, That thousands are gone to Hell, and
ten thousands upon their march thither, that in all probability had never come
there, if they had not been tempted from the Parish Churches, for the enjoyment
of Communion in a purer Church. Mr. Richard Baxter 's Epist. to separate
Congregations.

Mr. Baxter his Sense of the Evils of different Rites and Opinions, and of the
necessity of Uniformity to preserve the Church.
From diversity in Opinion, and external Rites, resulteth Dislike, thence
Enmity, thence Opposition, thence Schism in Church, and Sedition in State, the
State not standing secure without the Church, nor the Church without Unity, nor
Unity without Uniformity.

Votes of the Honorable House of Commons, Feb. 5. 1662. upon reading his
Majesty's gracious Declaration and Speech, etc.
Die Mercurii 25. Feb. and Regni Car. 2. Regis 15o.
Resolved nemine contradicente,

THAT the humble Thanks of this House be returned to his Majesty, for his
Resolution to maintain the Act of Uniformity.

Resolved also, That it be presented to the King's Majesty, as the humble
Advice of the House, That no Indulgence be granted to the Dissenters from the
Act of Uniformity. Part of their Address, which contains their Reasons against
Toleration, is as follows.

-- After all this we most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, that it is
with extreme unwillingness and reluctance of Heart, that we are brought to
differ from any thing which your Majesty has thought sit to propose. And
though we do no way doubt, but that the unreasonable Distempers of Men's
Spirits, and the many Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on, during
the late intervals of Parliament, did reasonably incline your Majesty to
endeavor by your Declaration to give some allay to those ill Humors, till the
Parliament assembled, and the hopes of Indulgence if the Parliament should
consent to it, especially seeing the Pretenders to this Indulgence did seem to
make some Titles to it, by virtue of your Majesty's Declaration from Breda.
Nevertheless, we your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are now
returned to serve in Parliament from those several Parts and Places of your
Kingdom, for which we are chosen, do humbly offer to your Majesty's great
Wisdom, That it is in no sort advisable, that there be any Indulgence to such
Persons, who presume to dissent from the Act of Uniformity, and the Religion
established. -- We have also considered the Nature of the Indulgence proposed,
with reference to these Consequences which must necessarily attend it.

It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
precarious, and the Censures of it of no moment or consideration at all.

It will expose your Majesty to the restless importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single Person also, who shall presume to dissent from the
Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will
weaken the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be
dissicult for it to defend it self against them: And which is yet farther
considerable, Those numbers which by being troublesome to the Government, find
they can arrive to an Indulgence, will as their numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, that so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, and in
time some prevalent Sect, will at last contend for an Establishment, which for
ought can be foreseen may end in Popery.

It is a thing altogether without precedent, and will take away all means of
convicting recusants, and be inconsistent with the method, and proceedings of
the Laws of England.

Lastly it is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence proposed, will be so far
from tending to the peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion
great disturbance. And on the contrary, that the asserting of the Laws, and the
Religion established, according to the act of Uniformity, is the most probable
means to produce a settled Peace and Obedience throughout the Kingdom. Because
variety of professions in Religion, when openly divulged, does directly
distinguish men into Parties, and withal gives them opportunity to count their
numbers, which considering the Animosities that out of a Religious Pride will
be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend directly and inevitably to
open Disturbance.

Nor can your Majesty have any security that the Doctrine or Worship of the
several Factions, which are all governed by a several Rule, shall be consistent
with the Peace of the Kingdom.

And if any Persons shall presume to disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, we do in
all humility declare, That we will for ever, and in all occasions, be ready
with our utmost endeavor and assistance to adhere to, and serve your Majesty
according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance.

These impregnable and unanswerable Reasons did the excellent Members of that
House allege against Toleration; Reasons full and clear, carrying with them
all the advantages of strength and evidence, and, as Dr. Tompkins said
deservedly of them, in his Pleas for Toleration discussed. These renowned
Gentlemen did then show, that they were able with their Pens to give an account
of that Cause, for which very many of themselves, and Fathers did honorably
draw their Swords, and knew very well how to assert that Church by all the
Rules of Christian Prudence, as well as they did formerly set inimitable
patterns of Christian Courage in suffering for it. In these we may see and
admire how those glorious Worthies came up to the Greatness of themselves, and
of the Argument; and indeed they were both worthy of one another, they to
defend, and that to be defended. And as nothing was ever better penned than
those Reasons, so there was scarce ever a better occasion. The best Church in
Europe was then bore witness to by the best House of Commons which ever sat in
this Nation. And these Votes shall ever remain as a lasting Monument, not only
of their Zeal and Religion, but of the incomparable Endowments and Abilities of
those who drew them up.

A LETTER OF THE MINISTERS Of the CITY of LONDON, Presented the First of
January, 1645. to the Reverend Assembly of Divines sitting at Westminister, by
Authority of Parliament, against TOLERATION.
To our Reverend, Learned, and Religious Brethren, the Prolocutor, and the rest
of the Divines assembled, and now sitting at Westminster by Authority of
Parliament, these present.
Reverend and beloved Brethren,
WE are exceedingly apprehensive of the desirableness of the Church's Peace,
and of the pleasantness of Brethrens Unity, knowing that when Peace is set upon
its proper basis, viz. Righteousness and Truth, it is one of the best
possessions, both delectable and profitable; like Aaron's Ointment, and the Dew
of Hermon. It is true, by reason of different lights and different sights among
Brethren, there may be dissenting in opinion; yet why should there be any
separating from Church Communion? The Church's Coat may be of diverse colors,
yet why should there be any rent in it? Have we not a touchstone of Truth, the
good word of God; and when all things are examined by that word, then that
which is best may be held fast; but first they must be known and then examined
afterward. If our dissenting Brethren, after so many importunate Entreaties,
would have been persuaded (either in zeal to the Truth, or in sincere love to
the Church's Peace and Unity among Brethren, or in respect to their own
reputation by fair and ingenuous dealing, or in conscience to their promise
made with the Ministers of London now five years since, or any such like
reasonable consideration) at last to have given us a full Narrative of their
Opinions, and grounds of their Separation, we are persuaded they would not have
slood at such a distance from us as now they do: But they chose rather to walk
by their own private lights, than to unbosom themselves to us their most
affectionate Brethren, and to set themselves in an untrodden way of their own,
rather than to wait what our covenanted Reformation, according to the Word of
God and Examples of the best Reformed Churches, would bring forth. But the
offense does not end here, it is much that our Brethren should separate from
the Church, but that they should endeavor to get a warrant to authorize their
separation from it, and to have liberty (by drawing Members out of it) to
weaken and diminish it, till (so far as lies in them) they have brought it to
nothing; this we think to be plainly unlawful, yet this we understand is their
present design and endeavor. Wherefore (Reverend Brethren) having bad such
large experience of your Zeal of God's Glory, your care of his afflicted
Church, your earnest endeavors to promote the complete Reformation of it, and
of your ready concurrence with us in the improvement of any means that might be
found conducible to this end; we are bold to hint unto you these our ensuing
Reasons against the Toleration of Independency in this Church.

I. The desires and endeavors of Independents for a Toleration are at this
time extremely unseasonable and preproperous: for,

1. The Reformation of Religion is not yet perfected and settled among us
according to our Covenant. And why may not the Reformation be raised up at last
to such purity, and perfection that truly tender Consciences may receive
abundant satisfaction for ought that yet appears?

2. It is not yet known what the Government of the Independents is, neither
would they ever yet vouchsafe to let the World know what they hold in that
point, though some of their party have been too forward to challenge the London
Petitioners as led with blind Obedience, and pinning their Souls upon the
Priest's sleeve, for desiring an establishment of the Government of Christ,
before there was any model of it extant.

3. We can hardly be persuaded, That the Independents themselves (after all the
stirs they have made amongst us) are as yet fully resolved about their own way
wherewith they would be concluded, seeing they publish not their model (though
they are nimble enough in publishing other things) and they profess Reserves,
and new Lights, for which they will (no doubt) expect the like Toleration, and
so in insinitum. It were more seasonable to move for Toleration when once they
are positively determined how far they mean to go, and where they mean to stay.

II. Their desires and endeavors are unreasonable and unequal in diverse
regards.

1. Partly because no such Toleration has hitherto been established (so far as
we know) in any Christian State by the Civil Magistrate.

2. Partly because some of them have solemnly professed, That they cannot
suffer Presbytery; and answerable hereunto is their practice in thoses places
where Independency prevails.

3. And partly because to grant to them and not to other Sectaries who are free
born as well as they, and have done as good service as they to the Public (as
they used to plead) will be counted Injustice and great Partiality; but to
grant it unto all will scarce be cleared from great Impiety.

III. Independency is a Schism; for,

1. Independents do depart from our Churches, being true Churches, and so
acknowledged by themselves.

2. They draw and seduce our Members from our Congregations.

3. They erect separate Congregations under a separate and undiscovered
Government.

4. They refuse Communion with our Churches in the Sacraments.

5. Their Ministers refuse to Preach among us as Officers.

6. Their Members, if at any time they join with us in hearing the Word and
Prayer, yet they do it not as with the ministerial Word and Prayer, not as Acts
of Church Communion.

Now we judge that no Schism is to be tolerated in the Church, Schisms.
(...), 1 Cor. 1.10. 1 Cor. 12.25. Divisions.
(...), Romans 6.17. with 1 Cor. 3.3. Gal. 5.20.

IV. Many mischiefs will inevitably follow upon this Toleration, and that both
to Church and Commonwealth.

First, To the Church, as,

1. Causeless and unjust revolts from our Ministry and Congregations.

2. Our Peoples minds will be troubled, and in danger to be subverted, as Acts
15.24.

3. Bitter heart-burnings among brethren will be fomented and perpetuated to
posterity.

4. The godly, painful and Orthodox Ministry will be discouraged and despised.

5. The life and power of Godliness will be eaten out by frivolous disputes and
vain janglings.

6. The whole course of Religion in private families will be interrupted and
undermined.

7. Reciprocal duties between persons of nearest and dearest relations will be
extremely violated.

8. The whole work of Reformation, especially in Discipline and Government,
will be retarded, disturbed, and in danger of being made utterly frustrate and
void, whilst every person shall have liberty upon every trivial discontent at
Presbyterial Government and Churches, to revolt from us and list themselves in
separated Congregations.

9. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will be encouraged to endeavor
the like Toleration.

10. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will safeguard and shelter
themselves under the wings of Independency, and some of the Independents in
their Books have openly avowed, that they plead for Liberty of Conscience as
well for others as themselves.

11. And the whole Church of England in short time will be swallowed up with
destraction and confusion. And God is not the Author of Confusion but of Peace,
1 Cor. 14.33.

Secondly, To the Commonwealth. For,

1. All these mischiefs in the Church will have their proportionable influence
upon the Commonwealth.

2. The Kingdom will be woefully weakened by scandals and Divisions, so that the
enemies of it both Domestical and Foreign will be encouraged to plot and
practice against it.

3. It is much to be doubted, lest the power of the Magistrate, should not
only be weakened, but even utterly overthrown, considering the principles and
practices of Independents, together with their compliance with other Sectaries,
sufficiently known to be Anti-Magistratical.

V. Such a Toleration is utterly repugnant and inconsistent with that solemn
League and Covenant for Reformation and Defense of Religion, which not only
both Houses of Parliament, but also persons of all sorts in both Kingdoms of
England and Scotland have subscribed, and with hands lifted up to the most high
God have sworn: Which Covenant likewise both you, and we, and those that most
earnestly pursue the establishment of this Toleration, have made, (or should
have made) in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts, with a
true intention to perform the same as we shall answer at that great day, when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. For,

1. This is opposite to the Reformation of Religion according to the Word of
God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches, Article 1.

2. It is destructive to the three Kingdoms nearest conjunction and uniformity
in Religion and Government, which might lead us and our Posterity after us as
brethren to live in Faith and Love, Art. 1.

3. It is plainly contrary to that extirpation of Schism, and whatsoever shall
be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, which we have
sworn sincerely, really, and constantly to endeavor without respect of
persons, Art. 2.

4. Hereby we shall be involved in the guilt of other men's sins, and thereby be
endangered to receive of their plagues, Art. 2.

5. It seems utterly impossible (if such a Toleration should be granted) that
the Lord should be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms, Art. 2.

6. This will palpably hinder the Reformation of Religion; Inevitably divide
one Kingdom from another, and unhappily make Factions and Parties among the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, of which evil offices whosoever
shall be found guilty, are reputed in the words of the Covenant, Incendiaries,
Malignants, or evil Instruments, to be discovered, that they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign Punishment, Art. 4. and 5.

These are some of the many considerations which make deep impression upon our
Spirits against that great Diana of Independents, and all the Sectaries so much
cried up by them in these distracted times, viz. A Toleration, A Toleration.
And however, none should have more rejoiced than our selves in the
establishment of a brotherly, peaceable and Christian Accommodation; yet this
being utterly rejected them, we cannot dissemble how upon the forementioned
grounds, we detest and abhor the much endeavored Toleration. Our bowels, our
bowels are stirred within us, and we could even drown our selves in tears, when
we call to mind how long and sharp a travel this Kingdom has been in for many
years together, to bring forth that blessed fruit of a pure and perfect
Reformation, and now at last, after all our pangs, and dolours, and
expectations, this real and thorough Reformation is in danger of being
strangled in the birth by a lawless Toleration that strives to be brought forth
before it.

Wherefore (Reverend and beloved Brethren) we could not satisfy our selves
till we had made some discovery of our thoughts unto you about this matter, not
that we can harbor the least jealousy of your zeal, fidelity, or industry in
the opposing and extirpating of such a root of gall and bitterness as
Toleration is and will be, both in present and future ages; but that we may,
what lies in us, endeavor mutually to strengthen one another resolutions
against the present growing evils, and that our Consciences may not smite us
another day for sinful silence, or sluggish deficiency in any point of duty
tending to the Glory of Christ, Honor of the Truth, Peace of the Church,
Perfection of Reformation, Performance of our Covenant, and benefit of present
and succeeding Generations.

From Sion Coll. London, December. 18. 1645. Subscribed by us your affectionate
Brethren, and Fellow Laborers in the work of the Ministry, to whom Truth and
Peace is very precious.

Sir Fr. Walsingham's Letter to Monsieur Critoy, concerning the Queen's
Proceedings against both Papists and Puritans.
SIR,
WHereas you desire to be advertised, touching the proceedings here in
Ecclesiastical Causes, because you seem to note in them some Inconstancy and
Variation, as if we inclined sometimes to one side, and sometimes to another;
and as if that Clemency and Lenity were not used of late, that was used in the
beginning: All which you imputed to your own superficial Understanding of the
Affairs of this State, having, notwithstanding Her Majesty's doing in singular
Reverence, as the real Pledges which she has given unto the World of her
Sincerity in Religion, and of the Wisdom in Government, well meriteth.

I am glad of this occasion, to import that little I know in that Matter unto
you, both for your own Satisfaction, and to the end you may make use thereof,
toward any that shall not be so modestly and reasonably minded as you are.

I find Her Majesty's Proceedings to have been grounded upon two Principles.

The one, That Consciences are not to be forced, but to be won and reduced by
force of Truth, with did of Time, and use of good means of Instructions and
Persuasion.

The other, That Causes of Consciences, when they exceed their bounds, and grow
to be matter of Faction, lose their Nature, and that Sovereign Princes ought
distinctly to punish their Practices and Contempt, though colored with the
pretenses of Conscience and Religion.

According to these Principles, Her Majesty coming to the Crown, utterly
disliking the Tyranny of Rome, which had used by Terror and Rigor to settle
Commandments of Men's Faith and Consciences; though, as a Princess of great Wisdom
and Magnanimity, She suffered but the Exercise of one Religion; yet her
Proceedings toward the Papists was with great Lenity, expecting the good
Effects which Time might work in them; and therefore Her Majesty revived not
the Laws made in the 28th. and 35th. of her Father's Reign, whereby the Oath of
Supremacy might have been offered at the King's pleasure to any Subject, so he
kept his Conscience never so modestly to himself, and the refusal to take the
same Oath, without further Circumstances, was made Treason. But contrariwise,
Her Majesty not liking to make Windows into Men's Hearts and secret Thoughts,
except the abundance of them did overflow into overt and express Acts or
Affirmations, tempered Her Law so, as it restrains every manifest
Disobedience, in impugning and impeaching, advisedly and maliciously, Her
Majesty's Supreme Power, maintaining and extolling a Foreign Jurisdiction: And
as for the Oath, it was altered by Her. Majesty, into a more grateful Form: The
hardness of the Name and Appellation of Supreme Head, was removed, and the
Penalty of the refusal thereof, turned only to disablement to take any
Promotion, or to exercise any Charge, and yet of Liberty to be reinvested
therein, if any Man should accept thereof, during his Life. But after, when
Pius Quintus Excommanicated Her Majesty, and the Bulls of Excommunication were
published in London, whereby Her Majesty was in a sort proscribed, and that
thereupon as upon a principal motive or preparative, followed the Rebellion in
the North, yet because the ill Humors of the Realm were by that Rebellion
partly purged, and that she feared at that time no foreign Invasion, and much
less the attempt of any within the Realm, not backed by some potent Power and
Succor from without, She contented her self to make a Law against that special
Case of bringing in, and publishing any Bulls, or the like Instruments;
whereunto was added a Prohibition, upon pain, not of Treason, but of an
inferior degree of punishment, against the bringing of the Agnus Dei's, and
such other Merchandice of Rome, as are all known, not to be any essential part
of the Romanists Religion, but only to be used in practice, as Love Tokens, to
inchant and bewitch the Peoples Affections from their Allegiance to their
natural Sovereign. In all other Points Her Majesty continued her former Lenity:
But when about the Twentieth Year of Her Reign, She had discovered in the King
of Spain an intention to invade Her Dominions; and that a principal part of the
Plot, was to prepare a Party within the Realm, that might adhere to the
Foreigner; and that the Seminaries began to blossom, and to send forth daily
Priests, and professed Men, who should by Vow taken at Shrift, reconcile her
Subjects from their Obedience, yea, and bind many of them to attempt against
Her Majesty's Sacred Person; and that, by the Poison which they spread, the
Humors of most Papists were altered, and that they were no more Papist in
Conscience, and of Softness, but Papist in Faction: Then were there new Laws
made, for the Punishment of such as should submit themselves to such
reconcilements, or renunciation of Obedience. And because it was a Treason
carried in the Clouds, and in wonderful Secrecy, and come seldom to light, and
that there was no presuspicion thereof so great, as the Recusancy to come to
Divine Service, because it was set down by their Decrees, that to come to
Church before Reconciliation was to live in Schism; but to come to Church after
Reconcilement, was absolutely Heretical and Damnable. Therefore there were
added Laws containing punishment Pecuniary, viz. such as might not enforce
Consciences, but to infeeble and impoverish the means of those about whom it
rests indifferent and ambiguous, whether they were reconciled or not: And
when, notwithstanding all this provision, the Poison was dispersed so secretly,
as that there was no means to stay it, but by restraining the Merchants that
brought it in: Then, lastly, there was added a Law, whereby such seditious
Priests, of new Erection, were exiled; and those that were at that time within
the Land, shipped over, and so commanded to keep hence upon pain of Treason.
This has been the proceeding, though intermingled, not only with sundry
Examples of her Majesty's Grace toward such as in her Wisdom she knew to be
Papist in Conscience, and not Faction and Singularity, but also with
extraordinary mitigation toward the Offenders in the highest degree, committed
by Law, if they would but protest, that if in Case this Realm should be invaded
with a Foreign Army, by the Pope's Authority, for the Catholic Cause, as they
term it, they would take part with her Majesty, and not adhere to her Enemies.

For the other Party, which have been offensive to the State, though in another
Degree, which named themselves Reformers, and we commonly call Puritans, this
has been the proceeding toward them. A great while, when they inveighed
against such abuses in the Church, as Pluralities, Non-residence, and the like;
their Zeal was not Condemned, only their Violence was sometimes Censured. When
they refused the use of some Ceremonies and Rites, as Superstitious, they were
tolerated with much Connivency and Gentleness; yea, when they called in
Question the Superiority of Bishops, and pretended to a Democrary in the
Church; yet, their Propositions were here considered, and by contrary Writings
debated and discussed; yet all this while, it was perceived that their Course
was dangerous, and very popular: As, because Papistry was odious, therefore it
was ever in their Mouths, That they sought to Purge the Church from the
Relics of Papistry; a thing acceptable to the People, who love ever to run
from one extreme to another.

Because multitudes of Rogues, and Poverty was an Eyesore, and a dislike to
every Man; therefore they put into the Peoples head, That if Discipline were
planted, there should be no Vagabonds nor Beggars, a thing very plausible: And
in like manner they promised the People, many of the impossible wonders of
their Discipline; besides, they opened to the People a way to Government, by
their Consistory and Presbytery; a thing, though in consequence no less
prejudicial to the Liberties of private Men, than to the Sovereignty of
Princes, yet in first show very Popular. Nevertheless this, except it were some
few that entered into extreme contempt, was born with, because they pretended
in dutiful manner to make Propositions, and to leave it to the Providence of
God, and the Authority of the Magistrate. But now of late Years, when there
issued from them that affirmed, the consent of the Magistrate was not to be
attended; when under pretense of a Confession, to avoid Slander and
Imputations, they combined themselves by Classes and Subscriptions, when they
descended into that vile and base means of defaming the Government of the
Church by ridiculous Pasquils; when they began to make many Subjects in doubt
to take Oaths, which is one of the fundamental Parts of Justice in this Land;
and in all places, when they began both to vaunt of their strength, and number
of their Partisans and Followers, and to use Comminations that their Cause
would prevail, through Vproar and Violence; then it appeared to be no more
Zeal, no more Conscience, but mere Faction and Division: And therefore, though
the State were compelled to hold somewhat a harder hand to restrain them than
before, yet was it with as great moderation, as the Peace of the State or
Church could permit. And therefore, Sir, to conclude, consider uprightly of
these matters, and you shall see Her Majesty is no more a Temporizer in
Religion: It is not the success Abroad, nor the Change of Servants here at
Home, can alter her; only as the things themselves alter, She applied her
Religious Wisdom to Methods correspondent unto them, still retaining the Two
Rules before mentioned, in dealing tenderly with Consciences, and yet in
discovering Faction from Conscience, and Softness from Singularity. Farewell.

Your loving Friend, Fr. Walsingham.
The Learned Dr. Burnet, now the Right Reverend Bishop of Sarum, first
published this Letter in the second Part of his History of the Reformation,
Page 418. and had he joined it to his Preface of Persecution before Lactantius
his Book of the Death of Persecutors, it would have vindicated the Proceedings
against Dissenters in the Reign of King Charles II. from the odium of
Persecution, when the Laws were so justly and deservedly Executed against them,
for their insolent provocations.

This Sir Francis Walsingham was sometime before a Friend and Favourer of the
Puritanical Party, and therefore he is not in the least to be suspected of
doing them wrong, in the Account which he has given of their unruly,
boisterous Carriage to the Government.

The Lord Keeper Puckering gave the like Account of their ungovernable Temper,
and how dangerous they were to the Government, in his Speech to the House of
Lords, by Queen Elizabeth 's Command, which you have in the following Page.



Lord Keeper Puckering's Speech.
IN the day of Queen Elizabeth the Puritans as well as Papists, persecuted her
Majesty so vigorously, that they thereby opened the door, and prepared the way
to the Spanish Invasion, and although they were very troublesome, and made a
noise with their great numbers, which would arise by disobliging them, which
were implicit threatenings, to awe her Majesty into a favorable compliance
with their insolent demands, yet even in that critical time, when she was
environed about with potent Enemies from abroad, she was nothing terrified with
the impetuous clamours of these domestic Foes, nor would she stoop so much
beneath the Honor and Dignity of the Government as to condescend, even in that
juncture of time, to their unreasonable as well as ungodly desires. And though
they had also great favorers of them at Court, as the Earl of Leicester, Sir
Francis Walsingham and others, that were ready to plead in their behalf, yet
would not her Majesty be prevailed upon in favor or out of fear of them, to
do the true Religion and the Church so much wrong as to grant them any
Indulgence. She did not like the Hobbian Politics of the present age, nor
would she adventure upon the displeasing of God and the making him her enemy,
to gratify them and gain their Friendship, by establishing so great a sin as
Schism or Toleration is, but having a good Cause and trusting in God for a
Blessing on it, she was so far from giving them any Indulgence, out of fear of
their great numbers, of which they boasted not a little, that she proceeded
against them with greater courage and resolution, and immediately before the
Spainish Invasion, she moved the Parliament against them, and gave order to the
then Lord Keeper Puckering to warn the Parliament not to hearken to them: which
accordingly he did in his speech, in the house of Lords in the following words.

-- Especially you are commanded by her Majesty to take heed, that no ear be
given, nor time afforded to the wearisome Solicitations of those that are
commonly called Puritans, wherewithal the late Parliaments have been
exceedingly importuned, which sort of men, while in the giddiness of their
Spirits, they labor and strive to advance a new Eldership, they do nothing
else but disturb the good repose of the Church, and the Commonwealth, which is
as well grounded for the Body of Religion it self, and as well guided for the
discipline as any Realm that professes the Truth. -- And as the present case
stands it may be doubted, whether they or the Jesuits do offer more danger,
or be more speedily to be repressed. For albeit the Jesuits do empoison the
hearts of her Majesty's Subjects under a pretext of Conscience, yet they do it
but closely and only in privy corners, but these men do both publish in their
printed Books, and teach in all their Conventicles, sundry opinions, not only
dangerous to the well settled State and Policy of the Realm, by putting a Pique
between the Clergy and the Laity, but also much derogatory to her sacred
Majesty and her Crown, as well by the diminution of her ancient and lawful
revenues, and by denying her highness Prerogative and Supremacy, as by offering
peril to her Majesty's safety in her own Kingdom. In all which things (however
in many other points, they pretend to be at War with the popish Jesuits, yet)
by the Separation of themselves from the unity of their fellow Subjects, and by
abusing the sacred Authority and Majesty of their Prince, they do both join and
concur with the Jesuits in opening the door and preparing the way to the
Spanish Invasion that is threatened against the Realm. And it is worth the
observation, says Dr. Heylin in his History of the Preshyterians, page 280.
That the Puritans were then most busy, as well in setting up their Discipline,
as in publishing railing and seditious Pamphlets, when the Spaniards were
hovering on the Seas with their terrible Navy; at what time they conceived and
not improbably, that the Queen and Council would be otherwise busied, than to
take notice of their practices, or suppress their doings; or rather that they
durst not call them into question, for their words or actions, for fear of
alienating the affections of so strong a party as they had raised unto
themselves. The serious apprehension of which mischievous counsels prevailed so
far on Leicester and Walsingham that they did absolutely renounce any farther
intercession for them, professing that they had been horribly abused with their
Hypocrisy. And it is as observable, that their so much boasted of great
numbers immediately did abate when the Laws were executed upon them, and they
presently submitted as soon as they did perceive that the Government would no
longer trifle with them and endure their insolences. So likewise as Dr.
Tompkins observes in his Pleas for Toleration discussed; It happened in King
James I. his days, their loud clamours were presently silenced as soon as ever
the King declared himself resolute at the Conference at Hampton Court. Nor
would the Act of Uniformity made in the Year 1662, have had any less effect, if
it had not been accompanied with a general discourse at the same time of a
Toleration to follow immediately upon it, the hopes of which hindered many
Nonconformists from conforming. However the awe of this Act, and the levying
sometimes a Shilling for absenting from the Church, wrought ry good effects;
insomuch that in most places, where Fanatics did greatly abound, they were
reduced to conformity, and in a great City of this Nation, containing fourteen
Parish Churches, as a Divine of good note that lived in it, has published to
the World, there were not above six or seven that absented from the Church,
till the Popish and Fanatic interest, in Conjunction together, procured a
Toleration in 1672, which drew them away from the Church again; but upon the
cancelling of that mischievous Indulgence, and the using of a little severity
in levying from some few of them, their Shillings for absenting from Church,
they repaired as formerly to their Parish Churches, and a Dissenter was very
rarely to be found. So that although King Charles the second in his Indulgence,
declared, that in twelve Years the Severities of the Laws, had not worked the
desired end in bringing Dissenters to close with the Church of England, and
that King James the second in his Declartion for Toleration asserts, That all
the endeavors that have been used in the last four reigns, for bringing this
Kingdom to an Unity in Religion have been ineffectual, it was not because the
means were defective or insufficient, for the working this design, but because
the Laws which were enacted for this purpose were so much neglected, or so
often intermitted, which if they had been steadily or constantly put in
execution, would have thoroughly cured the Nation of Divisions, but when they
were only upon some short and sudden fit put in execution, and such frequent
Connivences and Indulgences given afterward, to countenance and empower the
Ringleaders of the several Sectaries, to seduce from the Church, and to
propagate and increase their Parties, it could not be expected that the
dissenting Parties should close with the Church. And as the Learned Dr. Burnet,
now the Right Reverend Bishop of Sarum, well notes, in his reflections on the
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience. page 3. We can see no reason to induce
us to believe that a Toleration of Religion was proposed with any other design,
but either to divide us, or to lay us asleep for the destroying us. The Popish
Party, as he rightly says, Since Queen Elizabeth's gentle reign, has been ever
restless, and has had credit enough at Court, during the three last reigns, not
only to support it self, but to distract and divert us, by somenting of our
differences, and by setting on Toleration, etc. and as he further judiciously
observes, while such (intermitting) Methods were used, and the Government as in
an ague divided between hot and cold sits, no wonder if Laws so unsteadily
executed, have failed of their effect.

But if the Government shall think it sit to imitate that prudent excellent
Princess, and in instead of showing any fear of the Dissenters, put the Laws
moderately in execution against them, we shall no doubt in a short time find
the good effects of it, in the happy uniting them to the Church of England, to
the great disappointment and grief of the Papists. And till this be done we can
expect no other than Confusion and disorder in the Church and Distraction in
the State. And the Book that was written in the Oliverian days by a learned
Presbyterian, entitled, Wholesome Severity reconciled with Christian Liberty,
licenced by Ja. Cranford, will justify such a proceeding against the several
sorts of Dissenters, and vindicate it from the odious Imputation of
Persecution. In which Book there is this memorable sentence, That Liberty of
Horesie and Schism is no part of the Liberty of Conscience, which Christ has
purchased for us, but that under these fair colors, and handsome pretexts,
Sectaries infuse their poison, their pernicious, God-provoking, Truth-defacing,
Church-ruinating, and State-shaking Toleration.

The Character which the Great and good Archbishop Whitgift gave of the
turbulent Spirits of the Puritans, is very considerable, in a Letter of his to
the Privy Council, which was occasioned, by a Paper of some Suffolk Ministers.
True it is, says he, they are no Jesuits, neither are they charged to be so,
but notwithstanding they are contentious in the Church of England, and by their
Contentions, they minister occasion of offense to those which are seduced by
Jesuits, and give the Sacraments against the Form of public Prayer, used in
this Church and by Law established, and thereby increase the number of them,
and consirm them in their willfulness. They also make a Schism in the Church,
and draw many other of her Majesty's Subjects to the misliking of her Laws and
Government in Causes Ecclesiastical; so far are they from persuading Men to
Obedience; or, at least, if they persuade them to it, in the one part of her
Authority in Causes Civil, they dissuade them from it, as much in the other in
Causes Ecclesiastical; so that, indeed, they pluck down with the one hand, that
which they seem to build with the other.

And is is truly observed by Doctor Tompkins, in his Pleas, etc. Page 141. That
notwithstanding all the Zeal which the Nonconsormists do declare against
Popery, it is well known, that they have, and (as their Interest leads them)
can still, join both Counsels and Arms together. The leading Men of both
Parties in Ireland, were wonderfully great together, all the while that the
Design was managing against the Earl of Strafford. And here in England, in the
Declaration which King Charles I. set forth, concerning the Success of the
Battle at Edgehill, on October 23. 1643. he has left this Memorial to all
Posterity. All Men know the great member of Papists which serve in their
Armies, Commanders and others; the great Industry to corrupt the Loyalty and
Affection of all our loving Subjects of that Religion; the private Promises and
Undertakings that they have made to them, That if they would assist them
against us, all the Laws made in their prejudice should be repealed.

The Popish Party also, used the same persuasive methods in the late Days of
King James the Second, to allure the Dissenters to join with them, for the
pulling down the Established true Religion, and how effectually this Bait was
swallowed by them, and into what a hellish Confederacy these two Brethren in
Iniquity entered together for the Destruction of the Church of England, their
many scandalous Addresses, and other their libellous Invectives against the
Church of England (which were stuffed with the most inveterate Hatred, Rancour
and Malice that Hell could devise against it) do abundantly testify; nor can I
better express suitably to their deserts, how foolishly as well as criminally,
they acted in those Days, inconsistent with Prudence, Honesty, and their former
Clamours against Popery and Arbitrary Government. Then, in the Words of a late
Author, their Friend and Favourer, who professes a great deal of kindness for
them in many Pages of his Book, Entitled, A Representation of the threatening
Dangers impending over Protestants in Great Britain, before the coming of his
Highness the Prince of Orange. In this Book, notwithstanding the good will he
shows to the Dissenters, and his undeserved Censures and Reproaches of the
Church of England, which very spitefully do abound in it, yet when he came to
consider the Dissenters siding so much with the Papists, and the brave
opposition the Members of the Church of England made against Popery, it drew
from him smart reflections on the one, and very high Commendations of the
other, according to the just Merits; insomuch that by reason of the Dissenters
many flattering Addresses, and their countenancing and defending the King's
Arbitrary unjustifiable Proceedings, he says of them, Page 44. The World has
just ground to say, That the Phanaticks are not governed by Principles, but
that the measures they walk by, are what conduces to the private and personal
Benefit, or what lies in a tendency to their loss and prejudice; and that it
was not King Charles II. his Usurping an Arbitrary and Illegal Power that
offended them, but that they were not the Objects in whose favor it was
Exercised. And Page 46. he says this of them, Notwithstanding all the danger
from Popery that the Nation was exposed unto, and all the hazard that the Souls
of Men were in, of being poisoned with Romish Principles; yet instead of
Preaching or Writing against any of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, they
agreed among themselves, and with such of their Congregations as approved of
their procedure, not so much as to mention them, but to leave the Province of
defending our Religion, and of detecting the falsehood of Papal Tenets, to the
Pastors and Gentlemen of the Church of England. And being asked (as he knew of
some that were) why they did not preach against Antichrist, and confute the
Papal Doctrines? they very gravely replied, That by preaching Christ they did
preach against Antichrist, and that by teaching the Gospel they refuted Popery;
which is such a piece of fraudulent and guileful Subterfuge, that I want words
(bad enough) to express the Knavery and Criminalness of it. It was but the
other Day that the conformable Clergy were represented by some of the
Dissenters, not only as favorers of Popery, but as endeavoring to hale it in
upon us, by all the methods and ways that lay within their Circles; and yet now
the whole Defense of the reformed Religion must be entirely divolved into their
Hands: And when all the sluices were pulled up, that had been made to hinder
Popery from overflowing the Nation, they were left alone to stem the
Inundation, and prevent the Deluge. They, among the Phanaticks, that boasted to
be the most avowed and irreconcilable Enemies of the Church of Rome, were not
only become altogether silent, when they saw the Kingdom pestered with a swarm
of busy and seducing Emissaries, but were turned Advocates for that Arbitrary
Paper, whereby we were surrendered as a prey unto them; and did make it their
Business to detract from the Reputation of the National Ministers, The Members
of the Church of England wrote then above 220. Books against Popery, when there
were not above one or two writ by the Non-conformists, as is to be seen in the
late Lift or Account that was published of them.
who with a Zeal becoming their Office, and a Learning which deserves to be
admired, did set themselves in opposition to that croaking fry, and did enough
by their excellent and unimitable writings to save People from being deluded
and perverted, if either unanswerable Confutations of Popery, or demonstrative
Desences of the Articles and Doctrines of the Reformed Religion, can have any
efficacy upon the minds of Men.

And this Author farther says, Among other fulsome Flatteries made to his
Majesty by an addressing Dissenter, he found this hypocritical and shameful
Adulation, namely, That if there should remain any Seeds of Disloyalty in any
of his Subjects, the transcendant Goodness exerted in his Declaratian, would
mortify and kill them: To which he might have added with more Truth, That the
same transcendant Goodness had admost destroyed all the Seeds of their Honesty,
and mortified all their Care and Concernment for the Interest of Jesus Christ,
and for the Reformed Religion.

Their old strain of zealous Preaching against the Idolatry of Rome, and
concerning the coming out of Babylon, my People, were grown out of Fashion with
them -- And whosoever should come into their Assemblies, would think, (for any
thing that he there heard delivered from their Pulpits) that she, which was the
Whore of Babylon a few Years ago, were now become a Chaste Spouse; and that
what were heretofore the damnable Doctrines of Popery, were of late turned
innocent and harmless Opinions. -- And as they are already arrived, to believe
a Roman Catholic the best King, so they may, in a little time, come to esteem
Papists for the best Christians. This and a great deal more to the same purpose
you may find in this Book, of smart reflections upon the Dissenters scandalous
and abominable wicked Confederacy with the Papists, for the subverting the true
reformed Religon.

The Troublers of our Israel being thus plainly manifested to the World, and a
true Discovery made in the several Collections, from whence the Evils and
Miseries did principally arise, that have befallen our Church, and State, since
the days of Queen Elizabeth unto these present times, and which will
undoubtedly bring Ruin, Confusion, and Disorder on both, if not seasonably and
effectually redressed; for so the Fountain of Truth and Wisdom tells us, Matthew.
12.25. That a Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation, and
every City or House divided against it self cannot stand? The foregoing
accounts are therefore humbly offered to the serious perusal of our Church and
State-Physicians, the Parliament and Convocation to find out and apply proper
means and remedies, for the preventing the farther growth of these mischiefs,
which not only threaten, but genuinely tend and hasten to the destruction of
the true established Religion, and of our Nation.

And that they may zealously go about this good work, and effectually finish
it, it is the Interest and Duty of all good Christians to pray for them both,
as we are taught in that excellent Form in our Liturgy, That God would be
pleased to direct and prosper all their Consultations to the Advancement of his
Glory, the good of his Church, and the Safety, Honor and Welfare of their
Majesty's and Kingdoms. That all things may be so ordered and settled by their
endeavors upon the best and surest Foundations, that Peace and Happiness,
Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety may be established among us for all
Generations.

And it is no less the Duty of all that profess themselves Members of our
Church, to be sincerely minded, and not to be mockers with God, but earnestly
to seek and endeavor after the freeing us from those evils, which we pray to
be delivered from, in our Litany, viz. From all Sedition, privy Conspiracy and
Rebellion, from all false Doctrine, Heresy and Schism, from hardness of Heart,
and contempt of God's Word and Commandments; and that after the putting up
these Petitions in the Church to the Throne of Grace, that all who profess and
call themselves Christians, may be led into the way of Truth, and hold the
Faith in Unity of Spirit, in the bond of Peace, and Righteousness of Life; and
that God would give to us and all Nations Unity Peace and Concord, and bring
into the way of Truth all such as have erred and are deceived, none of us may
be found such wretched self-condemners in our Practice, and wicked
Prevaricators with God and the Church, as to act directly contrary to what we
pray for, in the promoting of a Connivence, Toleration, or Libertinism, which
will establish Schism, propagate and multiply Heresies, breed Discord and
Divisions, and will also empower and commission Satan to sow his tares and to
seduce multitudes from the ways of Truth, Peace, Unity and Righteousness, and
when people are left at Liberty, in matters of Religion, to do what seems
good in their own eyes, they seldom do what is good in the Lord's eyes, but are
laid open to great Temptations of being drawn away into the paths of the most
dangerous errors.

Happy is he that condemns not himself, in that which he allows, Romans
14.22. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows that
shall he reap, Gal. 6.7. St. Paul's Prophecy of the Downfall and Suppression of
seducing Separatists or Dividers, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. Now as Jannes and Jambres
(Egyptian Magicians) withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth: men
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. But they shall proceed no
further: for their folly shall be manifested as theirs also was.


FINIS.

