Religio Bibliopolae.

In Imitation of Dr. Browns RELIGIO MEDICI.

WITH A SUPPLEMENT to it.

By Benj. iBrgwater, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for P. Smart, and are to be sold at the Raven in the Poultry.
1691.

TO THE READER
THE Author of this Treatise not having leisure to finish this Piece as he
intended, being called aside upon unavoidable Reasons, we have been compelled
to supply that Defect by another Hand, yet with all the care possibly to reach
the Air, and Style of the Author, which is of that neatness and facility as
must needs recommend it (were there nothing else considerable) to the taste of
such an Age as this. The Method being obvious and easy, the Notions bold and
intelligible, aad the Whole throughout acted with such a Spirit of Life and
Vigor, as certainly can never fail of acceptance with the truly Learned and
Ingenious.

Under such Prejudices do we labor, and our conceptions of Things are for the
most part so irregular and monstrous, that but to attempt our Delivery, and set
us free from the slavish Power of Custom and Education, wherewith we are so
miserably involved, merits no small Commendation, tho the Success be
unanswerable to the Undertaking: But to clear our dim sight, to take the Film
from our Eyes, and place us in the open Sunshine of Reason, and true Judgment;
to acquaint us with the prerogative of our own Understandings, and the due
liberty and freedom of using them, is an Achievement that exacts the highest
Applause and Gratitude from the better and nobler part of Mankind.

H^reby we are enabled to make a true Estimate of things, to divest them from
all those foraign and spacious Accoutrements, with which Error and Mistake have
clothed them. We shall then see things in their own native and naked Forms,
and be able to reduce them to their true, and intrinsic Worth and Value.

The greatest and most universal mischief Mankind suffers under, is the
Delusion of a false and unrectifyed Imagination. This is, an Error, in the
first Concoction, and gives a Tincture to all our Judgments, and a Biass to all
the Actions of our Lives: The very Ground and Cause of all our Miscarriages. We
derive false Conceptions from our Cradles, and suck it in with our Mothers
Milk. Our Nurses, etc. destroy us in our very Infancy with their Tattle and
Impertinence, which root themselves so deeply in our Fancies, that we can
hardly, if ever, disengage our selves from them all our Life after. Hence we
contract a habit of Laziness, and become fitly disposed to take things upon
Trust and Reputation, to save the Charge of a little Examination, and Study:
The Spring and Rise of all our late Repentance, and Vexation.

Now the Business of this Author, is to Instruct us how to become our own
Masters, and to make use of those Faculties our Creator has endued us with, to
those Ends and Purposes for which they were intended.

The Reader upon the first View will find this Treatise to be an imitation of
that exquisite Piece of Dr. Brown, called Religio Medici, however without the
least Presumption of reaching so brave an Original, tho not without the hopes
of very nearly Resembling him in some of his Noblest Flights and Excellencies.

The Principal Subject of the whole is purely disputable, as being for the most
part matter of Opinion, wherein it has ever been lawful to take which side we
please: And tho he sometimes ventures upon Mysteries of an higher nature, yet
he hopes it is done with that Reverence and Tenderness, as may render him at
least excusable in that behalf. For notwithstanding, the Expression may appear
Dogmatical, the Design is wholly an Essay and Experiment, and not to be taken
for an Arbitrary and Decisive Sentence of those Matters.

I shall forestall the Readers impatience with no longer Harangue, not in the
least doubting, but upon the first reading, his consent to, and Approbation of
this Treatise, will be a sufficient Justification of the Author, and his
Attempt.

RELIGIO Bibliopolae.
THOUGH Trades (as well as Nations) have Scandals fastn'd upon them in the
Lump, yet there are some in all Professions to whom the abusive Character is
not due. Booksellers in the Gross are taken for no better than a (...) of (...)
(though thanks to our few Kindred among the Stars, it is only by prejudiced men)
yet among them there is a Re^ail of men who are no Strangers to Religion and
Honesty. I, that am one of that Calling, ^m bold to challenge the Title of a
Christian, neither am I ashamed to expose my Morals.

I have no reason to tax my Education, or blame those who had the Care of my
Juvenile Years. My Tutors were Learned and Orthodox, and made it their Business
to form my Mind, and square my Soul by the best Precepts and purest Examples.
Yet when I arrived at Years of maturer Judgment; I found occasion to prune my
self, and lop off many Excrescencies; to wipe out the early Impressions of my
Infant years, and unlearn the N^tions I sucked in with my Mothers Milk. Though
there were no Legends in the Nursery, nor Heresies in the Schools where I was
brought up: Yet my blooming Fancy was fertile in Errors, and sprouted forth in
many Luxuriant Thoughts. It was the Task of my Riper Judgment to correct These,
and reduce my self to the Standard of Reason and Faith.

Having therefore got the Weather-gage of Youthful Mistakes, by diligent
Scrutinies, and proper Remarks; Having put in the Balance and weighed my Native
Religion with all others that are extant, I now make that the Object of my
Choice, which before was only the Effect of Prepossession; and as I was listed
a Soldier of Christ in my Baptism, so now I decl^re my sel^ a Volunteer in his
Service: What was then done without my Knowledge, I now ratify by my free
Consent. And I resolve not to change my Banner as long as I live.

It Is no Solecism in Divinity to say, That the Prince of Peace is the Lord of
Hosts. The Church Militant is his Army composed of many Bartalions, in
different Posts, and under various Orders. So long as they all serve the great
Captain of our Salvation, and practice well the Discipline of their Arms, I
refuse not to give the word of Peace to any, let him be of what Company or
Troop soever. The variety which we behold in the Universe is not its deformity,
but its beauty. As the Eye is more ravished with a Landscape which invites it
with the grateful interpositions of Hills and Valleys, Woods and champian
Grounds, than if it were let out to lose it self in the Uniformity of a waste
Horizon or empty Prospect. So is the truly pious Soul more surpised with the
Glory of the Christian Religion when various apprehensions agree in the same
substantial Holiness, ( one Star differing from anoth^r in Glory,) yet all
shining with a light borrowed from the same Fountain. And doubtless he is the
Man who is most likely to be a Member of the Church Triumphant, who cordially
embraces with the extended Arms of good will, who ever are dignified with the
Image of Piety, though not distinguished with his own Superscription.

I profess my self an impartial Lover of all good men, and do presume every man
to be good till I find him otherwise. I have as little Zeal about things that
are manifestly indifferent, (either pro or con) as any man in the World, for
it is a Principle I received from my Education, that the real differences of
good and intelligent People are not so wide as they seem, and that through
prejudice and interest they do many times contest about words, whilst they do
heartily think the same thing.

I am not fond of the Names which distinguish one Party from another in the
Church. I esteem not a man the better for being regimented in this Communion,
rather than in that. And for ought I know in the Camp of God, a Reformade may
be as acceptable, as in those of Men. However a Mutineer in either is odious,
and to raise Factions about Religion, is to adore Mars instead of Christ, and
to commence a War for the sake of Peace. I cannot approve of their bitter Zeal,
who, if they cannot call down Fire from Heaven, will kindle it on the Earth
against all that think not as they do. He is an ill Disputant for Christianity,
who uses no other Topics than Gunpowder and Steel. The Logic of Mahomet
becomes not a Disciple of Jesus; and I should make but an Hypocritical Convert,
were I to be Dragoon'd into Religion by the Domineering Arguments of Booted
Apostles.

To persuade to Conformity by Prisons and Confiscations, is in my apprehension
something like demonstrating a proposition in Euclid, or apologizing by a
Beetle and Wedges, and I conceive they will equally produce their Effects; when
any Mathematitian shall do the one, the Spiritual Court may perform the other.
We find few edified by a Dungeon, or instructed by the spoiling of their goods.
Force has as little power on Souls as a Chirurgions Knife on the Understanding
and Affections of men: Remedies must have some Analogy with the Sick and their
Diseases. It Is sound Reason (which is of our Essence and Constitution) with
some little intermixtures of Kindness and Love, that must make men Proselytes
to the Church of England, or nothing.

The use I make of this Variety in Religions is fa^ different: Truth is
Homogeneous, and attracts to it self all that is of its own Nature, wheresoever
dispersed or separated, rejecting the rest as not pertaining to it. Thus I
overlooking the Errors and Mistakes of those who differ from me, at the same
time embrace their Orthodox Tenets, and shunning their Vices, I imitate their
Virtues. This is to take Things by the right handle, and like the Be to suck
Honey out of every Weed. It is of the Nature of the Sun, who has commerce with
many Pollutions, yet remains himself undefiled.

I abhor that mercenary Course of joining my self with any Party of Christians
that is uppermost, to abet the prevailing Faction, and assert the Opinions most
in Fashion. This is to be a Weathercock in Religion, pliable to every fresh
Gale of Interest. Neither on the other side do I think it good Manners or
Prudence to affront the Religion of the State, and by a saucy Impertinence
condemn those who worship God in the manner prescribed by the Laws of the Land.
In my Travels I learned this Moderation, and he that knows not how to practice
it, is not fit to stir out of his Chimny Corner. Religion does not authorize
Rudeness, neither is Arrogance compatible with Devotion. It is difficult to
find a Company of four or five men together, where there is not at least a
Triumvirate of Religions, and he that will set up for a Dictator among them,
shall have all their Forces united against himself.

I do not value any man's Religion by his starched looks or supercilious
Gravity. I hate to put on an unsociable Face, or screw my self into an
ill-humour'd Riddle; I do not angle for the Character of a Saint, by
magisterially declaiming against the Innocent Divertisements of Humane Life,
and ranking things indifferent among the greatest Crimes. Above all I cannot
approve of those who are prone to fasten Gods Judgments on particular
Occasions, as if they alone could unlock the Secrets of the Almighty, and were
the Privy-Counsellors of Heaven. No man's misfortune shall escape their Censure,
but forgetting what our Savior said of those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell,
they condemn all alike, and presume to distribute the Divine Justice by their
own false Weights and Measures. I am in Love with that Saying o^ Plato; There
is no Envy in the Deity. Assuredly that Immense Ocean of Goodness never ceases
to shower down his Favors and Blessings on all that are capable of receiving
them, and he is not partial to any of hi^ Creatures. Like the Sun he imparts
his Influence to all the World, and if any ^^joyce not in his Beams, the Cloud
that hind^^s them is of their own raising. Those men will hardly proselite me,
who dress the Deity in a frightful Figure, and then would persuade the World
it is his Essential Complexion. While they exclaim against Pictures and Images,
they themselves commit Idolatry: They set up an infinite Tyrant, morose,
arbitrary and cruel, instead of the Original, Increated Beauty and Goodness,
worshipping the Idol of their own Imagination, instead of the Indulgent Father
of all things.

I do not take Prayer to consist in babbling over the devoutest Collects and
Oraisons of the Church without a due Application of Spirit. This is the
Sacrifice of Fools, without Salt or Fire; and therefore must needs be unsavory
to God. The bended Knee, submiss Looks, and even a Body prostrate to the
Ground, unless accompanied with a proportionate Fervor and Humility of the
Soul, are but Religious Compliments, and a Pious Banter. Such Mock-Addresses, I
doubt, are not graciously received in the Court of Heaven.

An equal dislike I have for those who offer up strange and unhallowed Flames;
burning Incense, whose Composition is not warrantable; who hold not fast the
Form of sound Words, but giving the Reins to their Tongue, suffer it to commit
a thousand Indecencies in the Hearing of Him who made the Ear. These, as well
as the Former, are guilt^ ^f Crimen laesae Majestatis; while they affron^
Heaven with Tautologies and vain Repetitions. The one through Inadvertency, the
other through Presumption. This bringing Form without Matter, That offering
Matter without Form; and Both wanting the Spirit and Life of sincere Devotion.
Yet I neither censure such as use an allowable Form, provided it be accompanied
with attentive Devotion: and less those who address themselves to Heaven in
words of their own choosing, provided it be seasoned with Discretion and a
modest Sobriety of Spirit. For when a man fitly qualified, endued with Learning
too, and above that, adorned with a go^d Life, breaks out into a warm and well
delivered Prayer before his Sermon, it has the appearance of a Divine Rapture,
he raises and leads the Hearts of the Assembly in another manner than the
most composed or best studied Form of words can ever do: And the Praywees who
serve up all the Sermon with the same garnishing, would look like so many
Statues, or Men of Straw in the Pulpit, compared with those who speak with such
a powerful Zeal, that men are tempted at the moment to believe Heaven it self
has directed their words to them.

On the other side, I think not that to be the only Authentic Prayer, which is
attended with Sensual Raptures, and melting Entertainments: This is but the
Smoke of Passion, and soon vanishes; a mere Vapor or Ebullition, a pleasing
warmth of good Natures, and frequently the proper Result of a Sanguine
Complexion.

Prayer is the Exaltation of the Soul, the Flight of a Sublimated Spirit: It
makes Man an Angel pro Tempore, while his abstracted Mind takes the Wing, and
soars aloft, hovering on the Borders of Paradise. He then breaths immortal
Airs, burns like a Seraphim, and flames out with Holy and defaecate Fires, like
the most extasi'd Orders of the Celestial Court.

For my own part, I can Pray Kneeling, Standing, or Sitting; either at my
Business, or at my Repast; with or without Words and Ceremonies. And this I
take to be the only Method of complying with St. Paul's Counsel, when he bids
us Pray without ceasing. A swift and Pious Ejaculation many Times does the
Office of a multitude of Words (though the most apposite and elegant ^n Humane
Language) since God understands the Dialect of the Heart as well as that of ^he
Tongue, being the Architect of both.

The Posture which Pythagoras enjoined his Disciples, when they appeared before
the Gods, was not without a Mystery. He bid them hold their Tongues reversed;
intima^^ng thereby that they should observe a de^out Silence in such Tremendous
Company, and utter no Words which were not dipped ^n the Heart. And I could wish
the Advice ^f Solomon, instead of a Nosce Teipsum, were engraven on the
Frontispiece of our Churches. My Son, when thou enterest the House of God, let
thy words be few, and be more ready to hear, than to offer the Sacrifice of
Fools. In all this, I aim at a Devotion that is Masculine and Solid; Discreet
and Humble, Sincere and Modest; full of Primitive Revorence, and the Fervor of
the first Ages.

In proper speaking our very silent Necessities are eloquent Prayers, and the
wants which are hardest to be uttered, are such a prevailing Rhetoric with
God, as often times bring down swifter Relief from Heaven, than our loudest
Letanies. Even we our selves are more apt to dispose of our Alms to a dumb
Person, who by being disabled to make his Address any other ways than by mute
Signs, does by that Pathetick kind of Complaint, challenge our Charity, than to
the common Beggars, who make a Trade of Haranguing People out of their Money.
Indeed every Innocent Action of our Lives is a Prayer: but the more
extraordinary Performances of Heroic Virtue, pierce the Clouds, storm the
Regions above, and plunder Heaven it sel^ (if I may so speak) of its choicest
Blessings.

As to Public Prayer, I own there is a Necessity of using some Forms and
Ceremonies; and those are the best which have the greatest Efficacy to excite
and regulate our Devotion. Not too Pompous and Theatrical, nor slovenly and
mean, but such as become the House of God, and give it an external Beauty not a
mere Pageantry of Holiness.

That Custom of the Greek, and other Eastern Churches to separate the Men from
the Women in the Public Assembly, seems to have something of Antiquity for its
Plea, though the disuse of it in these Western Parts may make us think it a
Singularity. I envy not that Sex the Liberty of Worshipping God, and being
present at the Public Solemnities; yet I grudge them a Privilege which is so
manifest an Impediment to our Devotion, as is their prating over the Psalms,
Responses and other Portions of the Common Prayer. I could stand beside the
fairest of that Sex in the Church unmoved as Marble, their brightest Charms
serving but as Foils to se^ off the incomparable Eminency of that Majesty and
Glory who is adored in that Place. But when I hear them break the Bounds of
Female Modesty, whose greatest Ornament is Silence; when I hear their Tongues
running over the Prayers as loud, if not louder than the Men, either with a
care^ess wantonness, or affected Gravity their Eyes divided betwixt an amorous
Glance and a devout Ogle. This, I must confess, gives me Offense; it is an
Obstacle to my Devotion, and makes ^e think the Grecians are not without Reason
in assigning a particular Place of the Church to the Women, where they can
neither be seen or heard. And this will not seem uncourtly or austere, if we
remember that St. Paul himself has said, I permit not a Woman to speak in the
Church. And in another Place, Let Women have Power on their Heads [that is, be
covered or veiled] because of the Angels, or as some interpret it, because of
the young men.

I wish for a purer Reformation in the Church than we have hitherto seen; yet I
am not for tearing up Christianity by the Roots. I could be glad to see the
House of God purged and cleans'd, the Building Repaired and Beautified without
Removing it from the Foundations. The Office of a Bishop and a Presbyter, to
me, seems no other ways differenced than thus; I look upon a Presbyter as a
Parochial Bishop, and a Bishop as a Diocesan Presbyter. Their Dignity equal in
Quality, though not in Quantity. The one has Power of administering the Sacraments
as well as the other: only for the sake of Order and good Government in the
Church, one is invested with a Jurisdiction and Superiority, of which the other
is as capable, if duly Elected to it.

I envy not the Bishops or Ruling Presbyters, their Temporal Honors and
Riches, neither would I be a Leveller in the Church of God: Yet it were a
desirable thing, if there were a more equal Distribution of Ecclesiastical
Benefices, that the poorest Preaching Presbyter might have an Income that
should free Him from the Temptation of envying a Journey-man Carter, and other
inferior Trades, who many times can boast of a larger Stipend than some of the
Ministry.

Pluralities and Non-Residents were never heard of in the Primitive Ages, and
it is a shame there should be so many fat Parsonages, and yet so many lean
Parsons. It is the Devil's Market where Church Livings are bought and sold, and
such Spiritual Hucksters deserve to be whipped out of the Temple.

I refuse not to bow at the Name of Jesus, yet can give no Reason why I should
not as well bow at the Name of Joshua, they being both one and the same in the
Hebrew. And that Scripture, which is made to countenance this Ceremony, seems
to me to speak no more than that in the Name of Christ all addresses should be
made to God the Father. For if it were to be literally taken, why do they who
so receive it, bow the Head instead of the Knee? Besides, I see no Reason why I
should not also bow at the Name of Messiah, Christ, Emanuel, since the Redeemer
of the World is called by all these Names? Nay, why should not I pay the same
Reverence to all the Names of God in all Languages? especially to that
tremendous Name Jehovah, which the Jews think it unlawful to utter? It Is true
indeed, I can comply with the Custom of the Church in a thing not directly
opposite to any positive Command, but I protest at the same time, my wishes
^re, that a Custom acknowledged to be indiffe^ent, even by those who most
zealously plead for ^ts practice, were rather disused, than imposed on men of
tender Consciences, since it gives so much Scandal, and has no Authority but
that of Tradition to back it.

I am naturally a Lover of Music, and believe it has an efficacy in composing
or ruffling the Spirits, according to the various kinds of it. But I find its
most immediate Operation is on the Fancy, and sensual Affections, not on the
Superior Faculties of the Soul. And therefore I see no use of it in the
Church, where we come not to pay Homage to God in the strength of an exalted
Imagination, or to present him with the First Fruits of our Passions, though
never so refined, but to offer up our selves a Living Sacrifice, which is our
Rational Service, since God is to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, and not
with aerie Notions, and carnal Raptures.

Though the Ear is a Member consecrated to the Service of Religion since Faith
comes by Hearing, yet I cannot observe that my Faith is a^ any time increased
by the most Harmonious Lessons on the Organ or other Instruments of Music used
in Divine Service. Neithe^ do I admire at the Country-man's Freak, who the
first time he had ever been in a Cathedral hearing the Organ strike up, fell a
dancing a^ though he had been in a Musick-house. To spea^ freely, I know not why
we may not praise Go^ as acceptably in a Dance as with Music, since the Jews,
from whom we borrow our Arguments for the latter, did as usually practice the
former; there being but little use of the one without the other. To me a
Chapter in the Bible is the best Music in the World, and no Melody like that
of a good Sermon where the Preacher like a skilful Artist reconciles the
Discords of the Law and the Gospel, and between the Emblems and Types of the
one, and the Substantial Truths and Mysteries of the other strikes up such a
grateful Harmony, as far exceeds the best Consort in the World, though it were as
charming as Nebuchadnezzar's, and made up of the whole Family of Music.

So I am a great Admirer of good Painting and Sculpture, yet can never find
them Helps, but Hindrances to my Devotion, since it is impossible for the
greatest Master that ever professed those Arts, to draw or carve to the Life,
what was never exposed to any of his Senses, or to contrive a Figure of that
which has no Resemblance, the Invisible Divinity. Indeed a Man's own Fancy in
such Cases is the best Painter; and if it be lawful to make use of any Pictures
or Images, it is of such as our own Imagination frames: yet this is the way to
become Anthropomorphites, and worship God under the Similitude of a Man, or to
follow the Pagan Vanities and adore Him under the likeness of a Beast, or some
other sensible Figure, since all the Ideas of that Mimick Faculty, are but the
Transcripts of External Objects, Aristotle's Maxim being truer of this than of
the Intellect, That there is nothing in it which was not first in the Sense.
The only way to have a true Idea of God is to suppress the Operations of this
busy Faculty, and by withdrawing into the most inward Recess of the Mind,
there as in a Mirror to contemplate that Infinite Essence, who is hid behind
Himself (if ^ may so speak) and cannot be discovered but by his Back-parts.

It is with Pleasure that I behold Him in his Rays which shine in all his
works, and he has cast his shadow throughout the Universe, but I should be
oppressed with Glory, were I capable of fixing my Eyes on that Abyss of
Splendors, before which the most Illustrious Spirits in Heaven cover their
Faces, as if they were ashamed of their comparative Imperfections, and were not
able to behold that Original and Increated Purity without a Blush.

I have no ambition to become an Eagle in Divinity, neither do I emulate the
towering Flights of such as pretend to extraordinary Revelations. I had rather
walk under the Piazzas of Gods Church, than on the Battlements of the Devils
Chapel, lest my Head should grow giddy with Enthusiasms, and I be blown off
from those Heighths and Pinnacles with some wind of vain Doctrine. That Father
of the Arrian Heresy was an Icarus in Religion, he had lofty Thoughts and
soaring Speculations, but he flew without a Guide, he forsook the Path of his
Mother the Church, his Wings melted, and he had a terrible Fall, which at once
bereft him of his Life, and ('it is to be feared) of his Salvation.

I take great Pleasure sometimes to find my self entangled in Difficulties and
Dangers, out of which I have no Skill to extricate my self. I never think my
self safer than in such a Labyrinth of thwarting Events, as no Clue of my own
Reason or Experience can lead me out. It Is then I can be cheerful and triumph,
knowing my Deliverance is near at hand. And herein lies the quintessence of my
Comfort, that I am thus particularly, and demonstratively assured of the Divine
Favor and Protection, since nothing below a Miracle of Providence could untie
so knotty a juncture of Misfortunes.

Were all the Passages of my Life published, it would be taken for more than a
Romance. It is so full of Adventures which surpass the stories of Giants,
Monsters, Enchanted Castles, and the whole System of Knight Errantry. Such
strange and unexpected Escapes as I have made from the very Jaws of Death,
exceed the Fables of Poets. And had I no other Reason but the Remembrance of my
own Perils and Deliverances, it were more than enough to convince me of an
unerring Eye that watches over Mankind. This makes me cheerful and easy in all
humane Circumstances, and reconciles me to the Stoics. I look on all things to
be governed by a fixed Law and Eternal Destiny; and therefore could quietly sit
down with George Withers, and say, Nec habeo, nec careo, nec curo. I con^ider
my self as a Part of the Universe, and therefore am never troubled at any thing
which happens to me, since it comes not to pass without the Knowledge and Will
of him who in all his Dispensations has Regard to the Good of the Whole; from
which I am not excluded as a Member, and therefore must needs participate of
the Common Benefit, even when I think I suffer Damage. I am not peevish at a
Calumny, nor waspish at a loss. When any one does me an Injury, I take a
singular Pleasure in forgiving him. There is such a Noble Pride attends this
generous Conquest of an Enemy, as far surpasses the celebrated sweetness of
Revenge. I hate to gratify my Passion the common way; and because he has acted
the part o^ an ill Man, I must do so too or worse, by giving scope to my Rage,
and executing the severest Dictates of my Fury. He is but a Tinker in Morality,
who to repair one Breach, makes another* and perhaps wider than the first.
Besides, it is the most profitable kind o^ Revenge, when I turn a Wrong to an
Advantage by cancelling it: since thereby I make a Friend of an Enemy, and if
he have but the leas^ Spark of Gratitude and Virtue, my Benignity makes him not
only blush at his Offense, bu^ puts him upon some ingenuous study how to make
me amends.

Has any wronged thee? (says See his Encheridion.
Quarls) b^ bravely revenged, slight it, and the work's begun, forgive it and
it is finished. He is below himself that is not above an Injury.

If thy Brother has privately offended thee, reprove him privately, and having
lost himself in an Injury, thou shall find him in thy forgiveness. He that
rebukes a private fault openly sordidly, betrays it rather than reproves it.
The true way to ad^^nce anothe^s Virtue is to follow it, and the best means to
cry down another Vice is to decline it.

Have any wounded thee with Slanders? meet them with Patience, hasty word^
ranckle the wound, soft Language dress^s it, forgiveness cures it, oblivion
takes a^^^ the Scar. It is more noble by silence to ^over an Injury, than by
argument to overcome or spread it But in all cases of this nature change
conditions with thy Brother, then ask thy Conscience what thou would be done
to, being resolv d, exchange again, and do thou the like to him, and thy
Christianity shall never err.

I esteem it one of the most substantial Exercises of Religion, to subdue our
Passions: and because Anger is the most violent and precipitate, I use my most
strenuous Endeavors to stifle this in its Embryo. Other Passions take a
gradual Rise, and insinuate by steps, but Wrath like Gunpowder takes Fire all
at once, and blows a man up before he can look about him. Therefore I have by
long and assiduous Practice labored to get the Victory of this turbulent
Aflection, and I count it the Masterpiece of Humane Wit to be above all
Provocation. I could long ago stop my Hand in the midst of its Career, when
aimed at a faulty Servant, or scurrilous Companion, but now I can bridle the
Nerves which would have stretched it forth, and curb the officious Spirits
which were so ready to sally forth on such an Occasion. I scorn to suffer my
Tongue to be my Hand's Deputy, and to lavish out in unseemly Expressions, as if
the Height of Man's Wit and Valor lay in a biting Repartee. Nay, I will not
permit so much as my Cheek to change color, my Eye to sparkle, or any other
part of my Face to receive the least impression of my Resentments, whereby it
may be perceived that I am fermented Yet at the same time I am not insensible
of an Affront, nor void of due Reflection on it. All that I aim at is to comply
with the Apostles Advice, To be angry and not to sin.

I have no Pannick Fears of Death upon me neither am I sollicitous, how or when
I shall make my Exit from the Stage of this Life. Much less do I trouble my
self about the manner of my Burial, or to which of the Elements I shall commit
my Carcass. I envy not the Funeral State of Great Men, neither do I covet the
Embalming of the Egyptians I wonder at the Fancy of those who desire to be
imprisoned in leaden Coffins till the Resurrection, and to protract the
Corruption o^ their Flesh, out of which they shall be generated de Novo: as if
they dreamt of rising whole as they lay down, and carrying Flesh and Blood into
the Kingdom of Heaven, without a Change.

For my Part I admire the Indian Obsequies, and were it not against the long
established Custom of my Country, would sooner bequeath my Body to the Fire,
than be inhum'd, that so I might be sooner resolved into the Elements of which
I was first compounded.

Yet instead of that nearer way to Dissolution, I can be contented to undergo
the tedious Conversation of Worms and Serpents, those greedy Tenants of the
Grave, who will never be satisfied till they have eat up the Ground-Landlord.

I do not puzzle my self with projecting now my scattered Ashes shall be
collected together, neither do I for that Reason take Care for an Vrn to
enclose them. I am ^atisfied, that at the last Trumpet, I shall rise with the
same Individual Body. I now carry about me, though there may not then be one of
the same Individual Atoms to make it up, which are its present Ingredients.
For neither are they the same now as they were ^wenty years ago. Yet I may be
properly said to have the same Individual Body at this Hour, which my Mother
brought forth into ^he World, though it is manifest, that there ^s so vast an
Accession of other Particles since that Time, as are enough to make Ten such
Bodies as I had then. Which implies such a perpetual Flux of the former, as
'twould be a Solaecism in Philosophy to think I have one of my Infant Atoms
now left about me. If after all this, I may be still said to have the same
Individual Body as I had then, though there be not one of the same Individua^
Atoms left in its Composition, why may w^ not assert the same of the Bodies we
shall have after the Resurrection? Matter is on^ and the same in all Bodies,
the Individuatio^ of it, the Meum and Tuum proceeds onel^ from the infinitely
different Forms which actuate it. Thus when my Soul at the Resu^rection either
by its own Energy, or by the Power of God, and Assistance of Angels, sha^ be
reinvested with a Body, it is proper t^ say it will be the same Individual Body
have now, though made up of Atoms which never before were Ingredients of my
Comp^sition, since not the Matter but the For^ gives a Title to Individuation.

I am the more willing to believe this wi^^ be the manner of our Resurrection,
because I think it not Decorous to put the Ange^ on the Drudgery of Scavengers,
as if it should at that Day be their Employment to swee^ the Graves and
Channel-houses, to sift the Elements, and take in all the Receptacles o^ the
Dead for Men's divided Dust. Not th^^ I think it impossible for God even this
way (...) accomplish the Resurrection of the Dead; though the Bodies of all
Mankind were crumbled into Dus^ and that Dust scattered before the Wind, or
d^still'd into Water, or attenuated into Air, (...) though those Bodies were
eaten by the Beas^^ of the Earth, or the Fish of the Sea, as those Beasts and
Fish eaten again by Men. Though they should undergo all these Changes and
Transmigrations, yet were they still in the great Repository of God. The whole
World in this sense being but as one great Storehouse, and all the Elements as
so many Cells therein, so that wheresoever we shall be laid up, whether in the
Bellies of Fishes, Entrails of Beasts, or by various Altera^ions become ^he
Food of Men, yet the Great Architect of all Things knows where to find our
scattered Remnants. But why should we engage Him in so infinite a Task, when
the Work may as well be done a nearer way? And put him to the Expense of
multiplying Miracles, when fewer will serve the turn? When the Grand Alarm is
given, He can soon fit our Souls with proper Matter for their future Bodies,
out of the Elements, as well as out of their own Antiquated Embers. The Jewish
Rabbis seem to deny the gathering together our dispersed Ashes, and assign the
Trouble to a certain small Bone in every Man's Back which they say, never
suffers any Putrofaction, but remaining to the last Day in its Primitive
Consistency, impassible and incorruptible, is then impregnated by a Dew from
Heaven, which diffusing its Virtue like a Ferment, not only animates and
quickens this Seminal Bone, but also attracts all the Atoms, which formerly
constituted the Body, though dispersed in the remotest Corners, and most hidden
Recesses of the Universe, marshalling them in the same Order as they had before
their Dissolution, and so in a moment recovering the Body to its Primitive
State. But these are gross Conceits for Christians who believe that our bodies
shall in that great and Final Change become Spiritual and Immortal, being for
ever divested of all the peculiar Circumstances of Flesh, and Blood.

Let the manner be how it will please God, I am ravished to think what a bright
and serene Morning the Resurrection will prove after the long Night of Death,
and the languishing slumbers of the Grave! How vigorous and active we shall
rise from our Beds of Darkness, how merry and blithe from the melancholy
Regions of Horror and Silence! More sprightly than Youth; stronger than Lions;
and swifter than Eagles! Full of Light, full of Joy, we shall soar aloft, and
like well-mounted Travelers post it away through the Balmy Air, and liquid
Skies, till we arrive at the Place of admirable Mansions, and be welcomed to
the House of God.

I dare not with some of the Jewish Rabbis say that all shall not rise at the
great Day; much less will I presume with others to particularize so far as to
exclude all those who perished in Noah's Flood; or with a third sort to confine
the Resurrection to the Children of Israel, as if we that are of the Gentiles
were not capable of it as well as they! But above all I reject the Censure of
the Talmudists, who say, that neither Bilha the Concubine of Jacob that lay
with Reuben; nor Doeg that caused Saul to kill Abimelech and the Priests; nor
Gehazi the servant of Elijah the Prophet, nor Achitophel, David's prime
Minister of State, shall rise from the Dead. These are the Memoirs of Hebrew
Superstition; Invidious Remarks the peculiar Heresy of that overweening
Nation.

Yet I am more scandalized at some Christians who will not allow Salvation to
any man that is not within the visible Pale of their Church, as if the Eternal
Sun of Justice were Eclipsed to all that are out of their narrow Horizon.
Surely He enlightens every man that comes into this World, and his Rays are not
confined to Countries or Parties. He shines Universally, and no man can trace
him in the Zodiac of his Mercy.

I dare not it is true, (with Justin Martyr) canonize the Philosophers, and
place Socrates and Heraclitus in Heaven; neither am I sure that Aristotle, by
his learned Treatises of Heaven has obtained an Inheritance there himself. It Is
too officious a Regard, and too bold a Charity, thus happily to dispose of
Particular Men. On the other side I dread to pass the Sentence of Damnation on
all the ancient Pagans, and to aver that none were saved that died before the
fifteenth year of Tiberius. Though the mere Light of Natural Reason, was not
sufficient to conduct them, nor al^ their Morality, enough to entitle them, to
Supreme Felicity; Yet I cannot be persuaded that the infinite Goodness would
doom the virtuous Gentiles to the Abyss of Misery. Neither can any man
demonstrate, That Christ was not the Light of the Gentiles before his
Incarnation, as well as after; And since Abraham saw his Day and was glad, how
do we know that Plato, Solon, Lycurgus, Pythagoras, Cyrus, and other wise
Lawgivers, Philosophers and Kings, men renowned for their Prudence,
Temperance, Fortitude, Chastity, Liberality, and the like Virtues might not
also be favored with a glimpse of the Messiah, the desire of all Nations,
before he appeared in the Flesh. Though we have no Records in Scripture of Hermes
Trismegistus, Zoroaster, Phocilides, Homer, Theognes, Epictetus, Theseus and
Hercules, yet we cannot be assured, but that they had Faith, and expected the
Redeemer to come, as well as Job, who was not of the Holy Line, but a Branch of
the Gentiles.

When I consider what Pains some of the wiser Heathens have taken to find out
the Truth; when I contemplate a Pythagoras traveling through Asia, and
particularly conversant in Palestine; an Empedocles Journeying into Africa, to
learn the Wisdom of the Egyptians; an Alexander the Great falling at the Feet
of the Hebrew High Priest, I cannot think the Heathen World to be so ignorant
of the true Religion, as is commonly imagined. They had a Balaam to instruct
them, the Sybills to guide them to the Knowledge of a future Messiah, and for
ought I know, some of them might have the Scriptures of the Old Testament too,
or at least a good part of them, even before that celebrated Translation of the
Septuagint was extant; since it was easy for those Gentiles who had Commerce
with the Jews to procure Copies of their Law, especially when they were made
Captives in Media, Assyria, Egypt and Babylon.

An Esther lying in the Bosom of Ahasuerus, a Daniel sitting at the Right Hands
of Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzer, and Darius, had fair Opportunities of
instructing those Heathen Monarchs in the Mysteries of the Mosaic Law, and
surely such Holy Persons would never neglect so noble a Work as proselyting the
Kings and Princes of the Gentiles to God.

In the Days of Solomon the Fame of the Jewish Nation had reached the utmost
Parts of the Earth, Kings came from far, and Queens from the remotest Borders
of the Continent, to be the Disciples of that Royal Philosopher, and Spectators
of the Hebrew Grandeur. How could then the Divine Oracles be hid from the
Gentil^s, or the Sacred Tradition of Shiloh to come, not be delivered to the
inquisitive Nations of the Earth! Without doubt the East saw the dawning of the
Star of Jacob, and the South could calculate his Meridian, even before he rose.
Neither were the North and the West without some glimmerings of his Appearance.

The Wise Men that came to adore him at Bethlehem, performed but the Wishes of
their Fathers, and the Eunuch of Queen Candaces made no Scruple to become a
Christian, when Philip had convinced him that He of whom the Prophets had so
long foretold, was now come in the Flesh. Surely he was the desired of Nations,
the Hope of the Gentiles, as well as the Glory of his People Israel. Therefore
I cannot number it among the Commendations of Christianity, that a great Part
of those who profess that Name are so presumptuously uncharitable, as to damn
all that were not of the Seed of Abraham before Christ came in the Flesh, as if
Salvation were entailed to one Family, and no man could go to Heaven that was
not circumcised.

Much rather had I believe, That in the very Instant of Death, God revealed the
Mystery of Redemption to many innocent and virtuous Persons among the Gentiles,
and infused a saving Faith in Christ into their Souls, at the very moment that
their Senses were forsaking their Bodies. Supplying their want of Scripture or
Tradition, with the inspiration of his Holy Spirit, when they were taking the
last gasp, and breathing out their own.

Or if this be not thought sufficient, I will believe, That when Christ
descended into Hell, he preached the Gospel to the Spirits which were there in
Prison, not only those who were disobedient in the days of Noah, but all such
of the Race of Noah, as by completing the Measure of their Sins, had sunk
themselves into that fatal Place, whether they were Jews or Heathens. And I
cannot understand those Texts of Scripture which mention his spoiling of Hell,
and leading Captivity Captive, if they may not be applied to his Triumphant
Deliverance of some of those Souls which were shut up in the Infernal Caverns.
Neither do I perceive any Heresy in believing, there might be some Virtuous
Heathens in the Retinue he carried with Him from thence to Heaven, as well as
some of the Sons of Israel. However, leaving the manner of their Salvation to
God, I will conclude, That it is unreasonable, uncharitable, and has too much
of the Jew in it, to pass the Sentence of Damnation on all the Gentiles, since
the Holy Ghost has assured us, That God is no Respecter of Persons, but he that
in every Nation fears Him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of Him.

Besides, methinks if matters were brought to the severest Balance, it would
not appear Heterodox to say, That as all men sinned in Adam, without their own
Personal Knowledge or Consent, so some might be saved in Christ, even without a
Particular and Personal Belief in Him, of whom perhaps they never so much as
heard.

Some Grains of Allowance may be given to the involuntary Frailties of Humane
Nature, some Indulgence granted to the invincible Ignorance of a great Part of
Adam's Posterity, who if they knew not the Highway to Heaven which was
revealed to their Brethren the Jews and Christians, might yet be conducted
thither by some By-Path, since it is too narrow a Conceit of God's Mercy to
think, that because he had chiefly manifested it in the Royal Road of the Law
and the Gospel, therefore he could never go out of the beaten Track. This were
to retrench the Divine Prerogative, and to tie Him up to limited Conditions,
whose Ways are in the Great Deep, and whose Footsteps no Created Being can
Trace.

The Satisfaction I have of the Soul's Immortality, if it amounts not to a
Demonstration, may yet be numbered among those Proleptick Ideas that need none,
as being self-evident. It is a Parallel with first Principles, and has equal
Force on my Understanding; for I am not more convinced, That one and two make
three, than That the Soul of man is Immortal. So that I make it not so much an
Article of my Faith, as a Proposition of my Reason, and a Conclusion of
Science. Yet I do not always go so far round about, as by a long Train of
Logical Deductions and Inferences, to dispute my self into the Remembrance of
my Immortality. This indeed were necessary to persuade another, but I have a
nearer Method to comfort my self with the Demonstration of this Noble Truth,
while it becomes an Object of my very Sense, and I can feel that Immortality in
my self, which my Reason tells me another is possessed of as well as I. This is
easier to be experienced, than uttered in words, it is an Art not to be acquired
without assiduous Reflection and strict Animadversion on our own Thoughts. But
the Fatigue is more than recompensed with the inessable Pleasure that attends
it, for when by a long and often repeated Practice, a man has found the way to
keep close Pace with his own Intellect in all its Flights and abstracted Starts
from the Body, when he can stand on the Brink of the Immaterial World and
perceive what is before Him, perceiving also that he perceives it, then it is he
enjoys Heaven by Ant^cipation, and forestalls his Future Beatitude by tasting
Immortality at present. He is risen from the Dead, before he dies; and lives an
Eternity of Ages in a Moment. Neither is this a sleeping Chimera, or a waking
^ream, but a real Truth, which as I have said, is easier practiced than
expressed.

It was but a drowsy Conceit in those Fathers, who phancy'd the Soul should
sleep in the Grave till the Resurrection of the ^ody. Had they well traced the
Nature of a Spirit from its first Principles, they would (...) have provided a
Dormitory for That Being which would cease to be, should it cease to act, since
its very Essence implies a Contradiction to Rest. I could as easily and with
equal Reason believe it will be annihilated at its separation from the Body, or
at least that it shall be metamorphos'd into something else, since if it
continue the same it was before the Dissolution of the Body, it must continue
to think, it being indeed nothing else but a pure Thought; and how a Thought
can take a Nap, is beyond the Verge of my Philosophy to apprehend, neither do I
know of any thing in Divinity that seems to countenance so dull a Theorem. As
for those Texts of Scripture, which seem to adumbrate the Supreme Felicity of
the Saints by the Notion of Rest, I do not think they mean a Cessation of the
Souls natural Energy, for how could it then be capable of that Seraphick Love,
and Joy in the Beatifick Vision, which is the chief Entertainment of the
Blessed in Heaven? It seems rather to intimate the Soul's Escape and
Deliverance from the Troubles and Inquietudes of this Mortal Life, which may
very well be called a Rest, and yet be consistent with an Activity far
surpassing that which it was endued with in the Flesh. The Scripture clothes
many abstruse Mysteries in familiar Dresses, the better to accommodate Them to
the Conceptions of vulgar and ignorant People, who make up far the grearest
Part of Mankind, and we must not expect the rigid Definitions of Aristotle from
the Sacred Penmen. But when we come Scientifically, and according to the
Method of the Schools to treat of the Natures of Things, we ought to fit them
with proper and Intelligible Terms, and pursue their Essences by a continued
Progress, not by wild Fits and Starts.

I have but small acquaintance with the future State, but this I Am sure there
will be no change that will be so surprising to me as that By Death. It is a
thing of which I know but little, and none of the millions of Souls that have
past into the invisible World, have come again to tell me how it is.

I.
It must be done (my Soul) but it is a strange,
A Dismal and Mysterious change, Norris.

When thou shall leave this Tenement of Clay,
And to an unknown somewhere wing away;
When Time shall be Eternity, and thou
Shall be thou know not what, and live thou know not how.
II.
Amazing State! no wonder that we dread
To think of Death, or view the Dead,
You Are all wrapped up in Clouds, as if to thee
Our very knowledge had Antipathy.
Death could not a more sad retinue find,
Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind.
III.
^ome courteous Ghost tell this great Secrecy,
What it is you are, and we must be.
^ou warn us of approaching Death, and why
May we not know from you what it is to dye?
But you having shot the Gulf, delight to see
^ucceeding Souls plunge in with like uncertainty.
IV.
When Life 's close knot by writ from Destiny,
Disease shall cut, or age unty;
When after some delays, some dying strife,
The Soul stands shivering on the ridge of Life;
With what a dreadful Curiosity
Does she launch out into the Sea of vast Eternity.
V.
So when the spacious Globe was deluged over,
And lower holds could save no more,
On the utmost Bough the astonished Sinners stood,
And viewed the Advances of the encroaching Flood
O're-topp'd at length by the Elements increase,
With horror they resigned to the untried Abyss.
It is very desirable to know in what condition our Souls will be when they
leave the Body, and what is the Nature of that abod^ into which we must go, but
which we never saw into; and through what Regions we must then take our flight,
and after what manner this will be done. It Is certain my Soul will then
preserve the faculties that ar^ natural to it, viz. to understand, to will, to
remember, as it is represented to us under the Parable of Dives and Lazarus: But
alas! we little know how the People of the disembodied Societies act, and will,
and understand, and communicate their thoughts to one another, and therefore I
long to know it. What conception can I have of a separated Soul (says a late
Writer) but that It Is all Thought.

I firmly think when a man's body is taken from him by Death, he is turned into
all Thought and Spirit. How great will be its Thought when it is without any
hinderance from these material Organs that now obstruct its Operations. In that
Eternity (as one expresses it) the whole power of the Soul runs together one
and the same way. In Eternity the Soul is united in its Motions, which way one
faculty goes all go, and the Thoughts are all concentred as in one whole
Thought Beverley's great Soul of Man. page 292.
of Joy or Torment.

These things have occasioned great variety of Thoughts in me, and my Soul when
it looks toward the other World and thinks it self near, it can no more cease
to be inquisitive about it, than it can cease to be a Soul.

I am not at all edified in the Notion of the Blessed Trinity, by the sight of
a Triangle, neither can the whole System of the Mathematics improve my
Knowledge in this Point of Divinity. The three distinct Faculties of a Humane
Soul are far from illustrating to me the Three Persons in One Essence, since
there is a Subordination in the Former, whereas there is an Equality in the
Latter. Such Similitudes and Comparisons seem not to me a Stenography or short
Characters, but a false Spelling in Divinity. And though to wiser Reasons, and
more Active Beliefs, they may serve as Luminaries in the Abyss of knowledge,
yet my Heavy Judgment will never be able to mount on such weak and brittle
Scales and Roundels to the lofty Pinnacles of true Theology. All the force of
Rhetorical Wit has not Edge enough to dissect so tough a Subject, wherein the
little obscure Glimmerings we gain of that Inaccessible Light, come not to us
in direct Beams, but by the faint Reflections of a Negative Knowledge. And we
can better apprehend what it is not, than what it is. In the Disquisition of
his Works, I own, that those do highly magnify Him, whose Judicious Enquiry
into his Acts, and deliberate Research into his Creatures return the Homage of
a Devout and Learned Paraphrase. But in the Contemplation of that Eternal
Essence to which no created Thought can be adaequate, I will humbly sit down
and silently admire, that which neither the Heart can conceive, nor the Tongue
or Pen of Men or Angels can declare as they ought, and as it is.

I do not affect Rhodomontadoes in Religion, nor to boast of the Strength of my
Faith: I do not covet Temptations, nor court Dangers: Yet I can exercise my
Belief in the difficultest Point when called to it; and walk steadfast and
upright in Faith, without the Crutch of a visible Miracle. I can firmly believe
in Christ, without going in Pilgrimage to his Sepulcher, neither need I the
Confirmation that was vouchsafed to St. Thomas that Proverb of Unbelief.
However I do not bless my self, nor esteem my Faith the better, because I lived
not in the Days of Miracles, nor ever saw Christ or any of his Disciples. Or
because I was not one of his Patients on whom he wrought his Wonders. Both
their Faith and mine were infused by the Ministration of the Senses. And as
they believe't because they saw, so I believe, because I hear (undeniable
Witnesses give Testimony of) the same Matter of Fact. Nor do I esteem their
Faith the more Extraordinary who lived before his Coming, since they raised not
a Belief of the future Messiah, but on clear Prophesies, and most significant
Types, being assured by the constant stream of Tradition from Father to Son,
that what God had predetermin'd and foretold to Adam in Paradise, to Abraham,
to Jacob, and the Prophets, should infallibly be accomplished in the fullness of
Time. And I cannot see wherein their Faith had the Advantage of ours, that it
should deserve to be esteemed more Bold and Noble, since they had an Isaiah to
preach the Gospel to Them, who for the Eloquence of his Style, his most
accurate and particular Enarration of the Birth of Christ, has acquired the
Title of the fifth Evangelist. It Is certain both their Faith and ^ours rests on
the Divine Revelation, whether it consist in Prophecy of Things to come, or
History of Things past. The ultimate Object of our Belief is one and the same,
that is, the Authority of God. They had their Sacraments also to strengthen
their Faith as well as we. They were Baptized in the Cloud and in the Sea, they
had Manna from Heaven, and Water out of a Rock in the Earth. They all eat the
same Spiritual Meat, and drank the same Spiritual Drink as we, for they drank
of the Spiritual Rock of Ages that followed Them, and that Rock was Christ

I do not conclude from hence, That ther^ is, no difference between the
Sacraments o^ the Law, and those of the Gospel. Doubtless there is an
Excellency in the Latter to which the Former could not pretend The Elements in
Both are Natural, as Wate^ Manna, Bread, Wine, etc. so that in the Exterior,
neither of Them has the Advantag^ of the other. They were both also Conduits of
the same inward Grace and Spirit. Only herein lies the difference, that the
Jews had it but by Measure, whereas the Christians receive it in Abundance.
The^ touched but the Hem of Christ's Garment but we feed on his Body and Blood.
The^ did but wade in the low Ebb of Grace whereas we swim in the High-Tide an^
over-flowings of the Holy Spirit. Before the Everlasting Sluices were drawn up;
while the Heavens were kept shut, the Water which are above the Heavens did but
disti^gently on Mankind, The Divine Influenc^ came Drop by Drop, here a little
and ther^ a little. But when Christ had once ascended up on High, and opened
the Eternal Gate above, then he showered down his Gifts upon Men, and let loose
the Flood of Light and Grace, that so it might water the whole Earth, and make
glad the City of God, which is the Christian Church.

The Sacraments of Christianity are the Principal Channels through which
Eternal Life is conveyed to our Souls. By Baptism we are transplanted from the
Old Stock of the First Adam, and inoculated into Him who is the True Vine, in
whom we grow up as Branches, receiving Nourishment and Increase by the
Eucharist, which conveys to us the vital Principles of Immortality and
Salvation. I cannot speak of this tremendous Mystery, without a Circumlocution,
nor think of it without a Rapture! It is such a Complex of Riddles, as it has
posed the stoutest Samsons of the Church to solve: He alone was able to think
and speak aright of it in few words, who when he first instituted it, said,
This is my Body, This is my Blood. That there is a real Change made in the
outward Elements after the words of Consecration are pronounced, is an Article
of my Faith; but the Manner how this Change is effected is no Query of my
Philosophy. I had rather humbly believe what I cannot comprehend in this
Venerable Sacrament; than suffer any vain Disquisitions to stagger my Faith. I
see Bread and Wine both retaining the same Taste, Color, and other natural
Qualities of those Creatures. Therefore I conclude there is no Alteration made
in that which is the Object of my Senses. The Change must be in the Spiritual
Part, which only falls under the Intellect. And yet I believe this Change to be
Real, though I cannot sensibly perceive wherein, or how it is produced. Far be it
from me to enter into the Secret of those who make a mere empty Figure of the
Blessed Sacrament; as if we were made Partakers only of mere Natural Bread and
Wine in the Holy Communion. This is to follow the impious Steps of Manicheus
and Marcion, who taught that our Savior had only a Fantastic Figure of a
Body, not a Real one; as if they thought the Blessed Virgin Mary brought forth
nothing but a Shadow, because she was overshadow'd by the Holy Ghost. This is
to outstrip Judas, and begin where his Treason left off: and as he sold his
Master's Life, so we should rob the Church of his Body and Blood, which he
bequeathed to her in his last Supper. Doubtless his Body is in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, but not Bodily, or after a corporeal manner, not invested with
all the gross Circumstances of Flesh and Blood, but after a Spiritual Manner,
in a Mystery too profound for Humane Sense or Reason to comprehend. I am
extremely pleased with the Answer which Queen Elizabeth gave to the Bishop of
Winchester, when he demanded her Opinion of the Real Presence, said she, 'Twas
God the Word that spoke it,
He took the Bread and brake it;
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.


It was an ill-manner'd, as well as an envious Retort of him that stood by and
said, Your Highnesses Reply is like the Delphick Oracle, full of Ambiguous
Subtilty: He had discovered more Breeding and Charity, had he told her, That
her Answer savored of his Wisdom, who, when tempted by the Pharisees with a
Question concerning the Lawfulness of paying Tribure to Caesar, took a piece of
Money and asked whose Image and Superscription was that stamped on it, they
said Caesar's, He replied, Give therefore to Caesar, the Things that are
Caesar's, and to God the Things that are Gods. It is certainly a necessary
piece of Prudence sometimes to obviate the Trains of an Enemy, with a witty
Evasion; which may be done without denying the Truth, or violating ones
Conscience. Those who would trepan a man with Queries, and make him a
Transgressor for a word, deserve to be paid in the same Coin, and by an
Ingenious adapting of words and placing of Periods, be bassled in their Design,
and sent away like Fools as they came, without any better Satisfaction than
they could reap from a Riddle. In my Opinion it is but a Pious Skepticism to
suspend our Thoughts from determining the particular Mode of Christ's being
present in the Sacrament, since it is impossible ever to demonstrate so
recondite a Secret, into which even the Angels themselves, those perfect
Intelligences perhaps look with Admiration, without improving their Knowledge.
It is sufficient to my humble Faith, that my Redeemer is there, and that when I
worthily receive this Blessed Sacrament, I shall receive the Author of it into
my Tabernacle, and be united to the Heavenly Spouse. This is the true Hidden
Manna which nourishes both Angels and Men; This is the Bread of Life, which
strengthens Man's Heart; This is the Wine which rejoices God and Man. This
is that Heavenly Morsel which God has given us as an Antidote against the Dregs
of that Venom we all derive from Adam's eating the forbidden Fruit.

And he is a kind Physician, who, when nothing else in the Divine Pharmacopaea
could be sound available for so great a Cure, applies his own Body, to heal the
Distempers of our Souls, and his Blood to restore the Spoils of Humane Nature.
None but the Favorites of the King of Heaven are admitted to this Immortal
Banquet. None but such as have the Wedding Garment on, can have Access to this
Table of Delicacies, this Repast of Royal Dainties. Many indeed (and too many,
it is to be feared) are licensed to come into the Kings Anti-Chambers, and to
sit down in the Church and taste the outward Elements, but it is the Privilege
of his Saints only to enter his Cabinet, and be Regaled with the costly
Entertainment of his Secret Table, and to partake in the New Wine of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

A Serious Christian once told me, that if ever he was like Paul taken up into
the Third Heaven, it was when he first sat down at the Lords Table.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is the nearest and visiblest Communion that
can be had with God and Christ upon Earth. Here are the greatest revivings and
the sweetest refreshings that a Pious Soul is capable of on this side Heaven it
self. Other Duties seem to be our work, this our meat and wages, other duties
are but preparative to this, Baptism, Praying, Preaching, Hearing, Meditating,
Conferring, are all ordained but to sit us for this High and Mysterious
Ordinance. Here you have all the benefits of the Covenant of Grace folded up in
one Rite. Here is the whole contrivance of Salvation represented in a little
Bread and Wine, whereby God invisibly seals up an assurance of his Everlasting
Love upon our Hearts.

It is grown even to a Proverb, says Acosta, among the poor Indians that have
entertained the Faith that Qui Eucharistiam semel susceperit, etc. He must
never more be unholy that has once received the Holy Communion.

As to the Posture of Receiving, I am not scrupulous, being willing to conform
to the Custom of those with whom I communicate: I can receive on my Knees
without Danger of Idolatry; or Sitting, without the Guilt of Contempt. This
latter I esteem of greater Antiquity, it being the Posture wherein Christ
Communicated to his Disciples at the last Supper, unless it be said they lay
along according to the Mode of the Eastern People in those Days. However I do
not think the Position of the Body, but the Preparation of the Soul is required
to render one a Worthy Commun icant in these Holy Mysteries.

I censure not the Primitive Christians, not those more Modern ones, who
Communicate frequently, yet I should be timorous to approach these Holy
Mysteries too often, lest I should incur the Judgment which St. Paul has
pronounced on those who eat and drink unworthily. I have Charity for others who
Celebrate this Sacrament Monthly, Weekly, or Daily, but I should have little
for my self, should I receive this tremendous Mystery of Life, with less
Preparation than were requisite to fit me for Death. It being in the Number of
those Medicines which either Kill or Cure, according to the Constitution to
which they are applied.

If we examine the Books of Physicians, those Registers of Humane Frailty and
Mortality, we shall find no less than Six Thousand Diseases on the Score, to
which Man's Body is liable. And it is to be feared the Distempers of the Soul
come not short of the Account. What is Pride but a Tympany? Lust but a Fever?
Drunkenness but a Dropsy? Envy and Malice but the Consumption of the Soul? To
obviate these and innumerable more Spiritual Maladies, God has (as a Token of
his Infinite Bounty) given His Ministers Commission to dispense to the Sons of
Men the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, as a Divine Catholicon, or Cure for
[all] the Diseases which are incident to our Souls, but with this Condition,
That he who partakes of these Holy Mysteries unworthily, instead of being
healed, does but increase his Malady, work it up to a dangerous Crisis, if not
to a desperate Paroxism, which affords no Hopes, but a fearful Expectation of
Judgment to come. Cyprian tells us two remarkable Stories, that one coming to
the Sacrament, after the Minister had given him the Bread, and he going to eat
it, it stuck in his Throat Gladium sibi sumens non cibum, says he, he received
his Bane instead of Bread, the other came and took the Bread into his Hand, and
when he went to eat it, there was nothing but Ashes in his Hand. This
Apprehension, I ingenuously declare, has had such Influence on me, as to
restrain me long from approaching the Holy Table. I tremble at the Thought of
Eating and Drinking my own Damnation, and of trampling under-foot the Blood of
the Eternal Testament.

I love not to humor my Spleen or gratify my Hypocondria, by inveighing
against the Luxury of the present Age, as if it were worse than those of old,
and that our Forefathers did not Eat and Drink to Excess as well as we: The
present Intemperance of Mankind is but the Transmigration of the Former: And
our Posterity shall but act over the Patterns we set them. Drunkenness is as
old as Noah 's Flood, and Epicurism begun with Adam. The one had no sooner
escaped the Universal Inundation of Water, but he had like to have been drowned
in a Deluge of Wine; And the Other not content with the large Indulgence and
Commission God had given Him to eat of the Fruits of Paradise, must needs leap
the Fence which guarded the Forbidden Tree, and when he might have Banquetted
without Satiety or End on the Varieties which would have given him Life and
Immortality, he plays the Glutton, and Surfeits Himself with the Plant of Death
and Damnation. His Children soon learned to tread in their Father's Steps, and
Gluttony was equally propagated with Mankind. And though that Repairer of Adam's
almost Shipwrackt Progeny could he abstemious, when he might have furnished his
Table with all the Beasts of the Earth and Fowls of the Air at one Meal, yet he
could not refrain from the tempting Fruit of the Vine. His Ebriety was also
catching, and the Incestuous Offspring of Lot owed their Original to the Blood
of the Grape. Before the Flood Men were busied in Banqueting and Riot, so they
have been ever since, and so they will be, to the End of the World. Men are
great Followers of Antiquity in the Practice of these Vices.

For my Part I envy not the Board of Vitellius that at one Meal was covered
with two Thousand Fish, and double that Number of Fowls. Neither do I covet the
more Expensive Feasts of Heliogabulus. The refined Luxury of Cleopatra seems to
me less Sordid, though more Prodigal, who at one Draught swallowed down a King's
Ransom. It was not her Palate she gratified in that Rich Potion, but she
humored the Gust of her Ambition; which is a Sublimer sort of Vice, and may
not unfitly be called the Gluttony of the Soul, while it Revels on the Breath
of Fame, and Epicurizes with a Chamelion-like Appetite on the Air of Honor.

Intemperance is the Blind side of Mortals; it is our soft Place, where we
suffer our selves to be stroak'd and tickled to Death by the flattering
Serpent. This made Isaac mis-place his Blessing for a Piece of Venison, and his
Son to sell his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage. The Italian Proverb hits the
Glutton Home when it says, He digs his Grave with his Teeth, and cuts his
Throat with the Knife that carves his Meat.

Rioting and Drunkenness were formerly esteemed the National Sin of Germany
only, but I believe other Nations may put in for a share in the Charter. It is
the Epidemick Vice of the whole World. Men fall passionately in Love with it as
if they were of Mucaus the Poet's Opinion, who held, That perpetual Drunkenness
was the only Reward of Merit and Virtue. The very Mahometans themselves, who
are expressly forbidden by their Law to taste of Wine, being told by Mahomet
that there is lodged a Devil in every Grape, are sworn Votaries to Bacchus, and
the greatest Drunkards on Earth.

For my own Part, I could be content with the Diet of Johannes de Temporibus,
who when he had lived three Hundred years, being asked by the King of France,
What method he took to preserve his Life to so great an Age; Replied, Intus
Melle, extra Oleo. I say, I could be content with his Diet, not so much for the
sake of Spinning out my Life to Centuries of years, (which yet I believe were
not altogether impracticable in one of my Constitution) as that by a constant
and habitua^ Desuetude of merely Animal Enjoyments, (...) might the more
closely and vigorously atten^ the Operations of my Soul, and be always awake to
the Superior Faculties of my Mind and Intellect, Anima Sicca, est Anima
Sapiens, was a true Maxim of the Philosopher. And the Sons of Minerva
experience it.

I abhor the Superstitious Cant, and Discriminating Shibboleth of Enthusiasts,
who must needs take upon them to alter the Form of sound Words; as if the
Dialect of the Primitive Church were grown obsolete, or that the Apostles
understood not the Orthography of Christian Faith. I like not those Spiritual
Bouteseus, who take a great Deal of Pains to breed a Quarrel between Religion
and Nature, and set those two Twins together by the Ears; as if we could not be
good Christians, unless we deny our Sense and Reason. Certainly it is not the
Business of Religion to Supplant and Extirpate Nature, but to prune and
rectify it. Religion is that which polishes and smooths the Roughness of
lapsed Humanity, pares away the Vicious Knobs which grow up with us from our
tainted Embryo, and by various Instruments of Grace forms and squares us into
sit Materials for God's Holy Temple. The Work of Regeneration seems in some
manner to copy that of Creation. The Holy Ghost at his first Visit, finds us in
our corrupt state, but a mere Chaos, a confused Heap of Passions and Sensual
Appetites; our Reason, that Light of our Souls lies Dormant, smothered as it
were by our Animal Faculties; Darkness covers the Face of this Microcosm, till
he give the Word, Fiat Lux, and by a forcible Energy strike some Divine Sparks
out of our Flinty Hearts: Thus separating the Co^lestial Parts from the
Terrestrial, and Sublimating us into the Simi^itude of his own glorious
Essence, Enduing ^s with Faith, without destroying our Reason, and inspiring us
with Charity, without exterminating our Passions. Thus I can believe the most
transcendent Mysteries of our Religion, and yet not be guilty of an implicit
Credulity and blind Devotion: And I can practice Chri^^ian Moderation, though I
could never learn the ^toical Apathy.

I highly value the Sacred Scripture as the Oracle of Divinity, and Rule of
Faith: Yet I ^steem them not a System of Philosophy, or (...) Pandect of
natural Science. They are able ^o make us Wise unto Salvation, and perfect
(...) the Knowledge of God, through Faith in Christ Jesus, but they instruct us
not in Mun^ane Curiosities, nor acquaint us with the Theory of all his Works.
That frightful Cau^^on of the Apostle [Beware of vain Philosophy] no Bugbear
to my Studies, nor can it startle my harmless Enquiries into the Secrets of the
Elements. I will not be afraid of prying into the Circumstances of the Earth,
since J^^^^ has told us, it is hanged upon Nothing; nor ^^ casting my Eyes up
to the Heavens, and examining the Motions, Influences and Oper^tions, of the
Sun, Moon and Stars, since the same Holy Patriarch was posed with this
^strological Question by God himself, Ca^ Thou restrain the sweet Influence of
the Pleiad^^ or loose the Bands of Orion? There are ma^^ Natural Observations
in the Bible which m^^ serve as Hints or Spurs to more accurate D^^quisitions:
But in no Place that I know o^ does it set a Non Ultra to those Sober
Enqu^rers, who by making a Modest and Judicio^^ Search into the Works of the
Creation, are c^^pable of returning a more exact and consummate Praise to the
Eternal Architect Indee^ most (if not all) the Manual Trades in the World, are
but the several Species of Pract^cal Philosophy: While the Mechanic pu^ in
Execution the Theory of the Student, a^ what the One dictates from the School
of ^^ture, the other Experiments in the Shop ^^ Art. Neither would Men know how
to ke^^ themselves in Action or maintain Commerc^ were it not for the Sake of
Philosophy. T^ this are owing all the Advances and Progres^ons that Ingenious
Men have made in the Callings and Occupations. And every Smit^ Carpenter,
Mason, etc. that makes an Improvement in his Craft or Mystery deserve the Tit^e
of Virtuoso, and to be numbered among the Philosophers

Among all the Sciences, there is none to which (had I leisure) I could be more
devoted than to Astronomy, and for this Reason I could raise a Pyramid to the
Inventors of the Telescope, That Happy Midwife to new Discoveries in the
Heavens; and think my Self no less obliged to Him that first found out the
Motion of the Earth. Both have Enfranchised me from the Slavery of
Prepossession, and taught me to unthink the Sentiments of my greener Years.
Methinks I owe no Allegiance to Ptolomy, and am perfectly weaned from the
Magisterial Dictates of the Stagyrite. I cannot so readily believe that the Sun
moves above two Hundred and Fifty Thousand Miles every Minute of Time, as that
the Earth moves Eighteen Miles in that space. And that the Planet Saturn moves
ten, and the fixed Stars a Hundred Times faster and farther than the Sun in the
same space, which must be the Consequence of the Earth's standing still, and
the Suns Motion. It seems no good Divinity to me, to expect that from Gods
Infinite Power, which is repugnant to his equal Wisdom and the Laws of Motion
which he has Established in the Universe. This were to make one of his
Attributes Clash with another, and to calumniate his Holiness, which consists
in the Harmony of them all. I adore his Omnipotency, and tremble at the Thought
of calling in Question the Power that made All things of Nothing. Yet I think
it my Duty to be wise as well as Devout, and to speak rightly as well as
reverently of his Divine Perfections. As his word is the Rule of my Faith, so
his Providence is the Pole Star of my Reason. And in the Scrutiny of his Works
do not so much enquire what he is able to d^ as what he uses to do. Being
assured tha^ as nothing is to him Impossible, so he has stated the Being,
Actions, Passions, Qualities and Circumstances of all Things, ordering them i^
exact Number, Weight and Measure. So that a posse Dei ad esse Rei non valet
Consequentia. He has fixed the Laws of Loco-motion in Corporea^ Substances, and
tied up the Primum Mobile it self to a certain Proportion of Time and Distance,
which it can no more exceed, than the smallest Wheel of a Watch.

Such prodigious Whirligigs, as the Heavenly Bodies must needs be, in the
Ptolomaick Hypothesis, makes me giddy to think on it, and I believe they were
troubled with a Vertigo, that first reeled upon the Notion: Or they l^bour'd
under the Deception of those at Sea, who sailing within Sight of the Shore, and
not being able to perceive the Motion of the Vessel that carries them, are apt
to fancy the Neighboring Cliffs, Towns and Trees were under Sail, and
steering a contrary Course, since they so appear to do. For not less silently
do I believe the Earth moves constantly round on her Axis, thus making the
Natural Day and Night, without putting the whole Frame of the Universe into an
unconceivable Hurry.

The Planet Jupiter is discovered by the Telescope to make the same Circulation
in 10 Hours, Mars in 23, and the Sun himself in 28 Days. These are no
Chimaera's or Dreams of Poets, no Metaphysical Speculations of Nut-shell
Brains, but Real Truths, demonstrable by Art and Ocular Experience. And
methinks it is a more Uniform Idea, if we suppose the Earth to be a Planet like
the Rest, and to take its Turn in the Septenary Dance round the Sun, who is
placed in the Center of this Vortex, and is the true Apollo, to whose Music
the whole Planetary System keeps Time. I fear not the Lash of Maurolycus, nor
the Scourge of his bigoted Brethren. If Copernicus was by them thought Scutica
and Flagello dignus, for in^ovating on the Doctrines of Ptolomy; What was
Ptolomy himself worthy of, who entrenched on ^ greater Antiquity, and
undermined the Phi^osophy of Aristarchus Samius, who taught the Motion of the
Earth above four hundred years before Ptolomy was an Infant? For my Part I
^hink it no Treason against the Commonwealth ^f Learning to say, I prefer
Galileo's Tube to ^tolomy's Spectacles, and the Discoveries of our English
Royal Society, to the blind Conjectures ^f the Peripateticks, and the wild
Speculations ^f Athen^.

When I was first informed that there were ^iscover'd four new Stars moving
about Jupiter, and three about Saturn, I was as well pleased, as they who
received the earliest News of Columbus's landing in America. I am so far from
being of Alexander's Humor, that instead of weeping, I should heartily rejoice
could I be credibly satisfied, That there are ten Thousand more Worlds, than
are already discovered.

I am naturally Melancholy, and the weigh^ of this leaden Complexion does so
depress my Spirits, That all the Race of Mankind or Earth seems too small to
afford Variety enoug^ for a Relief. This makes me the more willin^ to believe
what my Reason suggests to be true That the Planets are Inhabited. It is a
lively as well as a Rational Notion; and since the are Dark, Opake Bodies, like
the Earth w^ tread on, having no other Light but what the^ borrow from the Sun,
and seem in all other Circumstances to be adapted for Habitations, see no
Solaecism in Philosophy, nor Heres^^ against the Faith to believe they are
really I^habited as is this Globe. That they have Su^cession of Day and Night,
and their Satellites ^^ Moons to give them Light by Night, even a^ we, is
demonstrable to the Eye by the help o^ the Telescope. But there would, in my
Opin^on, be little need of all this, were there ^^rational Inhabitants in those
Celestial Globes. ^^ is a fastidious Pride in Man to fancy all the Glittering
Furniture above was only made for Ornament, or for Shepherds to gaze on in the
Night, or for some other Inferior uses of the Sons of Adam. And it is a narrow
Concei^ to imagine, that though this Globe be plentifully Inhabited by all sorts
of Animals, not a Turf of Land, nor a Puddle of Water being without its
Tenants, yet all those ample and glorious Bodies above should lie empty and
vacant, though some of them be far bigger than our Earth, and for ought we know,
may be ten times more commodious for Habitation. Those Passages in St. Paul's
Epistles to the Philippians 2.11. Ephesians. 1.9, 10. Colos. 1.16. seem to be
calculated for the Inhabitants of those Heavenly Bodies. And his Emphatical
words in Ephesians. 3.9. seem to be but a Transcript of the Revelations he
received, and of the Things he saw when he was Rapt into the Third Heaven, viz.
That there are some in those Heavenly Places, even Principalities and Powers,
to whom the manifold Wisdom of God in Christ was made known, and that they were
not only Created by Him, but for Him, and that they and we are all of one
Family or Descent. These may be some of the (...) which that Holy Apostle
speaks of in 2 Cor. 12.4. Words and Mysteries which could not be uttered. And
for ought I know, those Beings which he calls Principalities, Powers, Mights,
Thrones and Dominions may be no other than the several glorious Colonies of the
Celestial Family dwelling in the Stars, who all believe in the same Eternal
Jesus, even as we do, and through his Mediation make their Approaches to God
the Father. This may be the farther Fellowship of the Mystery of God, hid from
the Beginning. This the untraceable Riches of Christ, which put St. Paul to an
(...). O the Depth of his Wisdom! O the Superlative Greatness of his Power! But
whether the Planets be Inhabited or no, this I am assured of, and can produce
an Hundre^ Authentic Witnesses, that they are Dark B^dies, like the Earth we
tread on, and tha^ they have no Light but what they receive from the Sun, which
also they do but partially enjoy like us, by Successive Hemispheres, having
their Day and Night measured out to them proportionate to the Time they take up
in moving round their Centers.

When I have tired my self with following these visible Motions of Nature, I
retire Home again, thinking to take Sanctuary in my self, and find a Rest in
the Contemplation of my own Soul: But there I do but commence a new Fatigue,
and am hurried about in a perpetual Circle by an invisible Energy within me. I
think, speak, and act with infinite Variety, yet know not how I perform these
different Operations. I know my self to be an Incorporeal Substance, and can
easily feel out my own Independency on the Body. I look on this House of Clay I
carry about with me, to be only my Prison. But how I am confined to this
Prison, I that am but a poor Scintillation or Spark of the Eternal Sun, is a
Riddle which I cannot solve. I can better imagine how a Beam of our Visible Sun
may be united to a Marble Statue, than that a pure Thought should be fastened to
a Clod of Earth, from which it cannot free it self but by Death, though it can
pervade all the Universe beside. What Cement is it that thus closely ties
together two such incompatible Essences, as Heaven and Earth, Light and
Darkness, Spirit and Body? This is a Knot must be left for Elias to untye, and
is indeed one chief Argument of the Shipwreck of Humane, Reason, since not only
all other Things are obscure to us, but we are so to our selves, the nearest
Objects, even our own Domestic Operations are as incomprehensible to us, as
those that are farthest off. The Things that touch us, nay the very Faculties
by which we touch, see, understand, etc. are as distant from us as the Ninth
Sphere, and we are as much strangers to our selves, as to the Inhabitants of
Terra Incognita. There would be nothing more welcome to me than a History of my
Original, for I do not compute my Age or Family, by the short Chronology of the
Parish-Register; nor do I think my self much the older by my Mother's
Additional Record of Nine Months, I lived in her Womb. I esteem her Reckoning
from my Conception, but the Tragic Memories of my Death, and those which by
most are accounted the Chambers of Life, and Shops of Generation, are no better
in my Judgment than the Receptacles of the Dead, Seminaries of Corruption, the
Graves of Souls defunct to the Higher World. For I believe I was then Born when
the Morning Stars Sang together, and when all the Sons of God shouted for Joy.
I time my Infancy with that of the Universe, and esteem no Man older or younger
than my self, no not the Angels themselves, believing that all Spiritual
Substances were Created together, in the Beginning. I will not with some accuse
Moses of scantiness in his History of the Creation, because according to the
Letter he seems to take but little notice of Immaterial Beings. The Hebrew
Cabbala, with the Commentaries of their Learned Rabbis, and some of the
Primitive Fathers of the Christian Church do sufficiently evince, That there
are greater Mysteries contained in the Three first Chapters of Genesis, than
the bare Letter, or Vulgar Translations seem to exhibit. There is a Sacrament
in that Holy Language, which whosoever partakes of, can be no stranger to the
Natural and Divine Truths couched under it. To such an One the History of the
Terrestrial Adam's Happy State in Paradise, and his Banishment from thence,
will be an Hieroglyphick of the Original Beatitude of the Immaterial World, and
the Degeneracy of humane Souls, their Descent from the Aetherial Mansions, and
Consinement to Houses of Clay, as well as of the Fall of Angels. I seem to my
self, not without Reason to embrace the Doctrine of the Praeexistence of Souls,
since it was among the Credenda of many Ancient Sages, a peculiar Tradition of
the Jews, and the general Opinion of all the East. That Question which was put
to our Savior concerning the Man that was born Blind, whether it was for his
own sins, or those of his Parents, seems clearly to imply, That he was in a
Condition or Capacity of sinning before his Birth, which how it could be
without supposing the Praeexistence of his Soul, is past my Divinity or
Philosophy to unriddle. The various Conjectures also which the Jews made of
Christ, according to the Report of his Disciples, when some said he was Elias,
others that he was one of the Prophets, a third sort, that he was John the
Baptist risen from the Dead, are evident Arguments, That the Doctrine of
Praeexistence, and a Metempsychosis was established as part of the Creed of
that Nation. Of which also that passage in the Wisdom of Solomon is no obscure
hint, where the Author says, Or rather being a good Spirit, I came into a Body
pure and undefiled. Neither am I startled because I find not Christ, or any of
his Apostles asserting, or so much as mentioning any such Doctrine. St. John's
Hyperbole in the last verse of his Gospel, satisfies me, that I must not expect
to find all that our Savior did and said, registered by the Evangelists: And
St. Paul's frequent Exhortation to hold fast the Traditions that he had
imparted to them, whether by Word or Epistle, convince me, That it is not
unreasonable to conclude, That he delivered many Doctrines in his Sermons,
which he had no occasion to mention in his Letters to the Churches: Among which
this might be one. However, it is a sufficient Warrant to my Belief, That I no
where in all the Scriptures can find this Doctrine reprehended. Which, had it
been an Error, could not have escaped the censure of Christ and his Apostles;
it being the Universal Tenet of all sorts of Jews, except the Sadduces. When I
consider also that Origin and Ammonius taught it in the Schools of Alexandria.
(Plotinus himself learning it from the latter) and that all the Primitive
Fathers who were Platonists, asserted it not only as a Philosophical, but also
as a Divine Truth; I look upon it as an Effect of Gothic Barbarity and
Ignorance, which afterward overspread all Christendom, That neither this, nor
hardly any other Point of Platonism were countenanced in the Christian Schools,
but only the Dictates of Aristotle and his Ghost Averroes. In fine, that
elegant Flourish of St. Augustine, Infundendo creatur, creando infunditur, is
no Rule of my Faith in this Point, since it fastens so many irreverend
Consequences on God Almighty; neither can I believe the Soul to be ex Traduce,
because it carries in its Front so many Inconsistencies in Philosophy, besides
the Indignity that is done to the Soul thereby, which amounts to a true
Scandalum Magnatum, since it is levelled at the whole Order of immaterial
Beings. I must therefore believe, That I had a Being long before I came into
this Body, and yet not resolve the Manner of my Existence into a mere
Potentiality, or an unactive slumber in the Bosom of my Causes, as if I were
then but a Seminal Idea in the Blood of my Fathers, or a Metaphysical Dream of
my present self. I believe I was in a State of greater Activity before I was
conceived by my Mother than since she bore me; and for ought I know, have
^^rang'd all the Boundless Tracts of the Universe, been Naturalized in the
several Regions of the Sky and Air, till being tired with so vast a Ramble, and
willing to try all States of Life, I was by the Force of a strong Inclination,
and the irresistible Charm of rightly adapted Matter, allured into this
Terrestrial Body, here to do Penance for the Faults of my Superior Life, and
in this Horizon between the upper and the lower World to make my Choice of Good
or Evil, Light or Darkness, Life or Death. This unlocks all the Aenigma's of
Providence; and reconciles the harsher Difficulties with which the Immediate
Creation or Traduction of Souls is involved. It is the noblest Instrument of
Virtue, the sharpest Spur to a Divine Life, whilst it doubles the Hope; we have
of being Immortal a Part post, by assuring us we were so a Part ante. And
that it is not from any Arbitrary Decree of God, inconsistent with the Rest of
his Divine Perfections, that we shall live for ever, but from our own Nature
and Essence, being Created to subsist an interminable Duration of Ages.

I believe those Books of the Holy Scripture which are lost, could they
possibly be recovered again, would serve as a Lamp to enlighten us in many
Obscurities of Religion, History, and Nature: And if the Writings of Jasher,
Idd^ the Prophet, etc. could inform us nothing of the Praeexistence of Souls,
it is very probabl^ the more early Oracles of Enoch would, sinc^ he was but the
Seventh Soul that was drench'^ in Terrestrial Matter, and led so pure and
incorrupt a Life, as would tempt one to believe, That he was awakened to the
Memory of his former State, which for ought we know, might have no small
influence on his succeeding Change.

I have often wondered where St. Jude had so particular an Account of Michael
the Archangels dispute with the Devil about the Body of Moses, that he was
able to relate the very words that passed between them. Surely the Jews had
some Books, or at least Traditions, which were believed to be Orthodox, though
they were not so much as mentioned in the Sacred Canon; for we cannot without
great Impiety imagine that the Holy Saint would impose upon our Belief any
thing that was Foreign or Apocryphal. I am apt to conclude from hence, That
there were many Traditional Doctrines entertained among the Hebrews, which are
by us esteemed no better than Fables.

However, though I am thus convinced of the Truth of our Praeexistence, and that
this present Life is but a Shadow or Dream in comparison of what we enjoyed
before our Immersion in the Flesh; yet I would not have this Dream interrupted
by any untimely or harsher stroke of Destiny. I should think it no
inconvenience to live long! but rather a Blessing, That so a multitude of years
might scum off the Froth and Sullage of our Appetites and Passions, that so
being gradually weaned from those low Affections which brought us down to the
Earth, we may without any Disquiet or Turbulency remount to our Aetherial
Homes. For I am apt to think that those ^ouls who go out of their Bodies, with
any remaining Relish upon them of the Body, like Fruit that is either plucked
off, or shaken down by violent Winds, still retain in their separation, a raw
and eager smack of the Flesh, with a languishing Bias toward it. Whereas he
that has tarried his full Period, in the Body, parts from it with Ease and
Willingness, as Ripe Fruit drops from the Tree. And therefore I do not wonder
that the most general Scene of Apparitions, Ghosts, etc. is the Churchyard, or
at least that Place where the Body of the Spectrum was buried. And the removed
Earth which covered the Cobbler of Silesia 's Body is a shrewd intimation, That
there are some Departed Souls, which if they seek not a Reunion with their
Bodies, yet endeavor to hold a kind of Correspondence with them even in the
Grave. And though the Impossibility of being married again to these their dear
Consorts, after that final Divorce, were enough, one would think, to cure their
Impotent Desires, yet they burn with a new Lust, and commit a Spiritual
Adultery in the unlawful Bed of the Grave. These I look on as the Effects of a
too early and violent Separation and therefore esteem Methuselah and the Res^
of the Fathers before the Flood, happy; who prolonged their years to the utmost
standar^ of Humane Life, and seemed not so much t^ die, (for that imports
Violence) as voluntarily to forsake their old Rotten Habitation shake Hands
with their Bodies, and so retu^^ to the Aetherial Palaces, from whence they ha^
so long stragled.

Yet notwithstanding the great Esteem ^ have of long Life, as a Means rather to
Improve than Impair us; I cannot promise my self to outlive a Jubilee, though I
have already seen one Revolution of Saturn. Neither do I affect to make Popes,
Emperors, Kings, and Grand Seigniours, the Landmarks in the Chronology of my
self; That were to insult over the Royal Ashes of Princes, besides the Ambition
in Ranking my self in their Number. Methinks I grow old even at those Years
when the World counts me Young, and possess the Heritage of David's last Ten
Years of Fourscore, in the Prime of my Age.

Indeed the whole Earth, and all this Planetary World seems to droop and decay.
Every Species of Beings grow weak and languid, and seem to draw near their
Dissolution. Yet it is needless to engage God in the Act, since though Creation
was above the Force of Nature, yet Mutation is not, and no Annihilation can
proceed from that Paternal Essence of Essences. It seems easy to me to
believe, That the World will perish upon the Ruins of its own Principles. And
though the precise Period of its Destruction be not known to the Angels
themselves, yet there are not wanting some Philosophical Rules, whereby one
might venture to Calculate its Duration, and by observing the various Attempts,
Eruptions and Devastations made by Fire already, one may conjecture about what
Time that most active Element shall be let loose, to destroy this Face of the
World, and transform this Superannuated Heaven and Earth into New Ones, as the
Holy Prophet has foretold. For as to Annihilation, look on it as a Chimera, or
Non Entity, which cannot be said to slow from Him who ^s All-being, and the
Fountain of Existence. ^t were easier to conceive that Cold should ^e the
immediate Effect of Fire, and Dark^ess the Natural Result of the actual
Pre^ence of Light, than to think that Annihi^^tion or not Being can proceed
from Him ^ho is the Original Source of Being, from those Divine Power, Wisdom
and Good^ess all Things flow by a Necessary Emana^^on, and continue in their
several Perfecti^ns by as unalterable a Law as that which ^ave them; so that
there can be no Vanity supposed in their Eternal Subsistence, ^o Leaps or
Starts from Something to No^^ing. It is far more agreeable to the Prin^^ples of
Philosophy to conceive, That only ^^e Gross and Corruptible Part of the
Uni^erse shall be subject to the Action of Fire, such as the Earth we tread on
with the other Planetary Bodies; but that the purest Aethe^ shall remain for
ever untouched, unchanged the Sanctuary of the Blessed, the Habitatio^ of the
Spirits of Just men made perfect. I a^ also confirmed in this Belief by
somethi^^ more Sacred and Authentic than natural Ph^losophy. For when the
Royal Psalmist in the Divine Rhapsody calls upon the Heavens (...) Heavens, and
the Waters which are above t^^ Heavens to praise God, he gives this for ^
Reason, (viz.) Because he spoke and the were made, he commanded and they were
created. He established them to Eternit^ and for Everlasting Ages: He fixed a
Decree which he will not disannul. Then he calls upon the Earth and all
Creatures therein to join i^ the same Act of Praise, but not for the sam^
Reason; not because the Earth shall endu^^ for ever, but because the Name of
God alon^ is exalted, and his Honor above Heaven an^ Earth. Which Distinction
seems to me a^ evident Argument of the unalterable Stabili^^ of the Celestial
and Aetherial World, what^^ever Mutations and Changes the Terresti^^ may be
subject to.

That those immense Tracts of quiet and i^passible Ether shall be the Seat of
the Bless is very consistent with Philosophy, and (...) ways repugnant to
Divinity. However, le^ the Place be where it pleases God, we ar^ assured that
the Entertainment and Joys ^^ far surpass all humane Comprehension. Ye^ though we
cannot have adequate Conceptions of Supreme Felicity, there are some Landmarks
by which we may take imperfect Measures of that Region of Promise. The
Dim-Light of Natural Reason may afford us a Glimpse, or faint Prospect of those
Superlative Joys, and the Optics of Faith will improve the View. We shall have
the same Nature and Faculties there as here, but free from the least Alloy of
Frailty and Imperfection. Our Souls shall display the radiant Brightness of
their Immortal Essence with stronger Vibrations than the Sun, having no
internal Scum of Concupiscence boiling out from the Center of a depraved Will
or erroneous Understanding, to blemish and stain those unspotted Orbs of Light;
nor a terrene gross Body to Eclipse and shut up their Splendors. But being ever
Bright and Serene, they shall shine through their Glorified and Spiritual
Bodies, as the Sun does through the ^ervious Air, or at least as he does on a
Bright Cloud, which drinks in his Beams to reflect them abroad with a more
sensible Glory. We shall then see, not by receiving the Visible Species into
the narrow Glass of an Organized Eye, we shall then hear without the distinct
and curious Contexture of the Ear. The Body shall then be all Eye, all Ear. All
Sense in the whole, and every Sense in every Part. In a word, it shall be all
over a common Sensorium, and being made of the purest Ether, without the
Mixture of any lower or grosser Element, the Soul shall by one undivided Act,
at once perceive all that Variety of Objects which now cannot without several
distinct Organs, and successive Actions or Passions, reach our Sense. From this
Superlative Tenuity and Claritude of our Bodies, will aris^ that ineffable
Delicacy in the Sensation of the Soul, which will transport it with Deligh^
infinitely transcending the Height of Mort^^ Voluptuousness, nay and even
those more exalted Pleasures which the Virtuous sometime^ enjoy here on Earth
as Foretasts of their futur^ Beatitude in Heaven. What here excites bu^ an
Ordinary Emotion of Joy in the Soul, wi^^ there produce all Raptures and
Ecstasies. We shall be always in Paroxisms of Love, such are the transcendent
Beauties of that admirable Place! and such the divinely amorous Bent of the
Soul. We shall be always languishing, yet ever enjoying what we languish for:
Neither suffering the least Pain through the Want of Fruition, nor through any
Satiety that shall attend it: But through the Vigor of an Immortal Activity,
we shall have ever freshly kindle^ Desires and new Enjoyments, being dissolved
in a Circle of Beatitude without Measure or End.

Here on Earth Men generally strive to Monopolize Pleasure to themselves, there
being few of so generous a Temper as to be sensibly touched with Delight, that
another should partake with them in that which they esteem Felicity: This is
the peculiar Advantage of the Blessed in Heaven, that even in the Height of
the Affairs of Immortal Love and Empire, where they possess Eternal Crowns and
unfading Beauties, there is no such Thing to be found as a Rival or Competitor,
but every one's Joy is enhanc'd by the Enjoyments of another. Every one loves
all, and all love every one. Neither would their Felicity be Perfect, could any
Member of that Happy Society be supposed not to have his full proportion and
share of Beatitude. So communicative is the Love and Joy of those Holy Souls,
that they must cease to love and enjoy themselves, should they desist from
loving and rejoicing in the Happiness of their Fellow-Citizens. And if we may
take our Measures of their Joys from our Common Experiences here on Earth, it
will be no small Augmentation of their Complacency, to find those very
Friendships which they had contracted here below, translated to the Mansions
above, when they shall both see and know those whom they once loved on Earth,
how to be made Denizens with them in Heaven, with what Ardours will they caress
one another! With what Transports of Divine Affection will they mutually
embrace, and vent those Innocent Flames, which had so long lain smothering in
the Grave! How passionately Rhetorical and Elegant will their Expressions be,
when their Sentiments which Death had Frozen up, when he congealed their Blood,
shall now be Thawed again in the warm Airs of Paradise! Like Men that have
escaped a common Shipwreck, and swim safe to the Shore, they will congratulate
each other's Happiness with Joy and Wonder. Their first Addresse^ will be a
Dialect of Interjections and short Periods the most Pathetick Language of
Surprise and high wrought Joy! And all their after converse eve^ to Eternity,
will be couched in the highes^ Strains and Flowers of Heavenly Oratory, wi^^
Allelujahs intermixed.

It much sweetneth the thoughts of Heaven to me to remember that there are a
multitu^^ of my Friends gone thither; to think such ^ Friend that died at such
a time, and such a (...) at another time (O! what a number of th^^ could I
name) and that all these I shall meet ^gain. It Is true, it is a question with
some wheth^^ we shall know each other in Heaven or no? b^^ it is none with me;
for surely there shall ^^ Knowledge cease which now we have, b^^ only that
which implies our Imperfection and what Imperfection can this imply? Inde^^ we
shall not know each other after the flesh, n^^ by Stature, Voice, Color, or
outward Shap^ nor by Terms of Affinity and Consanguini^^ nor by Youth or Age,
nor I think by Sex, bu^ by the Image of Christ and Spiritual Relation beyond
doubt we shall know and be know^ nor is it only my old Friends (such as Esse^
Russel, Sydney, etc.) that I shall know in He^ven, but all the Saints of all
Ages, who Faces in the Flesh I never saw. Luther in (...) last sickness being
asked his Judgment wheth^^ we shall know one another in Heaven, a^swer'd thus,
Quid accidit Adamo? nunquam i^ viderat Evam, etc. i. e. How was it with Adam?
he had never seen Eve, yet he asks not who she was, or whence she came, but
says, She is Flesh of my Flesh, and Bone of my Bone. And how knew he that?
Why, being endued with the true knowledge of God, he so pronounced; after the
same sort shall we be renewed by Christ in another Life. And we shall know our
Parents, Wives, Children, etc. much more perfectly than Adam did then know Eve.
In Heaven we shall not only see our Elder Brother Christ, but all our Kindred
and Friends that living here in his fear died in his favor, for since our
Savior tells us that the Children of the Resurrection shall be (...) equal to,
Luke ^0.36. Luke 16.
or like the Angels who yet in the Visions of Daniel and St. John appear to be
acquainted with each other, since in the Parable of the miserable Epicure and
the happy Beggar the Father of the Faithful is represented, as knowing not only
the Person and present condition, but the past story of Lazarus: Since the
Instructor of the Gentiles confidently expects his converted and pious
Thessalonians to be his Crown at that great day: Since these Arguments, besides
diverse others are afforded us by the Scripture, we may safely conclude that we
shall know each other in a place where, since nothing requisite to happiness
can be wanting, we may well suppose that we shall not want so great a
satisfaction as that of being knowingly happy in our other selves, our Friends.

Thus far we may venture to speak of the lower Degrees of Celestial Beatitude,
the mutual Love and Entertainment of the Blessed. But who has ever mounted to
the Highest Scale of Heavenly Bliss? Let him come down and tell us the
Mysteries wrapped up i^ Clouds, the Secrets hid within the Veil of I^accessible
Light! Let him describe the Wonders of the Beatifick Vision, and say how dee^
the Rivers of Pleasure are which run by God^ Right Hand for evermore! For my
Part, I must confess, I Am lost in that Abyss of Wonders, and therefore modestly
withdraw my Pen to Subjects more Domestic and within ou^ Reach, and yet even
here I shall but pass from one Abyss to another, since every Thing has a Depth
in it not to be fathomed by our weightiest Sense or most solid Reason.

I have often tried to dive into the Profundities of Death, but still I find my
Intellect too light a Plummet, and the whole Thread of Life, though spun out in
finest Speculations would still prove far too short to reach that endless
Bottom.

It Is true there have been men that have tried even in Death it self to relish
and taste it, and who have bent their utmost Faculties of Mind to discover what
this passage is; but they are none of them come back to tell us the News.

-- No one was ever known to wake,
Who once in Deaths cold Arms a Nap did take.
Lucret. Lib. 3. Canius Julius being condemned by that Beast Caligula, as he
was going to receive the stroke of the Executioner, was asked by a Philosopher,
Well Canius, said he, whereabout is your Soul now? What is she doing? What are
you thinking of? I was thinking, replied Canius, to keep my self ready, and the
Faculties of my Mind settled and fixed, to try if in this short and quick
instant of Death I could perceive the motion of the Soul when she parts from
the Body, and whether she has any resentment at the Separation, that I may
after come again to acquaint my Friends with it.

So that I fancy there is a certain way by which some Men make Trial what Death
is, but for my own part I could never yet find it out.

I have sometimes thought what would I give for the least glimpse of that
invisible World which the first step I take out of this Body will present me
with, and that there was nothing in the whole discourse of Death that I durst
not mee^ the boldest way, and have therefore often attempted to look him full
in the Face, that I might learn to die generously, but still when it came to
the pinch Conscience that makes Cowards of us all, made one of me, and I was
forced to shrink back with shame.

Yet surely the Terror is not so much in Death it self, as in the Tragic Pomp
that goes before and after it. The tedious Discipline of Sickness, the formal
Visits of Relations and Friends, their melancholy Chat, the frightful Harangue
of the Physician, and our own dismal Apprehensions compose that horrid Scene
which renders Death uncomfortable. When the poor Patient that perhaps may yet
outlive his Fears of Death, and see Millions drop into the Grave before him,
yet dies a Thousand Deaths in his Hag-ridden Fancy, and makes his Bed his
Grave by strength of an abused Imagination.

It Is only Fancy gives Death those hideous Shapes we think him in, for indeed
Death is no more than a soft and easy Nothing, or rather Natures play-day. I
firmly think it is no more to die than to be born, we felt no pain coming into
the World; nor shall we in the act of leaving it, though in the first one would
believe there were more of Trouble than in the latter, for we cry coming into
the World, but quietly and calmly leave it. What is Death but a ceasing to be
what we were, before we were, we are kindled and put out; to cease to be and
not to begin to be is the same thing. Methinks it is but the other day I came
into the World, and anon I am leaving it; for though I am but in my thirtieth
year, and at present in perfect health and strength, yet I look upon my self as
a man that has one foot in the Grave already, for David says seventy is the Age
of man, and I have lived near thirty years of that time already. The longest of
my design's now is not above a years extent, I think of nothing now but ending,
take my last leave of every place I depart from; alas! there is no fooling with
Life when it is once turned beyond thirty. Silence was a full answer of him
that being asked what he thought of Humane Life, said nothing, turned him round
and vanished. Oh how Time runs away! and we are dead e're we have time to think
our selves alive, one does but Breakfast here, another Dine, he that lives
longest does but Sup, we must all go to Bed in another World, therefore good
night to you here, and good morrow hereafter.

Indeed our whole Life is but one often repeated Stop to Death, and we are as
near it at the first Minute of our setting out as at a hundred years end. For
Death either keeps an even Collateral Pace with us from our very Birth, or at
least he marches but one Step behind us all the way of our Life; so that when
the appointed Time is come for him to execute his Commission, he soon can reach
forth his Hand, arrest us, and stop our further Journey. Man in the Vigor and
Prime of his years, Phancies himself in the midst of a vast Plain; he looks
behind him, and numbers all the weary Steps of Life he has already taken,
persuades himself that Death must also measure the same space of years in his
Pursuit, before he can overtake Him; then turning his Eyes before, he sees a
boundless Tract, an indeterminate set of years; being thus deluded by the
Enchanted Prospect, he rushes on, and bids defiance to pale languid death,
imagining he sees him lagging afar off, at the first entrance of all the
wide-stretch'd Waste, whereas the nimble Skeleton is as far advanced as he,
only keeps out of sight, and will never be seen till the very moment he gives
the fatal stroke. To whatsoever Light Man's turn his Face, death like his
Shadow, whips behind Him still, and is at his Back, but never will Face him,
till the latest Gasp. And he that can stoutly bear his Looks for that one
Moment, shall never see him more to all Eternity. It Is but the Fear of this one
Moments Pain, that makes our Lives so uneasy all along. And I am really
ashamed of this incorrigible Folly of Mortals, who spend so many years in
painful Disquisitions how to protract the Pain of one poor moment, and undergo
ten times more Labor to escape it, than they can possibly feel in undergoing
it. I admire the Resolution of the Indian Wives, who in contempt of Death,
scorn to survive their Husband's Funeral Pile, but with chaste Zeal, and an
undaunted Courage, throw themselves into the Flames, as if they were then going
to the Nuptial Bed. Certainly they calculate aright, who reckon the Day of our
Death, the Day of our Nativity, since we are then Born to the Possession of
Immortal Life. For this Reason I honor the Memory of Ludovicus Cartesius the
Paduan Lawyer, who in his Last Will and Testament ordered, that no sad Funeral
Rites should be observed for Him, but that His Corpse should be attended with
Music and Joy to the Grave, and as if it were the Day of his Espousals, he
commanded that Twelve Suits of Gay Apparel should be provided instead of
Mourning for an equal number of Virgins, who should usher his Body to the
Church.

It will not, I hope, be an unpardonable Transition, if I start back from the
melancholy Horrors of Death, to the innocent Comforts of Humane Life, and from
the Immortal Nuptials of this Italian, pass to the Mortal Emblem, the Rites of
Matrimony, the Happiness of Female Society, and our Obligations to Women. It Is
an uncourtly Virtue, which admits of no Proselytes but Men devoted to
Coelibacy, and he is a Reproach to his Parents, who shuns the Entertainments of
Hymen, the blissful Amors of the Fair Sex, without which he himself had not
gained so much as the Post of a Cipher, in the Numeration of Mankind, though he
now makes a Figure too much in Natures Arithmetic, since he would put a stop
to the Rule of Multiplication. He is worse than Numa Pompilius, who appointed
but a set number of Virgins, and those were free to Marry, after they had
guarded the Sacred Fires, the Term of four years: Whereas if his morose
Example were followed, all Women should turn Vestals against their wills, and
be consecrated to a peevish Virginity during their Lives. I wonder at the
unnatural Fancy of such as could wish we might procreate like Trees, as if
they were ashamed of the Act, without which they had never been capable of such
an extravagant Thought, or like Alphonsus King of Spain, would correct the
Institutions of Heaven, and say, Had they been present with God, when he
commanded Adam and Eve to increase and multiply, they would have proposed a
bette^ method for Generation. Certainly he that Created us, and has riveted the
Love of Women in the very Center of our Natures, never gave us those passionate
Desires to be our incurable Torment, but only as Spurs to our Wit and Virtue,
that by the Dexterity of the One and the Integrity of the Other, we might Merit
and Gain the Darling Object which should consummate our Earthly Happiness.

I do not patronize the Smoke of those Dunghill-Passions, who only court the
Possessions of an Heiress, and fall in Love with her Money. This is to make a
Market of Women, and prostitute the Noblest Affection of our Souls to the
sordid Ends of Avarice. Neither do I commend the softer Aims of those, who are
wedded only to the Charming Lineaments of a Beautiful Face, a clear Sk^n, or a
well shaped Body. It Is only the Virtue, Discretion, and good Humor of a Woman
could ever captivate me, and I am blessed in a Mate who has her share both of
these and the other exterior Ornaments.

I hate the Cynical Flout of those who can afford Women no better Title than
Necessary Evils, and the lewd Poetical License of Him who made this Anagram,
Vxor and Orcus -- idem. That Orator whispered the Doctrine of Devils, who
said, Were it not for the Company of Women, Angels would come down and dwell
among us. I rather think, were it not for such ill natured Fellows as he, Women
themselves would prove Angels

It Is an ungrateful Return, thus to abuse that Gentle Sex, who are the Moulds
in which all the Race of Adam are cast: As if they deserved no better Treatment
at our Hands, than we usually give to Saffron Bags and Verde Bottles, which are
thrown into a Corner, when the Wine and Spice are taken out of them. The Pagan
Poet was little better than a Murderer, who allowed but two good Hours to a
Woman.

(...).
Vnam in Thalamo, alteram in Tumulo.
For my Part, I should esteem the World but a Desert, were it not for the
Society of the Fair Sex; and the most Polished Part of Mankind would appear but
like Hermits in Masquerade, or a kind of Civilized Satyrs, so imperfect and
unaccomplish'd is our Virility, without the Reunion of our lost Rib, that
Substantial and Integral Part of our Selves. Those who are thus disjoynted from
Women, seem to inherit Adam's Dreams, out of which nothing can awake them, but
the Embraces of their own living Image, the Fair Traduct of the first
Metamorphosis in the World, the Bone converted into Flesh. They are always in
Slumbers and Trances, ever separated from themselves, in a wild Pursuit of an
intolerab^^ Loss, nor can any thing fix their Volatile Desires, but the
powerful Magnetism of some Charming Daughter of Eve. These are the Centers of
all our Desires and VVishes, the true Pandoras that alone can satisfy our
longing Appetites, and fill us with Gifts and Blessings, in them we live before
we breathe, and when we have tasted the Vital Air, it is but to die an amorous
Death, that we may live more pleasantly in them again. They are the Guardians
of our Infancy, the Life and Soul of our Youth, the Companions of our Riper
Years, and the Cherishers of our Old Age. From the Cradle to the Tomb, we are
wrapped in a Circle of Obligations to them for their Love and good Offices. And
he is a Monster in Nature who returns them not the Caresses of an Innocent
Affection, the Spotless Sallies of Virtue and Gratitude. Love is the Soul of
the World, the Vital Prop of the Elements, it is the Cement of Humane Society,
the strongest Fence of Nature. Earth would be a Hell without it, neither can
there be any Heaven where this is absent.

Yet I am no Advocate for those general Lovers, who not content to let this
active Passion run within the lawful Channel of chaste Marriage, swell it up
with irregular Tides, and wanton Floods of Lust, till it wash away the Banks of
Reason and Morality, find out new Passages and Rivulets, encroaching on other
Men's Possessions, or at least dilating on the general waste of the weaker Sex,
who ought to be as Gardens enclosed, or holy Ground not to be profaned by the
Access of every bold Intruder.

I approve not the Incestuous Mixtures of the Chinese where the Brother Marries
the Sister, or next akin; nor the Sensual Latitude of the Mahometans, who
allow every Man four Wives, and as many Concubines as he can maintain. But
above all I detest the wild and Brutal Liberty of that Philosopher, who in his
Idea of Humane Happiness, conceived a promiscuous Copulation ad Libitum to be a
necessary Ingredient of our Bliss.

On the Other side, My Regards to that Sex are not circumscribed within such
narrow Limits, as to exclude any from our Conversation and Friendship, that by
any warrantable Title can lay a Just Claim to it; I would have our Commerce
with Females as General as is their Number that deserve it, whose Knowledge and
Virtue will be a sufficient security from criminal Familiarities, and from the
Scandals of the World. There are among that Sex as among Men, Good and Bad,
Virtuous and Vicious, and a Prudent Man will so level his Cho^ce, as not to
stain his Reputation, or hazard his Integrity. It Is no small Point of
Discretion, I own, to regulate our Friendships with Women, and to walk evenly
on the Borders and very Ridge of a Passion, whose next Step i^ a Precipice of
Flames not kindled from the Altar of Virtue. However, it is not impossible to
conserve Innocence, on the Frontiers of Vic^ There is no Difference of Sex
among Souls, and Masculine Spirit may inhabit a Woman's Bod^ It is disingenuous
to rob Virtue of the Adva^tages it receives from Beauty, which make (...)
appear like Diamonds enchac'd in Gold, a^^ gives it a greater Luster. Reason it
self will ^^pear more Eloquent in the Mouth of a fair Man than in that of the
most Florid Orator: An^ there are no Figures in all the System of Rhetoric so
moving and forcible as the peculia^ Graces of that Sex. I am of Opinion that
Me^ can boast of no Endowments of the Mind which Women possess not in as great,
if not a greater Eminency. There have been Mus^^ as well as Amazons, and no Age
or Nation bu^ has produced some Females Renowned for their Wisdom or Virtue.
Which makes me conclude that the Conversation of Women is no less useful than
pleasant, and that the Dangers which attend their Friendships and Commerce, are
recompensed by vast Advantages.

But whatever may be adduced against the Friendships we contract with Women,
there is not in all the Magazine of Detraction any Weapon of Proof against the
mutual Intimacies of our own Sex, the generous Endearments of Souls truly
Masculine and Virtuous, united by Sympathies and Magnets whose Root is in
Heaven. No Panegyricks can reach the Worth of these Divine Engagements, since
they admit not of any Mediocrity, but derive their Value only from their
Excess. I have been always slow and cautious in contracting Amities, lest I
should run the Risque of his Mistake, who while he thought he had an Angel by
the Hand, held the Devil by the Foot: But where I have once pitched my
Affection, I love without Reserve or Rule. I never entertain without suspicion
the warm Professions of Love, which some Men are apt to make at first sight.
Such Mushroom-Friendships have no deep Root, and therefore most commonly wither
as soon as they are formed. Yet I deny not, but that there are some secret
Marks and Signatures which Souls ordained for Love and Friendship can read in
each other at a Glance, by which that Noble Passion is excited, that afterward
displays it self in more apparent Characters. This is the silent Language of
Platonic Love, wherein the Eye supplies the Office of the Tongue; it is the
Rhetoric of Amorous Spirits wherein they make their Court without a Word.
There are some lasting Friendships which owe their Birth to such an Interview,
but their Growth and Fastness proceeds from other Circumstances, being
cherished by frequent Conversation, repeated good Offices, and an inviolate
Fidelity, which are the only proper and substantial Aliment of Love. It Is
impossible to fix a durable Friendship, wherever we place a Transient
Inclination, because of the insuperable Necessities which divide particular Men
from each Others Commerce or Knowledge after they have begun to Love. In the
Orb of this Life Men are like the Planets, which now and then cast friendly
Aspects on each other en Passant: But following the Motion of the Greater
Sphere of Providence, the^ are again separated, their Influences dissolved and
new Amors commenced. But I would have my Friendship, resemble the Fixed Sta^^
and Constellations, who in the Eternal Revolution never part Company or
Interests.

I have ever looked on those Men to be bu^ one step differenced from Beasts,
whose Love is confined only to their own Families or Kindred. Such a narrow
Affection deserves not to be ranked in the Praedicament of Humanity. My Love is
communicative it makes a large Progress, and extends it self to Strangers, it
takes in Men of different Humors and Complexions, Customs and Languages, it
refuses none that have the Face of Men, but with wide-open'd Arms embraces all
that bear the stamp of Humane Nature. And I have this peculiar in my Temper,
that I find not the least Reluctance in loving and doing Good to my Enemies.
That which costs others so much Labor and Toil to persuade themselves to, is
to me as familiar and easy, as to laugh at a ridiculous Object, and I esteem
it not so properly a Virtue in my Self, as a Gift of Nature, the Effect of my
Constitution.

Yet I cannot pretend to such an universaliz'd Spirit, as to be without my
Antipathies. I esteem Hatred to be as necessary and allowable a Passion as
Love, provided it be exercised on its proper Objects, since as the One fastens
us to those Things which procure our Happiness, so the Other snatches us from
what would be the Cause of our Misery. I observe, that these contrary Faculties
are inherent in all Creatures, neither could the Creation subsist, were it not
for the Discords as well as the Agreements of the Elements. The whole Universe
subsists by the Opposition of its Parts, and the Epitome of it, our Microcosm
is preserved by its intestine Divisions. So that I cannot apprehend a more
immediate Way for the Supreme Architect to overthrow his Works, than by
diffusing that Nepenthe through the Elements, which should compose their
Quarrels, for they would no sooner cease to hate their Contraries, but they
would also desist from loving themselves, and having thus lost the Cement which
fastens them together in this exquisite Order, they must necessarily return to
their Primitive Chaos out of which they were extracted.

However I will not from these innocent Feuds of inanimate Creatures draw
Arguments to countenance in my self a Hatred which is Criminal, being assured
that among those various Aversions which molest the Quiet of Men, there is
hardly one which is not against Reason or Morality. Every Creature bears in its
Essence the stamp of Infinite Goodness; and 'twere gross Impiety to calumniate
any of those Works, on which God Himself has bestowed an universal Panegyric,
when he pronounced them all to be Good. They are all lovely in their Order, and
those which our Squeamish Phancies esteem the most odious, have Qualities which
claim our Love and Admiration. Those venomous Creatures which we shun as the
inveterate Enemies of our Race, deserve ou^ Caresses instead of our Spite,
since the Service they afford us, equals the Hurt we receive from them, and the
most Efficacious Medicines are sometimes compounded of the fiercest Poisons. In
strict speaking, the Devils themselves are not the Object of my Hatred,
according to their Essence, though they are so by the Malice of their Will.
They still retain their Natural Perfections, and the Goodness of their Essence
remains the same as it was before their Fall. Their Vigor, Beauty, and
Intellectual Accomplishments, have suffered no Detriment from the Depravedness
of their Affections, but remain untouched, as when they shone among the
Hierarchies above. And though God detests and punishes them for their Crimes,
yet he Himself loves and conserves their Essence. There is Nothing therefore in
Heaven, Earth or Hell but Sin that deserves our Hatred; with all things else we
may be enamored; and we ought to hate this Monster so much the more, in that
by disordering our Natures, it has planted in us those Antipathies and
Aversions which make us peevish at the Works of God, and hate those Things
which we ought to love.

But among all the Species of Hatred, I tremble at that which is exercised
against our own Race, because I find none so violent, none so inexorable as one
Man against another. They are not content with the most furious Sallies of this
Passion during their Lives, but to consummate the Height of their Malice, they
willingly involve themselves in Death. With Atreus they take Delight in their
own Ruin, provided Thyestes may be crushed in it too. Nay this Passion is
Immortal, and descends into the very Grave. The Antipathies of Eteocles and
Polenius were translated to the other World, their Hatred surviv d their
Breath, it lived in their Ashes, and would not suffer their divided Flames to
mix in the same Funeral Pile. Above all I abhor the Italians inslexible
Cruelty, who bequeath their Hatred as an Inheritance to their Children,
adjuring them to Eternal Enmity, with Curses on such of their Offspring as
shall ever make Peace with their Foes.

I quarrel not with that Logic, by which we call a Toad venomous. 'Twou'd
prove but a thin Sophistry that should impose on us the Safety of the
Experiment; and I doubt our best Metaphysics would make but a weak Antidote
against the Force of its Poison. I am not fond of quibbling my self into so
dangerous an Absurdity under the Protection of a refined Theory, whose Practice
would convince me of a foolish Madness, and that I were neither good
Philosopher nor Divine. Yet I cannot say I hate even this Creature which is
become the Proverb of Humane Hatred: For as much as it carries with it, in its
Life and Motion, the Character and Impression of a Divine Artificer especially
for this reason, that we have no ca^^ to believe it ever sinned, and
consequently thereupon maintains and performs the end and design of its
Creation, which though it be in a lower Sphere, has this Prerogative beyond
Mankind; that it never yet transgressed the Rules, nor violated the Laws of its
Maker. Nor can I imagine whence our Reflections upon such Creatures should
arise, but from a mistaken Knowledge of our selves, and a perfect Ignorance of
the Nature of all things beside. It Is under the Prejudice of Education, and the
prevailing Influence of Custom that we labor, and to which we owe the greatest
and most detected Errors of our Life. Have not some People lived upon that, and
deliciously too, that is another Man's Poison? Did not Mithridates take Poison
till the strongest Confection of that kind would not do his business when he
wanted it? It Is to that we are to ascribe the Mischiefs of Humane Life. For if
we could once forsake the false Guide we have been used to, and consult our own
Reason there is nothing would seem strange to us, nothing uneasy, nothing
dreadful. Therefore after I have a little Descanted upon this Subject, in order
to Rectify our Judgments and Reform our Practices, I shall cross the Cudgels,
and end this Discourse.

It is impossible fully to set forth the large Dominion and uncontrollable
Power of Custom and common Usage, together with the vast and long Series of
Difficulties and Mistakes we lie liable and exposed unto upon that account.
It Is the Master of the Mint, and Coins Words and Names for things according to
its own pleasure, sometimes not at all expressive of the Nature of the thing
intended; which have no further signification than what they obtain by repeated
use and frequency. We know very well that nothing in its own Nature is
accidental, and in respect of the Supreme Author all things are Regular and
Designed; but in Reference to us whose purblind Reason can reach no deeper than
the Outside, whose Sight is not sharp enough to Dive and Penetrate into the
Causes of things, many things prove fortuitous. When Events strange and
unexpected fall out, such as we had not the least apprehension or suspicion of
beforehand, we call it Chance and Accident. But the Misery is we Terminate
there, and never look to the hand that Ordered it. We attribute that to Fortune
which is the Effect of a Wise and Skilful Agent. When our Expectations are
balked, and our Aims frustrated, we cry 'twas done by chance and think that is
all. Whereas we ought to consider that God oftentimes delights to make our
Wisdom Foolishness, and thereby gives us caution not to trust our own
Foresight; since the Events of all things are in his Power and at his Disposal.
He will be Eyed in his Providence, and make Men know that the Success of all
their Undertakings is at his Discretion. That he is the Sole Governor of the
World: That he will be sought unto for his Blessing, and that we must wait his
Pleasure and ascribe the Glory of all to Him But this ought not to Encourage us
in a Supine and Slothful Negligence; That because God does all things according
to the Good Pleasure of his Will, we have nothing to do, but expect he should
bring things about for Advantage and Satisfaction. For though Grace loves to
magnify it self in the Weak, and exerts its Efficacy in mean and contemptible
Subjects, yet that is no Ground for us to stand Idle, or sit whining and
bewailing our Misfortunes, and think God should bear our burden himself. No,
these Remarkable Efforts of the Divine Power are to Encourage our Stedfastness,
and confirm us in the belief of its undoubted Presence, when our Designs and
Endeavors are conformable. It is Impertinent and Ridiculous to expect Relief
from others, when we are wholly unactive to procure it our selves. We ought to
make use of the best Means he affords us, and then Resigning our selves up to
him attend the Success. If it be according to our Desires we must gratefully
acknowledge, and thank him for it: If contrary, we must in all Humility submit,
confessing his Wisdom infinitely to exceed ours, and that he knows what is
better for us than we our selves This is what Divinity teaches us, and could we
be instructed by it, might greatly advance our Peace and Tranquillity in this
World.

This is a strain of Prudence, I know, Mankind can hardly be Skrew'd up to. The
Infirmity of Humane Nature is such, that every Shock of unexpected Adversity
makes it stagger. We are ready to turn Recreants, and yield the day to every
puny Evil, that unlooked for attacks us. It Is well if we can support our
Spirits and preserve our Courage against a foreseen Danger; but to be
surpised by a Misfortune is to be Overcome. I am of Opinion the Combat would
not be Difficult, nor the Victory Uncertain, were we but better acquainted with
our selves; and knew our own strength, and how to apply our selves to the Work.
Some torment themselves with Distracting Apprehensions aforehand, and doubly
possess their Misery in Reality and Fancy. Others immediately sink under the
Weight as soon as they feel it on their Shoulders. Others fly out into Despair,
as if the World were at an End, and they were never to see a good Day again.
For my part, as I cannot altogether boast of Insensibility, under my
afflictions at present; so neither can I complain of being too Apprehensive of
them at distance. I can see the Cloud gathering without much Consternation, and
comfort my self with this, that perhaps some Wind or other may blow it away, or
I am not Infallibly sure it shall break on my Head. I shall have enough of it
whenever it comes and do not so much provide to avoid it, as consider of what
Importance it may be whether I escape it or no. Perhaps it is my Fault, but I am
willing to indulge it. I have no other Means. I can consider it without too
much concern. I approach it without Horror. I bring it home to my self, and
treat with it as Present, when perhaps it may never come to pass I Inure my
self to it, and harden my self in it, by which means it becomes familiar to me,
That when it overtakes me I claim acquaintance with it. This dulls the Edge,
and blunts the Sting of an Affliction; which otherwise it may be I should never
be able to sustain.

But let us Examine Reason, and see what Arms she can furnish us with for our
Defense, against these Violent Assaults. She would in a great measure do our
Business for us, could we take her advice, and were there not private Enemies
within, that compel us to Surrender before we try our Strength. If our Passions
were Disarmed and Subdued, and brought into Obedience to Reason, we might
maintain our Ground with less Difficulty, and bid Defiance to Fortune. This
ought to be the Subject of our Courage. In this we shall appear more than
Conquerors. Let us stop these beginnings and our Business is soon done. Nothing
in Nature can be more Tumultuous and Irregular than our own Passions. And with
what Face can any Man pretend to withstand the sudden and violent attempts of
Fortune, that has no Guard against the inward and unruly motions of his own
Soul? Whither do we see some People hurried, by the precipituous Streams of
Anger, Love, Hatred, etc. even upon a bare Apprehension and Jealousy, without
the least Discovery of Cause or Motive? I have seen the Accidental breaking of
a Glass, the loss of a Groat, transport some to such a Degree, that they could
hardly Compose and Recover themselves for six hours after. They fall foul upon
all without Distinction, all Company must be Disturbed wherever they come,
it is impossible to give a calm uninterrupted answer to any thing that is asked
them. They Stamp, Stare, Burn, Rave, Fret, Roar, as if the Day of Judgment was
at hand, and they were a going Quick to Pluto. Wherefore do you wring your
Hands? Why are those Tears? Why look you so Discontented? You have lost your
best Friend. A dear Relation. You are afraid you shall be Poor. The Wheel is
come upon you. You cannot see how your Estate will hold out, and know not how
to Live when that is gone. Poor Wretch! The plain truth is you have lost your
Reason. What is become of your Religion, your Faith, your Confidence? Is this
the upshot of all your talk of relying on Providence, of trusting God? Do you
not Belie your selves? Is he not Able? Is he not Willing? Why are you not Calm?
Why are you not Quiet? They may talk as long as they please, but it must be
somewhat more than a few fine Words, and patherical Expressions, that must
convince me of the sincerity of their Profession, who Distrust Providence upon
every slender occasion. Are not these brave men, think you? Grace delights to
Accompany a Vigorous and Active Soul, and carries it out to perform
Achievements beyond its own strength and above its hopes, but unless our
Endeavors comport with our Words, Providence disdains us as unworthy of his
Care. What does that Soldier deserve that brags of singly Conquering whole
Armies, and turns his Back at the first Charge; nay, runs away perhaps before
the Enemy is in view, through a slavish despair of his own ability to resist? Our
whole Life is a Warfare. We have many Adversaries to Encounter. Some face us in
the open Field, and give us leisure to prepare, and require a sixth and
determinate resolution to oppose them. Some surprise us between the Hedge and
the Ditch, as they say, and expect we should be perpetually armed and upon our
Watch. These are Trials sent on purpose to evidence our Constancy, and if we
bear up manfully, our Courage shall be seconded and fortified with an Almighty
assistance. Yet it is a common Observation, that none are more apt to repine,
than such whose Tongues can run nimbly in matters of this nature.

To what purpose then should we torment our selves and others? And seeing we
are unable to govern our selves or our Affairs, why do we not deliver up our
selves to the Conduct of him who Governs the World? Why do we macerate our
Souls and Bodies when our vain Imaginations become successless and ineffectual?
Since there is a Wise and Intelligent Moderator, who will bring things about
according to the Methods of his own superlative Wisdom, in defiance of Humane
Craft and Policy. We may lay the Scheme of our Affairs as rationally as we can
devise, and back it with our utmost power and diligence, and then we have
satisfied our Office and done our Duty for in spite of all, the Issue and
Result of all must finally and arbitrarily depend upon the absolute Will and
Pleasure of another.

I am persuaded Custom and Example, lead us into more Errors and Mistakes than
any thing else beside. I find we submit to them with great ease and little
reluctance. Nay, and think our selves very excusable in all the slips we make
when we follow that Guide. Our very Dispositions, methinks, and natural
Inclinations are subdued by them. And in many things drawn to a compliance,
even against their own Biass. They Habituate us to Actions, however Ungrateful
and Disrelishing at their first appearance, and assist us to perform them with
Smoothness and Facility. I find the Path rugged when I am out of my usual way,
and we are contented to jogg on, quietly in a wrong Road, rather than put our
selves to the Trouble of finding out the right. It Is Brutish and Unmanly not to
examine what we do, and to be able to give no better account of our Actions,
than that it is the Custom of the Place. To what purpose serve our rational and
discerning Faculties, if we suspend their Exercise, and not suffer them to have
their Play in their natural and proper Velitations? Why should we debase our
own Judgments by a slavish submission to common usage. I then frustrate the end
of my Being, for one of the main businesses I have here is to acquire the
knowledge of my self. And it is for my own Actions I shall be immediately
accountable, and not those of other men. Example, I confess, may be of great
use, but then it must be managed according to discretion. It may serve as a
Caution but never as a Rule: It may be admitted into Council, but not entrusted
with the Government. It may prove an Excellent Monitor, but a very wretched
Dictator. Nor when thus qualified and circumscribed can it be of any advantage
to us, without a previous knowledge and understanding of our selves. It Is the
Wise man only, that knows his own strength, that shall use it with success.
And as such an ^^^e has less need of it; so he shall be further removed from
it; Insinuating and Usurping Dominion.

I would therefore begin first with my self, ransack my own Soul, and exactly
know its frame and constitution. I would muster my own forces first, and dive
into the truth of things, and put my Understanding upon the Exercise of its
Function, and give my Judgment its full swing. Truth shall be the Subject of my
Disquisition, and the End of my Enquiry.

If we look into the behavior and practice of most men, we shall find Fancy to
have the Ascendant over them. The Dread of not succeeding shakes their
Resolutions. They are Timorous and Inconstant because they neither know
Themselves, nor what they would be at. Every unsuspected Danger scares them out
of their Wits. They create Monsters in their own Brains, and supposing them
above their strength to resist, they slavishly resign the little Reason they
would seem to be Masters of to every uncommon Evil, not knowing how to
withstand or avoid it. It behooves me then to Examine the tendency of my own
Desires, and see whether any thing Substantial has affected my mind. Has any
man met with any thing that gives him a full and complete satisfaction? Or does
he not find his Passions and Appetite to increase upon him, and require
somewhat more even (...) the very Possession and Enjoyments of their Objects?
We penetrate no deeper than the Surface, and acquiesce in a Superficial Glance.
We ought therefore to come out of the Dark, that we may see to walk in the
Light. We must Unlearn, what we think we know, to be taught what we ought to
know. The first advance toward Wisdom is to renounce our Folly. Our Minds can
never be filled with sound and wholesome Knowledge, till they are first
Dispossessed of their Prejudices.

I hate to hear People cry out, Why cannot I do thus and thus? Why cannot I
manage an Affair like this or that man? I Will tell you, because you are a Fool,
and do not know your self: Because you cannot be contented as you are.
Uneasiness and Dissatisfaction under a Man's present condition, is an assured
and manifest proof he would carry himself as unhandsomly in another. Nature and
Providence has designed every man his Task, and that which is most suitable to
him. He that cannot Govern a Skuller would make an improper Commander of a Man
of War. It would, I profess. make a Man laugh till he expires, to come into a
Coffee-house, and behold a Pack of Cits prating of Politics and State Matters,
as if they were all Matchiavels and Mazarins. Had I been the King, says one,
that has not Wit enough to commend him for a Rat-catcher, I would have done
Thus. Had I been in Council cries another, I would never have advised That. Ye
doting Coxcombs! Why don't ye Regulate your Families Why do you suffer your
Wives to wear the Breeches Why do your Daughters run away with the Bullies
And your Prentices get to Bed to their Mistresses Amend your selves first,
Correct your Domestic Exorbitancies, Exemplify your Prudence in Rectifying
your private Affairs. Deal faithfully in your Trades, and become honest Men,
and then you shall have leave to prate. I have often considered with my self,
what should be the reason Men are so often disappointed of their Ends, and
balked in their Hopes? They undertake more than they can answer for, and by a
ridiculous presumption, enter upon Business they can never accomplish. It is
Ignorance that is the ground of all our Miscarriages, and Pride puts us upon
Attempts too weighty for our Shoulders. They are Twin-Sisters, and the latter
is a Natural Companion of the former. We have every one of us within our own
proper Sphere, more work cut out than we know well how to affect: Which one
Consideration, could it but duly take place, would be of force enough to
discourage us from loading our Shoulders with unnecessary Burdens.

I am confident nothing more betrays the Weakness and Infirmity of Humane
Nature, than Impatience under our present Circumstances, and a busy Curiosity
of prying into the Affairs of other^. It Is the Employment of a weak
understanding, and a Soul wholly unacquainted with it self, to be impetuously
hurried with a desire after things altogether beyond our proper Province.
Surely Nature has better provided for us, than we can for our selves; and did
we but Regularly follow her Dictates, we should not be so often compelled to
our shifts. But the mischief is, we are too much prone to Admire every thing we
do not possess. A Vanity intolerable! Which did it not shroud it self under
the Covert of Custom, would soon be abhorred and banished out of the World. B^^
Common Practice is become its Advocate, and resistibly pleads its defense in a
vulgar Judicatur^ Should we not think a Neighbor cracked on o^^ side of his
Head, who would entertain us a^ hour or two together, with an exact and
a^curate Description of some Foreign Countre^ when all the while he does not
know the wa^ to his own Parish Church? Preposterous madness! to pretend to know
every thing, an^ yet be totally Ignorant of our selves.

It is enough already, that I have lived for others. Let me at last return
home, and d^ somewhat for my self. Time flies away, Nature decays, and I shall
soon find my se^^ most unfit for the Work, when I shall stan^ most in need of
strength to do it. To wha^ purpose is it, we are so busily concerned i^ Exotic
Affairs, things neither consiste^^ with our present Peace, nor conducive to o^^
future Happiness?

When I take a review, and give my min^ leave (as she would often do, did I not
impertinently divert her) to Recollect her ow^ Thoughts, and make a serious
Reflection (...) the Employments and Enjoyments too of h^^ past life. Good God!
how full of Vanit^ and Inquietude, and dissatisfaction do they appear? As
enforces from me a Subscription t^ this Fatal Truth; that it is I my self tha^
have prevented my own happiness, and by a senseless Extravagance, and stupid
Self-Ignorance, undermined the Tranquillity of a Life that might have been more
Peaceable, and ^onsequently more pleasant, than the present ^ospect of any
Circumstances now warrant me ^o expect. I could now almost Hate, and Curse my
self, as to my Folly, and Self-Love ^t self, would justify my Indignation. But
that is not the Way, and Prudence suggests another Course. Let me therefore at
least preserve what I enjoy, if I cannot Recover what I have lost. Let the
consideration of what is past, awaken my diligence for the Future. We have been
Fools, and who has ^ot? Let Wisdom make amends and Can^el the Shame. I have
learned at least, this by the Bargain, to know my Distemper, which makes the
Cure less difficult. There is somewhat of Good to be extracted from every
thing: And Prescriptions in appearance contrary, have Eventually proved
themselves Friendly to Nature.

To do our own proper business, and to know our selves, is the only important
Employment we have in this World. And he that can do the latier, will never be
at a loss in the former. He will avoid all superfluous Undertakings. He can
tell how to Reform the Extravagance of his Passions, and correct the
Impetuosity of an hot Nature. He will never be obliged to Prosecute the
Concerns of Another, while any thing of his own lies on his Hands. Every thing
he Engages in shall be brought to perfection; because he attempts no more than
he understands, and is able to Accomplish. This Consideration would fix our
Thoughts, restrain and bridle our D^sires, and limit our Fancies within their
o^^ Bounds.

It has been my Observation ever since I ha^ been acquainted in the World, That
most M^^ are strays, they are guilty of a perpetual Tre^pass, and a Clausum
fregit may be charged upon us all. We see how foolish and impertine^^ soever
Men ordinarily are, yet they observe (...) Decorum, and put a constraint upon
their Word^ and Actions, when they are in the Company o^ Persons reputed Wise,
and Good: And an Affront put upon them before such, will be more highly
Resented, than if they were all of their own Stamp and Rank. So should we learn
to be acquainted, and reverence our selves, and dare to think and speak nothing
in our own Presence, we should be ashamed of before a Solomon or a Cato. Let us
then for once become our own Masters: Let us consult our selves, and take
advice of our Reason: It Is she alone will instruct us, not only what we have to
do, but also govern us in the management of our Actions, with much less
solicitude, and much more facility. The Sovereignty is her Due, our Passions
are her Slaves, and she ought to have the Principal, if not the only
Concurrence in all our Attempts. Leave the Business wholly to her, and you
shall find she will render the Event at least excusable, let it be what it will.

How vain is it thus to shun our selves, and follow the multitude! That Man
must certainly deserve Bedla^, who employs all his time in examining the
Estates of others, and values himself for knowing the particular Concerns of
the Noblest Families of the Nation, when yet he is a Stranger to what passes
under his own Roof, and can never find leisure to adjust his own private
Accounts. For my part, I am ashamed of my self, That little knowledge I have
acquired of my own Temper, if so much as to let me know the necessity I have of
knowing more. It is difficult for us to arrive at any tolerable Information of
another Humor, and to give a just and regular Estimate of him; we must follow
him close, pursue all his Windings, and Turnings, trace him through all his
Variations, Forms, and Appearances. Thus we must do with our selves, nor is the
Labor quite so perplexed. Mankind is all Labyrinth, and Disguise, and never
shows the same Face two hours together. I know my self better than all the Men
in the World know me, and can be more just and faithful, according to Truth, in
my Judgment and Censure. They set up a Rule, and try all Complexions and
Temperaments by That, wildly, unreasonably, and uncertainly. I daily find them
miserably out in their Conjectures of me, even those who think they best know
me. They may frame a general Air of my Humor, by a frequent Conversation, but
are wonderfully mistaken in their Application, as to the Ends, Inducements, and
Motives of most of my Actions.

The most stupid Soul that is, will sometimes work upon her self, review her
own Thoughts and Inclinations, and would delight to be more Conversant in this
Exercise, if we did not interrupt her Meditation by the Proposal of external
Objects, which do not at all concern her. It is the best Acquaintance we can
have, and would deal more faithfully and wisely in her Advisements than the
best Friend we know upon Earth. It is, I am confident, the want of this
Intelligence that occasions all the Irregularities and Disorders we are guilty
of. Remember to make Reason and Conscience of your Party, and you will soon
perceive your Anxiety, and Torment abated. Then should we not only be Wise, but
in a great measure Happy to boot: And for ought I know in as high a Degree as
humane Nature is capable of attaining. For the greatest part of our Felicity,
as I take it, in this Life, is placed in a due management of our Afflictions,
or the entire Dominion and Monarchy of Reason over our Passions. It is a
prejudicate Opinion, begot by Example, fomented by Education, and inveterate by
Custom, which has infected our Minds and debauched our Palates, that we can
relish nothing according to it is true, and natural Taste. For the Objects we
converse with, have for the most part an indifferent inclination to Good, or
Evil, and operate upon us only after the Judgment we make of them. We are
Masters of every thing before us, and a wise Man has an admirable Dexterity of
drawing Sweetness from what others call a Calamity: And makes ^ll the Injuries
of Fortune, serve his Designs, and further his Advancement. They are ge^erally
Men of weak Spirits, who are dejected wi^h Adversity, or exalted with
Prosperity. And who is either way affected with these things, gives a strong
Argument of his Imbecility, that he knows not how to live agreeable ^o either
Nature, or Reason. Will any Man Glory in another Man's Excellencies, and value
himself, because his Neighbor has a House better furnished than his own? The
Case is the same. Whatsoever is in the Power of Fortune, belongs not to us. We
ought no more to be concerned at her Contempts, than elevated with her Favors.
She is a capricious Goddess, and the Frailty of Mankind is the subject of her
Humor. She swells a Bubble with Pride, and breaks it with Scorn. Whoever
trusts her, does but Treasure up to himself an abundant, and inexplicable
Matter of Discontent and Perturbation.

I could (in some fits of contemplative Melancholy,) fall asleep as soon in a
Churchyard as on my Bed; and am often so weary of dull Life, that my greatest
delight is in such Objects as speak most to it is advantage.

I know that I carry a Ghost always about me, and that I my self am a Walking
Spirit. This thought allays in me those vulgar Fears of the haunts and visits
of Specter. And as I am not at all afraid of my self, so I am very little
apprehensive of Apparitions: Nay more, I could wish the Communications more
frequent betwix^ us and the Inhabitants of the Upper World: I would harden our
Christian Courage, familiari^^ to us the Thoughts of Separation; and creat^ in
us a more passionate love of the Heaven^ Country.

I pretend not by the Title of this small Tre^tise to any extraordinary Scheme
or new draug^^ of Religion for Men of my own Profession much less would I be
thought slighly to suggest any neglect or deficiency of theirs in the Practice
of the Old: I am very well assured, that Religio Bibliopolae seems a direct
Tautologie But surely it can be no Offense to say, that I could wish we were
all more in earnest for Heaven, and that we had all the Wisdom and Virtue that
ever appeared in the guise of true Reason in the World, summed up and amassed
in a Christian Bookseller; especially in a daily, sincere contempt of this
World.

No eager pursuit, or restless intemperate desire of Wealth or Honor, must be
harbored by us, who are to fix our whole hopes on another Country; and we
should confess our selves Strangers and Pilgrims on this Earth, by the Precepts
and Examples of all the Holy Prophets and Apostles throughout the whole Book of
God. To set any extraordinary value on the World, is to unravel the peculiar
Principle of Christianity, and run retrograde to the steps of the Holy Jesus.

FINIS.

