SOME REASONS WHY Robert Bridgman, and his Wife, And some others in
HUNTINGTON-SHIRE, Have left the Society of the People called QUAKERS, AND Have
joined in Communion with the Church of ENGLAND.

And some Passages contained in a Letter of George Whitehead to R. J. and R.
Bridgman's Reply to the same.

By ROBERT BRIDGMAN,

LONDON: Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, and Char. Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCC.

ROBERT BRIDGMAN's REASONS For Leaving the QUAKERS.

SOME REASONS WHY ROBERT BRIDGMAN, and others, Have left the QUAKERS.
IT has been matter of Sorrow and Shame unto me, and many others, that have now
left the Quakers Communion, that we so long professed the Christian Religion,
whilst we remained so ignorant of the fundamental Principles of it, the
Doctrine of the Trinity, or three Persons of one Nature and Substance in the
Godhead.

The Incarnation of the second Person or Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Satisfaction and Atonement made unto God the Father, by his Obedience and
Death upon the Cross.

The Resurrection and Ascension of his Body and Person into Heaven.

His remaining in our Nature at the right hand of God, in the Glory of his
Father, our Head, High Priest and Intercessour.

The Faith and full persuasion of his second, last, and outward appearance and
coming again to raise the Dead Bodies of the Saints, and of all Men in the great
Day and solemn Assize of all Nations, in which an Infallible and final Sentence
will be passed upon all, according to the Deeds done in the Body, agreeable to
the plain and positive sense of diverse Texts in Holy Scripture.

These Doctrines and the Faith of them, wrought by the Operation of the Holy
Ghost, the third Person in the Blessed Trinity, are Essential or Fundamental
Parts and Principles of the Christian Religion, without which, in the true
Faith of them, we cannot be saved in this or in the World to come.

And therefore it is of great Weight and Consequence, yea of the greatest
Importance, to every one under a Christian Profession, to be duly Instructed
and rightly Informed, in these great and necessary Truths of the Christian
Religion, and without which, in some good measure, no Man can be rightly
denominated a Christian Man or Believer.

The Faith of God as a Great and Mercyful Creator and the Seal of his Power and
Providence in and over all his Creatures, is indeed a necessary work, and our
Love and Obedience to the Law and Light with which he instructs and enlightens
our Nature, is a precious and necessary condition on our parts, to sit and
prepare us for the due reception of the Christian Faith; and indeed without
some experience of this sort, it is in vain to pretend to any Religion, much
more to the Christian Religion. Yet the order and progress of our Faith and
Hope ought to be duly distinguished, for to reduce all Religion and Faith
toward God, under a Profession and Experience of Light and Truth, without any
distinction of common and special Illumination or Grace, is dangerous to the
Soul and very destructive to the real Foundation of the Christian Religion. How
far the People called Quakers in general, and some of their most noted and
approved Authors and Ministers in particular, have Ignorantly and Blasphemously
opposed this work of Faith and Reformation (begun and carried on in the Souls
of many, by hearing the Word and Doctrine of the Gospel declared in the Holy
Scriptures, from Men qualified to Read and Expound the same) is now become so
evident to such whose Eyes the Lord in Mercy has opened, that to contradict or
deny it, must bespeak very great Ignorance or Obstinacy.

How far they have withstood and rejected the Institutions of our Blessed Lord
Jesus Christ, in the due administration of them, and the sincere and faithful
practice of such as are convinced of their Duty and Profit in receiving them,
is also as evident to such as have had occasion to deal with them, or peruse
their Writings constantly published from their beginning. And how under
pretense of higher Seize and farther Glory, a Spirit of Pride and great
Uncharitableness has possessed them, is sufficiently manifest by its fruits,
in Censuring and Reproaching all other denominations of Professed Christians,
whom they set to a great distance, and account as the World which yet lies in
Wickedness. And by a show of Spirituality, Simplicity, Humility and Patience,
have deceived themselves, and many of the most ignorant and inadvertent
Professors, who inconsiderately and rashly conclude, they are the most holy and
reformed People and Church of God, because they appear in a more sedate,
retired, and self denying manner, as a Society and Body of People, than
generally is observed of other Societies.

But whoever arrives to any tolerable understanding of sound Christian
Principles, and attends an impartial Examination of what the Quakers preach and
publish, shall not only find them very disagreeable one with another, but, in
general very opposite to true Christianity. And that which also very much
exposes them to contempt with all True Intelligent and Religious minds, is the
liberty they take in their Apologies and Defenses to quible and shuffle with
dull and apparent Sophistry.

It Is now become their repeated Practice to alter the sense of their own as
well as their Opponents writings, by adding or diminishing of words, by
Transposing them, by playing upon such as are equivocal, by connecting Matter
that lies disjoynted, and disjoynting Matter that lies connected, by
questioning the autography of their own Prints, when they cannot otherwise
vindicate or defend them. And thus they inherit the Jesuits practice ('tho
through want of their Education they fall short in their skill) and by this
very means ruin their Cause, notwithstanding their Zeal and specious
Pretenses. It Is a mercyful Providence so many are delivered from the snare of
their Spirit, which with soundings and Echoes works on the Imagination and
Fancy of the more Ignorant and Credulous.

Did they regard Truth and Justice, without respecting Persons in Judgment,
they would have never declined to be brought to the Test, before any competent
number of Sober and Judicious Persons, without making such Pleas and Pretenses
to excuse, and be excused as they have done.

Being detected, they became greatly enraged, and breath out their spite in
Prophecies and Curses, both in private and public, against such as oppose
them; whilst they are blessing and magnifying themselves and their Faction in
such flights of Devotion as allarms and amuzes the Ignorant and Unwary. The
account given by George Keith in his Books and Narratives of Matter of Fact, so
well attested, is such a Load upon them, that they are very uneasy; and not
daring to appear to justify themselves, are laboring to abuse and
misrepresent him. They have endeavored to insinuate, that Covetousness, Pride
and Envy are the motive of his practice: An Apostate, a Judas, a Renegado, are
the Epithets they bestow upon him. And in their Word to the Wellinclin'd,
represent him the Epitome and very Commonplace of all the Malice of their
preceding Adversaries: And these fine Characters they industriously spread
throughout the Nation, to defame and reproach him; having a method effectually
to do it, by spreading their Pamphlets according to an agreement of their
Yearly Meeting, (which is their supreme Authority in this and in other Kingdoms
and Countries where they have any settled Interest.) The Agreement and Order of
their Yearly Meeting held in London the first, second, third and fourth Days of
June 1691, and directed to the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings in England, and
Wales, and elsewhere, was and is. That each Monthly Meeting (of which they had
at that time about 150) in England and Wales (and since, no doubt, the number
is greatly increased) was to take off two Books of a sort, when both do not
exceed the price of a Shilling, and to be sent by the several Correspondents in
London (or their Order) to the Correspondents of each County, who are to send
up the Money out of their Meeting Stock; which sufficiently encourages both the
Author and Printer. And this Agreement and Order was expressly made for the
spreading their Books, as is more at large declared in their Yearly Meeting
Paper, printed in the Year 1691. And thus they are encouraged to be continually
scribbling, and judge it to be (as they say in their Word to the well-inclin'd)
the fairer, more substantial and edifying method.

But the misery that attends their numerous Proselytes, is the impressions they
are under in partiality and prejudice; what is published by their Party passes
for Truth, and that not only in Doctrine and Fact, but they conceive a peculiar
presence of God is a continual Blessing that accompanies them. The same conceit
they have in all they say and do, and are generally so affected with a Relish
and Savor of it, that puffs them up with intolerable Pride, even whilst it
appears to themselves under a Disguise of Humility. But true Humility is
another thing, it submits to Truth wherever, whenever and in whomsoever it
appears, enlarging the Heart with Catholic Love, which like the attracting and
bountiful Heaven, scatters its Dew on every Soil, and maintains its
correspondence with an impartial influence. The Lord in Mercy increase this
Virtue, and enable the sincere in all persuasions to let go the shackles of
their several singularities, looking up unto Jesus the universal Head and
Captain of their Salvation, who by his blessed and Holy Spirit is sprinkling
the Nations through the Faith of his Gospel, and that without respect of
persons. And therefore let me beseech such of my Friends, as profess their
Faith in a Crucified Jesus, and in humility submit to the means he has
appointed as the Seals of his Covenant, and Symbols of his Presence, to be very
careful in all manner of Conversation, that so the Adversary, who seeks many
ways to undermine and lay waste the Foundation and Pillars of the Christian
Religion, may be stopped every way in which he appears. The greatest reproach
that at this time attends the Christian Church, is a loose Conversation in too
many not seasoned with Grace and the fear of God? and this is the Ground and
Plea of all Schismatics, as well as it is the Air that infests the Atheist,
who secretly concludes, because of such Liberty, there is not a God of such
Purity and Power, as the Christians profess in their verbal Confession. But
this I can say from a good and comfortable experience, That there are many
pious and heavenly-minded Souls, in several places, both Ministers and People,
that are as Lights, and as Salt, in their several Stations, though once I could
hardly believe it, so much Filth and Dirt having been cast upon them by an
ignorant, proud and obstinate Generation of Men; whose feigned Simplicity and
Humility, under a pretense of Subjection to a Power above the Magistrate, is
very delusive in the Appearance of it, but when duly examined proves chiefly
the Fruit of Education and Humor.

Being taught and persuaded, that Reasoning is dangerous in things of Religion,
they stop their Ears and close their Eyes, until by degrees they grow hardy in
Imagination and Fancy, in the strength of which they have been suffered to
proceed until their own Folly has corrected them.

Whoever comes to a sober mind, and attentively, reads over the History given
by George Fox and his Delegates, in the Entrance of his Journal, may readily
find, that an ignorant Education and Melancholy Temper, impressed and blown up
by a Spirit of Enthusiasm, gave birth to his Faction in those Hurricane Times
(whilst the Church lay despoyled of her Power and Privileges) and since that
inundation of Heresy and Schism, the Breach has remaiued too much unobserved:
And to my Understanding no better Expedient can readily be proposed to heal up
this Breach and recover the Wastes, than a laborious and diligent instruction of
Youth, and detecting of Error, by open and free Conferences judiciously
managed in diverse parts of the Nation.

It Is a lamentable thing, that in a Christian Nation the public Seals and
Badges of its Communion should be so slighted, neglected, opposed and rejected
by a sort and number of men that will not be accountable in Matter of Fact for
their Mistakes and Abuses. It Is a most lame and scandalous Insinuation against
the Institution and Practice of Outward Baptism, which George Whitehead
advances in his Rector Examined, p. 27. saying, When this Rector (meaning Mr.
Merriton) can demonstrate a Probatum est, of such Virtue in that poor Element
(as he calls it) of Water Baptism, as to cure polluted and distempered Souls,
as if the Issue or Effect of a means that is prescribed, must determine the
right or lawfulness of its Institution and Practice without any Exception; he
may at the same rate question the Authority of our Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, in their Teaching and Preaching, because many that heard them were
not effectually Cleansed. And in the Commission that was given Math. 28. 19.
there is no more mention made of outward teaching, than of outward Baptism, and
the Quakers may as well reject Teaching with Words as Baptizing with Water. But
to manifest how liable they are to pervert the True Sense of the Matter, see
what George Whitehead says concerning the Supper, Page 35. of his Rector
Examined, where he produces some Testimonies out of the Book of Martyrs to
favor his Cause, which duly considered are directly against it. The Bread and
Wine in the Supper, are Figurative and Symbolical, and as the Eating and
Drinking by the faithful Receiver, Intitles him to the Graces and Blessings of
the Spirit of Christ, so the breaking the Bread and pouring out the Wine, were
Instituted as a means to preserve the Faith and Remembrance of his Body and
Blood, that was Broken and Slied for the Remission of Sin and which is now
Exalted and Glorified in the Heavens, and he being now in Heaven in his Body
out of the reach of our Bodily Senses.

One end of the Supper is to Receive and Establish the Faith of his Existence,
and assurance of his coming in his Body to Judge us; and those Arguments of Dr.
Cranmer and Ridley which George Whitehead recites, were at that time advanced
to oppose the Erroneous Conceit of Transubstantiation. See the Book of Martyrs
page 74. Where it is said, that to believe the Wafer and Wine to be
Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, [Argument
the second] it varieth from the Articles of Faith, He ascended into Heaven, and
sits on the right hand of God the Father, from whence (and not from any
other place, says St. Augustine) he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead. Thirdly, It destroys and takes away the Institution of the Lord's
Supper, which was commanded only to be used and continued until the Lord
Himself should come, if therefore He be now really present in the Body of his
Flesh, then must the Supper cease. For a Remembrance, is not of a thing
present, but of a thing past and absent, and there is a difference between
Remembrance and Presence, and (as one of the Fathers says) a Figure is in vain
where the thing figured is present.

Here you see the Fathers and Martyrs intended one thing, and George Whitehead
would make them to intend another; the Supper is a Figure and Sign not only of
the Inward and Spiritual Grace, received by the Faithful in their partaking of
it, but also of the Body of Christ now absent in Heaven, the Faith of which
being lost among the Quakers, and so much denied and opposed by their obstinate
pervertion; the reason of the Institution appears the more necessary, and the
frequent and due practice of it appears the more seasonable; and it is to be
hoped that these poor Elements, as they are pleased to call them, with the
Blessing of God at the Administration and Reception of them, will prove two
such Pillars and Supports of the Christian Faith and Experience, that the
Combination of Hell shall not prevail, tho her Gates many ways are set open to
furnish the Army of Abaddon.

It Is a specious pretense the Quakers have made to the Virtue and Efficacy of
the Inward Principle, as having therein an Art of Extraction, by which they
perform as by one single Still, all that can be proposed from the variety in a
Laboratory. This very Comparison and Illustration I heard from William Penn in
a public Meeting at Grace Church Street, and as much he delivers in his
Primitive Christianity, where he Rants at a very unreasonable rate, and as much
disparages the Reputation of their Principle by the extravagancy of his Notion,
as George Whitehead has done by the Irregularity of his practice. I am sure no
Principle of Truth ever taught William Penn to advance such a Notion of the
Composition of Man, as he delivers in p. 71. of his Primitive Christianity.
Man, (says he) as I said just now, is a Composition of both Worlds, his Body is
of this, his Soul of the other World -- by the Body the Soul looks into and
beholds this World, and by the World it beholds God, the World that is without
End. So that the World without End, and God, are with him Terms Synonimous, and
of this endless World is [with him] a part of Man's Composition, his Soul is of
its Essence, and beholds its being a kin to God, not only by a Relation but in
Substance: And in his Book called Judas and the Jews, p. 130. he has the
following Words. The new despised flock of God shall rest with him in that
World which never had beginning, and is without end; thus he gives us a
Description of God, and of the Soul of Man, its being a part of him. And thus,
after all the Shuffling and Cutting about the Soul, and Soul of the Soul, it is
easy to see how naturally William Penn jumps in with George Fox in his Notion
of the Soul, so fully exposed and explained by George Keith in his fourth
Narrative, p. 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67. And as in this his Book, entitled
Primitive Christianity, he defines the Soul to be part of God, so in his Book
entitled, The Invalidit^ of John Faldo, p. 365. he defines the Nature of the
Body and opposes the conclusion of his Opponent, who speaking of the
Resurrection of the Body, says, it shall have the same Matter, though not the
same Grossness; it shall have the same Essential Form, tho not the same
Accidents. William Penn's Answer will not allow that he ever read in Scripture
any thing favorably toward such a Conclusion. His words are, I never read yet
of a Body having the same Matter, and not the same Grossness, the same
Substance and Essence, and not the same Accidents; by which account we must
believe that either William Penn never read the Scripture, or that he believes
the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Bodies of those that arose after his
Resurrection, were changed in Substance. For according to him, if they had the
same Substance they must also retain the same Grossness and Accidents; and
consequently that the Body of our Lord Jesus, now in Heaven, is a gross and
mortal Body, if they believe he has the same Body now, which he had upon the
Earth, And yet notwithstanding this sort of Reasoning, the Quakers Objections
and constant Clamor against all sorts of Christians, has been to insinuate the
Carnality of their Notions. And thus do they raise such a dust of Confusion by
their Doctrines and Distinctions, that many poor People are led entangled in a
Mist of thick Darkness.

I could give a large and particular Relation of sundry Conferences I have had
with several of Note among them, (appointed to hear and examine my Reasons for
declining their Meetings) from whom I could never yet obtain any plain and
positive Answer to this necessary and seasonable Question, Whether our Lord
Jesus Christ is now in Heaven above, or without us, in the true and entire
Nature of Man glorified, the same for Substance which he had on Earth, and
forever to come united with the Godhead.



But finding this Doctrine so fully and so safely expressed in the Articles of
the Church of England, as also those other necessary and essential Principles
of the Christian Religion, inclined me to make a farther Search into the Matter
and Manner of her Public Worship; which appearing to me so sound and
instructive, I could not in Conscience delay my adventuring to make some
Approaches toward her Communion.

And through a merciful Providence it has pleased Almighty God so to influence
and to bless due means of Instruction, that my dear Wife, with several of our
Neighbors, who were also in Communion with the People called Quakers, are
become religiously affected with the Public Worship; and I hope the Lord will
preserve us in the Sincerity of our Intentions, the Insinuations
notwithstanding and Reproaches of our Adversaries: An instance of which I think
sit here to subjoyn, not being likely to obtain any offer of Justice from the
Person concerned.

Upon my Wife and Children's receiving Baptism in the Church of England, George
Whitehead writes a Letter of Condolence to my Wife's Father, wherein he
insinuates after this manner:

Dear Brother,
I have been often sensible of thy Exercise and Affection occasioned by the
miserable Backsliding of such near Relations, who have so long professed the
blessed Truth among us -- The blessed Truth which we have received from the
Beginning, in Life and Power, will stand for ever, and outlive all its
Adversaries; and they who are approved and stand faithful therein, shall the
more be manifest, and shine, when Shame and Confusion shall cover the
Rebellious, who reproach God's Heritage and People to excuse their own
Revolting and Looseness of Spirit.


The Letter in which these Passages are, falling, providentially into my Hand,
I wrote to Geo. Whitehead, as is hereafter expressed. But being in London a
considerable time, and having no prospect of having such a Meeting as I
desired, think fit to expose it, as matter of Caution to himself and such
others as may be under temptation to practice the like, to disparage and
discourage with such Blasts of Reviling.

Hunt. the 16th April, 1700. George Whitehead,
In these Passages [which I transcribed to him] are contained a severe Charge
by way of Insinuation against my self and my Wife, who are the near Relations
mentioned in that Letter: And we being such (had you proved your Charge) the
unworthiness of your Disposition, notwithstanding, has sufficiently appeared,
in offering so to aggravate, and by consequence to set such near Relations at
too great a Distance. But whereas your Charge and Insinuations remain unproved
by you, they ought in Justice to be returned upon you as a Slander. If you
think you can make Proof of these miserable, yea and I may add, detestable
things upon us, we desire you would do it; and that you may be the more
manifest and shine, we care not how publicly you do it. Your writing in such a
manner to my Father, without any Premonition to us (had we been really guilty)
looks not only like a Deed of Darkness, but (we being innocent) too much
intitles you to the Character of those mentioned in the 11th Psalm, Who bend
the Bow, and make ready their Arrow upon the String, that they may privily
shoot at the upright in heart.

Had not your Name and Pretenses been what they are, we should have endeavored
to have overlooked your Reproach, (as we have done a great deal from others of
a meaner Rank among you) cast upon us, as we verily believe, for our open
Profession of the Christian Faith, and practicing the Institutions of our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in ways most agreeable to our Judgment,
upon a serious, deliberate and impartial Enquiry and Consideration; and this we
take to be the Reason of your Displeasure, knowing very well how you have
slighted, opposed, and rejected those great and necessary Truths, and proper
means of Christian Fellowship and Communion, appointed, we believe, for that
end by our Lord Jesus Christ, and practiced by his holy Apostles and Disciples
in the first and purest Ages of Christianity. And you in particular bearing
such a Name and Sway (amongst so many deluded, though many of them, I believe,
well-meaning People) and so generally passing under the Character of an
honorable and worthy Minister of Christ, it is therefore highly necessary to
take some Notice of your practice. And I do hereby acquaint you that my
Occasions calling me to London in a little time, I shall expect you will give
me a Meeting before some sober and judicious Persons, either to endeavor the
Proof of your Charge, or to retract what you have in such manner insinuated
against us. If you think fit to decline to give me such a Meeting, I shall have
reason to take it as a sufficient demonstration that Shame and Confusion is
over you, in that very manner, and for the very same Cause suggested against us
in your Letter. Thus much at present from your abused Friend and Kinsman,

R. Bridgman.


To which Letter I may now add what is written in the 26th Chapter of the Book
of Proverbs, v. 26, 27. Whose Hatred is covered by Deceit, his Wickedness shall
be showed before the whole Congregation. Whosoever diggeth a Pit, shall fall
therein; and he that rolleth a Stone, it will return upon him.

FINIS.
Page 16. l. 3. for the World it, read the Word it.

BOOKS Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
MR. Keith's Last Sermon at Turner's-Hall, May 5. 1700. in which he gave an
account of his joining in Communion with the Church of England, Quarto.

-- His Two Sermons Preached at the Church of St. George Botolph-lane, May 12.
1700. being his first Preaching after Ordination. Quarto.

-- His Explications and Retractations of diverse Passages in his former Books.
Quanto. Price 6d*

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon Preached. April 16. 1696. Quarto. Price 6d.

-- His First Narrative at Turner's-Hall, Quarto. Price 12d.

-- His Second Narrative at Turner's-Hall, Quar. Price 6 d.

-- His Fourth Narrative at Turner's-Hall, detecting the Quakers gross Errors,
vile Heresies, and Antichristian Principles, etc. by clear and evident Proofs
(in above two hundred and fifty Quotations) faithfully taken out of their
Books: with an Attestation of Dr. Isham, Dr. Bedford, and three other Ministers
of the Church of England to the Truth of the said Quotations. Quarto. Price 1
s. 6 d.

-- His large Catechism for the Instruction of Youth. Octavo, Bound, Price 1 s.

-- His small Catechism for the Instruction of Children. Octavo, Stitched,
Price 3 d.

-- His Deism of William Penn. Octavo, Price 1 s.

BOOKS Printed for C. Brom at the Gun at the Westend of St. Paul's Churchyard.
DR. Spark's Devotions, with all new Cuts.

The Snake in the Grass, and Defense of it.

Five Discourses by the Author of the Snake in the Grass, with a new Preface:
And all the Pieces of that Author.

The first and fourth Parts of Virgil's Aeneads, in English Burlesque; by
Charles Cotton, Esquire.

Liturgies vindicated by the Dissenters. Price bound 1 s.

Advice to the Roman Catholics of England, especially those under Age by the
late Act of Parliament. Price 1 s.

The History of the Bible, in Quarto, with 264 Cuts, besides three Maps.

Le grand's Philosophy. Folio, English Cuts.

Mr. Keith's Farewell Sermon at Turners-Hall.

-- Two first Sermons after Ordination.

A full Account of Presbytery, as established in Scotland.

Sermons on several Occasions. By Dr. Sprat, Lord Bishop of Rochester.

Principles and Duties of Natural Religion. By Bishop Wilkins.

The Case of the Duchess of Mazarine.

The Conquest of India by the Portuguese. In 3 Vol.

The City and Republic of Venice.

Religious Conference about Godfathers and Godmothers.

Horace, Translated by Alex. Brom, etc.

Erasmus Colloquies, Translated by Sir R. L'Estrange and Mr. Brown.

The Complete Gamester.

The Guide of a Christian. Price bound 6 d.

A Guide to Heaven, in two Parts.

Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus.

A Manual of Prayers for Winchester College.

All the Pieces by the same Author.

A Treatise of Humane Reason.

Method with the Deists and Jews.

Arithmetical Recreations. By Leybourn.

The Godly-man's Companion.

Characters of a Whore, a Bawd, etc. Price 6 6d.

Plain-dealing Poulterer.


