A Tender Visitation And Friendly EXHORTATION To all the children of Truth to
be Valiant in this day of Trial.
UNto you the chosen and beloved of God born of the Royal seed, and brought
forth of the womb of eternal love, and children of one Father nursed and
brought up by the nourishment of the sincere milk of the living eternal Word;
growing into the stature of Christ and of his fullness receiving strength day by
day, by which you are begotten unto this lively hope, to know the resurrection
of the Just, and holy offspring and virtuous life of the only Son of God, who
is the brightness of the fathers glory, and is full of grace and truth: O how
is my heart affected with the unchangable love and life, which dwells with him
for ever, who is the fountain of living water, and from him does plentifully
flow forth of the same, into the hearts of them that he has freely called and
chosen to bear his name in their foreheads, and has received the lively image
of his eternal power, which works mightily in all that believe, and have
waited for his salvation, which is now revealed in this the day of his might
and power; O the great and notable day of God that is come to us, with his
wonderful arm of everlasting strength; to prepare us for himself, and to arm
us with his armor that is invincible, that no assault of all the weapons of
unrighteousness can prevail against. O now we are warriors in the lambs power,
and with him do fight the great battle in this the day of God almighty; what
remains for us? but to fill up the measure of his sufferings, that if we suffer
with him, we may reign in the glorious life which rises in our hearts, to give
us the victory over sin, death and hell; and him that is the Prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now rules in the children of disobedience,
which are such as disobeys the light by which they are lighted, and so
persecutes the children of the light, and still invents new weapons of
deceiveablness of unrighteousness, with their wiles and snares if it were
possible to draw us into the pit of darkness, in which they wallow up and down,
and are drunk with the spirit of darkness, which makes them reel to and fro,
but God has made known unto us the stable everlasting truth, and only way of
salvation; that we may be a fixed people, not like wandering stars, nor blazing
Comets to make a great appearance and show in the time of prosperity, when no
persecution is, but when the Dragon is up with the strength of his power of
darkness, and that he appears in the open field like Gog and Magog to incamp
the Saints of the most high; And so appearing as if he would devour and
swallow up, and destroy all before him; and when the Captain of the Philistine
Band comes forth to defy the God of Israel, and to destroy his little Camp,
then not to hide the head, but in the faith of little David to come forth, as
with a sling and a stone to the wounding of this great Goliath, and so to
discomfit the whole Host of the Philistine Band of carnal Warriors; O my
friends, we do not now Wrestle with flesh and blood, but against
principalities, and against powers, and the rulers of the darkness of this
World, and against spiritual wickedness in high places, and therefore had need
to be furnished with the spiritual Armor of God, and to be filled with his
righteous power; And that now in this day to put on the whole armor of him;
not here a little and there a piece, but to be like armed soldiers that is
going into the open field, into a hot battle, and in the face of a cruel
resolved enemy to kill and lay waste all before him; so that in this the day
wherein every one having a testimony in their hearts for God may feel him
preparing and furnishing them with a full resolution to encounter, and give
this cruel resolved enemy battle, that we may see the Lord fighting for mount
Sion, and for the hill thereof; O my friends and brethren of this camp of God,
we have a faithful and valiant Captain, whose cause it is that we are engaged
in, and can there be a more Nobler and Honorable cause, then the cause we have
undertaken, and God has called us by the sound of his eternal Word, that has
awakened our hearts, and is a furnishing and arming of his with the spirit that
yet was never overcome, nor conquered, nor never shall be; though many of his
faithful Warriors have not loved their lives unto death for this cause, and so
have fallen a sleep as to the outward man; yet has been Conquerors in the Lord,
and life of the Lamb, over all the enemies, and have had an eternal Crown of
life and peace set upon their heads. And so it is not being conquered because of
suffering, but it is a Crown and Victory won by being faithful unto death, and
continuing in the well-doing. And therefore this is a Visitation, and a
brotherly and friendly Invitation or Exhortation to all to come forth in the
true armor of light, to engage in faithfulness in this blessed War, and Work
of God. O let none be entangled with the fears of the loss of this carnal
outward life, neither let the hearts of any be encumbered with the many things
of this World. O let all that makes mention of the name of the Lord and of his
living truth, not be drawn aside from the holding of it forth, by any fears of
the loosing these outward enjoyments, but let all be given up to the Lord, and
for his living truth, that must reign and rule for ever, that so none may lose
their part and portion in it, when it shall have the throne over all. O we that
are chosen and faithful, are the lambs Warriors, and must War in faithfulness
unto the end of our race we have to run, while we have a being in this mortal,
that mortality may be swallowed up of life. O every one that is turned to the
light of the Lord, and from the darkness of this world is concerned in this day
of the lambs War; and all who have waited for the great day of Gods salvation,
to be redeemed out of the many things into that World that has no end; O the
Kingdom that we War for, is glorious, and shall endure for ever; It is a
Kingdom of righteousness and of peace; its a Kingdom of life and love, rest and
assurance for ever; a Kingdom that has no end. It Is a Kingdom that raigns
over all the Kingdoms of men, and all that are begotten by the Word of this
Kingdom, and into the measure of this hope to wait to feel the resurrection of
the Just one, are subjects of this Kingdom, and have a part and portion
therein, and so are concerned in the weighty matters of it. O my friends, let
all that have a part and portion in this Kingdom of Peace; be as Israel of old
in such a capacity as they were, that eat of the Passover, ready with their
staves in their hands to pass out of Egypt to the land of Rest, with resolved
minds to encounter with all the difficulties that stands in the way, and that
may pursue behind, that the Victory may be known to be obtained by the Lambs
power: O the Lord does sight for Mount Sion, as I said, and for the hill
thereof; and my dear friends, great is the love of God unto his people in this
day, as in the days of old, and his Cause the same: And much more glory is to
be revealed, it being the last days: O let none stay behind, but as the Lord
invites and draws forth, and inclines the heart and mind, so let obedience be
to him, and every one be ready prepared to take part with the sufferings for
the Lords sake, and his innocent Cause in this day; And let every one take heed
of that spirit that draws back, and seeks to hide its head till the storm be
over, and leave some of the weak ones to the heat of the battle, who are but
young and tender. O let the strong come forth and show their strength, that the
weak may be strengthened, and the feeble be supported by their Valor and
Faithfulness, that have had a time of growth, and have known the goings forth
of the wonderful power of God in the days that are past; when they were
young and tender. O it is a day that every one must be tried, and the
faithfulness of the upright to be known; therefore let every one shake
themselves from the dust of this world, and put on strength and courage to
come forth, to meet with the dark enemy by the arm of light to encounter
with him, and to put him to flight in all his shifts, and holes in which he
seeks to hide his head, and ever and anon to start forth when he thinks he has
advantage to deceive, and if he cannot deceive by his wiles and subtilties,
then he will with rage and furious madness come forth to devour and destroy if
he could the innocent; Yet so to be found like valiant soldiers of the Lamb,
as not to start back, nor be afraid of any of his assaults, wiles, threats, nor
cruelties, but to stand still in the strength of the Lambs power, in which the
victory is obtained over all, and certainly the victory is sealed unto the
faithful Warriors and followers of the Lamb, and we do see and feel that
Victory is obtained, and obtaining day by day, so that the Lord is known to
take part with his innocent people in this the day of his mighty power, and we
are more then conquerors in the life of the Lamb, which is over all; And that
in the time of the greatest need he is near unto, to stand by and defend us,
and to plead the cause of himself that he has be trusted us with, and has
counted us worthy to suffer for, and to bear in our bodies the dying of our
Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh, so
that his life may reign and rule in all our hearts, and we to be subject to
him, so that we may reign with him, as certainly we shall and do; as we suffer
with him, and therefore let us arm our selves with patience, and wait to be
armed with his power in a holy resolution, and with a godly fear and
sincerity to undergo a great fight of affliction, and to endure hardship as
good soldiers of Jesus Christ, and not to fear none of the threats nor cruel
dealings of our adversaries, nor to be afraid of departing from our native
countries, and relations, which may be near and dear to us, but let the
precious truth of our God be unto us the nearest and dearest of all. And let us
give up life and liberty, and all unto the Lord, who takes care for us, and
will never leave any that trust in him. And this is my friendly exhortation,
and brotherly invitation to all the followers of the Lamb, in this the day of
his battle and war with the dragon and his power. Dear friends, great is my
love unto you all, who are faithful, and great is the tender desires and
breathings of my life for all the weak and feeble ones, and strong is the
consolation that will be witnessed in all that stands out of themselves in this
day of trial. And in that which teaches to deny self, in which the comfort and
consolation is known which is beyond all words. And so in the living eternal
Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, feel to live in, in all times
that in it you may be enriched with all spiritual Wisdom and understanding, and
so to depart from all that that would lead from God into the love of this world
from which we are called, for therein is the darkness and the death, therefore
let none of us in this day love the world, nor the things of the world, knowing
this, that he that loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him; so
the mighty God of my life and my strength preserve you in the pure fear of his
great Name, that is become as a pleasant ointment to all his beloved Virgins,
which are chaste unto him, and not joined unto any other lover, but he alone is
the only beloved of their souls; so my dear friends and brethren, in what
state and condition of sufferings you be, or out of sufferings let us all be
ready with our Lamps trimmed and burning, that when the Lord calls to do his
will for us to be witnesses for his Name sake, we may be alvvaies ready, and
casting of every weight and burden, that nothing may hinder us in our journie
to War with the power of darkness that is risen to make War with the Lamb
and his followers, but that we may follovv the Lamb vvhether-soever he goes:
And so this is my friendly Visitation unto you, and a bidding of you to
farevvel in the God of my life, who is my rest and peace in this time of my
outvvard imprisonment for the testimony of his everlasting truth, and by the
wills of men sentenced for Transportation, but free in him who has made free
from sin and death, and has set our feet upon the everlasting rock, against
which the gates of hell shall not prevail. But in the everlasting arm of his
Power, we shall be kept for ever as we follovv him fully, so God Almighty
preserve you all. Amen says my soul.

William Brend.
From Nevvgate, London the 20. of the 11. month. 1664.
THE END.

