ESSAYS ON TRADE AND Navigation.

In FIVE PARTS.

The First Part.

By Sir FRANCIS BREWSTER, Knight.

LICENSED, January 3. 1694/5;.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. MDCXCV.

THE PREFACE.
I Know no Subject that has been more writ on, and worse handled, than that of
Trade; nor is it to be wondered at, since it is the misfortune of that Mystery
not to be in the hands of Philosophers, or men bred to the Liberal Sciences;
but such whose Education has been more in the Cantore, than Schools: And when
men of finer Heads and Studies engage in it, they commonly make Flights as far
above the genuine Meaning and Nature of Trade, as others that are better versed
in it do cover and deface it with Incoherence and Lumber.

There is also another Disadvantage that Treatises of Trade and Navigation lie
under, which other Studies and Employments are not liable unto; and that is,
Trade being Universal in its Nature, but Particular in the Practice, one
Merchant dealing for one part of the World, and perhaps a stranger to another,
yet if he writes of Trade, cannot be confined unto his own Province, for that
would be too narrow for a Discourse of Trade; and if he should keep within his
Bounds, he may not be a proper Judge of that where he is a Party; and in
discourse of his own Trade may interfere with that of his Neighbor, either by
being ignorant of another's, or partial in his own concern: But it is not thus
in other Professions; The Divine is within his limits, not intermixed with the
Lawyer, nor is He with the Physician; yet each learned and qualified to
expatiate on their own Studies; and there being no part in any of the foregoing
Arts practicable in matters of Trade, it seems to me a prejudice to Commerce,
that so many trouble the world with their crude and undigested Notions in that
which they understand not themselves; nor can have any other effect, but
disturbing men that are in their own Track and beaten Road of Traffic; which
is better for the Nation to have followed, than any particular Model of private
men: And therefore I conceive a Council of Trade absolutely needful, where
every man's Observation may be brought under a thorough Scrutiny, and out of
all a Body of Trade composed.

Having said this, I may be thought to condemn my self in what I arraign in
others; nor do I undertake to be quit of all I blame in others, my best defense
being to claim the Privilege of being in the Crowd with the same Impunity
others have allowed them; and perhaps have something more to plead in my excuse
than most men have, my Education and Practice in Trade having been for Thirty
Years at Home and Abroad in a Universal Trade. I know of but Four Trades that I
have not some way been concerned in, the East India, Turk, Muscovy, and
Green-land: And I must further say for my self, That in all I here treat of, it
is with submission to better Judgments, not asserting my opinion in opposition
to any other; tho I confess I cannot approve of many of those Prints on Trade
which I have seen, except what Sir Josiah Child has with great Judgment and
more Perspicuity set forth, than any I ever saw.

What I design by the following Discourse, is not much more than an
Introduction to the other Parts that shall succeed; nor had this come forth
alone, but that I have seen some things lately published, that in my humble
Opinion are no better than Libels on Trade; and tho I affect not Controversies,
and therefore do not name them, yet believe it may be useful to write another
Sense on the same Things; submitting both to the Censure of better
Understandings.

I think it a mortal Distemper in Trade (nor to be cured because in the first
Concoction), That we have so few men of University-Learning conversant in true
Mercantine Employments: If there were as much care to have men of the best
Heads and Education in it, as there is in the Laws, the Nation would fetch more
from Abroad, and spend less in Lawsuits at Home. We have it reckoned up by the
Infallible Author, as the Glory of a City, That her Merchants were Princes and
Nobles; their Business and Transactions in the world with such, is more than
belongs to any other Set of men: Would it not then be the Honor of a Nation,
as well as Profit, to have men of the best Sense and Learning in the Foreign
Negoce of a Kingdom? If such had been in the Trade of these Kingdoms, it seems
reasonable to believe we had not lost the most considerable Navigating Trade
and Employment of our Seamen.

It would be an astonishing Observation to men of any Country but our own, to
see more Heads employed in Westminster Hall to divide the Gain of the Nation,
than there are Hands on the Exchange to gather it together. I have sometimes
thought, that if these Kingdoms lay not under the confusion and
unintelligibleness of Understanding in Trade, as the Builders of Babel did in
Languages, we might without the Sin of those arrogant Architects, erect such
Towers in Trade as might overtop the Universe in that Mystery. We see how all
Arts and Sciences have been improved in this Kingdom within the compass of one
Century, but amongst them all, the Merchants Part the least; and the reason is
plain, men of small Learning and moderare Understanding, are generally put in
it: For tho there are some of excellent Parts and clean Heads among them, yet
the Major Part are not so polished: I speak not this to abate the Respect that
I shall always think is due to the Profession, and all men in it; but we know
it is the Vanity of the Nation: Scarce a Tradesman but if he have a Son that a
Country Schoolmaster tells him would make a Scholar, because he learns his
Grammar well, but immediately passes the approbation of his Kindred, who judge
it pity so hopeful a Youth should be lost in Trade; the University is the only
Soil fit for him to be planted in.

By such disposition of the Youth of our Nation, many a good Tradesman is lost,
and poor Scholars in every respect made; and if this Humor prevail in
Mechanics, and men of ordinary Quality; much more, and with better
Pretensions, it affects our Gentry; to be sure the Eldest Son is above Trade,
and if the Younger be of a Quaint and Studious Temper, they are thought fit for
the Law, not many for the Pulpit, which I confess I likewise think a Mistake in
our Gentry: Had we more of Them in the Clergy, we should have fewer to despise,
that might be better Builders of Houses than of the Church.

But to return to what I observe of the Improvement in all the Employments in
the Kingdom, I see none that have arrived to that vast Increase as those in the
Law: This perhaps is accounted an evil; but I will not quarrel with that
Long-Robe; I hope it will be no offense to wish them among us, but not with
their Bar-Gowns; they would in my opinion look better in a Counting House than
in the Temple; and had the Humor of our Ancestors run that way, as much as it
did for the Law, there might have been as great an Enlargement in Maritime
Traffic and Navigation, as there is now of the Laws: I presume none will say,
that they began with equal Numbers; Trade had the Primogeniture, and set forth
with the Employment of the People, before there could be work for Lawyers; and
I believe those of best value amongst them do not think their Growth and Gain
contributes to either in the Advantage of the Nation; tho without the
Profession there can be no securing Property; but perhaps the Numbers make more
work than there would be if they were less. Hamburgh, tho a Place of great
Trade, allows but Two: And tho our Foreign Plantations are filled with men of
no better Principles than they leave behind them, yet they have few among them
who raise their Fortunes by the Law; for which no reason can be given, but that
there is not a Foundation and Nursery for that Profession to breed up Men of
Learning and Ingenuity in.

I have been the longer on this Subject, because there seems to me an Expedient
in this matter; and that is, To make such Provision for Noblemen and Gentlemen's
Children, as may be equally reputable with the Inns of Court, for young
Gentlemen to come to from the Universities, and with less Charge than their
Expense in Seven Years studying the Law, become expert in Trade.

To be thus managed: In each Maritime City and considerable Port of the
Kingdom, to have a College built, in which there may be some Persons of
Experience in Trade, to teach and direct in the Mystery of it, to all Parts of
the World: And that they may have the Practick, as well as Theory, That every
Person entering himself into the Society, may be obliged to bring in a Thousand
Pounds Stock, which will make a Capital perhaps of 20 or 30000 l. Sterling. to
Traffic with in Thirty Cities, etc. in the Kingdom: They to be obliged to
spend Five Years in this Society, and at the end of that Term to receive the
Principal they brought, allowing the Casualty of Profit and Loss, as it
happens: Going thus out, they will be entered in Trade, and probably have a Fund
to begin with; and by this means Trade will fall into the hands of Gentlemen,
Persons of Learning and Consideration in the Nation; and likewise preserve from
misfortunes numbers that now miscarry in their Studies of the Law, thorough Ill
Conversation, and having no Employments.

To this Project (a Word now traduced to contempt, tho in its self of good
signification both for Peace and War) I foresee two Objections that will be
made against it; and they are these:

First, This will make too many Merchans.

Secondly, That this will leave no room for Younger Brothers, that have nothing
to prefer them in the world, but a small Sum to put them Prentice to a
Merchant, by which they often raise their Fortunes in the World.

To the First I answer, That the evil of having too many Merchants, is in the
Numbers that are bred up from Apprentices; many of which coming into Business
without Funds, strain their Credit, which to keep above water they are forced
to venture at all ways that have but a Probability of Success, to keep
themselves in Business; and then to comply with their Credit often sell to
loss, which in the end brings them to Misfortune, and that begets an Opinion
that there are too many Traders; whereas the true reason is the Want of Stock,
not Number of Merchants.

The second Objection, That this will hinder Merchants from taking Apprentices,
is in part answered in the first, that their Number prejudice Trade: But there
is a farther Consideration in this matter, and that is, Two sort of Youths
stand Candidate for a Mercantine Education, Gentlemen with a Capital, others of
less Quality with none. I think it will admit of no question which shall be
preferred; and that the other may be more profitably employed for the Nation
and themselves, in Trades that require more Labor and less Stock.

But after all I have said, my Wishes are greater than my Expectation, to see
Trade thus courted in a Kingdom that treats it as some do their Wives,
considering them no farther than to the Production of a Legitimate Posterity,
reserving their Caresses and Delights for a Miss; so the Humor of this Age
seems to incline, whilst Foreign Commerce is neglected, and men's Thoughts and
Designs run after Offices and Employments in the State; to pay which,
Spider-like, the Nation spins out her Bowels to catch Flies; and the Simile
goes farther, such Food turns into Poison, where it feeds men faulty in their
Morals; and such too often supplant better men, or find ways to be preferred
before them: To say this, will be no Offense to deserving men; and for others,
I shall only desire them to snspend their Resentments until the Second Part
comes forth, and then they will have more reason, because it will come in my
way to be more particular, when I come to speak of the Trade of Ireland; in
which there has of late been such Notorious Demonstrations how Ill Men in
Offices and Places of Trust may ruin and destroy a Kingdom, as admits of no
Defense. I have for this, the Authority of Both Houses of Parliament in their
Addresses to the King: And the Infallible Author tells us, That he who says to
the wicked, Thou art righteous, the people will curse, Nations shall abhor him.

What I have said in the following Discourse, relating to Trade and Navigation
we have lost, is not with prejudice to our Neighbors, who by their Industry
and better Conduct have gained what we by supine Negligence and destructive
Impositions on Merchandise have lost; nor do I think it Christian or Human by
Club-Law to take that from another Nation which God has made common for every
Nation to participate of, as they can entitle themselves by the most early and
beneficial Methods in Commerce. The Dutch lie most in our way in this
Controversy; but the Sea is wide enough for us both if we agree, but too narrow
if we quarrel, for then we shall be apt to jostle. How malicious it looks, I
will not say, but to me it seems scandalous, to quarrel with men for their
Industry; Envy is the Offspring of Ignorance and Sloth, and is an evil quality
in a people, tho it carries them not so far as to do others hurt, if it
prevails with themselves to do nothing; but as I am not for beating a Traveller
for being better mounted than my self, and so making his Journey easier and
sooner than I can, yet I should stop his Career if he broke through my Fence,
or grazed on my Ground, or made it his Road. In some cases it is so with Trade
and Navigation; among others, that of New Foundland is the Property of the
Imperial Crown of England; and the French have no more Right to fish there,
than in the River of Thames: This Nation was the first that ever threw a Hook
and Line in those Seas; and tho there is no Landmarks above Water for the Bank
of New Foundland, (it lying out of sight of the shore) yet there is under
Water, from the first Soundings, and so far this Nation has a Property; and we
may now, if ever, hope to have it asserted, since we have a King who has put a
stop to that Towering Monarch who knew no Bounds before: And there seems good
grounds to believe, That if we are not wanting to Him who exposes His Royal
Person so far for us, That the French King must soon retire into his own
Limits. But upon Discourse of this nature I have been answered, When it was so,
and the War over, then, and not before, was a proper time to treat of Trade: I
have mentioned something of this in the following Sheets, and therefore shall
say the less now; yet cannot omit that which stares us in the face, The Neglect
of Trade in time of War drives many out of the Kingdom who will never return:
It is observed so at this time of Ireland; Thousands are come away since the
Reduction of that unfortunate Kingdom, that endured the whole brunt of the War,
and are not now in fear of the Irish, but are reduced to Beggary by Idleness,
for want of Trade and Employment that they formerly had; the consequence of
which is easy to be read, and how it will reach us at last; but we are a People
that neither Fire, Sword, Plague, or Famine can work upon. He that silently
laments, doats; and he that complains of our impendent Misfortunes, is mad; a
Character now more in use than ever in this Nation, and found very useful for
covering some men's actions: I speak not this as having a Talent for, or desire
to be in Public Employment; I never was in any: That which I believe would
satisfy all men of Trade and Commerce, I am sure it would me, is the Motion of
a Parliament Man of Leverpoole, which we find in Story; That a Bill being
brought into the House which bore hard on the Commons, in Trials for Life and
Death of the Lords, the honest man of Leverpoole stood up and said, Since he
saw the House were for passing that Bill, he gave his Assent also; provided
there might be this Exception in the Act, That no Lord should kill either him,
his Wife Joan, Son Tom, or any of the good Town of Leverpoole for which he
served. So say I, Since the Nation are contented that the Public Treasure
should be shared among Offices and Employments, Merchants and Seamen, etc. are
content, so that they in the Management will give Security and Encouragement
for Trade, which pays them all; but they are not wise to themselves that let
Trade run from them, whilst they are warring to secure it; our Neighbors do
not so.

Our improvidence in this matter is to our great Reproach, since we are under
the Blessing of such a Government as this Nation never had but once before: And
it is not to be forgotten, that in that Reign, tho encompassed with Wars, there
was more done in the advancement of Trade and Navigation than ever was done
before: We have taken care to lose much of it since; but we have now a King
that denies us nothing we ask for the good of the Nation; and where any thing
is entire in himself (and it is well some things are so) we find it, There
never was Better or Greater Men in the Church and on the Bench; which is
sufficient demonstration, that where we are unhappy, it is by our own
Recommendation and Parties. The Filth of the last Reign still sticks about us;
from which Time will, I hope, relieve the King and Us.

THE CONTENTS.
OF Trade in general, Page 1. Of Naturalizing and Encouraging Foreign
Protestants, 7. Of Providing for Foreign Protestants, 11. Of the Manufactory
and Dispose of Sheeps-Wool, 22. Of Free Ports, 29. Of Exports of Foreign
Importations, 32. Of a Council of Trade, 37. Of Prohibiting Foreign
Commodities, 41. Of Sumptuary Laws, 49. Of Working-Schools and Hospitals, 57.
Reasons humbly offered for establishing by Charter Hospitals and
Working-Schools, 65. Of the New Foundland Fishing, 68. Of Navigation and
Seamen, 75. Of Building Ships, 84. Of the Act of Navigation, 92. Of Banks and
Lumbers, 109. Of Agriculture and Rural Employments, 116.
ON Trade in General.
THESE Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, differ from most parts of the
World, in that of their Strength, as they do in that of their Situation, and
Aptness for Trade.

Their Situation gives them the Preferrance of the most Valuable Trade in the
World, which must pass their Doors before it comes to their Neighbors; and as
they are happy in their Situation, so are they as Superior to other Countries
in their Native Growth and Production for Commerce; as Rich Soil is to that
which is Barren; these Kingdoms producing Trade as some Land does Fruit,
without Art or Labor, when other Countries like forced Ground raise their
Trade by Assiduity in both: And such a People are more to be feared, than those
that abound with the Blessings of Nature, but want that of Industry; we need go
no further than the Dutch and Spaniards for Demonstrarion.

The Danger that has been impendent over us for more than Thirty Years in this
of our Trade, is from the French; and in Truth no Nation in the World can so
well contest it with England as they can; and therefore it seems reasonable to
consider them in this as much as we do in that of their Arms; and perhaps they
may be found laying a Foundation in War to enlarge their Trade and Navigation,
and we at the same time declining in both.

That these Kingdoms cannot be safe under the Growth of France none will deny,
and that it is safer for England to meet them in Flanders than here; but if the
Advance Guards should be only considered, and the Main Body neglected, the
consequence might be feared.

Our Naval Force is thought the Main Body and Strength of the Nation: Now
though large Supplies in Parliament are absolutely necessary for that use, yet
there is something else wanting to make us formidable at Sea, and that is
Marine Trade and Navigation, which like Food to the Body must be daily renewed,
or else our Naval Strength will decay. And although perhaps it is not
considered, yet the want of Seamen for our Navigation and Trade in time of
Naval War, Impoverisheth the Nation more than the Charge of the War.

There goes many Threads to make up the Webb of Trade, too fine for every eye
to see; and among others the Cheap Navigating Ships is one: Now our want of
Seamen obliges Merchants to advance their Wages, and that gives Advantage to
our Neighbors in carrying Commodities cheaper to a Market than we can, and
consequently makes them the Carriers of our Produce and Manufactory; which is
the only certain Gain in Trade. Merchants often loose when a Ship Arrives safe
in Port, but Seamen have their full Wages.

There is also another Prejudice and Loss to the Nation, and that is carrying
Money out by Foreign Seamen that are employed in our Merchantmen, * being
allowed by the Act of Navigation; which might have been thought the only
mistake in that Act, if the Consideration of our not having sufficient for our
Ships had not produced that Liberty.

As Naval War abates the number of our Seamen, so it increases those of the
French; for that they employ more Seamen in their Privateers, than they do in
time of Peace in Merchantmen: And as this affects us in War, so it may
reasonably be feared it will in time of Peace; For having so many Seamen made
to their hands, will naturally put them upon enlarging their Navigation; to
which they will be the more encouraged by our want of Men to supply ours, which
they will soon fall into.

And the Abating of our Marine Employments has a worse Consequence than the
Loss of our Trade; for that it seems the most effectual way to lay us open to
the Invasion of the French, which we are no longer secure from, than whilst we
Command the Sea; And if we find the French alone able to contend with us and
the Dutch United, what might they not do if they should be assisted with other
helps, and we left single to oppose them, There are more ways than one to bring
such a Revolution in Europe: And therefore it seems of the greatest moment for
this Nation, to provide in their Naval Force, as if they were left to their own
defense against the Power of more than the French at Sea: It is, no doubt, the
Interest of England to support the Dutch, and it is hoped we shall never be
divided. But that Kingdom is in an ill Condition that cannot secure its self
without the Force of its Allies

Such Reflections as these may not be improper in this Age, They were thought
necessary in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when she questioned the French of
Building a Ship of War but of Fourteen Guns.

And since they are now above such Demands, and that we cannot restrain them,
it seems necessary for us to increase our own; and that is not possible to be
done any other way than by Improving our Navigation, and enlarging our Trade,
without which we may fight for the Sovereignty of the Sea until we have lost
the use of it. If Account were taken of those several Trades that this Nation
has in a manner totally lost since the Reign of James the First, it might open
those Eyes that are always shut to that which is the Strength and Riches of
this Nation, as Navigation is.

There were many Thousand Seamen formerly employed, where for late years we
have few or none, as the Greenland, and Muscovy Trade lost; that of the
North-Seas, and Newfound-Land, little better; most of our Eastland-Trades
managed by Foreign Ships; and so the Trade of Ireland; the neglect of which in
that point, as well as some others, may be found when it is too late of
pernicious Consequence to England.

These are Trades we lost to the French, and Northern Navigation, in time of
Peace; and this War has brought on the Stage the Portugese, a Nation we least
feared; yet under this cover, we may very well loose great part of our Southern
Trade. We formerly employed our Ships in their Braziel and other Trades, and
now we are forced to employ theirs; not only because of their being Free Ships,
but also because we cannot get Seamen to Navigate our own Ships.

By Accidents of War, Trade often shifts from one Nation to another, and some
will stick behind after the War is ended; for that Seamen and Merchants rest
where they find most Encouragement; and wherever they come they are made
wellcom, and when the benefit they bring to the Country they Trade in is
observed, they will not want Encouragement to stay there: There never was a
fairer opportunity, if the Portugueze make use of the Introduction this War
has given them; to make Lisbon the Mart for Trade, and Navigation in the
Western and Levant Trade: It is a mistake to think that Navigation and Marine
Employments can have no growth where the Natives are not Numerous and Apt for
the Sea.

Trade is best Improved by good Laws, and Encouragement for Strangers; where
such are together with a Situation for Trade, that place will be crowded; and
so would Lisbon and the Portugueze Ports if it were not for the Inquisition;
but it is believed the Rigor of that will be Abated now they have tasted the
sweets of Trade. All these things make against us, and though little
considered, bodes ill for these Kingdoms; if some extraordinary, and speedy
Resolutions be not taken to regain our Navigation and Sea-Imployments, this
Nation will fall under some Foreign Power. It is easy to read our Destiny, nor
will it be like a Conquest on a Continent; One Day at Sea may determine the
Fate of these Kingdoms; and if we have no Fund or Nursery for Seamen in
Proportion to the French, and others about us, what can be expected.

That which I humbly conceive the most visible Means to preserve these Kingdoms
in their Trade and Navigation, and nothing but that can provide for their Naval
Force, is the setting up a National Bank: This now on foot is too little, and
yet too bigg; the first because it promotes nothing of our Navigation, but on
the contrary may be feared to Destroy it, by that Tax on Shipping; but I have
left my Bank; which as I conceive too little for the reason I mentioned, so I
think it too big because it will Ingross the Money, and consequently the Trade
of the Nation, into one City; and will draw from all Parts of the Kingdom those
little Sums that do now in great measure support the Manufactoryes of the
Nation.

When there was no place where Money could be lodged at Interest for a Day; it
was easy for Industrious Men to borrow from their Neighbors; and by that
means our Manufactories were made Plenty and Cheap; but now a little time will
show they can be neither: But of this I have writ my thoughts a part.

The Bank that I conceive would be useful in this Nation, must be of such
Universal Extent, that every Person in the Kingdom may be concerned in it, and
that every corner in the Kingdom shall partake of the Streams that run from it:
That out of this Bank there may be Provision for Ships and Seamen.

That those Trades beforementioned, that we have lost may be retrieved; and
such Methods laid down as may encourage that Navigation which imploys most
Seamen, as the Fishing, etc.

To Establish this Bank will require great Consideration, for that as it may be
Constituted, the Trade and Treasure of this Nation will be very much increased;
all the Poor and now Useless hands Employed, not a Beggar in the Streets: And
since England wants nothing so much as People, One way to supply that defect,
is to increase your work for them you have: And so one Man may be better than
two, as to the Riches of the Nation.

And the full Employments of the Hands we have is the only way to get more; but
to invite Strangers into a Kingdom, where the Taxes for the Poor amount to more
than the Revenue of some of the Neighboring Countries, shows we consider Trade
as wise Men do Play, for Diversion, not Business; and in that Delusion may be
read the Ruin of these Nations.

Of Naturalizing and Encouraging Foreign Protestants.
IT is observed that though there is no part in the Universe so straightened,
and filled with Inhabitants as the United Provinces, yet there is no Government
that gives such Encouragement to Invite in more: They make their Country as God
has the Air, every Man's Property that Breathes in it; and equally in the Power
of a Man to be a Denison, or a Tenant, a Burger as a Parishioner; the good
Effect it has in that Commonwealth needs no Illustration.

It may be supposed this Provident Economy happened in that State, above any
Government in Europe, by reason of their being of latter Date in their
Establishment, and so saw the mistakes of their Neighbors; and on the other
hand our Government deriving from Antiquated Laws, and Prescriptions, which
according to the Experience of those times made Bullwarks against Strangers and
Foreigners; believing they could never be secure of what they had in
possession, or at Liberty to enlarge their Fortunes, if Strangers were allow*d
the Freedom of Natives: But in the Reign of Hen 3. there was large Immunities
given to the Easterlins, then so called, to settle Trade in the Kingdom, which
the Steel-Yard yet bears the Memory of, but that was but a particular and
limited thing; the Old Laws and Prohibition of Naturalization still continued,
and by it this Kingdom deprived of such Numbers as might have in some
proportion filled those wastes that this fruitful Island has now in it, for
that it cannot be said to be one half Peopled

There now seems a greater tendency in the Nation to remove those Bars that lie
in the way of New-Comers by that Charitable Law for Liberty of Conscience, and
as we owe great part of our Woollen Manufactories to the Blessed Memory of
Queen Elizabeth receiving in the Persecuted Protestants from Flanders, whose
Posterity are now become Natives, so may we the Enlarging of our Navigation,
Fishing, and Numbers of our Inhabitants to this Reign, if Encouragement were
given to Invite Protestants of all Nations to settle here with the same
Security and Privilege as Natives* I will not determine whither the Limitation
of Offices and Employments of Profit, may not be necessary to such as are not
born in that Kingdom, but I think that would be no obstacle to such as are
worth receiving for that Trade, and purchasing in that Kingdom must be the
business of those as are supposed to be invited in, and there Posterity will be
capable of Preferments in the Commonwealth, and the fewer there is of such, (I
mean Places and Offices of Profit amongst us,) the better; we see it so in the
United Provinces, where perchance there is not by Civil Employments so many Men
Enriched as we have in one Parish. Where there is most Trade there is fewest
Offices.

But to return to the Advantage of bringing in Foreigners, I presume Men of
Real Estates do believe that it will advance the Rates of Lands by a greater
Consumption of the Native Product.

And however some of our Artizans may mistake it, yet the most considerable of
them allow that the Increase of Hands in labor improves and increases
Manufactory, even in the very Expense of them that are added; one Man that
Works may have five or six that only Eats and Wears.

And it is undeniable that if the Increase of hands abates the Price of
Manufactoryes, it will enlarge their Exports and Expense at home; the Cheap
making of Manufactories abroad is known to be the chief Cause of abating our
Rent.

The next Consideration is that of Seamen, to Increase them by Foreigners
admits of no Objection since we are forced to make use of them at dear Rates,
and they carry out our Money for their Wages. If Merchants will not complain at
the bringing in and Naturalizing Foreign Seamen, for the Reasons before; so
neither will our Seamen complain, for that the Increase of them will ease ours
from the Press, when Foreigners are made as liable to it as they; whereas now
they do our Seamen a double Injury, take their Employment in Merchantmen, and
leave them no way of getting their Bread, but by Sailing in Men of War. There
remains then only to be questioned the Prejudice Foreign Merchants may do to
ours; for none deny but that they are an Advantage to all other Societies and
Persons in the Nation by their Trade and Expense; but to our Merchants, some
may say they are a hindrance; though I do not think any Merchant, that is truly
so, will say it, they are not found so in Amsterdam; but Merchants there are
pleased with their Numbers, and it is always accounted a Misfortune, even by
them that slay, to have Merchants quitt a Place.

There might be much more said, if it were wanting, to show, That Naturalising
Foreign Merchants can be no Prejudice to Natives; but since it concerns Men of
the best Sense and Knowledge in business, it is but waste of Time: They know
Foreign Merchants abate not their Trade for want of Naturalization, but it is
our advantage to have them brought under the Taxes and Offices of Charge in the
Nation, as well as to have their Estates fixed in it.

Upon the whole I submit to better Judgment, Whither the Treasure of the Nation
in the Bodies of Men, which I take to be of the greatest Value.

The Wealth of the Nation by their Estates and their Support of the Government
by bearing part of the charge of it, will not be advanced by the bringing
Foreign Protestants into all the Privileges and Immunity of English Men, which
it in time will make so. If we reflect on the Numbers lost in five years past,
there may seem as much reason to recruit the Nation as the Army* Laws and
Property has always been the Language of our Nation, and much talk of securing
them; this ought to be done, but there is something of greater Value that ought
not to be left undone, which we hear not off; and that is, Provision for the
Increase of Posterity, and Ways to Invite in present Supplies. If this came
once under Consideration of Parliament, I cannot but believe it would produce
the best Statute this Nation ever saw.

Of Providing for Foreign Protestants.
AS I believe an Act of Naturalization would enlarge the Trade of this Nation,
so would the planting Foreign Protestants in Ireland: And it seems but
reasonable that this Nation should make some Advantage by that sink of their
Blood and Treasure, which they never yet have done, but every Forty Years at
most are put to the Expense of a New War: It is astonishing to reflect on the
Story of that Kingdom; in which it is said there has been above Fifteen
Hundred Thousand English murdered in Fifty Two Rebellions: It would be but a
reasonable and provident Consideration how to prevent such continual bleeding
in that Kingdom for the future; But Matters of State is not the design of this
Discourse; only where Trade must call to it for Aid, as in this case it seems
to do, for the Government to give a hand to the planting that Kingdom, by which
it may be profitable to this; and it can never be by lying waste, or being kept
poor, which is a general Opinion amongst us; and I fear one of our most
pernicious Mistakes in Trade, as it is point of our security, we should allow
some Thoughts and Value for the Bodies of Men; and if we did so, there would
not be such continued Slaughter in that Kingdom without producing one good
Statute to secure that Country, as in reason it should be entirely to the
obedience and disposition of this; the greatest part of the Land of that
Kingdom is, or ought to be in the hands of our Brethren, and they sure will not
be unwilling to give us the privilege of governing it, especially when by it
we preserve them, as by sending Foreign Protestants among them we should do: In
private management we should think him Lunatic that would pursue one Method a
thousand times over, though he had as constantly miscarried in it; that seems
the Case of Ireland; it is vain to imagine that British, so I think they call
the English and Scotch of Ireland, can ever balance the Irish; it is said, the
Irish are now above twenty to one at this time, notwithstanding much more of
the Irish perished in this last War, than of the British.

That then which I conceive would be the best management this Nation ever made
of Ireland, would be to dispose the Forfeitures of that Kingdom to Strangers of
all sorts that are not of the Church of Rome; and having made that exception,
it will be necessary to give my Reasons for it. My Principles (I must confess)
are against Force in Religion; but in this Case of Ireland there is a necessity
to exclude as much as may be, those that have any Relation or dependence on the
Church; because the Irish are a Bigoted People, and own a Foreign
Jurisdiction, which is a Principle against the Government and Laws of the Land;
and where those of that Opinion are superior in Number to them that are in the
Interest of Government, it seems absolutely Incumbent on the Government to
provide against such Men as believe themselves under the most Sacred Ties of
Religion and Conscience, to Obey and Promote the Edicts and Injunctions of a
Foreign Prince, for so the Pope is. But to return to that of bringing
Protestants to Ireland; I conceive there must be more than making them
Denizons, because at this time Ireland differs very little from a new
Plantation, and to Plant such, there is always given larger Encouragement to
New Comers, than in Settled and Planted Countries. If therefore such Methods
were thought on, as might make those that would settle in that Kingdom
Freeholders of small Proportions of Lands at very easy Rents, that might be a
great Inducement to Foreigners to go and fill that Country, and they would
soon by intermixture in Marriages with the English and Scotch become British;
and so those of the Interest of England would be Superior to that of the Irish
and Interest of Rome; and until it be so, England can never be sure of Ireland.
All that this Nation ever yet had by it, was a breathing time of thirty or
Forty Years, and then had a new Conquest to make.

But such a disposition as this would prevent Future Rebellions, and also
greatly Improve the Trade and Navigation of this Kingdom; For it is to be
Noted, that the Chief Consumption of Ireland is of the Product and Manufactory
of this Kingdom: And by an Account I have seen, Ireland takes off more from us
than Virginia and New England; and if we take it into our Care, would Employ
more of our Ships; but of that I intend in the second part of my Essays to
treat at large, and in the mean time shall here Insert Verbatim part of a
Discourse I find in a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Linen and Woollen
Manufactories: A Discourse Printed in the Year 1691: The whole was Rational;
but that which I think applicable to what I am now upon, was as follows: He
begins the Paragraff thus, as I said before, Ireland is no more than one of our
Foreign Plantations, only I think it will be allowed the first Place, and more
than any other in nearness of Blood; and that of our Nobles there being many
Families in that Kingdom descended from the Ancient Families of this; and most
of the Estates in Ireland held by the decent from our Brethren, who purchased
it with their Blood: These Reflections may prevail for our care of them, at
least to any Collony abroad; and we never think it our prejudice to have them
thrive, nor would the growth of Ireland, if rightly disposed or understood: And
here give me leave to make a Digression, if it may be called so, but you may
think it not Foreign to the Discourse.

I find it generally believed that Ireland is as mischievous to our Trade in
time of Peace, as it is destructive to our Men and Treasure in time of War; and
though this Opinion never went far with me, yet something I did doubt was in
it, until I met with something that gave plain Demonstration to the contrary,
and it was this:

I fell into an entire acquaintance with a Gentleman of Ireland, whose
experience and long continuance in all the Foreign Trade of that Kingdom
furnished him with Arguments I could not answer, to prove that England was a
great Gainer by the Trade of Ireland. When I could not confute him, nor he
prevail with me; he told me he would show me that which carried Authority with
it; and so he did, being as he assured me, the work of some years, as he could
spare time to compose it: The whole Discourse takes up many Sheets upon the
Trade of Ireland to all parts, and particular Remarks upon every Commodity
Exported and Imported into that Kingdom; and where, and how it affects England.
Some other things he reserved as Secrets from me, as he does the rest from
others; for it was never seen by any but one beside my self. Out of the whole,
he has extracted an Account of the Exports and Imports for one year in a
medium out of six; and then distinguished what related to England, by what
Ships brought in and out; then computed the Value of each Commodity, and to
what they were Improved, being Manufactor'd in England, and then what Money in
Specie, or Bills of Exchange, which is the same, was returned from Foreign
Parts to England, out of the Proceed of Goods sent from Ireland; all which
appeared, (being brought up to a Sum) that England Gained by Ireland Two
Millions Sterling per Annum: It seemed to me an Incredible thing; but being (as
he affirms) Matter of Fact, for which he has the account of the Customs, it is
not to be denied; the breviate is drawn in so plain and intelligible a Method,
as renders it easy to any Understanding, and therefore to mine: I would fain
have prevailed with him to Print the whole Matter, but he thinks it may be made
use of a better way; and affirms that as great as this looks, yet it might be
improved to much more, if the Trade of Ireland were disposed as it might be to
the Advantage of England: But he said that Kingdom was in no Reign since the
first Conquest of Ireland consulted in its Trade, but left to its self, or
treated like an Enemy: All the use made of it was for Courtiers Men of
Projection and Necessity to Traffic, and dispose it into Grants, Employments,
and Offices and so made it rather a Forest for Game, than a Plantation for
Trade and Commerce; and that which continued it so in the Reign of Charles the
Second, was the Jealousies and Mistakes of England, believing it grew too fast,
and incroached on their Trade, though it is demonstrable Ireland does us no
hurt, but where we by our own Laws force it; and that Act (pardon the
expression) like Lunaticks, that strive to suppress their Shadows for fear they
should assault them.

None will say, England would be the worse if it were double the Acres it now
is; And though the Sea part us from Ireland, may not Laws make us one in our
Interest and Trade; and so that Ireland may be more profitable to England in
General, than Wales, or any County in England is to the whole in its
proportion. There never was so fair an opportunity for Enriching this Nation by
Ireland, as now it is by Divine Providence once put a Blank in our hands, in
which His Majesty may stamp what he pleases: And we have reason to believe,
That He who ventures His Royal Person so freely for the Preservation of these
Kingdoms, will not deny us any thing that can contribute to our Growth in Trade
and Treasure. One thing I must not omit, which I had from this Gentleman of
Ireland, that to me seems valid for Confirmation of all he asserts, That
Ireland neither Interferes with, nor gains on England; for that in the last
Twenty Years of Irelands greatest Prosperity, not one Man in England purchased
in Ireland; but Numbers of Ireland have in that time purchased in England, as
they of that Kingdom, I mean the English always do, as they Increase their
Fortunes. This being so, Ireland is to England a Mine of Treasure, and affects
us, though in a much larger Proportion; as New Foundland, Hudson's- Bay,
whatever is gained in them, terminates in England. Here I end with the
Pamphlet, of which I shall only say, If the Matter of Fact be truly Related, as
by the Authority he gives, we have reason to believe it is, then there is plain
Demonstration that Ireland has been, and may be made much more profitable to
this Kingdom, then most of our Foreign Plantations: Of them we take great care;
and why not more of this, since it lies so near, and costs us so dear, seems
unaccountable: The truth is, our Ancestors had never such a happy Juncture to
do it, as we have now to secure it: If therefore we lay not hold on the
opportunity put into our hands, we cannot answer it so well as they might.

The Numbers of Refugees here, and in other Countries near us, are Objects in
this case, both for our Charity to them, and Advantage to our selves.

There has been for several Sessions of Parliament much talk of the
Forfeitures of Ireland; and that it was reasonable they should be Sold, and
made a Fund to raise Money toward the carrying on the present War; which might
be thought reasonable for us of England to press, because it would ease us of
so much in our Taxes: But why the Gentlemen of Ireland were so busy to promote
it, was at first to me a question, and set me on the Inquiry; and from some of
themselves I had this answer, That though they could not deny but the benefit
of those Forfeitures were justly due to us of England, yet the Justice of the
thing was not all the motive they had to promote it; but their own future
security was at least as much considered by them, for that they hoped the Sale
of those Forfeited Lands would put them in Protestant hands, and by that,
strengthen the British Interest in Ireland, which could never be secure, whilst
the Irish held so great a proportion in the Kingdom; and that whilst the Land
lay undisposed, they feared the Irish would find ways to be restored, they
having got enough by their Robberies and Plunder of the English to purchase
them, though they cost them Ten Years purchase: And that they were in fear also
of the Irish buying from such as had great Grants of Forfeited Lands; but if
there was a Public Sale, they would come into so many hands, that most of them
would stick with the Purchaser, and not come to the Irish. They further said,
It was not the Interest of England to let the Forfeitures come again into the
Irish hands; for that they never Improved, nor Traded, and so were no ways
profitable to England. If this apprehension of the Protestants be valid, either
to them, or us, it seems that a disposition of these Forfeitures of Ireland to
Protestant Strangers would answer all objections, and be a more certain way to
keep such Lands of Ireland out of Irish hands, then by selling them to the
English; for by that they would be to greater value in one Man's hand, and the
English would for advantage sell them to the Irish Proprietors; for that few
Purchasers would go to settle on their Lands, nor could they find Tenants in
the Country, since there is so much Land waste; but if Foreigners had it in
small Proportions, they would be able to manage it themselves, and so keep it
from returning to the Irish. I have been longer on this of the Forfeitures,
then perhaps will be thought proper, since my Subject is Trade: But since it
has relation to the Improvement of Ireland in the way of Trade, this
Digression I hope will be excused.

I return then to show, how the bringing in Refugees to Ireland will advance
the Trade of England, and that may appear in three particulars.

The Increase of People in Ireland will occasion the Expense of Manufactories
and Product of England; for that they have from England, or would, if the Laws
of that Kingdom in Relation to the Customs were duly executed, most of the
fine Draperies, Silk, Iron Manufactory, Haberdashers-Wares, Hats, Sadlers
Wares, Tapes, Pins, and other small Manufactories.

Also from England they have all the hopes, white Salt, Coals, Brass
Commodities, Tobacco, Sugars, and Groceryes.

They also Employ, or should so, if due care was taken in the Act of
Navigation, the Ships of England; all which would be considerably advanced, if
that Kingdom were improved by Foreigners.

2. Foreigners would Enlarge the Linen Manufactory in Ireland, to which no
part of Europe is most proper: And there is already a beginning and aptness in
the Irish to that Manufactory; and however, it is not the Interest of England,
that Ireland should grow in the Woollen Manufactory; yet it is that, that they
should in the Linen and Cordage: But of this I shall in the Second Part, when
I come to Discourse at large of the Trade of Ireland, say more.

3. The bringing Foreign Protestants into Ireland will Enlarge the Fishings
there: Great part of which will be to the Advantage of England, as would the
General Improvement of Ireland be, if it were disposed to such Trade and
Navigation as might be subservient and helpful to ours: But to make Laws with
design to keep them Poor, is not unlike him that set his own House on Fire,
that his Neighbors might be burnt; keeping Ireland Poor, and discouraging the
Protestant Interest there, puts that Kingdom in the hands of the Irish, and
that renders it not only unprofitable to England, but dangerous the management
of Ireland. Since the first Conquest will not be Credited in future Ages, and
although we must own, of a Nation that has the best Constitution in
Government, we have always been unhappy in the Administration; yet I think in
nothing so much, as in the Neglect of Trade, and in that of Ireland; which any
Nation but we, would make a Treasure of; and we Employ all our skill to make it
an Aceldama: It has been so to this poor Kingdom; and if relation be true, is
in a ready way to be so again. They in whose Province it is, will consider the
Politic part, my business is Trade; and in that I will venture to say, Ireland
might be made more profitable to England than all the Foreign Plantations have
ever yet been. I confess New England, and Newfound-Land may be made more than
altogether; but that which makes Ireland of more Consideration to England than
all the rest, is, because without keeping that, we can enjoy none of the rest.
It is every days Refuge for our Merchantmen, and not to be forgotten, how soon
after this Reduction it saved our Smirna and Levant Fleet.

Of the Manufactory and Dispose of Sheeps-Wooll.
THIS is the great Staple of the Kingdom, and in truth, of the World; which by
Divine Providence is so put into our hands, as that without a turn in Nature,
we cannot totally loose it; yet all that is possible for an unthinking People,
(as we are called abroad,) we have done to the prejudice of those Commodities,
by which means we have transferred great part of our Woollen Manufactoryes to
other Countries, to Germany, and Venice our Coarse Draperies, to Holland and
France our fine and New Draperies; and that which is remarkable, is, that we
laid the foundation for loosing them, the same way by which we first got them;
that is, by persecuting Men for their Religion. Abel's acceptable Sacrifice
seems still to follow the Fleece: No Society of Men in the Kingdom are so
generally affected with the strictest Injunctions of our Religion, as our
People bred up in the Woollen Manufactories; and these Men first fell under the
Rod after the Restoration; an excellent Reform to drive Men out of the Kingdom
for having too much Religion, but not question such as had none at all.

This driving our Clothiers into Germany and Holland, put them and their
Friends upon Inventions to send our Wool after them; and in that their Friends
that stayed behind were, and still are assisting them, though to the prejudice
of the Trades they are in themselves; there being nothing that draws compassion
more from one Man to another, than seeing Men of honest and unblameable
Conversation used worse than Thieves and Robbers for serving God according to
their Conscience. This severity banished many thousands out of England soon
after the Restoration of Charles the Second: One Tilham carried in the Year
1665, Three Thousand into the Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, and diverse others
did the same into other parts; insomuch, that Account was taken of Twenty
Thousand Sacks of Wool carried into one Port of France in less than Two Years
from England, and more went from Ireland; and besides, the Quantities that went
for Holland is Incredible: All this is evidently fallen upon the Nation by the
fury of those that would make a Trade of Religion, and banish those that had
Religion with their Trades: But blessed be God we have now a King of a more
comprehensive Persuasion, and our Church better supplied with Men of Learning
and Charity, which the Infallible Author tells us, is above all the Arts,
Sciences, and Acts of Devotion whatsoever.

Such Numbers of Men being gone out of the Kingdom for want of that Liberty
they may now enjoy, it is a wonder they do not return; and a greater, that they
are not sent for, and Invited back: We do not consider what the loss of a Man
is in a Kingdom not half Peopled: We want nothing so much as Bodies of Men; and
it is said, we have above Thirty Thousand in Foreign Countries, and they are
not of the raff, but sober, Industrious People; such as these should not be
lost.

But from the hands to Work Wool, I come to the Wool it self; how useful, and
in some cases of such absolute use in their Manufactories, that they can make
none of their best without our Wool: This is no Secret, nor the Severe Laws
that are made to prevent Escapes of Wool, but none have proved effectual; some
of them being too easy, and others severe to loss of Life to them all. I have
seen a Proposal of a Gentleman that has been a great Dealer in that Commodity
to Foreign Parts, which he affirms would be Infallible to prevent Exports of
Wool to Foreign Parts, From England, it seems probable enough; but he is
positive, and reserves part of the Secret; which he says, when told, will make
every one that hears it as positive as himself. I would have persuaded him to
offer it to the House, but he expects a great Gratification, and that he thinks
at this time will not be given; though I am of another mind, and believe he
deserves more than he can either ask or expect, if his Project takes. It is
indeed to be lamented, that solid Proposals for the Trade and Manufactory of
the Nation should not meet with so much Encouragement as a Lottery; but to the
contrary should be suppressed: And I know a great Minister, who once disputed
on that with warmth against a care for Wool, and that it was a burden to the
Nation; It may not be Foreign to this Discourse to give the heads of the
Dispute, which I the rather do, that so it may show the need there is for the
Great Council of the Nation to take it under their Consideration.

The Discourse rose on a Proposition that was brought to him, for stopping a
vast Quantity of Wool that was then going to France; it was brought him in
Writing, and demonstrated, That that very Wool was enough to work up all the
Coarse Wool of France for Seven Years; and that the consequence would be the
loss of great part of our Manufactories to Spain and Portugal.

The Minister made little return to that, but brought his Discourse to the
great Loss it was to Men of Estates; that there was not a way for Selling twice
the Wool that now they did; That there was three Years Wool then in England,
and what should Men do upon this Topic of the want of a Consumption for the
Wool of England, the Gentleman laid down these Positions.

First, That the War was one Reason of the Decay of the Woollen Manufactories.

Secondly, That the extraordinary Escapes of Wool to Foreign Parts, put them
upon making more Woollen Manufactories than ever they did before, and that
abated our Trade abroad.

Thirdly, That our Wool going to Foreign Parts made it so cheap at home; This
I remember put the Minister into a ^aughter; and laying the two first aside, he
desired him to make out the last Position, That the Escapes of Wool to Foreign
Parts made the Wool fall in Price: That the sending so great Quantities of
Wool out of the Kingdom should fall the Price of that which was left, was a
Mystery he could not understand, but seemed to him, the only way to make it
rise: But the Gentleman undertook to make out his Assertion, that every Pound
of English Wool worked up Three Pound of Foreign Wool; and that as much as
they Manufactur'd, so much was Abated in our Exports; for that they made such
Manufactoryes with our Wool, as they could not make without it; and
consequently by that means, one pound of our Wool with theirs, made four times
as much Clothes and Stuffs as we could have made with it, if we had kept it at
home: From which he Inferred, That if one fourth of the Wool of England went
to Foreign Parts, there would be as much Manufactoryes made Abroad for Foreign
Markets, as we could make, if we had wrought all our own Wool; and so much
being made Abroad, we could not have use for half our own Wool that was left:
This he affirmed was the reason that there lay so much Wool unwrought in
England; and he being brought for Proof of what he said, That which was Matter
of Fact I thought undeniable, though it would not be allowed so by the
Minister: The thing was this, The Year after the Restoration, there was a
Gentleman that got a Grant from the King, with a Non obstante to any Statute,
for Liberty to Export a certain Quantity of Wool to Foreign Parts from
Ireland; upon which, some Merchants in London buying the Grant, sent over to
Ireland, and bought most of the Wool, and sent it to Foreign Parts; this at
first raised the Price of Wool both there and in England; but in so short a
time as Five Months, it fell Fifty per Cent. And though not one fourth of what
formerly came from Ireland into England, came then to England, yet there was no
Vent for the Wool of England; and in Ireland it fell from Seven Shillings to
Three Shillings and Six Pence, their Stone of Sixteen pounds all the time they
shipped it for Foreign Parts. This he affirmed he could prove by the Merchants
Books that were concern d, to be literally true; and that the Year after the
Shipping for Foreign Parts was over, that Wool rise to its former Price both
here and in Ireland. And he farther added, that the great Quantities which by
stealth go from England and Ireland, makes Wool in both Kingdoms fall in
Price, according to the Quantities that are sent out. This part of the Dispute
being over, the next Question was, Whither the Wool of Ireland did not Abate
the Price of the Wool in England, and hinder Sheep Masters from Enlarging
their Flocks, and consequently keep down the Rents of Land. This was answered
in the Negative to all the three, that it did not Abate the Price of English
Wool, nor hinder the Increase of Sheep, or Abate the Rents of Land: That the
Irish Wool coming into England helped the working up of some Wool that could
not be made the most of without it. That the Wool of Ireland was a larger
Staple than that of England, and most proper for Bays and Serges: That it was
not the Wool of Ireland that came to England that made the Price fall, but it
was that which went to Foreign Parts that did the Mischief; and for the reasons
before given, he concluded, that if there went no Wool from England or Ireland
to Foreign Parts, all the Wool of both Kingdoms would not be half enough to
supply the Manufactories that England would have Markets for Abroad; for that
there is now made twice as much Manufactories with the help of our Wool
Abroad, as is made in England; so that if there were an effectual stop upon the
Wool of both Kingdoms, the Flocks of both might be trebled, and yet not be
sufficient for the Manufactories England might vent. This in few words was the
best account I ever heard of the Nature and Improvement of the Wool of these
Kingdoms, and is such demonstration of the Mischief the Exports of Wool does
to the Nation, that I cannot but think him a worse Enemy to his Country than a
Common Pyrate; for that he robs but a small Number, but he that sends out
Wool, destroys Thousands, weakens the Strength of the Nation both at Land and
Sea; and if we believe the Lord Coke's Assertion, That Nine parts of the Trade
of England comes from the Sheeps Back, there cannot be enough done to secure
it; but it has ever been the misfortune of our Nation, neither to punish or
reward Impunity in the first, makes us abound in Criminals; and the neglect in
the latter makes us barren of great Actions for our Country; I mean, in that
which makes a Nation Rich and Wise: Our Ancestors showed more of their good
will to it in the Dark of Trade and Navigation, than we do at Noonday. I have
often thought that it was possible for a Monarch of these Kingdoms to make all
Europe Tributaries to him in Trade, by a true Management of the Natureal and
Artificial Product and Navigation of these Kingdoms; without being obliged to
any help, but what arises from his own Dominions, of which Wool is the Chief.

Of Free Ports.
THere is nothing more talked of, and yet in my Opinion less understood than
the use of Free Ports.

The great Success that of Leghorn has met with, giving the Name a greater
Reputation in the World than perhaps the thing in it self deserves, for that it
seems the Effect of a bad cause; and though it is a good Expedient that has
neither Natural or Artificial Provision for Trade and Navigation, yet it may be
prejudicial to a Nation that has both: To make this Intelligible, give me
leave to say something of the first Establishing Leghorn a Free Port; because I
take that in all its Circumstances to be the first Complete President in Europe.

The Grand Duke of Tuscany's Territories are not of Extent to produce Natural
or Artificial Commodities for the Loading Ten Ships of Burden a Year; nor is
his Country able to Consume, except it be of Fish, half the Loading of that
Number; and having not room for Trade of his own, it was no doubt his Interest
to Encourage that of Strangers; which the Ignorance of all his Neighbors in
Trade gave him opportunity to do: So stupid was the Genoees, as to believe,
because they had then the Money-Trade and Navigation of the Levant, that
therefore they could set Laws and Bounds to other Nations, and make them pay
Customs as they saw fit; this Exaction on Trade had the same effect as
oppression in Government, and drove Merchants to seek out better Entertainment,
and the Duke had early provided for all that would come.

He was Despotick, and wherever that is, a general Excise raises the surest
Revenue; and Freedom of Importation advances it, by the Expense of those that
Commerce brings into the Country; but these Reasons hold not in all places,
particularly in England: And though perchance no part of the World in general
speaking, is thought better placed for Free Ports; and no doubt it is so, if
the Consideration be had on Foreigners; but I cannot think it so, for either
King or People* I expect but few with me in this, therefore must not pass it
over without giving those Inducements that prevail with me to this belief: I
begin with that relating to the Crown, Free Ports will give opportunity for
running Goods, nor is it possible to prevent the Arts of Merchants when they
have such a handle as Free Ports will give them.

There is no one Kingdom, not France it self, that Consumes so much of Foreign
Commodities as England; the Duties on which are very considerable; but if these
Foreign Commodities were ^odg'd in Free Ports, the Customs would sink, and the
Expense of them Increase; which is a double Mischief, the Loss of the Revenue
on one hand, wasting the Treasure of the Nation upon Foreign Commodities on the
other.

There is another Prejudice which Free Ports would bring to the Nation in
general; and that is, they would lessen and discourage our own Navigation,
which by all means we have reason to promote.

Now if there was Free Ports in England which lies in the Center of the Trade
of Europe, all Nations would make our Harbors their Docks and Harbors for
Wintering and Laying up their Ships; and this they might do with Advantage, by
Selling part of their Cargoes, which Variety and Choice will tempt so Luxurious
and Expensive a People as we are to Consume; and allowing that, which perhaps
will seldom be, That they carry off our Commodities, yet that is no
Compensation for these Reasons.

First, It is no Gain to the Nation to eat up their own Product, as that would
be, if Foreign Commodities was spent in Return of our own.

Then Foreign Ships carrying of the Product of the Nation, will Abate the
Employment of our own Ships and Men, and Insensibly Introduce them into our
Carriage, which is the certain Profit of Trade.

And that which may not be less considerable than all beforementioned, Free
Ports would make our Loss of the Northern and Sound Trade Irrecoverable, by
Transferring it unto the French and Portugueze, as well as the Dutch; for that
out of our Free Ports they will be supplied with sorts of Commodities besides
their own, which is the Advantage the Dutch now have over us in that Trade.

Upon the whole it appears to me, That Free Ports would only be an Improvement
for Foreigners in their Trade, without the least Advantage to us, not so much
as the Increasing the Revenue, as it does where there is a General Excise;
which I think is an Inseparable Companion of Free Ports, and they of Countries
that cannot of themselves make a Trade.

I presume none believes the Dutch to be properly Free Ports; or if they were,
Can they be a President for us? Greatest part of their Consumption being in
Germany and Flanders, etc. which is within themselves, and no other Nation can
interfere with them.

I have done with Free Ports, and shall come in the next Chapter to that which
I think the Interest of the Nation, to Establish in room of them.

Of Exports of Foreign Importations.
HAving said so much against Free Ports, which is with good reason, accounted
to be the only way those Countries have to make a Trade that want Funds, Men,
and Ships of their own.

I now come to that which I conceive may supply the want of Free Ports in these
Kingdoms; and that is, Liberty for Exports of such Commodities as have paid
Customs Inwards: That I call Liberty, is to have all the Duty repaid upon such
Exports.

This at first sight may be thought making the whole Kingdom a Free Port, after
I have been declaiming against having any; I confess that I shall here propose,
will do the Work of a Free Port for the benefit of our own Trade, but not for
those that have too much Advantage of us already.

That then I humbly offer in this matter is, That whereas now there is by Law
Repayments of part of Customs upon Exporting of Commodities that paid Inwards;
that for the future, the whole Money paid Inwards be Repayd upon Exporting,
without any defaliation upon these Terms following.

1. That no Repayments shall be made, but on such Goods as were Imported in
English Ships and Men.

2. That no Repayments be made, but on such Goods as shall be Exported by
English Ships and Men.

3. That no Repayments be made, but on such Goods that have been more than
Twelve Months landed

4. That no Repayments be made on any Goods damnified, or decayed. With these
Reservations, I think it is the Interest of the Nation to admit any Foreigners
the same Privilege, so that our own Ships have the Carriage in and out.

To this I foresee the Common Custom-House-Objections, What will become of the
Kings Customs? Merchants will find ways to make their Exports pay for most of
their Imports.

To this I Answer, No doubt there will be Arts used by some; but it is as
certain, that ways may be laid down to prevent them, and much easier on the
Exports, than was at first upon the Importation: Let that be well looked to,
and Frauds upon Exports cannot easily be Committed; for the Trick will lie as
it does in some Cases at this time: The Merchant saves suppose one third of his
Duty, and then Ships out one third of what he paid Duty for, and by that means
pays but half Duties, two thirds being Sold; and he paying Duty but for one,
and to drive this Trade, it may be worth a Merchants while to Import, with
design at least, one third more than he Intends to sell in the Kingdom: But
though this is an Inconveniency, and may be some Prejudice to the Revenue, yet
I do not think it is of that Value, as to obstruct a much greater Advantage to
the Public: But it will be further objected, that to Repay all the Duty paid
Inwards upon the Exports, is unreasonable; something at least to defray the
Charge of the Officers should be allowed, and that is allowed where there is
the greatest Freedom: To this I Answer, That the Design here is to Encourage
our own Navigation, and to retrieve our lost Trades in Russia and the Sound: To
effect which, there may perhaps be more Encouragement than this given. The
Parliament upon other occasions have thought fit to give Money to Encourage the
Exports of the Kingdom, as that of Corn: And though I shall not presume to
direct, yet perhaps there may be found necessity to do something of that
Nature, to lay hold of Trades we have lost: I have often thought there was the
same reason for a Nation to lay out a Stock of Money to Introduce some Trades,
as there is for a particular Person; and though that Objection which some make,
That Public Funds are always Imbezled, be true; and that no Private Person
will receive any Return for what he pays toward a Public Benefit; Yet if the
Money be Employed in Manufactoryes, or Navigation, though the Original Money be
sunk, yet every Individual Man in the Nation is the better for it, even to the
Cobbler in his Stall. I might Enlarge on the many Advantages these Repayments on
Exports would bring to the Nation, but I shall sum them all up in,

1. It will Increase the Customs, if that be a Profit to the Nation in General,
which to me is a Question; but however, it is that which is acceptable to the
Government; and that a Liberty of Exporting, without any Charge, what Merchants
cannot dispose of, will certainly Encourage to greater Imports, than when Men
are liable to loose both Goods and Customs, as now they in many Cases are.

2. It will bring a very considerable Advance to our Ships and Seamen; and in
this there is more than at first sight appears.

By the Act of Navigation, it is wisely provided, That every Nation might
Import into England the Commodities of their own Country in their own Ships:
This Liberty was fair and equal Dealing in matter of Trade; That every Country
should have the Command of their own Trade, and so gave no Offense; nor could
we advance our own Navigation by it more, than what each Country had not Ships
of their own to carry their Commodities; but this Liberty of Foreigners
bringing their Commodities to seek a Market, and if they do not meet it, may
Ship out what they cannot sell, and have all the Duty Repayd, so it be Imported
and Exported in English Ships; this will put them upon Employing our Ships,
that so they may be Entitled to make our Harbors Free Ports, and it will be a
very great Encouragement to them in their Trade, and as great to us to have the
Carriage there, being more clear and certain Gain by the Navigation part of
Trade, than by the Merchantine part of it.

These Bill Repayments upon Exports, will not only supply us with all sorts of
Foreign Commodities on easy Terms to complete Cargoes for the Northern Trades
we have now lost, but also be a means to Increase the Exports of our Woollen
Manufactoryes; of which we shall send Quantities abroad to places we cannot
now, for want of other Commodities, to make up Cargoes for several Markets.

Upon the whole, I conceive this Freedom will ^n all respect the Benefit of
Free Ports, with this Advantage of terminating in the Increase of our Ships and
Seamen.

Of a Counsel of Trade.
THIS has been the common Theme of Men of all Understandings, on which so much
is said and writ, that it looks like remonstrating against the Government, to
print more on that Subject, since there seemed not a tendency toward it: For
this reason I thought to have passed ^t by, but hearing such a thing is now
under Consideration, and having lately seen a Print Prescribing the Modus of a
Counsel of Trade, I venture to put my Oar in the Boat, though I cannot keep
stroke with any I ever yet met in this matter, differing both in the Men and
Numbers of a Counsel of Trade.

1. As to the Qualification of the Men that is generally thought proper, some
there be that would have a Counsel of Trade composed of Men of all Qualities in
Trade and Manufactoryes, such as was in the Reign of K. James the First, that
sat in Haberdashers-Hall, and were more like a Parliament than Counsel of Trade.

Others there are that are not for such a promiscuous multitude, but yet would
have a great Number of Merchants, as believing them the best Judges of Trade,
and so I think them to be; yet whilst they are in Trade, not the properest
Directors of it: Against both these Qualifications of Men for composing a
Counsel of Trade, I submit these reasons:

First, That Mechanics are generally Strangers to any Trades but their own,
and consequently can be no Judges and Advisers in other Men's.

Secondly, Bringing Artizans and Mechanics into a Counsel of Trade would raise
Discontents thorough the Kingdom among them of differing Trades; nothing being
more Common than Men of one Trade to Interfere with another: And where any such
Complaint shall come to the Counsel of Trade, as they being in it, will
Encourage them to bring, they will be Judges of their own Complaints; for that
many Trades have dependence one upon another, and so these Men will naturally
have Parties, as Interest leads them; which they acquainting their Friends and
Brethren of in their Respective Countries, will create Dissentions among
Artizans, who are good Judges among themselves in their respective Companies of
one another in their own Trades, but seldom determine Disputes in other Men's
Trades, but with a Club and broken Head: Now as for the foregoing Reasons, I
think Mechanics not proper for a Counsel of Trade; so neither do I believe
Merchants in Trade proper; for though they are Superior to understanding and
Conversation with the former, yet they are under the same Temptations and
Difficulties of making Parties, and Interfering with one another in their
Trades; and therefore not proper Judges whilst they are Parties, though they
may be the best when they are not. A Counsel of Trade, if rightly Established,
will be a Member in the Government; and in such the Venetian Policy, which
seems a good Constitution, allows none that are Merchants, that has not been
at least Seven Years out of all Trade and Commerce: I have been Educated a
Merchant, and therefore cannot be thought to lessen the Profession, though I
believe no Man in the Actual Part and Converse of Trade can be equal and
different in the Determination of Controverted Matters in Traffic: I have
often had the like Reflections on our Public Justice, in which, at this time,
I believe we are the most happy People in the World, with Great and Just Men on
the Bench; yet there has been times when they were filled with Men that smelt
too much of Bar; might it not then add to the Honor of that Robe, if there
was another step besides that from the Bar to the Bench? But this is not my
Province: I return to the Second Consideration, that of the Number in which
most agree; one of a County, and one of every City in the Kingdom; besides some
of the Ministry: This would be a huddle in my Opinion of no signification,
unless they had Competent Salaryes: For Men would not loose their time, and
spend their Money for nothing; and the Charge would be too great for the King
to pay without a Fund given by Parliament, so then I apprehend this large
Committee is lodged here.

It may now be expected that I should propose, and that I think a better part
than Controversies, though as I always use them where there is least offense;
for I do not pretend to more than giving my Opinion to be determined by better
Judgments, and so I shall offer my Thoughts, how a Counsel of Trade may be
Established for the benefit of the Nation.

The Number not to exceed Nine; of which Three to be such as have been bread
Merchants formerly, and of the most Universal Trades used in these Kingdoms,
and the rest of the Counsel to be composed of the Ministry, Admiralty, and
Customs; the whole Counsel to sit three times a Week, and three of them every
day, to Receive, Examine, and Prepare Matters for the General Meeting.

And because no Man will spend his time for nothing; and time so disposed, is
generally valued as nothing; that therefore such Sallaryes be given them, as
may pay for their whole time, and give a Reputation to the Commission equal to
the Great work to be done by it; for so it is, if it be rightly understood; it
is a wonder that in a Kingdom so Fruitful in Offices, that which pays them all
(as Trade does) should be allowed none; but it is an untoward. Reason that is
given for it, which therefore I omit; and shall only say that by such Men set
apart for the Care of Trade. France and Sweedland have to a Wonder Enlarged
their Trade and Navigation; and it is apparent, that for want of such a
Counsel, we have lost great part of ours.

The several Parts, Uses, and Manage, I shall at large set forth in the Second
Part.

Of Prohibiting Foreign Commodities.
IT is the Policy of all Civilized and Trading Countries to make such Goods
counterband as are thought Unnecessary and Expensive to the Inhabitants, or
hinder their own Manufactories or Native Growth; but in doing this, they
sometimes bring a worse Mischief on themselves than that they design to remove;
for as soon as a Government find any of their Growth or Manufactory Prohibited
by any other, they return it with laying a greater Duty or Prohibition on some
Commodity that Country supplied them with before.

To prevent this, Consideration should be first had of all their Exports to
that Country they Intend any Prohibition against; and if they find that
Country can any other ways be supplied with the same Commodities they used to
send them, then they should forbear any Prohibition, because it is more
prejudicial to lessen their own Product and Labor, than to Consume that of
their Neighbors; for that time may abate, but the loss of their own Trade and
Manufactoryes may never be recovered, if the place that used them be either
fallen into a Trade with another People for that Commodity, or the want of them
brings them out of use; and they are never retrieved: I think therefore,
Prohibition ought never to be made, but on some extraordinary occasion, or
where there cannot be the like done to them: I will Instance but one for all in
this Kingdom, and that is Flanders-Lace; though this Prohibition be of Absolute
Necessity, because of of the great Value this Kingdom spends in that Commodity;
yet if a due Estimate was made of what this Extravagancy carries out of the
Kingdom, it would appear, that the Prohibition is the Original and Present
Cause of our Excess in that Commodity: There is indeed another accidental help
to it, and that is our Army in Flanders, the continual Passing and Repassing of
our Men gives opportunity of smugling the Duty, and they also coming over with
the Fashion about their Necks, our Apish Humors soon follows it; but yet the
Prohibition is that which first Established the Fashion among onr Boas and
Boasses; for it is not Persons of the first Magnitude, as in former Ages that
now Introduce a Fashion, but such who carry their Fortunes about them, and are
always in the midst of their Estates, these have no ways to distinguish
themselves, but by despising our own Manufactory, and the Nasty Dress, as they
term it, of a Country Lady or a Citizen; though the latter is too apt to
follow them in Expense; and because they can better pay for Extravagancies,
therefore they believe themselves equally Entitled to them: And thus the
Vanity runs round to the great Loss of the Nation.

Now that which to me seems the most Effectual way to Prohibit a Commodity that
the Nation finds so Injurious, as to make a Law against, as in this of
Flanders-Lace, or any other: For I name that Commodity, because it stands most
in the way: I say then, to make that, or any other Prohibition effectual, would
be, to lay an Imposition on any that uses them: If that were done, the Mischief
would be at an end. But to make it forfeiture of them, to bring them, or
placing a high Duty, which some think the best Expedient, is all Allurements,
and Persuasive to those whose Vanity, and (in some cases) unhappy way of
Living, cannot be without them, to Covet and Purchase them, because they
believe Difficulty, and hazard the Merchant runs in bringing them, will make
them too dear for Common Wear: But to this it may be objected, That in many
Cases Prohibitions are made to the end some Commodity of our own of the same
Nature might be used; and then the laying a Duty on the Consumer would be
Troublesome or Impracticable, since perchance the Commodities might not be
distinguished, as it is in this of Flanders-Lace; which cannot be
distinguished, but in some of the highest Prizes.

This Objection must be allowed good in some cases, and may be answered in
others; where it is the first placing a high Duty upon the Importation, is a
better way than an Absolute Prohibition, but in the latter, where it may be
answered, as in the case of Flanders-Lace, that the Commodities cannot be
distinguished, there appears a difficulty; and that will oblige the Government
to some other Expedient, and I see none, but to consider whether a Total
Abolishing the use of Lace may be enjoined: And here two things are to be
inquired into.

1. Whether such a Law might not produce from those abroad some such effect on
some of our Commodities?

2. Whether it will not be Injurious to our selves in turning a Number of our
own People out of their Trades and way of Living?

To the first, that of Provoking our Neighbors, I think it can do us no hurt,
because there is no Trade in the World (as I take it) that we use, which vends
less of our Commodities than Flanders does; but such as they cannot be without;
so that if we did abate the use of more of their Product and Manufactoryes, it
were but just, and the Interest of the Nation; nor can they do us more hurt
than they do. But to the second Objection,

2. That of hindering our own People, that looks ill; and therefore, as well as
I can, shall answer it; and to that end think it necessary to Inquire first,
into the hands that are Employed in this Work, and then whether they are
capable of any other Employment that they may get their Living by: For the
first, Those that make Lace, are of the Female Sex, Women and Children; and
such I think can turn their hands to another Work that would be profitable to
the Nation, and save Money from going out; whereas this of making Lace is the
occasion of carrying Money out two ways; one for fine Thread to make it, and
the other by Importing Flanders Lace of greater Value, and finer then can be
made here.

That which our People might be employed in, is spinning fine Thread; which may
be done, though not the finest sort, yet to Eight Shillings a pound, which
would hinder the Importation of many sorts of Thread to a considerable Value in
the Year: This I presume cannot be denied; but then it may be said, this will
require time to bring them that are bred up to other Work before they can Earn
their Bread; so that these People must be provided for, until they are brought
into the Methods of Spinning finer Thread than is now made for Linen; which in
another place I shall show is not for the Interest of the Nation to promote.

The way then that I conceive Provision may be made to maintain these People
for one year, which will be time sufficient for their learning to Spin, is to
place a small Mulct by the Quarter on all such as wear any sort of Thread Lace,
and that there will be enough raised on such, to me seems reasonable to
believe, because that the Poorer sort of People that now wear Lace, to avoid
the Tax, will leave it off; and that will make it look like a Discriminating
Character of Poverty and Meanness in such as formerly wore it, and upon this
Tax to leave it off; and those that have Points and Lace of Value, will not for
a small matter throw them away, as they must do, if they wear them not; for
that Year there will be Liberty: But supposing, which there seems no reason to
believe, that there should be no Money rais*d this way, is there not as much
reason to find out some other way on the Excise or Customs for one Year, as
there is for Encouragement of the Exports of Corn? The French King pays Money
to Encourage the Exports of Provisions, and some other things; and there seems
as much reason for this, which has a greater prospect of Improvement, than
what he aims at in Exports of Provisions, which is neither proper, nor possible
for this Kingdom to do, whilst Ireland is above Water; nor if he had all that
Export which Ireland had in the best Condition of that Country, which was in
the Reign of Charles the Second, would it amount to that Yearly Value as our
Vanity of Lace amounts to in the Imports from Flanders?

It is not possible to give a certain Estimate of it, because it comes not
through the Custom-House; nor can there be a near Estimate by the Quantities
Sold, since there is such Numbers that bring it from Flanders and Holland; not
a Ship, or scarce a Man, but brings over some in his Pocket, or about his Neck;
and there are those that tell us of some Thousands in the Year, that do thus:
But giving all this into the account, I will only mention what I have picked up
from Observations made in Yarmouth, Hull, New Castle, and London: In Yarmouth
it is said there are Five Persous that get near a Thousand Pounds a Year apiece
by what they Import and sent to Norwich* from Hall as much; at Newcastle more:
In London it is said, one Man has in few Years got Forty Thousand Pounds; and
above Eight more that altogether get twice his Sum; all these may make up at a
Moderate Computation Forty Thousand Pounds per Annum; that is, so much got by
what they Import, allowing the Total to arise by Twenty per Cent. gain, which
is an Extravagant Profit, when Merchants deal for Five per Cent. Profit in
other Commodities; but allowing at Twenty, the Import is Two Hundred Thousand
Pounds per Annum, besides smaller Men and Passengers, which is believed to be
as much: This is a Computation at random, yet with as much probability as it
can bear; and in the whole, cannot be less than Four Hundred Thousand Pounds
per Annum; they that see our Churches, where perchance there may be of Men,
Women, and Children, Five Hundred in a Church, that have less or more of this
Finery about them, will not think Four Hundred Thousand Pounds worth more than
is wore in this Kingdom in a Day: Now though this be a guess, yet what I bring
against it in the Exports of Provisions from Ireland is a certainty from
Account of the Entries at the Custom-House; and there was never Shipped out in
one Year to the Value of Three Hundred Thousand Pound Sterling: I mention this,
to show how little we consider the Interest and Trade of the Nation, and how
mistaken in our Account when we quarrel at a part of our selves, for so we
ought to make it, for living on their Product; and at the same time see not a
far greater Value than all that poor Country produces, carried away in Specie
from us by Foreigners, so is this Commodity purchased, or with Bills of
Exchange, which is the same thing, and so allowed by all that understnad Trade.

I have been the longer on this Commodity, because I name it for all that come
under the head of Prohibitions; which I think not to be sufficiently considered
or understood, were it so, but in this one triffle; it deserves no better a
Name, if relation be had to the use of it: There is plain demonstration, that
what with the turn of our hands to a Commodity, as we now Purchase with Money
from abroad, and with the preventing the Imports of Lace, the whole would add
more than Six Hundred Thousand Pounds per Annum so the Treasure of the Nation;
and this might in my humble Opinion be easier done, than regulating the
East-India-Company: I will not make comparisons as to the Gain, but wish I knew
any one Trade, though that of the Foreign Plantations were one, that brings in
Six Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling clear Gain to the Nation, as this might
do, if the Old Proverb be allowed, that a Penny saved, is a Penny got.

But that I might not lie under a Vulgar censure in this matter, though I take
it to be as much an Error (that Extravagancies in Clothes is an Advantage to
the Artizans, Manufactoryes, and Poor of the Nation) what is here proposed does
not bar the Gayety and Expense of such as delight in fine Clothes, for that
there may be other Inventions found out for Ornament as Costly as Lace: I
remember when Band-strings were come to such Curiosity in Work, that they were
wore from Five Shillings to Five Pound a Pair, and made in England; and have my
self, when I could not write Man, had Ribbons to one Suit to more than Fifteen
Pounds Value: If these Extravagancies must be used, were it not better to have
them of our own Fabric, than from them that eat not our Bread, nor wear our
Wool, though they work too much of it?

I have done on this head, when I say, That as the Wisdom of the Nation makes
Laws of Prohibition, I wish there was effectual means to have them observed.

Of Sumptuary Laws.
I Think Laws to Restrain Excess in Apparel and Food, may properly be brought
into a Treatise of Trade; and that Sumptuary Laws are, or should be, a Guide
in it.

That before I Engage in this Matter, there is a Received Opinion to be
removed; and that is, that Expense of the Labor and Product of a Country, is
the support of the Artizans, and beings Riches to Men of Real Estates: If this
was in Truth so, then there is not only an end of Sumptuary Laws, but some
other Statutes and Customs that yet hinder Abuses, which perchance might
otherwise grow amongst us as Artizans and Tradesmen wearing Swords, that would
Increase that Manufactory; yet in well-Governed Places, the Justices and
Magistrates of Towns would bind to the good behavior such as did, if Servants
and Apprentices were allowed playing at Cards and Dice, it would occasion the
Consumption of great Quantities, and so Enlarge those Manufactories; yet the
Laws and Custom of the Nation Prohibits it; and it is a Covenant in the
Indentures of Apprentices to this day, that they Forfeit their Indentures, if
they do use them in Play.

If then there be reason for these smaller Expenses, there seems reason for
Care in greater.

How the Old Sumptuary Laws of the Nation comes to be out of use, I could never
understand; nor can I think that it is that, because they were found Injurious
to our Tradesmen and Manufactoryes, but rather the Vanity and Levity of the
Nation in following the Modes of France; which taking first in our Courts,
descended to Lower Ranks of People; and Merchants and Tradesmen making a Gain
by Curiosities in Apparel, that soon begat a Party to support them, until the
Livelihood of Numbers depended on the Manufactoryes of them: And that brings me
to Inquire into the Opinion, that it is a benefit of the Nation to be Expensive
in Diet and Apparel.

The Reason that is given for it is, because it Imploys the Poor, and supports
the Farmer to pay greater Rents.

To this I Answer,

First, That whatever Artizans and Farmers get by Consumption in the Kingdom,
is no profit to the Nation.

No Private Gentleman is accounted Rich, if he spends all his Rents in Clothes
and Housekeeping, though it be all laid out among his own Tenants; but he is
accounted Rich, in that he saves over above his Expense: And it holds so in a
Kingdom, the Riches of a Country is accoun^ed and made out of nothing, but
their Exports that is common to every Understanding, and needs no Explanation;
and being allowed, what a Miserable People should we be, if we supported the
Common People by our home Consumption; It would terminate in paying Rents, as
they do in Scotland, in kind, that is, as they call it, Victual, Corn, etc. For
if we spend all in the Country, we shall have no Exports, and consequently no
Money.

2. What is spent in the Kingdom lessens the Gain of the Artizan and
Countryman, for that Exports would raise the Price of our Native Commodities,
by Increasing Chapmen, and bringing Strangers and Trade into the Kingdom.

We need not go farther than the Isle of Man for Demonstration; Perchance those
People Eat and Drink better, Wear as Warm and Decent Cloths as our Yeomen in
Kent, and yet One Thousand of them make not so great a Purse as One of our
Yeomen beforementioned; and the reason is, because they live upon their own
Product.

If what is here said be sufficient to prove that the Nation is no Gainer by
what is spent, if we then come to that of Sumptuary Laws, how the observance of
them would Increase the Trade and Treasure of the Nation.

I begin with that of Apparel, and that I must crave leave to differ with a
Famed Author, Montaigne; who gave his Opinion on this Subject, that it would be
for the Profit of the Kingdom, and take off all from Wearing Rich Clothes, if
the King and Court did not wear such; though no doubt it would have that effect
of taking off the People from Sumptuous Clothes, if the Court wore plain, and
so far do good as it reached the Common People; yet it would have an ill
consequence where it effected the Court and Nobility, for that their Expense is
a Gain to the Nation, and Encouragement to Industry: Not that I think it
imploys the Poor more than they would be, if they worked for Exportation; but
that I conceive in this matter, is that Frugality in the Court and Nobility,
would bring all the Money of the Nation into their Coffers; for they seldom
Trade; and so there would want Running Cash to drive the Trade of the Nation,
and then there would need no Laws to restrain the middle People in their
Cloths, for they would soon come to Rags: I think it therefore distructive to
the Nation for Men of great Estates to be Parcimonious, as I do for others to
be Extravagant. Montaigne writ his Opinion as a Lord, and I as a Commoner: If
Lords lived as Commoners, Commoners would never be Lords: And perhaps if there
was no room for Ambition, there might not be so much Industry.

Having past the Throne, and such as attend it, among which I account Gentlemen
of Real Estates, I come to those which I think Sumptuary Laws should reach, and
they are Merchants, Artizans and Contrymen. I leave out Divines and Lawyers;
the first lie under no Temptation, the latter I hope they will pardon me, if I
say it is the best return they could make to disperse their great Gains among
the Poor. But to return to those, I think properly under Sumptuary Laws,
Merchants, Tradesmen, etc. And for them there seems a double reason, one
because they know how to Employ their Money in Trade and Manufactoryes; and
therefore should as much as is practicable, be kept from wasting their Stock on
unnecessary Expenses; for that their Stock is the Seed Corn of Trade; and all
Men are careful that they want not Seed for their Ground, because it is common,
therefore not regarded; but it is certainly true, that the endless Expense of
our Artizans and Poor is the Greatest Cause of the Decay of our Manufactoryes:
There is a Train of Mischiefs that attend one another in the Excess of People
that depend on Labor; Twenty Shillings may find Materials to keep a Family a
Month at Work; and the want of it not only hinders them, but puts them upon
farther Expense, and perhaps Gaming or Debauchery.

Shopkeepers arrive to a higher Excess before it Effects them, but yet they
are often dipped before they see their Danger; and so it is with Merchants that
are a Degree above them, usually so in every respect, by means of their
Education and Converse; yet these Men are oftener undone by an Insensible way of
Expense, than by Losses at Sea; no Men know how to live better than they; I
mean, that we call fine Eating, and good Equipage; and there are those among
our Merchants can afford it; but then it is such as are come into Estates that
were not got by Men that understood fine Living.

I have often reflected on the Gain of Countrey-Farmers that may have a
Freehold of Forty or Fifty Pounds per Annum: These Men we see, out of their
small Income, with their Industry in Rural Matters, shall be able to give good
Portions to their Children, have Money always at Command; when a Merchant of
Ten times his Fund and Appearance of Gain shall hardly be able to keep afloat;
and for this I can assign no Cause but the difference in Expense; and yet the
Merchant not accounted Extravagant; but the difference lies in this, The Custom
of the Country where the Countryman lives is to wear plain warm Clothes; his
Wife perhaps with good Searge, himself with Kersey; Twice or Thrice a Weak the
Pot boyls, and the Spit used on Sundays.

The Merchant he lives in a City, where Rich Clothes, Lace, etc. is Common
Wear, and a Set Table every day, and to be but in the common Road with his
Neighbors, he spends Five times as much as the Countryman; this at a
moderate Computation amounts to a great Sum in Twenty or Thirty Years. I might
Enlarge on this Subject, but I submit to better Understandings what I have
said; and my Opinion that Sumptuary Laws duly Executed would Enrich and
Strengthen these Kingdoms: We see it does so among our Neighbors, the Dutch
and Hamburgers; where you seldom hear of a middle sort of Dealer, and perhaps
never of a Handioraft Man to fail: It is certain they sell for less Profit than
we do; that they loose more in proportion at Sea than we do, occasioned by the
under-Manning their Ships: Yet notwithstanding these disadvantages, their
Merchants, and all sorts of Tradesmen are much Richer than ours; for which no
reason can be given, but their Frugal Living, which to me is an undeniable
Confutation of the Opinion, that the larger our Expense in Clothes and Food is,
the better our Artizans and Poor are maintained.

The true way for Increasing the Riches of the Nation in General, and the
Artizan in Particular, is to Employ them in Commodities Exported, not consumed
in the Kingdom.

If what I have said gain any Acceptance, the Modus for putting something in
Practice like Sumptuary-Laws may be admitted, and it shall be in few words.

First, Negatively, I do not think making Laws to Prohibit or Limit any sort of
People in their Diet or Apparel practicable, it would set the Nation in a
Ferment, and Heralds must become Judges of others Food and Raiment; as Lawyers
are of their Freeholds and Properties: Those were happy times, when pulling off
a Shoe was a good Conveyance, and a Prince was his own Caterour, His Lady the
Cook: We have an Infallible Author for it. But to return the Method for
bringing what has been discoursed on this Head into Practice, I conceive may
be to lay a Mulct by the Quarter on all Persons that are Artizans,
Handicrafts-Men, Farmers, Victuallers, Inn Keepers, that shall wear any Silk,
Gold, or Silver: This would restrain the Extravagancy of such as Expense does
most hurt unto; and be a means to Enable them to Enlarge their Trades and
Manufactoryes: As I have said before, their Money is the Seed of Trade; and if
we suppose there may be but Five Hundred Thousand such Families in the Kingdom,
and that by Frugal Living they may lay up but Forty Shillings a Year of their
needless Expense in Clothes, it would put a Million a Year more in the Trade
and Manufactory of the Nation; which besides other Advantages, in Humane
Probability might save Parishes from the Charge of many Poor: But of that the
next Chapter will Treat.

Of Working-Schools and Hospitals.
THere seems nothing that would be a more Universal Good, than a Provision for
the Infant Poor of the Nation; whose Misfortunes seems not greater in their
Being, than in the Provision that is made for them by the Parishes where they
were born. The common Practice in the dispose of them, is to pay a Poor Woman
by the Year for keeping a Child; and as soon, or before they are capable of the
meanest Service, they are turned off, and seldom put to a Trade; by which
means, as their Entrance into the World is a Charge to the Parish, so is their
going out in Old Age, if they come not to a worse end; it being observed that
most of the Pilfering and Vagrant People that fill the Streets, are such that
are not bred to Trades in their Youth: This Evil, like Original Sin, comes into
the World with these Miserable People: I mean, when they are sent out of the
Parish, without Education, in a habit of Idleness, which produces every day
worse Conversation, and less Shame.

And if from these Slips comes the greatest part of the most Unfortunate Poor,
(such I mean as come to untimely ends;) may not this then deserve the
Consideration of the most Pious and Politic Heads in the Nation? It is
strange to see how provident we are to keep off little troubles when they are
near, and how careless we are of greater Mischiefs if they be at a distance; We
hunt a Strange Beggar out of our Parishes; and if in time of Scarcity Numbers
come into a City from the Country, A Common Council is called, and their Grave
Wisdom set at Work, how to get rid of their New Comers; and yet at the same
time, perhaps, that very City is breeding up a greater Number of Poor Children
than they hunt out, to Act the same part in the Commonwealth; that is, of
Stealing, Begging, and Idleness, as Mankind Naturally would do, if Education
Improved not Nature. The worst of Men would keep, if they could, that part of
Primitive Innocence, Eating without Labor; and are True Believers of that part
in Divine Writ, That it is a Curse to eat their Bred by the Sweat of their
Brow: There needs no other Evidence of this Truth, than that of the O^^ Bailey,
where Numbers are every Sessions of both Sexes made Victims for the Sins of the
Parish where they were Born: Had they been bred up in Trades, they might
probably not come to Untimely Ends. There is no Nation I ever read of, who by a
Compulsary Law, raises so much Money for the poor as England does: That of
Holland is Voluntary, and turns to a Revenue to the Commonwealth, as they
manage it; but our Charity is become a Nuisance, and may be thought the greatest
Mistake of that Blessed Reign, in which that Law Passed, which is the Idle and
Improvident Man's Charter; for if Shame or Fear of Punishment makes him Earn his
Daily Bread, he will do no more; his Children are the Charge of the Parish, and
his Old Age his Recess from Labor or Care; he makes no Provision for it in the
time of his Youth and Strength, because he has better Security for his
Maintenance than Money of his own Laying up: But of this sort of Poor, I design
a Discourse in the Second Part of Essays on Trade, etc. I am now on that of
Infant-Poor; and besides, that of the Parish there is another Provision; which
for as much as it takes up, makes a fine Show; but yet in my Opinion that
Charity might be better disposed, than to keep Children till they are Thirteen
or Fourteen Years of Age without any Labor; and then often taken away by
Gentlemen, that perhaps keep them to wait on them; or some other Employment
that is more proper for one that has been by Misfortune fallen from a
Competency, and is too far grown to beg in a Manual Education: For this reason
I think there should not be one taken out of an Hospital, but to some Mechanic
Art, or Navigation. I know there are some that tell us, It is pity, where an
Ingenious Boy shall be found, but that he should be advanced according to his
Genious in Learning. If our Nation did want such Men, there might be some
pretense for this Opinion, though perhaps I should be still against it; But
when we see such Excess of Studients, that there is not Preferment for them; we
have not to the Degree of Clerks for some, that perhaps, if they had according
to their Learning and Parts might deserve Preferment in Church and State; but
the Stock is too many for the Pasture, and that brings many Young Gentlemen to
Misfortune, who have been well Educated, That being all their Fathers could
give them; and being born Gentlemen, not so agreeable to set to Mechanical
Labor, as it is for the most Ingenious Boy an Hospital can produce, his
Original must be derived from thence: And so a Handicraft Trade cannot be too
mean for him; and if he be of Extraordinary Understanding, let him lay it out
in Curious Arts and Manufactoryes; such would be of more use to the Nation; and
of such we cannot have too many: And if there were the same Conduct in the
Great Community of a Nation, as there is in Private Families: (And I see no
reason why there may not) there would not be so many Thousands in this Kingdom
sent out of their Hives without a Sting, and so become Drones, Living on the
Labor of the Industrious Be, so I think them that are not bred up in some
Employment. Now to make a lasting Reformation in this thing, I conceive it must
be to begin at the Root; Manure and Improve the first Sprouts as they come into
the World: And that brings me to a Proposition that was brought to some of the
greatest Ministers in Church and State, where it met with so good a Reception,
that some of them were pleased to say, That though they had for several Years
been laboring for such a thing, and had made some Progress in it, yet they
could never frame a Scheme, but there was some objection to it; but in this
they saw none; and therefore Resolved upon the Kings Return from Flanders, to
lay it before His Majesty. The Late Arch Bishop of Canterbury few Days before
his Death expressed his Earnest Desires and Intentions to promote so good a
Work, as he was pleased to call it, and said, he would loose no time, for fear
it might be lost, if he that was Master of it should die before it was
Established; there being some things reserved by the Proposer, until he had
Assurance of His Majesty's Approbation. As far as I have Liberty to make it
Public, I shall shall here set down the Proposition; That so if better Heads
can Correct or Improve it, the Nation may have the Advantage, by Enlarging a
thing which may be of so Public a Benefit.

The Proposition was as follows,

That a Charter be Granted to such as shall be willing to Erect Hospitals and
Working-Schools through the Kingdom for Poor Children, on the Terms following.
1. That they shall be obliged to Receive from all the Parishes in England, if
the Parish think fit, such Children as they have at the Charge of the Parish:
The Parish paying Ten Pound, and sending them with Two Suits of Clothes.

2. The Schools and Hospitals taking them in at Seven Years of Age, and to
teach them to Read and Write; and Employ them chiefly in the Linen Manufactory
and Cordage; The Boys to be discharged at the Years of Twenty One, and the
Girls at Eighteen; by which time they may be made perfect in the Art of
Spinning and Weaving Linen; neither of which are improved to the height in
this Nation.

3. That forasmuch as it is hoped many Charitable and Well-disposed People will
Extend their Bounty to the Poor this way; if they might set out a Poor Child,
so as it may be put in a good way of Subsistence for its whole Life.

4. That these Hospitals and Schools be obliged to take in from all Persons,
Children upon Reasonable Terms.

And forasmuch as it may be of a more Universal Benefit to the Kingdom to leave
a Latitude to the Governors of these Working Schools, to breed up such of the
Boys as shall have a Genius to any other Mechanical Art, that then they may be
so Instructed.

And also for the better Encouragement of Youth, and such as may be the
Children of Parents, by Misfortune brought to Decay, that they may be so at the
Liberty of the Governors to dispose of, as shall be found capable, and desired
by Merchants, Navigators, or others, to take Apprentice, and breed them up in
some Trade, so that it be for their Preferment, and at the Desire of the Youth.

5. That who'ere shall be put out to Apprentice, shall not withstanding Receive
the Sum paid with them, when he comes to Age of Twenty One Years, provided he
faithfully serves his Time.

6. That there be a Liberty for the Governors, etc. to receive the Charity of
all such as shall at any time Give, or Bequeath Money or Land to this Good Work.

7. That they may have Power to Purchase Lands in every County of England and
Wales, which may be a Fund for Payment of the Sum that was paid in with each
Child to such as behave themselves well, and go out at the Years
beforementioned.

8. That these Schools shall be always Free from any Tax, either for their
Land or Stock that must be Employed in the Work.

9. That there be in each Hospital a Minister to Instruct the Children, and
Officiate in Ecclesiastical Affairs.

10. That for the better Government of these Hospitals, and to the Intent that
the Work proposed be duly pursued, That all Bishops and Peers, and Members of
the House of Commons in their Respective Countys for the time being, and so for
ever, succeed Visitors of those Hospitals; and that they may have Power upon
just Complaint to Remove and Displace any Inferior Officer or Overseers that
shall misbehave themselves.

11. To Complete the whole Design, and make these Hospitals and Schools the
greatest Work of Charity and Universal Good that ever was bestowed on this
Nation, is to Establish a Fund for Stock and Portions of such as go out of
these Hospitals; that is, to pay as much as is paid in with the Child, and that
they shall be free to set up the Linen Manufactory in any Corporation of the
Kingdom.

This will require an Act of Parliament, and the Fund for Portions and Stock
may be Raised out of that which no one will Refuse, nor yet shall any be
obliged to pay.

Reasons humbly offered for Establishing by Charter, Hospitals and
Working-Schools.
1. THey will ease the Nation of a Charge and Burden: The Charge is upon the
Parish in breeding up the Children, and the Burden is having Streets filled
with Beggars in their Old Age; for such usually are so, that are bred to no
Trades in their Youth.

2. These Schools will add to the Nation in their Trade and Manufactories, more
than Twenty thousand Persons a Year, allowing but Two out of a Parish, with
such as may be supposed will be put in by particular persons, that may think a
Child well disposed of, for a small Sum to be taught a Trade, and have a Stock
at going out to set up with.

They will not only add to the Nation so many as come from the Parishes, but
they will produce another Generation by Marriages: Whereas the Poor bred to no
Employment, seldom do more than waste away their Life in a single condition.

3. These Hospitals and Schools breeding up Numbers in the Linnen-Manufactory,
will invite over Foreigners to settle in the same Employment; for that it is a
Maxim in Trade and Manufactory, That where there are but few employed, they
will be found too many; and where there are great numbers, they may be thought
too few.

4. These Hospitals and Schools for Linen will by themselves and their
Increase settle such a Manufactory of Linen as will not only prevent the great
Sums of Money that go out of the Nation, but also bring in Money for several
sorts of Linen; they will soon arrive to that Perfection which can never be
introduced by the Methods now taken.

5. There seems not a more certain way for raising the Rents of Lands and
Houses, than advancing the Poor, and increasing of People and Trade; both which
will certainly arise from these Schools and Hospitals.

6. These Hospitals and Working-Schools will exceed not only all the Charitable
Works of this Kingdom, but may be thought above any in Europe. Former Charities
seldom exceed present Provision for the Poor, and that only to keep them so;
but by this there will be raised of them which are now the Disease of the
Nation, a Useful and Industrious People: It is reasonable to believe they will
be in their spreading forth in the Kingdom, Examples of Sobriety and Industry;
for that they will be strangers to the common Vices of this Age, and know
nothing but what they are bred up to in their Schools.

And that this Great Work may not miscarry, as Public Stocks and Manufactories
always do,

It is humbly proposed, That a Charter may be given to such as will undertake
so good a Work; and that they may have such Encouragement as may give them a
Prospect of Advantage, without which the Undertaking cannot succeed; for that
it is a mixed Undertaking, a Manufactory and an Hospital; the first to support
the latter, and that with such Benefit to the Nation as might be wished, tho at
the Purchase of a National Fund: But here is nothing desired for the
Maintenance of all the Poor Children of the Nation, for that the Ten Pounds to
be paid by the Parish will not answer the Charge of Building and Furnishing the
Houses; and that for a Fund to raise so much apiece when they go out, will not
come to any Proportion of what must be paid in Fourteen Years. So that in truth
the entire Success of this Affair rests on the Management and Stock of the
Undertakers.

Thus far went the Propositions and Reasons for it, which to me appeared
without exception, tho perhaps according to the unhappy humor of this Age some
may be against it, if there appears any Advantage to the Undertakers; which is
in my opinion a pernicious Principle, that has been no small prejudice to our
Trade and Manufactories, discourages Ingenuity, and has driven many profitable
Inventions out of the Kingdom into other Countries, where they meet with better
Entertainment: But of this I shall at large discourse in the Second Part, and
here only say, That I conceive one of the greatest Mistakes in our Provision
for the Poor, is, That they are not put under the Charge of some that may be
Gainers by their Work.

I never saw Public Undertakings in Labor and Manufactory turn to any
Advantage; nor do I see any reason to expect it, whilst it is so difficult for
Private Undertakers to defend themselves against the Frauds of Artisans and
Laborers in Employments their Masters are bred in; and if it be so where men
have both Understanding and Self-Interest united for their own Advantage, the
Success cannot reasonably be so great. Suppose Managers ever so honest, there
are some Difficulties that Public Ministers lie under, which men in their own
Concerns are free from; that is, Set Rules and Methods which they must observe,
and by that means lose some Advantages which private men can take or leave, as
they find them for their purpose. But that which seems unanswerable in this
Undertaking, is, That the Proposition is to breed up Children in Manufactories,
so as to ease the Nation of a Charge, and replenish the Country with People;
and this cannot be done without great Expense of Money, and Industry of the
Undertakers.

And why they should not have the Benefit of both, since it is not at the
Public Charge, none I believe can give a reason, but those wise men that would
have no good done that any man gets by.

Of the New Foundland Fishing.
THE Name of a Joint Stock and Company in Trade, is in general terms thought
injurious to the several Interests of the Nation, but in some Cases it is
allowed by all, That Companies are absolutely necessary; and if in any, it
seems to be so for the Fishing of New Foundland, which was once the most
considerable Trade and Nursery for Seamen of this Nation.

How it came to be lost by us, and taken up by the French, is visible, and
chiefly since the Restoration of Charles the Second, in whose Reign it was
complained of, and Petitions from the West-Countrey-men to retrieve it, and
secure them from the growing Encroachments of the French, daily made upon the
Fishing of this Nation; but no Care was taken, the French Interest being then
prevalent at Court.

The Island of New Foundland is as much the Right of the Crown, as any Foreign
Plantation; nor have the French the least pretense to it.

But since they have got footing in it, no Private Undertakers are able to
contest it with them; nor if the Government should dispossess them, would
Private Undertakers be able to secure and maintain the Place and Trade.

The French have now Forts there, and send such Numbers of Ships Yearly, as is
little less than a Warlike Effort added to their Trade; and by the Fishing they
have raised their Seamen, and so became formidable at Sea, all their other
Navigation not employing one fourth of the Seamen their Fishing of
New Foundland and Canady does.

And as the French have grown great in their Trade and Navigation by this
Fishing, so has England by the Loss of it abated in both, to the weakening and
Poverty of the Nation.

If the Strength and Security of this Nation lies in the Naval Force, it may be
thought that which makes and employs Seamen cannot be bought too dear, but
deserves the greatest Encouragement; and then the Fishing of New Foundland
would be as much considered, and as well preserved from Foreign Encroachment as
our other Plantations, where none are admitted to Trade but the Subjects of
England.

It cannot be denied, however some may apprehend, but the Foreign Plantations
add to the Strength and Treasure of the Nation, even in that of People, which
is generally thought our Plantations abroad consume; but if it were considered,
That by taking off one useless person, for such generally go abroad, we add
Twenty Blacks in the Labor and Manufactories of this Nation, that Mistake
would be removed.

But whatever the Advantages of our Foreign Plantations are to England, this of
New Foundland Fishing will be much more, for that by it there will be Riches
gained out of the Sea, without the Expense of any Foreign Commodities; but it
is not so in the Foreign Plantations.

By this Fishing there will be no person, only some few to keep the Forts,
taken out of the Kingdom; nor any fed or clothed with the Product of other
Parts, but all they consume will be of the Growth and Manufactory of the Nation.

And this Fishing of New Foundland will be supported entirely with the Product
of the Nation, which no other Trade is; so will the Product of this Fishing
bring in more Bullion than any other Trade can: Whereas the Product of our
Foreign Plantations is greatest part consumed in the Kingdom, and that adds
nothing to the Riches of the Nation.

And that which is not the least considerable in this Undertaking, is, That
whereas in all our other Plantations abroad our men are employed in labor on
shore, and so of no use in time of Naval War, this Plantation of New Foundland
will be all Seamen, and most of them at home once a year, and may soon be to
the Number of 10000 Men; which may be thought a greater Strength to the Nation
than a Land-Army of thrice the number; with this advantage, that Seamen are
always readier for Service, and yet of no Charge to the Government until they
are in it.

And to sum up all in that which is the Security as well as Treasure of
England, by this Fishing there may be added Thirty Sail of Men of War always
ready for the Service of the Nation.

It may perhaps be expected, That after telling what mighty things may be done
by this Fishing, I should lay down a Scheme how it may be made practicable: But
as what I have here said is no more than Hints, on which better Heads may
enlarge, so I must own my want of Assurance to prescribe Rules and Methods for
so great an Undertaking, especially at a Time when the Supreme Council of the
Nation are sitting, before whom I lay these Essays, as Suppliants do their
Petitions, to be considered of. In that nature I shall also further submit some
Particulars, which I humbly conceive necessary for the Establishing this
Fishery.

I conceive that out of the National Bank before proposed, must arise a Fund
for this Undertaking, and such as to Build and Purchase a Hundred Sail of
Ships, from 100 to 300 Tun, and to carry Guns according to their Burden, for
every Ten Tun a Gun.

That there be at the Company's Charge Ten Third Rates, Ten Fourth Rates, Five
Fifth Rates, and Five Sixth Rates, Manned and Gunn'd as Ships of War. The Use
of these Ships, and Charge of maintaining them to the Advantage of the Company,
shall be made out, if demanded.

That tho these Ships shall be built by English Carpenters, yet not by English
Timber; it being too evident that there will be want of that for the Navy.

That there be Forts and Plantations established in New Foundland, for Defense
and Security of the Place.

That no Spanish or French Salt be used in saving their Fish, there being a way
to save that Expense.

The Design and Advantage of this Trade being singular from any Trade yet in
this Nation, That there shall be no Use or Consumption of any thing, but the
Product and Manufactory of the Nation.

That in regard there will be 20000 Persons one way or other Employed in this
Trade, and considering the want of People already in this Kingdom; That a
Statute may be made to take out of Prisons such Persons as are kept for small
Debts, Fees, etc. of which sort Thousands Perish in Goals.

And that the same Provision be made for Criminals not guilty of Murder.

A Shaved Head and a Chain would be a greater Terror than a Gallows, and be a
more lasting Example than the Execution of an Hour.

It seems also a Punishment to the innocent for the nocent, that a man should
be lost to the Nation for an Offense done to a private Person, and the Sufferer
have no Reparation for what he has lost; whereas if the Offender were kept to
Work during his Life, some Reparation might be made to the Person Injured, and
a certain Gain made to the Nation by the Work of a man; and this way of
Punishing Felons would bring more to Punishment than Death does, for that many
choose rather to let Felons escape, than Prosecute where their Life is in danger.

That all such Offenders as are now Transported, or have License to go for
Foreign Parts from Ireland, of the Irish Nation, be sent to New Foundland, by
which means they would be made useful and of profit to this Nation; whereas by
their going to Foreign Parts they are enabled to do mischief, and so it has
been found in all Rebellions of that People, they returning back Experienced
Commanders and Soldiers, which has not been the least encouragement to them in
all their Rebellions.

This Disposition of the faulty Irish, will not only be a Gain to this Nation,
but also a Security in taking away one handle for future Rebellions, and make
them, in some measure, Hostages for their Brethren in Ireland.

It may be thought a mistake in those who think it a good expedient to send the
Irish to serve Foreign Princes, rather than venture them at Home; great part of
the Common People are said to be Peaceable and easily led into Discipline, and
nothing but want forces them to Disorder; such are to be valued as a Stock in
a Kingdom, where the Country is almost waste for want of Inhabitants; and for
such as are faulty, they being sent where Laborers are wanting, and methods
taken to keep them at work, they will be of good use; the Banishing of the
Moors out of Spain is a lasting monument of ill Conduct, sufficient to warn us
of the like mistake; if a living Dog be better than a dead Lion, it may be
thought the worst of Men are better than none; good Laws and Discipline may
make Bad men useful in a Commonwealth, but no Human Law can Create them. There
are many other things that attend this Undertaking, which in Time and Place may
be offered.

Of Navigation and Seamen.
I Find more difficulty to say any thing on this Subject, than on any thing
relating to Trade; because it is a common Theme on which men of diverse
Understandings have Wrote, and few conversant in Business, but cry it up as the
Diana of the Ephesians, England's Guardian Angel, and needs no Advocate; but
yet though all agree in Adoration, yet some differ in the form, and others
believe we are safe enough in the Possession of it, when more fear we were
never so near losing it; among the Crowd I shall bring in my Observations, and
leave to better Judgments the determination.

That our Shipping and Navigation has been declining for many years, is
evident by the loss of that part of our Navigation which employed most of our
Seamen; so it appears if we look into the Account that was taken of all the
Seamen and Ships in England in the year 1615; the Navigation of Europe was not
then one third of what it is now; the number of Seamen then taken, that were
employed in the Ships of Trade, were but 11000, and of them 3000 in the
Newcastle and Coal Trade; 1900 in the Streights, Portugal, and Southern Trade;
800 in the French Trade; 4400 in the Greenland, Iceland, and New Foundland
Fishing; 400 in the Sound; and 500 in the Muscovy Trade; this is demonstration
how we have declined the most laborious part of our Navigation, since near one
half of the employment of our Seamen in that Age, were in those Trades and
Navigation which we have now in a manner lost, as that of the New Foundland,
Greenland, Muscovy, and the Sound; this shows the want of a Council of Trade,
not only of Merchants, but of the greatest Ministers of State.

Had our Forefathers understood Foreign Trade as well as they did their Native,
it is probable they would have made as good Laws for the first, as they did for
the latter: They did consider and provide, as far as the Experience of the Age
allowed, for the improvement of Trade and employment of the People; we see what
care they took against Monopolizers and Forestallers, what exactness in
Provision for the Poor, the Assize of their Bread; and at the same time care
taken that they should not exact in their Wages; what Penalties they laid on
such as did vend or make defective Manufactories; and had they known the much
greater Mischiefs that attend the Foreign Trade of the Nation, they would have
provided against them.

For as Merchants are above the Rank of of Artizans, so is their Skill and
opportunity to do good or harm in their Negotiations: There can be no Assize
set upon their Commodities, nor Essay to the Curiosity of the Indies, or Luxury
of the Levant, but they may be Limited and Prescribed in their Trade, and it
seems of the greatest consequence that they should be so; for they often gain
by that which is the Nation's greatest Loss; and not only Merchants, but Seamen
will choose, as all men naturally do, that Employment which brings Profit with
least Toil and Labor; and that is one cause of the loss of the New Foundland
Fishing, and Northern Trades; they were Laborious and of small Gain; and
therefore as soon as we found out the Southern, and Plantation-Trades, we left
them; and the French, who followed us in Trade, began where we left off, and by
that means have made themselves so considerable at Sea; and although their
Navigation has not hitherto been so profitable as ours to the Merchant, yet is
more considerable to their Monarchy, than the Effeminate Navigation of the East
and Southern Trades; for that 1000 l. in the Northern and Fishing Trade employs
more men than 20000 l. in the Eastern and Southern Trades. This consideration
may be thought to affect England more than any part of the World; for that we
are nothing on Shore longer than we Command the Seas; and our neglect and loss
of the rougher part of the Navigation in the Fishing and Northern Trades,
abates near one half of the Seamen that might be Employed in these Kingdoms;
and nothing but the hand of the Government can retrieve this loss by
encouraging the poorest part of Navigation, though most considerable as to
increase of Seamen, which is the Strength of the Nation; and this cannot be
done but by such Banks as will Interest all the men of Estates in the Kingdom
one way or other in the Navigation and Trade of the Nation.

But of Banks I shall say something apart, and therefore now return to that of
our Navigation and Seamen, in which, I believe, we cannot exceed, though upon
occasion of proposing a way to increase the number of Seamen it was said, and
for that reason rejected, That the methods proposed would make too many Seamen;
that which then, and still prevails with me to believe that we cannot have too
many Seamen, though that should happen which was objected, and to me seems very
remote, that there would be want of Laboring men for Rural Employments, is,
because that if we had more than our own Navigation could Employ, yet they
would not want Employment in Foreign Ships, and what they get Abroad would be
most of it brought Home, as now what Foreign Seamen get here, they carry Home
into their own Country, and our Englishmen are not so apt to quit their own
Country as Foreigners are, who change for the better, and ours must for a
worse, if they did at all: But to answer what was said, That we must hire
Plowmen from Abroad, if we take up our Countrymen for the Sea; allowing the
assertion (which perchance few will) yet I conceive it were the Interest of the
Nation to make the change, for that every Seaman Abroad might reasonably be
supposed to return 10 l. Sterling of his Wages per Ann. into his own Country;
for home, generally speaking, they will come, and the Plowmen we fetch from
other Countries whatever they get must be spent where they Earn it, their Wages
being seldom more than Feeds and Clothes them, whereas a Seaman's is more than
double, for he spends nothing at Sea.

If what I have said be allowed Answer sufficient to the Objection, That we may
have too many Seamen, I shall proceed to show, that we now want at least as
many more as we have. The measure I make for our Seamen is in Two particulars.

The first is the Numbers we Employ in the Navy.

The other is in those Employed in our Merchantmen.

For the First; It is too evident that there is great part in the Fleet are
Land-men, and others that have nothing more to nominate them Seamen, than the
Rowing in a Wherry; and however shift is made with them, yet I presume it would
be more pleasing to any Commander to have Men that could Top and Yard, and able
to take his Trick at Helm, and perchance there may not be above one half in
most Ships.

For Merchantmen there need no greater demonstration of their want, than the
lying of so many Ships by the Walls, and such difficulty to keep men from Press
that go to Sea, and so many Portugal, Genoese, and other Free Ships Employed by
our Merchants; which is not only occasioned by the advantage of their being
Free Ships, but also by the want of Seamen to Sail our own Ships.

Now there is a Third inducement for the increase of the Numbers of Seamen we
want, or at least Navigation and Trade to Employ them, and in this we have
different reasons from any part of Europe; other Countries may encourage Seamen
for their advantage in Traffic, but we must enlarge and encourage Numbers for
our Security, and should seek out Places for Trade and Navigation that might
give constant Employment for as many Seamen as might at least Balance the
Numbers of the French, if we cannot arrive to that of the Dutch; it will be no
offense to walk with as good a Sword by my Side as my Neighbor.

To clear this matter, let us look into a Calculation that was as exactly made
as private Correspondency with Merchants could do it, in the year 1687. of the
Numbers of Seamen then in England, France, and Holland, and it was thus:

That in England there were not more than Forty thousand Able Foremast men; in
France more than Sixty thousand; in the United Provinces more than One hundred
and twenty thousand.

If this compute be true, as we may suppose it near the matter, it may be
thought there has been no Consideration of late years of the most important
Affair of the Nation, and therefore the more reason to mind it now; and if the
French were then Superior to us in their Numbers of Seamen, they are much more
now, for that Naval War increases their Numbers by Privateers, and abates ours
who depend only on Trade, and that fails in time of War; Privateers we have not
many, and those few we had, it is said, have met with great discouragements, of
which there are many Instances given, which I dare not persume to mention,
since that matter has been under the Consideration of the Parliament; but the
blame has been laid on the Commissioners of the Prises, who, if we believe
those concerned in Privateers, and others conversant in Maritime Affairs, are
no great Masters in that of Trade and Navigation. If then what is here said be
tanto, may it not deserve a thought how to enlarge, or at least retrieve that
part of the Navigation we have lost in the Trades beforementioned, which if
regained will Employ Twenty thousand Seamen, and beside the Profit they may
bring to the Nation, would be a Sea-Militia for the security of these Kingdoms,
beyond any we can have on Land.

And one man Employed at Sea adds more to the Treasure and Employments of the
Poor, than five on Shore, besides replenishing the Kingdom, Seamen being like
Decoy-Ducks, going abroad in better circumstances than most People in other
Parts of the World do, invite others to return with them to a Place where they
are better Fed and Clothed than they are in their own Countries; and it is
reasonable to believe, were our Laws for Naturalization and Freedom for
Strangers but correspondent to the other advantages this Kingdom allows to any
that are Industrious, we should soon increase our Numbers.

It now remains I should say something of ways and methods how to make Seamen;
for I think it presumption to propose encouragement for them we have, since His
Majesty has been gracionsly pleased to recommend that to the Parliament.

But how to increase our Numbers may not be Offensive or Officious, if
Reflections on the Pains some have taken to publish their Prescriptions in that
matter renders not this impertinent; but its not being so Voluminous may, it is
hoped, prevail for its excuse.

What I shall then offer is:

First; Agreeable to what I have said before, that our lost Fishings and
Northern Trade be resumed, and that being National will have such encouragement
as shall in some measure force men to come into it, I mean by the advantage of
Gain and Profit to Seamen; for that no human Policy and Law can bring men into
Arts with Success, and the increase of them, but by Gain, and security of
enjoying it; and therefore I cannot understand how pulling men out of their
dwellings to bring them into the Fleet can make Seamen; I would gladly hear a
reason why we may not with as much ease Man our Fleet without Force, as the
Dutch? or whether ever they used such methods as these Gentlemen propose for
getting Seamen? It is true we cannot expect men to come in voluntary for the
King's Pay, whilst the scarcity of Seamen obliges Merchants to give double the
Wages of the King's Pay; but if we had double the Seamen, that would abate; and
the way to have them, I conceive, is to put in practice something like that
proposed three years since, which was, That there should be publicly assurance
given, that whoever entered himself into Sea-service, that was never at Sea
before, should be free from Press for Three years, by which means there would
be Numbers of lusty Young men that want Employment, enter themselves in
Merchantmen; and Bind themselves to Masters of Ships, who would soon make them
Foremast-men for their own Profit: and more would come in time of War, when
they want Work at many Trades, than in time of Peace; it being great
encouragement for them to be secure from Press for Three years, in which time
they might hope for a Peace.

Nor would this obstruct Manning the Fleet, for that it exempts none that are
now Seamen, nor would be if this encouragement made them not so; and this
bringing in New Men would daily add to the Fleet; for that as New Men
increased, those that were Seamen before Employed in Merchantmen, might be
spared out of Merchant Ships, who with one fourth Foreigners, as the Act
allows, and these New Men, might with one third of Old Seamen be Navigated.

And the way to prevent Collering Old Seamen under the notion of New, is easy
and infallible, as was beyond Objection, even to them that encouraged not this
Proposal, demonstrated.

If this expedient be not approved, it may perchance set better heads on more
proper means, for that there seems a necessity to provide for Trade against
times of Peace, as well as now for the Navy in time of War; and in my humble
Opinion, there can be no encouragement so effectual to make Seamen, as
exemption from Men of War for some Time.

Inventions to find out concealed Seamen, seems to me an antidote against
making New; Force and Projects may be useful to make an ignorant servile People
Slaves, but can have no good effect with those that know better, and will not
be so; there needs no trick to promote the true Interest of a Nation, every man
will run into it; and he would be a Statesman worthy of Honor that did
advance the Interest of his Country above that of their Neighbors.

Of Building Ships.
HAving in few words, for so they are if regard be had to the Subject, done
with Navigation and Seamen, I come to that of Building Ships; and some think we
are in danger of wanting them for Merchantmen. For the Fleet none doubts but to
an extremity we do, and that lies before those who can only supply it; but that
we want Merchant Ships sufficient for our Trade, I am afraid we don't, I wish
we did; but whilst so many Ships lie by the Walls, it is no great sign we do;
and this was our case before the War, more than now, which may be answered by
the loss of our Ships this War; but that seems not sufficient, there being
allowance for all, and yet too plain that we want not Ships for the Trade of
England if we had a Peace to morrow, which is a misfortune that the Nation has
not so much Trade left them as to Employ one half the Seamen their Neighbors
do; and until we have at least always in Employment as many as the French,
there seems no security to these Kingdoms; but it is hoped there will be ways
found to Employ them, as there soon will be when those Trades we have lost are
retrieved; and if the Great Council of the Nation thinks it necessary, no human
Hand or Policy can hinder them, either in that, or any other Trade of the
Nation, if it be taken in hand in time. What can withstand a People that
outdoth all Kingdoms in Europe in Taxes, without Complaints and Famine, as they
have in other Countries? A Fifth part of one years Tax might be so laid out, as
to conquer and secure that we most want: But to come to the Proposition of
Building Ships, there are two difficulties started in this matter; one is, that
the Timber of the Kingdom is much wasted, and cannot hold out long.

The other is, that Timber from Norway is not to be purchased by us at such
easy rates as the Dutch have, and consequently cannot Build so Cheap as they
do; now though there is truth in both these Objections, yet are raised on
another occasion, that of the Act of Navigation; yet I see no great weight in
it as to the use they would make of it, that is to show the necessity for the
Nation to buy Ships of the Dutch; I confess to my Understanding the reasons
they give, turn upon them; and were there nothing more but what they offer
against the Act of Navigation in that point, it is enough to show the good of
that Act; but of this I shall speak apart, and return to the Building of Ships.

That there is nothing of greater consequence to a people that live by Trade,
than to be makers of their own Tools by which they work, none will deny; now
Shipping are the Tools and Utensils of the Nation; to fetch them from abroad is
to Trade by License; whenever our Northern Neighbors please, we must lie
still, or pay such rates as they please, that shall be equal to a Tax on our
Trade; for this reason I conceive it worth a consideration how to find out an
expedient; and that, with submission to better Judgments, I shall propose, is
either or both of these ways.

1. That the Act of Navagation, for that part of it relating to Timber and
Naval Stores, be dispensed with for three years, and that all Customs, Port and
Town Duties be taken off for that time on Timber, etc. relating to Building and
Fitting Ships to Sea; this will tumble in Materials fast enough, perchance to a
glut, if the following proposition be effectually pursued; that is,

2. To give such Encouragement for raising Naval Commodities, as Pitch, Tar,
Hemp, etc. in our Foreign Plantations, as may advance that Trade to more than
our own Consumption; if this were done, it would make the Northern Princes
abate their Impositions they have lately laid on their Commodities, and set
them upon all ways of furnishing us so cheap, as might render our attempts of
raising them our selves unprofitable; and let it succeed to their expectation
or not, the effect would be to our advantage; and the success to either, time
will show.

The next thing then that is to be enquired into, in this matter, is, How our
Plantations stand as to the natural Product of these Commodities, and how
provided with hands to Manufacture them.

As to the first, I can say something upon my own Observations in America, That
New England is Superior to any of the Northern Crowns for Timber and Masts,
Pines and Firr, to make Pitch and Tarr, for Soil to raise Hemp, and well enough
for making Iron.

But there seems some difficulties in the want of hands to work and supply,
that is the only Objection I see in this Affair; and although that has been too
great for particular men to undertake, yet may not, tho if undertook by a
public Fund; which perchance upon a thorough consideration may be found
necessary to be done upon some such Inducements as these.

It would make New England, of the most useless and unprofitable Plantation of
this Nation, the best and most advantageous to this Nation. I might enumerate
many particulars, but I presume this will come into hands that need no more
than to put them in mind of the Place and Product.

That New England lies better for a Market to Spain, Portugal, and the Levant,
than the Northern Crowns, who now furnish that part of Europe with those
Commodities New England can furnish.

That establishing this Trade will Employ many Ship-Carpenters and Seamen,
which I cannot omit, wherever it comes in my way, to say, is the Treasure and
Strength of these Kingdoms.

That this Trade will occasion the Consumption of more Woollen Manufactories
than all our Foreign Plantations, it being a Cold Climate, and Men with hard
Labor wear out much Clothes.

That there will be room and reason to give great encouragement for Foreigners
to settle in this Plantation and Undertaking, which next to our Seamen, seems
of moment to advance, which even those that are against at home, will not be
when they are abroad.

And to sum up all: As this Plantation may save the Nation the Expense they are
now at in purchasing Naval Stores, so it will bring in considerable returns in
Bullion for what they send into the Levant, Spain, etc.

And that this may not appear as a Chimera, it is to be noted, That there has
been many years since several Ships laden in New England, with Masts, etc. for
the Streights; but for the Reasons before given, (the want of Hands, and
Public Encouragement) that Trade did not prosper. Merchants do not affect a
Trade that takes up much Time and little Stock, as the Lumber-Trade does, which
is more profitable to the Ship and Men than the Merchant; and it is a mistake
in those that think Merchants are always Owners; perhaps they have least share
in the Ships of England. Having thus given some sew Hints, for they are no
more, if compared with what is to be said on this Copious Subject, it may be
expected that I should say something of the Modus for setting up this
Manufactory, and building Ships in New England: To set down an Exact Scheme,
would take up more Sheets than I design Lines in this Place; but something I
shall mention.

1. To carry on this Work, it will be necessary that extraordinary Privileges
be given to Foreign Protestants that will inhabit there, as having Land given
them, free Liberty of Conscience, greater Wages than they can have in their own
Countries, Houses for some time Rent-free from all manner of Impositions, etc.

2. That such Encouragement be given, as may invite the Natives to work: They
are very ingenious and docible, but naturally averse to Labor; yet I have seen
some of them take great pains in working Curiosities; and that which induces
me to believe they would work if they were sure of good Wages, is the great
labor they take in making their Wampompeeg, of which the most skilful and
laborious amongst them cannot make above Two Shillings a day: Now if these men
could have so much a day for any other work, it is reasonable to believe they
might be brought to it, and by that means they would be better clothed than
those that are idle, and that would tempt them in also. But to this may be
objected, That this dear Wages would make those Commodities dear: To which I
answer, That there is some works in Falling, Floating, and Drawing Timber, that
cannot be had cheaper; and that there are no men will sooner learn the best
labor than they; and as the Country fills, and the Indians are brought to
work, Wages will fall.

3. There may be Negroes brought, whose labor will come cheap; and their very
little Children will be very useful in peeling Hemp, picking Oacum, and other
things about Pitch and Tar.

This Undertaking being thoroughly managed, will be such a Staple for Shipping
and Naval Stores, as no part of Europe can exceed, and put these Kingdoms out
of the Power of their Neighbors, in that of their Naval Provisions; and our
Ships may be cheaper built than in any part of Europe, with the advantage of
preserving the Timber of England for the Royal Fleet.

I have often wondered that such a disposition as this has not been thought on
for that unprofitable Plantation, which now brings nothing to this Nation, but
to the contrary buries Numbers of Industrious People in a Wilderness, that
produces nothing but Provisions to feed them; and yet the most useful
Commodities in it for the Nation, being that which makes our Walls and
Bulwarks. This neglect is such as was in this Kingdom in exporting our Wool;
which was considered by that Wise Prince Edward the Third, who thereupon passed
a Law for encouraging Foreign Clothiers, and that they should settle in what
part of the Kingdom they pleased: A good President for giving all the
Encouragement and Immunities imaginable, to invite Foreign Carpenters and
others into a Plantation, that might raise such Commodities as are the
Foundation of our Wealth and Security.

Of the Act of Navigation.
TO write upon this, is to enter upon Controversy in Trade, which I think does
as little good as that in Religion, and is commonly undertook, or at least
started by those that have least share in the Practice. I have never been so
attached to my own Understanding, as to conclude those in the wrong that differ
with me; but I must own my self a great Votary to the Act of Navigation,
believing it the Sea Magna Charta, and the only Law that ever past in England
for the securing our Trade and Navigation; and I had like to have said, with it
our Religion, Laws, and Properties too; for that no men in the Government are
more averse to Popery and Arbitrary Power than they are: And although I believe we
can never add too many to our Number on Shore, yet perhaps it may be the
Interest of the Nation to keep as many English in our Sea-Employments as we
can; for that they are in truth our Guards; and tho when Naturalized, and
Inhabitants, Foreign Seamen may be useful, yet so as that they may be but a
small Proportion to the whole Number of Seamen in our Trade and Navigation. It
is observable, that notwithstanding the States in Italy are inseparably united
in their Force at Sea against the Turks, yet they are so jealous of each others
Growth in that Strength, that they are obliged to each other not to exceed the
Number of Galleys they are by Compact allowed to have. This provident care of
theirs might put us in mind of our Neighbors, and that we have no reason to
declaim against the Act of Navigation, that does only encourage our own Seamen,
and that we have reason to do, since we have no Compact with those about us to
restrain their Growth at Sea, but every Government enlarge as much as they can.

And whatever reason they have for it, we have more both as to our Trade and
Safety. One reason that is given why there are no Beggars in the United
Provinces, is because of the Multitude of Seamen; none gives more Employment to
the Poor than Seamen, their own Consumption of the ordinary Manufactory,
besides the small Adventures of them they carry abroad; but I think it needless
to enter upon the Benefits we receive by the Act of Navigation; we are in
possession of it, and therefore have only to answer the Charge laid against it,
and I take them all to be comprehended under Four Heads.

1. That by the Act of Navigation we have lost several Trades, as the Muscovy,
Greenland, Norway, and in great measure the Trade into the Sound.

2. That the Act of Navigation has raised the Wages of Seamen to the great
Discouragement of all Merchants.

3. That by the Act of Navigation we have very much lessened the Building of
Ships.

4. That by the Act of Navigation we have totally lost some Trades, because
they of that Country have no Shipping, and Strangers of other Countries cannot
bring their Commodities. These are the several Topics upon which all is said
that I can find against the Act of Navigation. I shall begin with the first:

That by it we have lost the Muscovy Trade. This is said, but no Reason or
Instance given to evince how, as there is for some of the following; and since
they can give no reason, I can find none our of the Act of Navigation; but
other Reasons there are how we come to lose that Trade.

One is the heavy Customs placed on Commodities brought from Foreign Parts,
which is in consequence a Prohibition to their Exports from us to any other
Country: The Dutch, who court Trade as their Mistress, lay their Customs so
that they can export them again with little Charge; and the Muscovite Trade
requires variety of Commodities in a Cargo which we have not proper for that
Country of our own Product, and our Customs hinder shipping out any: This put
that Trade with Advantage into the hands of the Dutch in the Reign of Charles.
the First, and they taking the Advantage of the Civil Wars in England,
represented us under such Characters to that Court, that no English for some
time durst appear there. These are the true Causes of our Lofs of the Mascovy
Trade* not the Act of Navigation, which was made some years after.

It is further said, By it we have lost the Greenland Trade, but appears not by
any thing that is offered, but that the Dutch-built Ships are cheaper, and
sailed with fewer men: It is true, Dutch-built Ships are cheaper, but as true
that an English-built ship will last twice as long* So then I cannot find the
odds, but that the sailing with fewer Men is an Argument for the Greenland
Trade, shows their being Strangers to that Trade, who bring it for a reason,
because the Greenland Fishing obliges the Ships to carry Five times the number
that would sail her, to be employed in their Shalops when they come to the
Fishing. So then there is no advantage by the Number of Seamen to sail a Ship
to Greenland, when they are forced to carry so many for their Fishing.

But for discourse sake, to see if any thing could be made of this Argument,
allowing it was as they mistake, that a Dutch Ship and Men can fish cheaper
than we; yet where is the Argument, That therefore Englishmen go not at all? It
is equally alike to the English, whether they manage it dearer or no; for they
set their Rates accordingly; since by the Act of Navigation the Dutch nor any
other Nation can bring into England the Product of that Fishing, but upon
paying double, Aliens Duty. So that I can see nothing in this matter; but
believe we have lost that, with other Northern Navigations, by our Southern and
Levant Trade, being more pleasant and profitable Voyages for Seamen, and so
wanted Men for our less profitable Trade; and we should for some other Trades
we yet hold* as that of Virginia, and the little we have left of the
New Foundland Fishing, if the Act of Navigation did not secure them. There
seemed for these Reasons, no doubt, grounds for the Act of Navigation, to
confine this Trade to our Ships and Seamen, as much as they could; otherwise it
would certainly have fallen into Foreign hands: And according to my sense of
Trade, it were better for the Nation to have neither Whale, nor Oil, nor
Whalefin, than to have them by Purchase from Foreigners.

I make this distinction, That there is no Gain to the Nation by what is
consumed in it; and neither of these Commodities are exported.

The next Objection is, The Loss of the Norway Trade; and in this there is
something; but I cannot see so great a mischief in it, as is represented, but
that which may be remedied by a dispensation for employing Dutch Ships in that
Trade, so they be sailed by English men; for that I conceive is the great
design, and of more value than all the rest in the Act of Navigation; for that
in most of our Trades, English-built Ships are used, and Dutch not proper; so
there needs no force when it is done of choice: But that which may put an end
to this Exception in the Act of Navigation, and most of the Northern Trade is
proposed in the foregoing Essay of Building Ships.

That which is objected of hindering our Trade in the Sound, has nothing in it,
when at the same time it appears, that of Seven Ships a year sent there, Five
goes in there Ballast.

That we have lost our Trade into the Sound, is plain from the variety of
Commodities the Dutch carry in one Ship; and we commonly carry the Product of
England, which is one of our Mistakes in Trade, that for fear of a small loss
in the Customs, we lose so considerable a Trade as we do in the Sound, and
Northern Kindoms: But of this, something shall be said apart. And so I have
done with the first Head in relation to the Act of Navigation, which better
Judgments may determine, but in mine there is nothing appears to the prejudice
of the Act.

The second Objection against the Act is, That it has raised Sea-mens Wages,
so that Merchants are now at the Mercy of Seamen, who raise their Wages at
pleasure, and so impose upon Trade, to the discouragement of Merchants: All
this I know to be literally true; and allowing the Matter of Fact, we will see
what Inferences are made from it: They that are against the Act of Navigation,
bring it for demonstration, and it is so, That Seamen have since raised their
Wages, and that is a Prejudice to Trade: Now to make this matter clear to every
Understanding, it may be needful to show, that in this there is two handles,
both to be laid hold on in Argument, one is the Profit of the Merchant, the
other is that of the Public and National Interest.

The Complaint lies thus; Before the Act of Navigation, Merchants had Seamen at
easy and low Wages; this was their Gain, and the Foreign Seamens Profit, who
carried their Wages out of the Kingdom, and most commonly in Money.

The Act of Navigation bars these Foreign Seamen from sailing entirely in our
Ships, that is, from being the whole Crew; for one fourth of Foreign Seamen the
Act allows; which I think is the only mistake in that Statute, to give Foreign
Seamen any room in our Ships: But thus it stands, By excluding Foreign Seamen,
ours have raised their Wages, and that is a loss to the Merchants, I mean it is
said so; but that is equally a mistake with the rest; for Merchants will rate
their Goods according to their Charge; and it is the Consumer, not Importer,
that pays it: But allowing the matter as it is said, the Merchant he gets by
having Foreign Seamen, the Nation gets by employing our own Seamen; which of
those is to be encouraged, I think can be no question among Englishmen.

I confess, amongst all the Arguments that I have heard made use of, this of
Seamen was most surprising, because I always thought it the greatest Authority,
and invincible Argument for the Act of Navigation. It shows the Necessity for a
Law to make Seamen, when you have not Three fourths to sail your Merchantmen;
for as before is said, the Act allows of making use of one fourth Foreigners;
and yet we see the Merchants complain for want of more. If these Gentlemen that
are displeased with the Act of Navigation, would but consider the Condition of
the Nation in all parts of its Trade and Navigation, I persuade my self they
would be Advocates on the other side, for their Discourse shows them men of
Ingenuity, and well-affected to their Country; and tho I will not pretend to
convince them by dint of words, yet I do not despair of doing it, by laying
before them the State of the Nation in this Particular, when this Act was, and
was first thought on, in the time of the Rump-Parliament, thus, as I find it by
Story and Relation of some that were Merchants and Commanders at Sea in that
time: The Rump-Parliament quarrelling with the Dutch, took the opportunity of
making Trade the chiefest pretense for it, believing that would be Popular, and
affect England; and the truth is, there was ground enough for Quarrel in
matters of Trade; the Dutch grew very fast upon us all the Reign of Charles the
First; and it is a mistake to say that we lost our Trade into the Sound and
Muscovy since the Act of Navigation; for it was stealing from us the year 1634,
and was in a manner quite lost by the year 1652: But that which most affected,
and gave offense to the Nation, was, the Dutch had got such a Trade to our
Plantations in the West Indies, that we could scarce get so much Sugars home,
as the Nation consumed; they supplied our Plantations with Wines and Brandies,
Linen, and almost every thing they spent in the Islands. This being so
notorious, the then Government thought upon the Act of Navigation, which had
good effect in preserving that part of our Trade and Navigation that was left;
and perhaps we owe at this day the Preservation of these Kingdoms to it; for
that upon the Restoration of Charles the Second, had not this Act lain in the
way, there might not have been such course taken as there was in our Trade and
Navigation: The disposition of those times seemed to tend another way, for
Pleasure more than Trade; but this Act stood as a Sentinel for the Traffic of
the Nation, and put them in mind of other things.

I have now brought this Act to the year 1660. and let us see how the Trade of
the Nation stood then.

Upon the Restoration of Charles II. there was a Set of People in Trade, that
had been bred up in it in the time of the Parliament, and these Men having the
Money, as well as the Trade of the Kingdom in their hands, were at that time
easier heard than they have been since. They not knowing what force Foreign
Money might have at Court, thought themselves never safe until they got the Act
of Navigation confirmed; and being early in their Application, they succeeded
to their own Satisfaction, with some Advantages more than was in the former
Act. For it is to be observed, That under Oliver's Government, the Act of
Navigation had little force; both the Government, and the Merchants, were
willing to let it sleep; for that during the War with Spain, to avoid their
Privateers, which were so numerous, that scarce a Ship could stir without a
Convoy, most of our Trade was managed in Dutch bottoms, they being at Peace
with Spain; this Management had almost stifled the Act of Navigation, and
Merchants finding their present Gain by the cheapness of Dutch-Sailing, did not
consider the future Consequence, immediate Gain was what they minded: But upon
the Restoration, the same men that under the Usurped Government were content
with the General Scramble of the Nation, and to come in for a Share, were now
for securing Trade to Posterity, which they were careless of, whilst they had
no Foundation of Law or Government.

I have been the larger in this Account, because I find it generally believed,
That this Act of Navigation was originally brought forth in prejudice to the
Dutch, and for the same reason renewed in the Reign of Charles the II. whereas
in truth it was at first made with as much reason and necessity as our Laws
against Exportation of Wool; for neither that nor any thing else can with
reason be thought our own, longer than our Ships and Seamen have the Guard of
it, and that they cannot have, unless they have the Carriage; and if that be
allowed, which I submit, then the Second Objection against this Act, That it
raises the Wages of Seamen, will not be found material, but rather be, as
indeed I think it, the best Argument that can be given for the Act of
Navigation; if Seamen be our Guards, as well as Laborers; and Foreign Seamen
by their cheap Sailing have so beaten out ours, that we have not to sail our
Ships in time of Peace, sure it was time to consider of a way to increase and
encourage our Seamen.

The Third Objection made against the Act of Navigation, is, That it hinders
the Building of Ships; this I confess would have weight in it, if it were
possible to be true, which to me it does not appear, no more than because I
cannot get brown Bread, I will starve rather than eat white: Dutch Ships are
cheaper, and failed with fewer Men, and consequently can bring Lumber for
building Ships cheaper than Englishmen can; and because we cannot fetch these
Materials at so easy rates, therefore we will be sullen, and neither fetch nor
buy of the Danes or Sweeds, who by the way, methinks, should be able to bring
their own Commodities as cheap as the Dutch, and so leave off building Ships,
Trade, and Navigation. This would be a surly dogged Humor indeed, exceeding
any thing in story, that a Nation should make a Law that should be so injurious
to their own Trade, as that with one consent they would set down and Starve;
for so it must be, if we build not Ships since we cannot use Foreigners; it
seems more reasonable to believe, let the Charge be what it will, Ships would
be built the faster. For that, in short, then there would be no Trade, nor will
the raising price of Ships or Freight be a loss to Merchants or Owners, because
it will be charged on the Commodities, and that is paid by the Consumers. But
to make it yet more plain, that after all this pretense, there can be no
prejudice either to the Merchant or Consumer by employing our own Ships; We
will examine further, what Trade requires our own built Ships and Seamen, and
then how much our Ships will be the dearer, by buying Naval Provisions from the
Danes or Sweeds, or by fetching them in our Ships, than if we bought them from
the Dutch; for it is they that are pretended to bring Materials cheapest.

For the first part of the Enquiry, What Trade requires our own Ships and Men?

There remains then nothing but some part of the European Trade, and greatest
part of that before the Act of Navigation was managed by our own Ships; and all
that Foreign Ships were employed in, was the Northern Trade; the consequence of
which was, the Dutch by degrees taking it all out of our hands.

The second Inquiry is, How much our Building will be dearer by the Sweeds and
Danes, and our own fetching of Materials?

I cannot find either by my own Experience, (and I have traded considerably in
all three) or any others, That the Dutch could bring Timber, etc. cheaper than
the Danes or Sweeds, and all the difference I could ever find betwixt our Ships
and theirs, was not above 5 s. in a Tun, tho we loaded English-built Ships; and
how that affects our Building, is easily computed, when in building a Ship of
200 Tun, all that is needful to import for her Building and Rigging, will be
little more than 50 Tun Stowidge; for it is to be noted, we use most of our own
Timber and Plank for every part of the Ship, but her Decks and finishing within
board, with some other slight Ornamental part of the Ship; but this difference
in the Carriage is so inconsiderable, that it will not serve for a dispute. I
shall therefore allow the difference of Freight to be 10 s. per Tun, which no
man that is conversant in that Trade will say; and the Quantum to be double,
that is, 100 Tun, which would make the difference 50 l. in Building a Ship,
that fitted to Sea might cost 2000 l. This being a large Calculation for them
that bring in the Objection, yet makes the difference so small, that it is of
little consideration among Private Men, and will be of less to the Public,
especially where our own Ships are employed; and it is also to be remembered,
that we make not Building of a Ship as a Manufactory for Sale, but for our own
use; and whether it would be more Profit for the Nation to Buy Ships, though
they could be had 30 per Cent. Cheaper than we could Build for, I leave to
Judgment: I know the common Topic, Cheapness of Carriage will be brought, as
often it is, where it is foreign to the thing controverted, as it is here;
Dutch Ships being Cheaper Built then ours, can afford Cheaper Freight than we;
and so we lose the profitable part of Trade, as Carriage no doubt is: This at
first sight looks formidable, as if it would stand its ground; but enquiring
into the matter, we shall find nothing in it; I have before showed that to more
than three parts of the world, our Ships are allowed, more desirable than any
Foreign Ships, especially than such as are slight and cheaper Built; so then
there is three parts in four that we stand at least on the level with other
Ships.

That which remains is part of the European and Home-Trade; let us see how we
could get a share of that Carriage, if we had as Cheap Sea-Waggens as our
Neighbors; for no better are most of the Ships used in the Lumber-Trade. For
that part relating to the Dutch Importation into their Country and Rivers, none
will pretend unto; and for that of the Northern Crowns, I mean their
Importations, the Dutch will have the Advantage, until we can persuade them to
two things.

First, That they will Eat no Bread, and then follow our example, place such
Duties on all Goods Imported into Holland, that there may be no possibility of
Shipping them out again; until these two particulars happen, we roll a stone up
hill, to imagine we can upon equal terms deal with them in the Northern Trade;
for that they can send Ships laden with Commodities of all Countries, where we
must send them light; and they can bring back Corn in Barter, and returns for
what they carry there; but we have seldom need of Corn in this Northern Trade;
we can then at most aim at no more than Navigating our own expense in it; so
here is no Freight for us.

We then come to the French Trade; and they are wiser than to let any Carry for
them, but from them you may; they wisely laid 5 s. per Tun upon Foreign Ships,
but none upon their own, as we have done: All this being matter of Fact, I
cannot find if we had Ships as cheap as Eggshells, where we should Employ one
more on Freight to Foreigners than we do, and they are very few to the
Southward, and in the Levant, in neither of which Cheap Sailing is in demand,
but Ships of Strength and Force; and for that reason the English have been in
most esteem there.

I think there needs no more to answer the Objection, that the Act of
Navigation hinders the Building of Ships, or that we want slight Ships, since
we have little use for them, and none at all if they any ways interfere with
the Act of Navigation.

We now come to the last exception against the Act: That by it we have totally
lost several Trades; for that by the Act none but English-built Ships can
Import the Commodities of any Foreign Country, or the Ships and Men of that
Country, and perhaps they have none; and we Trading not there at all, the Trade
is lost. This had I only heard in Discourse, and not seen in Print, I should
not have mentioned it, left it might have been thought a Wisp of Straw of my
own lighting; but I place it as I find it; for I leave nothing out of all I
could ever hear Objected against the Act, and therefore bring in this, though,
I think, there needs no Answer more than to say, There are no Ships to bring
away the Product of a Country, and we send none to fetch them; it is a strange
Indication that we have no use of their Commodities, or our Ships are better
employed, and that we want Ships and Men for such poor Trades, which nothing
will force us to increase, but the Act of Navigation; it being a certain Maxim
in Trade and Navigation, That whilst there is room in the easy and most
profitable Part, none will run into the poor and more Laborious. And we not
having Seamen enough to manage our profitable and easy Navigation, as I have
before mentioned, is one reason of the decay of our rougher and poor
Navigation; which was wisely provided for in this Act, That all Foreign Import,
of Fish, Oil, Whale, Finn, etc. should pay double Allience Duty. This was
intended to give us advantage above Foreigners; and would, no doubt, be a good
encouragement, if we had our other Trades supplied, to bring Seamen into the
Fishing Trade; but having lost the Trades for want of Ships and Seamen, that
therefore we should sit down with the loss, and take no course to retrieve it,
because at first we cannot bring in these Commodities as Cheap as Foreigners
can, is with the Sloathful to say, A Lion is in the way.

But we had, when this Act was made, better Resolutions, and knew then, and so
may now, That it is better for the Kingdom to Pay twenty Shillings to their own
Men, than Fifteen to Strangers; and by doing that for a time, we may regain
those Trades, and manage them on as good terms as any other.

This I believe will be thought sufficient cause for the supporting the Act, as
it was for making it.

I shall add no more, but set down in few words the Tenor and Force of the Act
of Navigation, and leave every man to his own Judgment of it.

The Act in the Preamble tells us, the necessity for Increase of our Ships and
Seamen.

That for Encouragement to so good a Work, that after a time limited, no
Foreignbuilt Ship, or men, shall Import any Commodities, but of the Product of
their own Country.

The Consequence of which is, That no other Nation should have the benefit of
Carriage to us, but each Country their own; and if they could not do it so
Cheap as we, then our Ships would have the Carriage, and not Foreigners; by
which our Ships and Seamen would be Increased.

The other part of the Act is for encouraging our Fishing, and that is by
placing double Allience-duty upon all Fish, Oil, etc. Caught and Imported by
Foreigners.

This sure cannot be a fault, to give our own Men encouragement above
Strangers; since the Navigation and Trade of the Kingdom gives them better
Livelihood than the Fishing would; if Foreigners, who live hardly, might import
Fish as free from Duty as they, the consequence of which would be, that we
should lose the Fishing, as we have some other Employments of our Seamen.

Of Banks and Lumbers.
PResuming the usefulness of Banks in England is not now controverted, I submit
to better Judgments how Banks and Lumbers may be set up in all Parts of this
Kingdom for the Encouragement of the Manufactories and Navigation thereof. I
conceive there is nothing so destructive to the Trade and Employments of the
Nation, as engrossing the Money and Business of the Kingdom in great and few
hands; that would bring the Kingdom into the Rickets, draw all the Nourishment
to the Head, London would swell beyond its natural growth, and the other parts
of the Kingdom waste and dwindle to nothing.

The Banks then that I should humbly Propose, may be thus established;

1. That in every Shire there be a Bank erected by Act of Parliament.

2. That the Fund for these Banks be Land and Money: And because there may be
no difficulty in point of Title of such Lands as shall be put in Bank, that a
Law may pass in Parliament, That whoever is in quiet Possession of an Estate,
and shall place it in the Bank as part of the Original Fund, that Land shall be
perpetually in the Bank, whatever Title may afterward appear; and shall only
be transferred to him that shall recover the same: For it is to be understood,
that whoever puts Land in Bank, is never to receive more out than his
proportionable part of the Gain arising from the General Stock: So that Land
remains the same, whoever makes a Title to it.

But for the better Credit of Land in the Bank, a Proviso may be in the Act,
That no Title of Land put into the Bank shall be questioned after years: This
will give a Reputation to any particular person's Title of Lands in the Bank,
if he should have occasion to sell his Interest, which otherwise will not be of
equal Value with those that put their Original Fund into the Bank in Money.

The Fund of Banks being thus established by Land and Money in each County, the
next thing will be to appoint the Quantum, and who shall come in; for it is not
to be doubted, but there will be more than enough, and every Shire will strive
to bring in as much as they will be permitted.

For the General Fund of the whole Kingdom, I suppose Four Millions may be
sufficient to begin with, half Land, and half Money; and for the particular
Proportions of each Shire, their Proportion in the Land Tax may be a good Rule.
The Manage of these Banks in each Shire may be by men chosen among themselves.

That twice a year a General Meeting may be in London, two being sent out of
every Shire, there to settle Accounts, and make Dividends of the Profit; which
would be great satisfaction to all persons concerned, and would quicken the
Trade and Business of the Nation.

For the dispose, putting out, and receiving Money in Bank, there can be no set
Rules, and therefore will depend upon the Accidents of War and Trade; but some
standing Rules may be thought on for the Rates of Exchange through the Kingdom;
upon which there will arise great part of the Gain, and will be considerable in
the Advantage and Ease of the Nation, in quick circulating of the Money, and
the most effectual way for suppressing Highway-men, for that no man need travel
with more than Pocket-Money for his Expense, when he may have Bank-Tickets to
any part of the Kingdom where he goes.

There seems a difficulty, Whether these Banks should pay any Interest-Money,
having so great a Fund, with which, and their Credit, they may supply all the
Wants and Employments of the Nation, for that it will be impossible to hinder
these Banks from having an Unlimited Credit; so that perchance Two Millions of
Ready Money may answer Ten Millions in the Current Payment of the Nation; for
that few will take Money out, but transfer from one account to another.

And it is reasonable to suppose, that most men will lodge their Money in Bank,
for the greatness of Security, and saving the trouble and hazard of telling
Money.

For these Reasons it may be thought a Bank will pay no Interest; and that may
be injurious to the Nation in two respects: First, It may necessitate many
people to carry their Money out of the Kingdom, where they may make some
Benefit by it, when they are debarred from any Advantage at home. The other
mischief it may do, reaches Widows and Orphans, whose Support often depends
upon the Interest of their Money; and if Banks pay none, they will be able to
set out at very low Interest, more than the wants of the Kingdom will require.

But that which I conceive may be an expedient in this case, may be a Proviso
in the Act of Parliament, That these Banks shall set out no Money at Interest
upon Real Estates; by which means there will be room for private persons to set
out Money upon Mortgages.

These Banks being National, may be so constituted as to retrieve that most
considerable part of the Navigation of the Greenland and New Foundland
Fishing: But because that may be discouraging to some persons that understand
not Trade, and only depend on their Money at Interest, it will be necessary to
show, That notwithstanding the Trade proposed, there shall be a certain Fund or
Dividend of at least Five per cent. per Ann. besides the Profit of Trade, and
that may be done thus; Supposing the Fund of Land to be valued at 20 years
Purchase, the Rent will be Five per Cent. for Two Millions; then for the other
Two Millions in Cash, allowing but Five per Cent. more for the Gain of
Exchange, that compleats the Five per Cent. upon the whole Fund. This is a
Certainty, without reckoning any Advantage to be made by the Credit of the
Bank, and putting out Money to Interest.

There will not be here room to mention the Modus or Advantages that will
attend that most important Undertaking of the New Foundland Fishing: I shall
only say, it would employ all the loose and unprofitable hands in the Nation;
it would add Ten thousand Seamen to the Strength of it; it would bring a
Treasure into the Nation taken out of the Sea; it would occasion the
Consumption of great Quantities of Manufactories; it would advance the Price,
and consume great Quantities of Provisions of this Kingdom; for that
New Foundland is no place for either Tillage or Cattle, and we shall employ
many Foreign Hands in that Trade.

The Advantages that will arise to the Nation by these Banks, need no
explanation, for that they are easy to every Understanding; among the rest,
that of supplying the King with Money upon any Public Funds, as shall be
appointed by Parliament, is not the least.

Lumbers for poor Artizans and others, is an Appendix to Banks, and may by
Funds out of them in each County be supplied so, as that the Poor may have
Money to carry on their Trades and Employments on Pawns, that may be so easy,
and with the advantage of selling in Public Sales what they leave in Pledge,
and that what they borrow shall be of more advantage and ease to them than if
the Money were lent them gratis; and may be of great use in the improvement and
enlarging the Manufactories of the Nation, which are much discouraged by the
necessities and hardships that are put on the poor for want of Sales, which
these Lumbers will supply, and the best and readiest means for the poor to sell
their Goods every Month; whereas now they are often forced to sell their Labor
to Shopkeepers at such rates, as gives them little more than what their
Materials cost them; which has the worse effect, in that it encourages a set
of Idle men in the Kingdom, with folded Arms in a Shop, to live upon the Ruins
of Handicrafts-men; their Numbers are increased even to a Nuisance, by their
easy way of living on the Oppression of the Poor.

If we took Presidents from abroad, this evil would not have grown thus amongst
us. It is observed, That there is not so many Retailers in Amsterdam, as there
is in some Market Towns in England; and this evil is the more to be condemned,
since we want not a Statute to prevent it; for in the 5 th. year of Queen
Elizabeth a Statute passed, That Artizans Sons should not be Apprentices to
Shopkeepers: There was then none turned from Mechanical Arts to be Retailers,
as now there are Numbers that do, and greatest part Quakers, a People that for
many reasons may be thought as unprofitable to the Nation as Jews; and so I
take the greatest part of Retailers and Hawkers to be; they ought as much to be
restrained and kept to a Quantum, as Hackney-Coachmen and Coffee-Houses; for
tho both, if confined to Numbers, are useful, yet in their excess are Nurseries
of Idleness, and such as I am of opinion would have been provided against by
our Ancestors, had they sprung up in their days: But on this Subject, among
other Enormities, I have writ at large in another Discourse, which when the
disposition of the Times will admit, may come forth.

Of Agriculture and Rural Employments.
BEfore I enter upon the Subject, I must Apologize for my self, that I am to
the last degree ignorant of the Practick part of Husbandry; the whole Course of
my Life having been spent in Maritine-Towns, or on the Sea.

I beg pardon, contrary to Custom, before I commit the Error, giving an
instance of my ignorance in Country Matters; which I should not trouble the
Reader with, if I did not think it divertive.

It was in the 32 year of my Age, that I first had a thought of Acres; and
being importuned by Friends to fix something on the Land, and not have all on
the Sea, I made a Purchase before I saw it, for that I might do with as much
Judgment, as if had; some time after I went to see the Purchase I had made, and
on the Road gave as much Diversion to my Friends, in declaring my want of
Understanding the Distinction and Names of every thing the Field produced, as I
did trouble to them to inform me; tho it was near Harvest, I knew not Barley
from Wheat in the Ear; and when I came to the Estate, and riding through the
Woods (of which there were great Quantities on the Land); I was yet more
troublesome in asking the Names of Trees, not being able to distinguish an Oak
from an Ash, or that from Wich-Hazel, which made a merry Fellow, a Ranger in
the Woods, say, He had a Master he was sure would not question his Care or
Honesty, since he knew not a Tree from a Weed. After this Account of my self, I
hope to be excused, if I mistake in any Point of Country and Land-Improvement;
nor shall I attempt to prescribe Rules, or give my Opinion in these matters, as
I may venture to do in that of Trade; and therefore as Rural Matters have
relation to that, so I shall here treat of the Plow, and of the Pruning-Hook;
the Field, and the Orchard.

How Land may be improved, there cannot be a truer or greater President, than
that of the Land of Canaan, a spot of Ground not so large, as one third part of
England, yet maintained double the People England does. That the Fertility of
the Soil did not make the difference in their great increase above ours, is
observed by such as Travel there; that at this time under the manage of the
Lazy Turk, that Land is much worse, and brings forth less increase than ours.
So then it is apparent, Labor and Industry makes the difference. Now, if the
foregoing Computation be right, that there were near double the People in that
little Spot than there are in England, (as there is reason to believe) for that
in David's Reign the Number of Fighting-men was 1510000, besides the Two Tribes
not brought into the Account; this being allowed, it will follow, that there is
not one Sixth part made of the Land of England, as might be: But to this, might
be said, the want of Hands is the cause of our scant Production; and that
nothing but Crowds forces Labor; this is true as to matter of fact, but not
so as to be without a Remedy: Nmbers of People make Laws for Industry out of
necessity, and good Laws may do the same with this Advantage, that enlarging
the Labor in Rural Affairs, will produce more than is consumed in the Nation;
and that adds to the Treasure of it: Whereas Numbers of Hands that only work to
feed themselves, adds nothing to the Riches of the Kingdom. Now as Riches
increase, so will the Bodies of Men (which is indeed the best Treasure); we see
this in the United Provinces, where all Nations flock as Fowl where they find
best feeding; Money is so to Men, and where that abounds, Labor and Industry
is encouraged; but to sit down with an Opinion, that England cannot be improved
for want of People, is too mean and abject for Englishmen.

There is a visible Prospect how great Improvements may be made in this Kingdom
by the Hands we have; and if that were done, we should soon have more.

There are thousands of Persons in this Kingdom that beg, who might be
serviceable in many things relating to the Plow; if lame in their Feet, yet
they may weed Corn, that perchance now takes up the time of a lusty Man.

A Blind man may carry Burdens in company with other; a Man without Hands may
look to Cattle, etc.

There are numbers of Men of no Employment, that we have Laws that might oblige
to Work, and if they are not full enough to reach them, they may be made to do
it.

There is also another Set of Men that are lost in the Nation under the Cover
of being Serving-men and Footmen. Now this might be restrained, and Men
confined to the Numbers they keep according to their Quality, which if done,
might add to the Plow, and other Country Employments, many thousands in this
Nation.

I differ with them, who complain of our Gentries humor of taking French
Valets de Chambres. I wish there were a Law that none but such should be taken
into such Employments, or at least that no Gentleman should have above one
Englishman in his Family in Service, as a Waiter or Footman; this would drive
Young men into the Country to Labor, when they had no expectation of a Lazy
Life and Maintenance, as now they have.

Tho this is a General Complaint through the Kingdom, of the want of Men for the
Plow, and that the Wages of a Plowman is risen from 5 to 10 l. per Annum, no
man will say, it is because there are not Men in the Kingdom, but it is because
there are easier ways to get a Living; tho at the same time, if those that
choose that idle Life of waiting on Gentlemen, did but consider their hazard of
begging their Bread in their Old Age, or sooner, if Sickness, or any other
Accident befall them: Whereas there are few instances of Labouring-men in the
Country that come to such misfortunes; many from the Plow or Orchard, arrive to
a decent Living and Competency, but few from holding a Plate.

I have often lamented the sight of Four or five lusty young Fellows hanging at
the Tail of a Coach, when they are wanted at the Plow; and since it is not
practicable to get Plow-men from France, but is to get Footmen and Valets de
Chambres, to me it would seem a good Law to prohibit Englishmen from such
Employments, and that would bring in French and other Foreigners enough to
supply their places.

Thus I have laid down my thoughts of adding hands to our Country Employments,
which may be improved by better Judgments. All I shall further say, is, That to
me it seems plain, that there might be 40000 Persons added to those we now have
in Country Employments, and they would so advance, and enlarge Rural
Production, as would invite Numbers, both at home and from abroad, into the
Country, which has been for some Ages so much neglected; the humor of this
Nation running too much after the French, I mean those of them that come
abroad; for their Peasantry never do; those we have from them are Artizans or
Lacquies, and such too many of our Nation affect to be, and so quit their
Country Employments; I mean not by this, any discouragement to Manufactories,
they cannot exceed; but some have too many that attend them, especially such as
are consumed in the Kingdom, which advances the Vanity of the Nation, whilst
the most solid Improvements and Employments of it are neglected for want of
hands; and if what is here proposed may produce and bring Numbers into Country
Labors, the next enquiry will be, how to Employ them, so as to make Plowing
and Land-Improvements as much a Trade and Manufactory as other Manual Arts; for
that which has always discouraged Tillage in this Kingdom, has been the
practice of making Provision for no more than the Expense of the Nation;
whereas if such quantities of Grain was Sowed as might make it a Commodity for
Exports, that would soon invite Merchants to Exportation.

The Statute which was made for encouragement of Tillage, was for that part of
allowance at the Custom-House of good use; but something more must be done to
make Corn a Commodity for Exportation, and that must be to have quantities
yearly Sowed beyond the Expense of the Nation, that so Merchants may be sure of
a constant Trade, as they have in the Sound; where the Country depend as much
on their Harvest, as France does on its Vintage; and Merchants being sure of a
constant supply, make Provision for the Trade; whereas ours is only a chance
Market, when the Harvest proves beyond expectation, and often failing, puts us
upon Importing Corn from other parts: This in a Country so natural for Grain,
and that lies so near Holland, which fetches such quantities from abroad, may
be thought not the least of our mistakes in Trade and Commerce: To me, I
confess, it seems a great neglect, to see so many Acres set for Five or Ten
Shillings an Acre, and the Tenants scarce able to pay that, which under Corn
might yield to the Farmer Five Pounds; and though part of that goes in Labor,
yet the whole is so much added to the Treasure of the Nation; and would be the
greatest advantage to the Rent of Lands that ever was, or can be by any other
means raised in the Kingdom.

Now that what I here propose may appear practicable, something shall be
offered that, I conceive may show what I here set down to be more than merely
Notional.

1. First then as to the Grain, which is most in demand in Foreign Markets, and
they are Rye for Holland, Horse-Beans for Bilboa, and Barley for Portugal; I
mention not Wheat, because that we have most of, but the other three is least
propagated in England, though the most proper for Exportation, and seems
possible, considering how much nearer we lie to a Market than Dantzick, to be
exported from England as Cheap as from any Part; and as Quantities in other
Commodities enables the Seller of them to abate in Price of what they can when
they are scarce; so it would be in this of Corn; when a Farmer is more sure of
a Market for Twenty Acres of Corn, than he is now of Five; he may abate of his
Price, and yet be a greater Gainer than when he has but a little, and a
greater Price; we account it so in all other Commodities.

2. For Encouragement of making Corn an Export, it is to be remembered, That we
send most of our Ships light to Bilboa and Lisbon; so that will help our
Navigation that loads our Ships; then it is to be considered, that our Exports
to Lisbon, do not answer our Imports from thence, since we fetch so much Wine
from Portugal; and it is hoped since we have fallen into it, we shall never
exceed in French Wine: They neither can, nor will take off our Commodities;
Corn they never did, as Portugal will.

The difficulty that appears to the introduction of this so profitable a
disposition of the Lands of England, is how to bring the Nation to it; for all
new things are hardly propagated.

Three things I submit, that to me seem of strength to bring the Nation into
it: And they are these,

1. That a Statute be made to oblige all persons to a certain Proportion of
Plowing, according to what they keep in Grazing.

2. That all Land under Tillage shall be free from any manner of Tax.

3. That some ease may be given as to the Tithe for what is Exported; it is a
heavy load and discouragement, one tenth for that which goes out; care should
be taken to make what goes out as Cheap as possible, that so no other Country
might Undersel us; I would not be thought to lessen the Income of the Clergy;
to the contrary, I think, they ought to partake of all the Increase of the
Kingdom; and what I here propose, would be for their advantage, by encouraging
the greater Exports; and ways might be found to give some encouragement from
them to the Plowman, that might be easy to both. But to all that has been
said for encouragement of Tillage, there appears a seeming Objection, and that
is, We often see Corn so Cheap, that the Farmers are broke by it, and what
would they do with double the Quantities, as it is hoped this Law and
Encouragement might produce? This is partly answered before, That the reason
why we want a Market for our Corn, is because we have not always Store, and so
Merchants make no Provision for the Trade, nor will quit a place where they are
sure of Supply; so if once it were known that England set upon the Trade of
Corn, there would not be want of Buyers; it is not to be imagined how soon the
Plenty of a Commodity makes a Trade; I remember when we imported quantities of
Silk Stockins from the Levant, but as soon as we had the Invention of Looms,
the stream turned, and we send them there. Plenty makes Cheapness, and that
increases Trade.

But there is another Answer to be given for the want of a Market for our Corn,
and that is, We run most on Wheat, and neglect those sorts beforementioned,
which are most in demand abroad, and of which we could never exceed, but the
more we provide, the greater will the Price be; for Quantities, as is before
said, brings numbers of Buyers; whereas where there are not Stores of a
Commodity, Buyers are but few, and then they set the Market, and have the
Commodity at their own Rate.

I shall end this First Part of my Essays as I began them, Truth may be allowed
repetition; That as this Nation never more wanted Thoughts and Endeavors to
enlarge and improve their Navigation and Commerce than now (having so Potent a
Neighbor as the French that grow upon us) so, Blessed be God, England never
had a greater Monarch that lays out himself to make us a great and flourishing
People: If we are wanting to our selves, it is our fault, and will be our
misfortune; Measures for Trade must arise from the Subject, Grants and
Concessions from the King.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockeril, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey, London.
THE Instrumentality of Faith, Asserted, Proved, Explained, Compared with, and
Preferred to a Conditional Relation thereof, in order to Pardon and Happiness,
when seriously taken in a Legal or Foederal sense, By W. Cross. M. A.

Good Deeds done for God's House: A Sermon Preached on the occasion of the
Death of Dr. Jeremiah Butt, one of the Physicians appointed for His Majesty's
Fleet. By Ed Veal.

Infant Baptism God's Ordinance: Or a clear proof, that all the Children of
believing parents are in the Covenant of Grace, and have as much Right to
Baptism, the now Seal of the Covenant, as the Infant Seed of the Jews had to
Circumsion, the then Seal of the Covenant. By Michael Harrison.

A Remedy against Trouble, in a Discourse on John 14. 1. Wherein something is
also briefly attempted, for clearing the nature of Faith; of Justification; of
the Covenant of Grace, Assurance, the Witness, Seal and Earnest of the Spirit;
and Preparation for Conversion, or the Necessity of Holiness. By Henry Lukin.

A Discourse of Schism. By Edward Polhill Esquire; of Burwash in Sussex.

Eutropii Historiae Romanae Breviarium ab urbe Conditum usque ad Valentianum
and Valentem Augustos. Ex recensione and cum Notulis Tanquilli Fabri ut and
Sexti Aurelii Victoris de Vires Illustribus. Liber in Usum Scholarum.

Phaedri Augusti Caesaris Liberti Fabularum Aesopiarum* Libri Quinque. In usum
Serenissimi Delphini. Notis Illustravit Petrus Danet.

Geography Rectified; or a Description of the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes,
Names, Inhabitants, Scituations, Histories, Customs, Commodities, Government.
Illustrated with about 80 Maps. Third Edition. By Robert Morden.

Instructions about Heart-work, what is to be done on God's Part and ours, for
the Cure and keeping of the Heart, etc. By that Eminent Gospel-Minister, Mr.
Richard Alleyn. With a Preface by Dr. Annesley. The 2d Edition.

The Evidence of Things not seen: Or diverse Spiritual and Philosophical
Discourses, concerning the state of Holy Men after Death. By that Eminently
Learned Divine, Moses Amyraldus. Translated out of the French Tongue, by a
Minister of the Church of England.

Poems on several Occasions, with a Pastoral: To which is added, A Discourse of
Life. By John ^utchin.

A succinct and seasonable Discourse of the Occasions, Causes, Natures, Rise,
Growth and Remedies of Mental Errors. To which is added, (1.) An Answer to Mr.
Carry against Infant Baptism. (2.) An Answer to some Antinomian Errors. (3) A
Sermon about Union. By John Flavel.

Mr. John Flavel's Remains, being two Sermons. The one preached at Dartmouth in
Devon, on the day of the Coronation of Their Majesty's. The latter intended to
be Preached at a Meeting of the United Ministers of several Counties. With some
Account of his Life.

A Discourse of Regeneration, Faith and Repentance, Preached at the Merchants
Lecture in Broad-street. By The Cole, Minister of the Gospel.

A Discourse of Christian Religion in sundry Points, viz. Christ the Hope of
Glory; what it is to know God in Christ; Christ the only Savior, the only
Mediator, Foundation of our Adoption, etc. Preached at the Merchants Lecture.
By Tho Cole.

Geography Anatomized: Or a Complete Geographical Grammar; being a short and
exact Analysis of the whole Body of Modern Geography, after a new, plain, and
easy method, whereby any person may in a short time attain to the knowledge of
that most noble and useful Science, etc. To which is subjoined the present
state of the European plantations in the East and West Indies, with a
reasonable proposal for the propagation of the Gospel in all Pagan Countries.
Illustrated with diverse Maps. By Patrick Gordon, M. A.


