FAITH IN THE JUST Victorious over the WORLD A SERMON Preached at the SAVOY in
the French Church, on Sunday October. 10. 1669.

By Dr. BREVALL, heretofore Preacher to the the Queen Mother.

Translated into English by Dr. Du-Moulin, Canon of Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Not, and are to be sold at the Queens-Arms the
Pell-mell. 1670.

TO THE READERS.
YOu are not obliged to me for the Sermon I give you, because it is a Present
which I give unwillingly. There are so many Preached every day that are so much
better, and are not Printed, as it would have seemed to me a Crime, if any
thing less then Necessity had made me do mine that Honor. I had no other
reason to excuse my self to many people that desired it of me: and I had been
firm in this refusal but for the occasion I am about to tell.

The Superior of the Capuchins at Somersethouse meeting me in the Street the
Sunday after my Sermon, as I went to the French Church in the Savoy with one of
the Elders, stopped me most uncivilly, and told me I might have been ashamed to
have preached the last Sunday so many foul, so many infamous things; so many
Crimes and Abominations, which had so horribly scandalized all the World.

I confess this Language did surprise and move me, because till then I had had
nothing but Praises and Acclamations, as well from the one Party as the other;
yet I only told him he did more wrong to himself then to me by so unjust a
reproach, and that he did oblige me to make my Sermon public, that so I might
have more Witnesses and Judges then I had Auditors, though they were as many as
the Church could hold.

But before I did it, I asked counsel of the Wisest, the most Virtuous and
Illustrious Persons that I could reasonably consult with. Their Advice was,
that I ought with speed to clear my self publicly from so wicked a Calumny;
that so by the falsehood of this, which I should make apparent to all, the
Impostures of my Enemies in other ill stories that they make of me might be
known.

I obeyed this Counsel, or rather this Order that was given me, without other
design then to justify my Doctrine. It concerns me not much what they say or
believe of me; one thing excepted, which I cannot suffer without complaining of
my Persecutors, who durst say, that in the last Wars I offered my service to
the King of England against the King of France.

I have a good Witness to the contrary, who knows that the passion I then
expressed for this Kingdom was without prejudice to the Loyalty I owe to that
wherein I was born.

To show you in few words the unsinceritie of those people that persecute me:
You must know, that soon after my Conversion they would have it that I had been
a Spy for England against France, to draw upon me the Hatred of the French
that are here. I give God thanks, who has always kept me in the Duties I owe
to both these Kingdoms; I look on them both as my Country since I was born in
the one, and prepare my self to die in the other.

Doubtless this is more then enough to take away all credit from my Enemies in
the rest of the Accusations, which from time to time they frame against me,
they are so unlikely; and the World is already so far disabused, that my
Defense is needless. Themselves begin not to dare to publish them so boldly,
and are almost reduced to reproach me with nothing but my Marriage, and I am
very happy that people who hate me so much, have nothing to say against me
but that which is so innocent and so lawful; would to God they could every
where be reproched with the same thing; it might save them from other more
heinous Accusations. I am sure the liberty of one Sacrament (as they call it)
would hinder the commerce of many Sacrileges.

I will take some more seasonable time to explain my self further, when I shall
come to answer for mine own Person, and not for a Sermon. Besides, if my
Behavior were ill, my Doctrine may be good for all that; and I defy the
precisest Critic, (so he be a Christian) to find one word amiss in it: or if
it be true, that I am deceived in any thing, they will do me a pleasure to
rectify me; for I am of Saint Augustines mind, I may he in an Error, but I
would not be.

THE PRAYER Before the SERMON.
LOrd, whose MAJESTY covers the Heavens, and whose Mercies, the Earth; we come
with souls full of devotion and humble confidence, to render our duties and
implore thy favor; we beg it generally for all men, and particularly for
Christians: but more especially for those that worship and serve thee in the
Purity of the Gospel; comfort and assist their Churches where they are in
oppression, preserve and increase their splendour and tranquillity where they
are flourishing; principally in these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland. O good God! Pour thy choicest Blessings on the KING, whom thou have
given them to defend them against their enemies; establish his Throne more and
more, and since thou have established him to be immediately under thee and thy
Christ, universal Governor in all his Estates, and Defender of the Faith: Raise
his virtue as high as thou have raised his Glory; Bless the Queen his Consort;
their Royal Highness's the Duke and Duchess of York, with all the Royal
Family; the Lords of the Council, the Nobility with all the Orders of the
Kingdom. But, O God, pour thy double spirit upon their Pastors, the Arch
Bishops, the Bishops, and all other Ministers and Dispensers of thy Sacraments,
of thy Mysteries, and of thy Word; let them sustain the weight and dignity of
their charge with such doctrine, zeal and good life as is requisite. Thou
see, O Lord, the need I have of this grace for my self; and since thou have
made me by thy mercy, one of the Preachers of thy Gospel, by the same mercy
make me worthily to answer the end and sublimity of thy Ministry: Enlighten my
spirit warm my heart, purify my lips, and generally give me that which thou will I should dispense to thy people: dispose their minds to profit by my
instructions, and that they and I may go from hence better then we came hither.
O Lord, these are the mercies that we crave of thee this day; and since the
acknowledgement of thy benefits never fails to bring new mercies upon us, we
praise thee, O God, for the infinite excesses of thy bounties to us in general
and in particular: chiefly, that thou have redeemed us by thy Son, and that
thou do daily instruct us by his Example, and by that of all the Saints which
have followed him. O Lord! the thanks we can give are too little, we offer
Christ himself unto thee, for our duties as well as for our sins; and as it is
by him only that we owe thee all things, so it is by him alone, that we will or
can acquit our selves. O Lord, then look on thy Christ, and seek in him all
thou will have of us, as we seek in him and by him, all that we would have of
thee; it is in that frame of heart that we lie prostrate at thy feet, and say
unto thee what himself has taught us to say,

Our Father which art in Heaven,
Hallowed be thy Name, etc.
THE TEXT Is in the First Epistle of Saint JOHN, Chap. V. Ver. IV.
For whatsoever is born of GOD overcomes the World; and this is the Victory
that overcomes the World, even our Faith.
PRovidence, which is admirable in all things, is so especially in the Economy
of the Scripture, where, that which is sometimes but occasional, is
nevertheless of infinite use and consequence: which made St. John Chrysostom
say so well in his Homily on Genesis 18. That the Scripture says nothing save
wise and holy Design.

Of this we have in the Text a very Authentic Instance, since the whole verse
seems to have been written only upon the occasion of that which went before,
where St. John having said, that the Commandments of God are not grievous; and
foreseeing the objections of an infinite number of people, to whom they are
(without doubt) very difficult, found himself insensibly engaged to render this
reason; That all which is born of God overcomes the World, and that this is
the victory which has overcome the World, even our faith. Now you see,
Christians, that there was nothing more necessary to be taught, then that which
at first sight seemed to be taught us here by chance only.

In effect, where can be found in one or the other Testament, more instruction,
or more mysteries then in these few words? must not one have leaned on the
bosom of JESUS, as this Apostle did? must not one have drunk (as St. Austin
speaks) in this source of wisdom, to comprehend so many marvels in so few
words? I dare say, that not only the Law and the Prophets, but that all the
Gospel it self, all its spirit, all its perfection, is divinely enclosed in
this Text: for, if they are born of God, if they have overcome the world, and
if the triumph be obtained by faith, which is wanting to the consummation of
the virtue, and the accomplishment of the design of Jesus Christ in the
sanctification of men?

This divine Birth, this illustrious triumph, and this victorious faith, being
then (as it is evident) the last effort of grace, and the most glorious work of
the Spirit in the soul of a Christian; shall I not this day competently fulfill
the dispensation of my Ministry, if in one verse of Scripture, which I
endeavor to expound, I clear unto you these three great Mysteries that
comprehend all holiness? letting you see,

1. Who are those which are born of God.

2. What victory they obtain over the World.

3. What this Faith is which makes them obtain this Victory.

Christians! here is all that seems to me necessary for the explaining of my
Text: which says plainly, that Whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world,
and that this is the victory which has overcome the world, even our Faith.

We will begin with clearing the first part; My Brethren! Give such attention
as it deserves; and Thou, O my God, give the blessing, which I crave.

THE FIRST PART.
One of the greatest Questions that ever puzzled the Philosophers before the
knowledge of the Gospel, was; to find, whether any thing could be born of God,
by any sort of Generation; the greatest number, and the most subtle, believed
that it was impossible; First, (said they) because God is a Spirit, and Spirits
engender not, having no power proper, or appointed for that use: Secondly,
because he is God, and in that quality he ought necessarily to be One; which he
should no more be if he were capable of generation; because, a God can beget
none but a God, for then he should introduce a multitude contrary to his
Essence; from whence they concluded in the end, an impossibility that any thing
should be born or begotten of God. But the Gospel having better enlightened us
by the obscurities of faith, then the Philosophers had done by the light of
Science; we know infallibly, that this birth or generation is not impossible;
and this text of S. John is enough to teach it; since, by saying, All that is
born of God overcomes the world, it supposes, either diverse persons or diverse
things to be born of him; but, the better to discern of what this Apostle
speaks here, we ought to take notice that generally, the Scripture gives this
illustrious praise to be born of God, to all that he has produced with some
resemblance of himself: and, it is a doctrine conformable enough to Philosophy;
which teaches, that all that is born of a principle, receives from it not only
being, but resemblance besides.

Now, as God does diversely communicate the resemblance of himself, to the
things that he produces; from thence it comes, that all possess not by the
same title the honor to be born of him

A great man, and one of the most learned the world ever had in Philosophy or
Divinity; observes subtly and solidly five different manners, wherein the
things that God has produced have some resemblance with him: Similitudo
Natural, Ves^ig^^, Imaginis, G^ari^, Gloriae.
for, this resemblance (says he) may be, either of Nature, or of Trace, or of
Image, or of Grace, or of Glory; whence he concludes, that the advantage to be
born of God, (that is, to have God for Father) belongs

1. To the Word.

2. To Creatures merely material.

3. To Creatures Intelligent and Reasonable.

4. To the Just.

5. To the Glorified.

To the Word by resemblance, or rather, by Identity of Nature.

To Creatures merely material by some imperfect traces, or by some obscure
marks of the Excellency of God.

To Creatures intelligent and reasonable (that is, to Men and Angels) by their
understanding and reason, which are the illustrious Images of God himself.

To the Just, by communication of grace and holiness.

To the Glorified, by the imitation of his Glory.

These resemblances that all things have with God, being (as you see) so
different, make us easily conceive, that God is diversely the Father of them;
and that the advantage to be born of him, is more or less noble, according as
the resemblance is more or less persect.

That which is (without comparison) above all others, is the resemblance of
Nature which belongs only to the Verb; and which belongs not to him
specifically, (as Philosophers and Divines speak) but individually: that is,
The Word is not only like his Father as we are to ours; having the same nature
with him; for, since it is impossible there should be more then one God, it
cannot be possible that his Nature should multiply: so, when the Father
produces his Essential Word, he gives him not another Nature like his, but the
same as his own: from whence it is that the Title of the Son of God (to speak
strictly) can belong to none but him: and it is by a metaphor merely, and a
kind of usurpation, that it is attributed to others. The Scripture does fully
witness it when it says so often, that he is the only Son, or, only begotten of
God, and when by Excellence it says in Romans 5.32. That He is God's own Son;
and when it says in Hebr. 1. That it is to him alone that God bare this
witness, in Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: And
finally, that in the 110. Psalm. it is of none but him that the Father speaks,
when he says according to the Latin Version, I have begotten thee of my bosom.

Now, we find nothing, either in Divinity or in the Scripture it self; of this
great Privilege, and of this proper and particular Title of the Word, but the
perfection of resemblance that he has with his Father, and which other things
have not.

The holy Spirit it self which proceeds from the Father (as the Gospel
teaches us) and who has the same nature with him, yet is not called the Son,
and it is not said that he is born, nor that he is begotten, because he does
not proceed formally (as Divines teach us) by way of resemblance, since (at the
least) as they say very rationally, the holy Spirit is the production of Love
and not of Knowledge: so that proceeding from the Will, and not from the
Understanding of God* it cannot have a formal resemblance with its principle:
Philosophy it self teaching us, that resemblance is not an effect of the Will,
but of the Understanding, because it is proper to the Will to carry it self to
its Object, whereas the Understanding attracts his Object by imprinting on it
his resemblance. Whence it is, that Aristotle says, that the Understanding
becomes all things; not by changing it self into them, but, on the contrary, by
changing them into it self. Moreover, it is from thence, that the Production or
Term of the Will is called a Weight, a Propension, an Inclination -- which does
not at all signify resemblance; but the production of the understanding is
called Verb, Image, Representation. Therefore, Scripture never gives these
Names to the Holy Spirit, but to the Son only; whose Name, says St. John, Rev.
19. is, The Word of God. Now, this word Verb signifies either the thought, or
the word, and we know that the thought is the representation of the object that
one thinks of, and the Word is the Image of the thought it self; so that, both
in the one and in the other sense, the word Verb applied to the Son in the
Gospel is a name of resemblance.

But St. Paul, willing more clearly to expound himself, says to the
Corinthians, and to the Colossians, That he is the Image of God; and to the
Hebrews, That he is the splendour of his Glory, and the figure of his Substance,
according to the Latin Version; or of his Person, according to the Greek
Original.

Thus, by all these reasons, and so many authorities it is properly the second
Divine Person that is born of God. Yet, it is not of that our Text speaks, when
St. John says, That all which is born of God overcomes the World by Faith;
for, though Jesus Christ, who is this Adorable Person, has overcome the World,
as himself does witness by the same Evangelist, in the 16th. chapter of his
History, verse 33. and, though it be also in some manner by means of faith that
he has triumphed; yet it is not of him that the Text speaks, because it is
easy to comprehend by that which goes before, and that which comes after;
that, it is of them that have faith, that these words should be understood: and
that they cannot belong to Jesus Christ, who, though he be the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, (as St. Paul calls him, in the XIII. Chapter of the
Epistle to the Hebrews) yet he has it not formally, since he cannot have faith
of that which he has the knowledge, the experience of the sight.

So when St. John speaks here of that which is born of God, he speaks but of
those which have only an imperfect resemblance of him, differing from that of
Nature* and yet he speaks not of all sorts: for,

First, it is clear that by that which is born of God, he means not things
merely material, which have only a Trace or Footstep of likeness to him; it is
true, that God having produced them, and they representing to us, (as they do
all) some of his perfections, God may justly be called their Father: Job in
this sense calls him the Father of the rain, and says, It is be that has
begotten the dew: he might say as much of all other creatures; though destitute
of intelligence and reason, since, besides that God made them, they have
moreover this advantage, to represent him in some sort, Paul who says in the
first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, the 20. verse, that, the invisible
things of him are clearly seen from the Creation of the world, being understood
by the things that are made. But the end of our Text shows evidently, that he
speaks not of that sort of creatures, although in some respects, it may be said
they are born of God.

Secondly, neither is it of Angels or Men in the quality of intelligent and
reasonable creatures; for though the Angels are the least imperfect images of
God, (which gave occasion to a learned man to call them, The bright Looking
Glasses of the Godhead) and though by the right of this resemblance there is
nothing in Nature that more justly deserves the title of the children of God
then they do; and though himself by the mouth of Job calls them so often by
this glorious Name: yet it is manifest that it is not of them that St. John
here makes mention, when he speaks of those who are born of God, since he
speaks of such as are in the world, and have sought with it, and have triumphed
over it by faith, which (you see) cannot be applied to Angels: Nor does he
speak of men, considered only as reasonable; for though reason has made them
fair Copies, and illustrious Images of the Divinity, to answer (what St. Paul
highly in their praise says) that they are the Image of the Glory of God: and
to deserve that the Prophet Malachy should call God their Father by the general
right of their Creation: yet, it is not of them (at least in the quality of
reasonable creatures only) that the text we expound, speaks, who overcome the
world by their faith, and not by all the strength of their reason and
understanding.

Then, they must needs be either the Just, or the Glorified that are here
spoken of. Doubtless, they are not the Glorified; for, though they have this
noble resemblance of Glory with God, who does almost transform them into
himself, as St. John expounds it, in the third of his first Epistle: and that
they are called in the Scripture Children of God more properly then all other
created things, as it appears in Luke 20. where they are expressly called The
Children of God, because they are children of the Resurrection, heirs and
actual possessors of Glory; yet, our Text speaks not of them, they being no
more at strife with the world, the clear sight of God having happily taken away
their sai h.

It remains then, that it must needs be of the Just on earth that our Text
speaks, that is, of those that God has regenerated, who resemble him in grace
and holiness, since there is nothing in this Text, which may not, and ought not
rightly, to be applied to them. For,

First, they are born of God. I prove it by three convincing Reasons. The first
is, that it is impossible they should be born of any other: The second, that he
deals with them as a Father: And the third, that they resemble him.

That they cannot be born of any other but God, the Scripture and the Fathers,
especially S. Paul and S. Augustine are altogether for it, when they say so
often, that Justification is the work of God. In effect, Christians! assemble
all the forces of Men and Angels; assemble all Prelates and all Kings; assemble
all Priests and all Popes (...) they cannot make one just with all the Power of
the (...) they boast so much of. I say no more then what every good Philosopher
and every sound Divine ought to agree to; since in the very Schools it is a
common Doctrine, that Creation is a work so proper to God, that it is
impossible for all other Powers of Heaven and Earth to create so much as one
grain of Sand only; and that neither Man nor Angel can obtain of God that
Authority. Judge, my Brethren, from the more to the less; what we should think
of the work of Justification, which is a greater benefit then the Creation of a
thousand Worlds: since the Creation is but a Passage from the nothing of Nature
to the being of Nature: and Justification is a Passage from the nothing of
Grace to the being of Grace. Now there is without compare a greater distance
between Grace and its privation, then between Nature and hers: the passage then
is much more difficult, and the one requires more force then the other. Why?
the whole World cost God but one word to make it; but there was need of all his
blood only to justify men, nay, there was need of all his blood to justify
one Man only; for which there is no other reason, but that the dignity of
Grace was infinitely higher (...) that of Nature, because it is a participation
of the (...) o^ God, as S. Peter teaches us whereas Nature is (...) an effect
of his Power: from whence we must needs (...) if Creation can belong to none
but God, it is impossible that Justification should belong to any other. In
effect, who can give a participation of the Being of God, but God himself? and
what but an infinite Agent can be capable of an infinite production? It is
known that none but God is so; then the just are born of God, because it is
impossible they should be born of any other.

The second reason to persuade you to this (Brethren) is, that God takes a
Fatherly care of them: for where did we ever see a Father take so much care for
his Children, as God takes of the just? He brings them up, he feeds them, he
protects them, he advanceh them: the whole Scriptuto speaks unto us of no other
thing almost in both Testaments. You read at all times his tenderness and
goodness in their education* so that there is nothing wanting in order to bring
them up well; neither Instructions, nor Promises, nor Threatenings, nor
Recompenses, nor Chastisements; and all for their good: for he intends nothing
by such different Dispensations but to make them better. If they want any thing
for their spiritual nourishment, my Brethren! he not only imploys his graces
and his Virtues, but he imploys himself to nourish them with his Holy Spirit,
and with all that he is, as well as with all that he has in the Mysteries of
our Sacrament. You doubt not of his Protection, since he tells us in the
Scripture, that he preserves them as the Apple of his eye, that he covers them
under the shadow of his wings, that he does compass them with a wall of fire,
that he watches day and night to defend them, that he comforts them in their
afflictions, that he upholds them in their prosperities, to the end they may
not be cast down by the one, nor puff't up by the other: briefly, he assists
them in all their needs, and declares himself an enemy to all their enemies.
What will he not do to advance them? He makes them go up (as the Psalmist
speaks from virtue to virtue, from knowledge to knowledge, from holiness to
holiness, from Glory to Glory: we have an admirable expression of it in one of
St. Paul's Epistles, where he shows, that God from Eternity began the
advancement of the Just, and sets it forward more and more to the end of the
World; Whom he did foreknow (says he) he also did predestinate; moreover, whom
he did predestinate, them he also called, and whom he called them he also
justified, and whom he justified them he also glorified; because of their
calling he has sanctified them, and after their sanctification he has
glorified them.

Christians! in earnest, are not these the cares of a Father, and of the best
of all Fathers? Tampius nemo, tam pater nemo. Tert.
This was it which made Tertullian say, There was no Father so good, nor so
much a Father as God: it is then an evident demonstration that the Just are
born of him, since none take most care of strangers.

But the greatest and most sensible argument to convince, that they are in
effect born of God, is, That they resemble him. For it is the doctrine of Jesus
Christ in the 8th. of St. John; and of St. John himself in the third of his
first Epistle; and of St. Paul in the 9th. of his Epistle to the Romans, That a
man is Son to him whom he resembles, and of those whose works he does: if the
works of Abraham, he is the Son of Abraham: if the works of God he is the son
of God: if the works of the Devil, he is the son of the Devil. Here you see the
great characters of the filiation of the Just, this is it which does chiefly
establish their right, even that their conduct, their life, their works, and
all the rest, is but a continual imitation of God; they will nothing but what
he wills; they love nothing but what he loves, they hate nothing but what he
hates; so that all the truly Just may say with St. Paul, That it is God that
lives in them, and not they themselves: that their life is hid in him: and that
they have no other spirit then his. So high does St. Paul raise the conformity
of the Just with God, when he says in the eighth chap. to the Romans, That
they are become one spirit with him, which is an evident mark of the highest
perfection of resemblance.

Well then, Brethren! from so many reasons must we not in the end conclude,
That the Just are born of God, and ought not only to be called his children,
but are so in effect? as says Saint John in our Epistle, yet it is but one of
the conditions for the which the Text that we have taken may be applied fitly
to them.

We must see, Secondly, whether the other necessary conditions are found in
them; that is, if they triumph over the world; and if they triumph by faith.
This we shall see in the two parts that remain of this Discourse. But before we
begin, I crave one moment of reflection upon the first. For it is not enough to
know who are those whom Saint John says, to be born of God; but we must
observe, whether we our selves be of that number; it is not enough that
adoption, or even regeneration does assure us of it but we must seek into the
center of our hearts, and into the most secret passages of our lives, whether
we bare the Image of God; and if we have that resemblance of holiness and
grace, which does properly establish our right of Filiation: for, whosoever is
unlike his Father is unjustly called his son* and they are not only the
Philosophers that will have this resemblance, and this rapport between the
production and its principle, indispenseably necessary to the essence of their
relation; neither are they the modern Divines that introduce this necessity.
Have not the most ancient Fathers been of this opinion? Judge ye of it by this
fine learned expression of Gregory Nazianzen, who says, the Son is the
definition of the Father, that is, the Son is but the expounding of what his
Father is: so, the resemblance between the Father and the Son is no less
indispenseable, then between the definition of a thing, and the thing defined
it self: which another Gregory has more clearly expressed, when he called the
Son the Image of the Father. But what need is there of reasons and Authorities,
to prove to you the necessity of this resemblance, since Jesus Christ himself,
Saint John, and Saint Paul assure us of it; when they tell us, that a man is
the child only of him, whose works he does?

It is then, a truth out of question, That we are not the children of God, but
so far as we resemble him; by imitation of his virtue, and by this conformity
of our life and innocence with his.

By this principle, it is easy to discern whether we are born of God, and it
is impossible to be deceived upon so certain a rule; It is the same that our
Apostle gives us in the second chapter of his first Epistle, If you know,
(says he) that God is just, know that whosoever does righteousness is born of
him. But, because this rule may possibly be too vast, and some despair is to be
feared, if, to be the children of God we must be like him in all the
excellencies of his holiness; and in the great number of virtues comprehended
in his Justice, the same Apostle in the same Epistle, reduces the necessity of
this resemblance to the love of our Neighbor; Beloved (says he) let us love
one another, for love is of God, and whosoever loves is born of God.

O how few would be found born of him, though there needed but this one
resemblance to be born of him, since, so few love their brethren? do you love
your brethren, you that tear them by your calumnies? do you love them, you that
take pleasure in their disgraces? and are tormented with their prosperities? in
good earnest, do you think you love them, who seek so many occasions to hurt
them, and shun all occasions to help them? no, no! let us not flatter our
selves, but confess ingenuously, that we do not love our brethren, while we
harbor grudges against them* coldness, sharpness, envy, suspicion, contempt,
with infinite other dispositions and thoughts that are more criminal.

It is not then of us that St. John speaks in our. Text, because, not loving
our* brethren, it is impossible we should be born of him: the hatred we have
for them destroying all the resemblance that (otherwise) we should have of him,
for what resemblance can we have of any person, if we hate what he loves? since
love and hate are the two great Movers which carry on the rest of our Passions,
there is necessarily a hatred between two wills, when one hates what the other
loves.

Will you, then be the children of God? St. John has told you in two words
what is necessary for that; Love one another: for whosoever loves is born of
God. What! do you refuse to purchase so great an honor at so cheap a rate?
Consider the glory of being children of such a Father, and see how easily you
may obtain it. And that you may have a greater desire to it, I will show you
the illustrious victory that they get over the World, who are born of God: it
is the second part of my Text, and of my Discourse.

THE SECOND PART.
Amongst infinite circumstances that compose an illustrious victory, Clarior
laus est quo clarior* est quem vice^is. Curt. l. 6.

Non est gloriosa victoria nisi ubi su^int glo^i sa sa certamina. Amoros. lib.
^. Offic.


the most considerable is the force of the Enemy which is overcome, whence a
great Historian took occasion to say, That a Triumph was so much the more
illustrious, as be was whom we triumph ever: and St. Ambrose with the same
spirit says, That no Victory is glorious, but after a difficult combat, and a
pertinacious Resistance; therefore the Scripture describes with so much care
the powerful Armies of Pharaoh, Holophernes, Sennacherib, and all the other
great enemies of Israel: for thereby a greater ground is afforded for admiring
the Conqueror; and to adore the greatness of God, the chief cause of the
victory: even of the Giant whom David overcame, the sacred History marks
exactly all that might render him terrible; that the triumph of the generous
Shepherd might be so much the more commended, as there was more difficulty to
overcome so powerful an enemy.

I must follow the Example the Scripture gives me, and let you see what is the
strength of this world which is overcome in the Text by the children of God,
that you may judge of the glory of the Triumph, and that so, I may make you the
more desire it. But first, we must know what world is here spoken of, it being
a word very equivocal in Scripture: All the different significations that it
makes use of may be reduced to two principal, since it never speaks of the
world but in a physical or moral sense, that is, the world is still put in a
natural or mystical signification in Scripture.

Again, the natural world is taken in diverse ways: I observe three; the first
is very large, the second less, the third less then either: for the first, by
the world the Scripture means sometimes all the Universe, both Heaven and
Earth; and all that they contain: you have Examples for it in many places,
where it speaks of the world as of the work of Creation. Thus Acts 17. verse
24. Saint Paul preaching to the Athenians, makes it evident that he speaks of
the created world.

Secondly, in many Texts it means the Earth only, as in Saint Matthew chap.
4. where it is said, That the Tempter showed Jesus Christ all the Kingdoms of
the World.

Thirdly, sometimes in the New Testament it signifies only men, so it is
expounded in many places of the Gospel, and in the Epistles of Saint Paul and
Saint John: as, when it is said in the second of the Corinthians chap. 5. verse
19. That God was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself. You see that
there the World signifies only men.

To take it then physically, that is, in a natural sense. The world in
Scripture means always one of these three things, either the whole Universe, or
the Earth, or Mankind.

But, to take it spiritually, in a moral or mystical sense, it sometimes
signifies, according to the style of Scripture, those who seek only earthly
things, without caring to obtain the heavenly, as John 16.20. where Jesus
Christ said to his Apostles, You shall weep, but the world shall rejoice again
in this spiritual way; it signifies all the corrupt principles that men
commonly follow in their conversation; in which sense St. Paul said to the
Galatians, chap. 6. that the World was crucified unto him, and he unto the
World. I doubt not but it is in this sense, that we must take the world in our
Text, because in Saint John's Language, throughout this Epistle; we must imagine
by the world a certain spirit of pleasure, interest and ambition that reigns
amongst men; he explains it enough in the second Chap. verse 16. All that is in
the World, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the pride of
life. And in our Text he makes it appear that this is his meaning, when having
said in the verse before, The Commandments of God are not grievous. He gives
this reason for it, that those who are born of God overcome the World, that is,
they overcome the things which make the Commandments of God grievous; and what
are those things, Christians, but the corrupt Maxims we have spoken of,
Pleasure, Interest, and Ambition.

You see then what the World is, judge ye by that how illustrious is the
victory of those that triumph over it; how great a glory is it to vanquish an
Enemy so strong and formidable: the Caesar's and the Alexanders that heretofore
triumphed over the material World, knew not how to vanquish this mystical
World, because, as St. Austin says, being Masters of the Universe, they were
Slaves to their guilty Passions, and to the corrupt Maxims of sin.

In effect, these Maxims, and these domineering Passions, have got so much
Authority, and so absolute an Empire over men, that, like a Torrent, it hurries
them away, in spite of their reason, making all resistance vain without the
victorious help of Grace. Alas! how many people are there who are very witty,
whom Nature has made very sensible of Virtue and Honor, who yet suffer
themselves to be corrupted by these Maxims, and unlucky Passions.

There are very few of whom Pleasure has not made her self Mistress, because
the chief Maxim of the World is, to love and seek Pleasure at any rate; this
Passion has such Charms, that the bravest men knew not how to defend
themselves from it. We have seen too much of it in the falls of David and
Solomon, who were both vanquished by it; and neither the holiness of the one,
nor the wisdom of the other, could save them from it: The example of St.
Austin, and his own confession, does yet more sensibly evidence unto us the
power of this passion; he acknowledges, that after all his godly resolutions
to live well, one only word that Pleasure suggested to him, plunged him more
than ever, in his former disorderly course; Grace was two years continually and
strongly laboring to convert him; he says himself there were continual
Combats within him, and after Grace had sometimes made a good progress in the
work of his conversion, Pleasure came and overthrew all; his heart was in the
midst between these two Champions; Grace drew it to the one side, and Pleasure
to the other; and when he was ready to yield to Grace, Pleasure pulled him by
the Cloak, saying, What Austin! Will thou forsake this and that? Can thou
resolve to forsake me? Can thou live without my Divertisements? there needed
no more to captivate the heart of Austin; all that Grace had said, made no more
impression on him; and when Grace would yet speak of conversion, he put it off
till another time; for Pleasure held him so much her Slave, that he could not,
nor would not shake off his fetters. O how powerful is this passion! what
violent assaults it gives! what pertinacious resistances! since Grace it self
has so much ado to overcome it.

The Tyrants that persecuted the Church knew well the force and power that
Pleasure had over the heart of man; for, after they had tried to corrupt the
faith of the Martyrs, by the violence of punishments; at last, they tempted
them by the sweetness of pleasures; and it fell out oft-times, that such as had
generously resisted all the rage and cruelty of the Executioner, sunk under the
temptation of Pleasure. Alas! there were few found generous enough to do that
which we read but of one, who being importuned on all sides by Pleasure to
yield, bit out his Tongue with his Teeth, and spit it in the face of the
fairest Lady of Rome, who did solicit him; having nothing else free to defend
himself from her, bound as he was, on a Bed strewn with Roses: and there were
as few of those who were so far from yielding to the sweet persuasions of
Voluptuousness, that they dyed of sorrow for living among Pleasures; as
Ecclesiastical History tells us of another.

Christians! we need not wonder that this Passion is so powerful and formidable
an Enemy; flattering that flesh of ours so pleasingly: the thing we naturally
love best in the world.

Interest and Ambition, which are the two other Enemies that the World presents
us to fight with, have not much less force than Pleasure, to corrupt the
innocence of our hearts; and where shall we find any almost which are not
Slaves to the one, or the other of these great powers?

Even in the Times that seemed most innocent, did not Interest make an
universal Corruption in the World? Was it not the offense of Saul, and all
Israel, 1 Samuel 15. where Interest had more power than the Commands or
Threatenings of God, when his people -- victorious over the Amalekites, let
themselves be overcome by this shameful passion; reserving in despite of God's
prohibition, all that was precious in the spoils of the defeated Army? Was it
not Interest that corrupted a Disciple in the very Family of Jesus Christ, and
transported him to that Sacrilege to sell and betray his good Master? Has not
this passion daily, the same power? Is it not for Interest that so many in the
World continually betray the Son of God? Do not all men almost prefer their
Interest, before his Glory? as St. Paul complained in his time, They seek their
own things, not the things of Jesus Christ.

My Brethren, examine what is done among Christians, even of the best Reformed
Churches; what fierce desires have we daily to become richer? and how much
coldness to become holier and better men? let us consider what is done at Rome
upon the Throne of splendid Holiness; you will quickly find, that the same
passion that heretofore made Judas sell Jesus Christ, makes the Pope's Officers
sell the Holy Ghost every hour; for they sell Archbishoplicks. Pardons, and
Forgiveness of Sins; with the entry into Paradise, and many other like Graces,
whereof the Holy Ghost alone must be the Distributer, as he is the Principle of
the same: It is not from the resentments of an altered man that I speak so;
within these two years there have been Experiments enough to make the World
acknowledge, that of all those that have been converted, perhaps I am one of
the most moderate; but I speak that which is to the purpose, and which all the
World knows. But, though Pleasure and Interest had not strength enough to
corrupt our Innocence, Ambition alone would have more then needs for that; it
is not impossible to find some Souls neither voluptuous, nor interessed; but I
know not where to find any, whom Ambition has not corrupted: it is that
properly, which we may, and ought to call the weak fide of man. He was yet in
his state of original Innocence, above all the assaults of Interest and
Pleasure; yet at the first onset of Ambition, he let himself be overcome
without resistance; the Devil, who himself had proved the force of this
temptation, made use of no other bait to seduce the fair innocent souls of Adam
and his Wife. This Tempter was too crafty not to know, that it was the only
part whereby he might take hold of them; and certainly, if there had been a
stronger temptation, he would not have failed to have made use of it in such an
occasion, whereon depended the salvation, or total fall of all Mankind.

Since that unlucky moment, it has been too much justified, that nothing is so
powerful as Ambition, to make us undertake all things against the respect and
obedience that we owe to God. All Histories, both holy and profane, are full
of examples of this. Was it not that enraged passion that made Absalom rebel
against his father, the best father of the World? Was it not the same passion
that made Athalia the Murderess of her own Children, after the death of
Ochosias her Husband, the tenderness of a Mother being incapable to take away
her ambition to be a Sovereign; was not the ambition of another woman cruel,
when, going to take possession of the Throne, she made her Coach and Horses to
go over the body of her father that was newly slain? here is too much, my
Brethren, to manifest the power of this inhumane passion, since it choaks the
tenderest and strongest sentiments of Nature it self: insomuch, as St. Basil
calls it in one of his Letters, The most wicked of all Devils. Conclude then
with me, That the World, which according to St. John, and according to our
daily Experiments, is nothing but Pleasure, Interest and Ambition, is a very
powerful and almost invincible Enemy: and consequently, if ever we get the
Victory over it, it is an infinitely glorious Victory; we must fight, before we
can overcome such terrible Enemies as these; and, if it be true which a
Philosopher says, and Tertullian after him, That a man, fighting with the same
fortune that Job had to wrestle with on his Dunghill, was a spectacle, worthy
the eyes and attention of God: Is it a less worthy sight, when one man alone
fights all the Forces of the World? when he is assaulted on all sides by the
most tender and charming delights, and yet, the sweetness of those pleasures
does not corrupt the integrity of his heart, nor the innocence of his life?

Christians! what a wonderful sight is this, to see a man solicited by the
strongest temptations of Interest, by all the splendour of gold and silver, and,
all the delight of being rich, and his soul not cast down by the violence of
this assault? In Conclusion, what a Miracle is it, what a Prodigy, to see a
man, whom Ambition tempts with the hopes of greatness; yet, remaining firm in
his humility and modesty, not dazzled with the glistering of Thrones, Scepters
and Crowns, triumphing thus over the World, and all its glory! O how well may
the Apostles, and all the just, who have thus triumphed, say with St. Paul, We
are the spectacles of God, of Angels, and of men. Spectacles of complaisance in
respect of God, of admiration in respect of Angels, and of astonishment in
respect of men.

O what a glorious Triumph is obtained by them that are born of God, since they
are Conquerors of a World so difficult to be overcome! we must not doubt, but
that those who are born of God, have, in effect, got this Victory, since the
World we speak of, that is, Pleasure, Interest and Ambition, can get no
advantage, with all his Forces, over those that have the honor to resemble
God, as children resemble their father: and, this Adoption that he has made of
them, being a spiritual generation, we must not doubt, but that he does impart
his Spirit unto them: because, it is according to the Spirit that they are his
children; and that, being filled with his divine Spirit, it is easy for them
to triumph over all that is contrary to its Maxims, and the purity of its
Sentiments.

This is it which made our Apostle say immediately before the Text, That the
Commandments of God were not grievous, to them that were born of him, as he
explains himself soon after; for in truth what Commandment did God ever make,
whereunto the obedience is not easy to any that is become holy in some sort,
like him, by this mystical Regeneration, and by this communication of his
Spirit? what difficulty will they find to obey him, when they are Masters, and
victorious of all that hinders their obedience to him? our Pleasure, our
Interest, and our Ambition being (as they are) the greatest obstacles of our
fidelity to his commands, no doubt; but when we have overcome these three
powerful Enemies of the Law of God, all the obedience that lies upon us proves
easy to us; for commonly, all the pains we find in doing Gods Will, is, that
Pleasure, Interest, or Ambition persuades us to the contrary: but, when we have
triumphed over these three passions, which are properly that which St Paul (1
Cor. 2.12.) calls, The Spirit of the World; and St. John in our Text, the
World it self; then, whatever God commands is so far from painful, that we find
pleasure in it: and the reason of this relish, and this easiness, is no other,
but what we say, as our Apostle does so evidently justify, when, after he had
said, The Commandments of God are easy; he presently brings the proof, For
(says he) all that is born of God, overcomes the World; letting us see
manifestly, that there is nothing but the World, that is, its Spirit, and its
Maxims, that makes our obedience uneasy; and, the infallible mark of
overcoming the World, is, the easiness we find in obeying the Commandments of
God.

But alas! how few then are there that have overcome the World, since there are
so few that do not find the Commandments of God grievous? it seems to them an
insupportable yoke, even so much, that sometimes they will say, that Gods
Commandments are of an impossible performance.

You have not then overcome the World, you, who yet complain of their
difficulty; who groan under the weight of the yoke, and express so much grief
to submit your selves to the orders and commands that he gives you. No, no, you
have not yet triumphed over the World, you that are yet Slaves to your
Pleasures, to your Interest, and your Pride; since, it is that which is
properly called the World; this illustrious Victory belongs to none but the
children of God, whom he has, as it were, transformed into himself, by a
resemblance of holiness, of spirit and life; hope not then for the glory of
this triumph, without being first entered into this noble Alliance with God:
but, as soon as you are become his children, by a mending of your courses, and
by a new birth of piety and grace, be you assured, that you shall triumph over
the World, because, the Oracle of Divine Truth has said it, that, all which is
born of God, overcomes the World: And since it is by Faith that we get this
Victory, as the Text tells us, let us examine in the last Part of this
Discourse, what that Faith is?

The Third Part.
IT is with the spiritual Combats much as with the temporal; it does not
suffice, in ordinary Combats, to be strong, and to be valiant to overcome; all
the World knows, that besides that, one must have Arms, and make use of them:
Likewise, to overcome the World, it is not enough to be born of God, Lib. 22.
cap. 25. Victoria de hoc mundo non nostris viribus adscribetur.
we must take Arms to oppose the violence of this formidable Enemy: for, as St.
Austin says in his Book of the City of God, The victory over the World is not
attributed to our Forces, it is not by them we gain it; but, what Arms must we
make use of? nothing can triumph over the World as a principal cause, or as an
instrument of victory which is not born of God; since St. John does not
attribute this honor, but to those that are so born. Our Arms then ought to be
some of those Virtues which they call Theological or Divine; not only, because
God is the chief object of them, but for that he is their immediate principle,
to distinguish them from other Virtues which they call Moral, that may spring
from elsewhere. Yanta est charitas quae si adsit, habentur omnia; si desit,
frustra habentur caetera. Aug.


Then, of necessity, it must be either Faith, or Hope, or Charity, that must
serve us for Arms in this Combat; but why rather Faith, than the other two? Is
not Hope admirably well fitted for this great employment, since it does promise
us eternal rewards? there are no temptations, nor assaults, that it enableth us
not to overcome; or, at least, why should it not be Charity, which is the
Queen, and the most noble of all virtues, as the Apostle assures us? and
whereof St. Austin says, That having it alone, one has all; and not having
it, it is useless to have the rest; which he learned of St. Paul, who says,
That neither Martyrdom, nor the most holy things, nor even Faith it self, is
any thing without Charity. Nevertheless we must believe our Text, which says
plainly, It is by Faith that we overcome the world: And St. Paul in the Epistle
to the Hebrews agrees well with this sentiment, when he says, That it is by
Faith that so many just persons have done such wonders; and that, They have
vanquished Kingdoms (what Kingdoms, but those of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil?) and that, They have conquered Eternity: Is it not of Faith, that our
Lord himself has said, That nothing shall be impossible to it; and, that there
needs but little of it to work wonders, even to remove Mountains?

But, whereas there are Christians that have Faith, and in the mean time are
rather Slaves of the World, than Masters and Conquerors of it; what kind of
Faith is that, which may be the instrument of so glorious a victory? It seems
the Apostle, in the Verse that follows the Text, would spare us the pains of
this search: Who is he (says he) that overcomes the world, but he that
believes that JESUS is the Son of God? Yet, there being an infinite number of
people that believe so much, who notwithstanding, are rather overcome by the
World, than Conquerors of it; we are still to seek, and have need to repair to
Divinity, and to other Texts of Scripture, for the clearing of so great, and so
important a difficulty.

Divinity distinguishes two sorts of Faith, the one dead, the other living.
The dead Faith, which is otherwise called unperfect, or unformed, is no more
than a conviction we have of a truth upon Divine testimony, without any
bettering of our will by that conviction of our understanding; some call this
Faith Speculative, or Historical, because it makes one believe only the fact of
things, without leading him to other Acts, worthy of such a belief.

It was of this Faith that St. James spoke, Chap. 2.14. when he said, What can
it profit, my Brethren, though a man say I have Faith, and has not Works; Can
Faith save him?

In this sense St. Paul speaks of it, 1 Cor. 13.2. If I have Faith enough to
remove Mountains (says he) and have not Charity, I am nothing. There are some
also which call this Faith the Faith of Devils; for an Apostle speaking to a
man that had Faith without works -- Thou believe (says he) that there is a
God, thou do well to believe it; but the Devils believe it too, and therefore
they tremble. The Devils, for that kind of believing are no less Devils, and no
less wicked.

This barren Faith is good for nothing, unless it be to make us more guilty;
since, having believed as we ought to believe, we have no excuse why we have
not lived as we ought to live; it is not then this kind of Faith that our Text
so highly praises, as to say, It is the victory that overcomes the World; it
must be a generous and warlike Faith, and not a base, cowardly, dejected Faith;
which has no courage neither to undertake, nor to maintain any thing.
Scripture and Divinity tell us of another kind of Faith, quite opposite; they
call it a lively Faith, perfect or formed; which, besides that it at first
convinces the understanding, by the Authorities of revealed Truths; persuades
the will to approve them, by Sentiments conformable to such holy motions; it is
what JESUS CHRIST said of St. John Baptist, A burning and a shining Lamp:
shining, because it brings light and knowledge to the mind; burning, because it
brings fire and piety to the heart.

Of that the Prophet Habakkuk says, The just shall live by Faith; that is, by
reason of his Faith; as St. Paul expounds it, Romans 1.17. and the same Apostle
speaks again of it in the Chapters following, and particularly in Chap 3. ver.
28. where he says, It is the sense of all Christians, that man is justified by
Faith, without the works of Moses his Law. He says as much of it, almost in
the same words, in the beginning of the fifth Chapter, and in diverse other
places of the same Epistle, and in all his other Epistles. St. Peter says no
less of it, when he assures the Gentiles (Acts 19.) that God had purified their
hearts by Faith: And in his 1 Epist. 1.8. You are preserved (says he) by the
means of Faith, to be heirs of Salvation; which is the reward of Faith, as he
says presently after, ver. 9. and certainly, it is that which the Apostle St.
Jude, in his Catholic Epistle, ( ver. 20.) calls most holy; not only, because
it is the formal holiness of the Soul, but, because that (as Divines expound
it) it fulfilleth all duties of holiness, by an entire obedience to the
Ordinances and Commands of God; which gives occasion to Divines to call it
sometimes, an obedient Faith; and certainly, it is of this Faith that our Text
speaks, when it says, that the victory that overcomes the World, is Faith.

It is not therefore enough, Christians, to show you that all that is born of
God, overcomes the World, and that it is by Faith it overcomes; it is needful
that I tell you moreover, by what Faith: for, we are not without enemies that
accuse us of giving to Faith alone (without joining it with other virtues) this
victorious power.

And indeed, there are too many souls among us, either libertine enough, or ill
enough instructed, to persuade themselves that there needs nothing but
believing, to overcome all, and to be saved: if they had not such thoughts
assuredly, we should see them live better; for, it is impossible to lead so ill
a life, if they did believe that they must lead a better if they will be saved.

Let our Enemies, and our Libertines, and our Ignorants learn then this day,
what we think, and what we ought to think of Faith which justifies; or, as our
Text speaks, which overcomes the World.

The true Sentiment of all Reformed Churches, is, that this Faith is not only a
naked and barren belief, which acknowledges and confesses only the truth of
our mysteries, without troubling ones self to practice that piety which these
mysteries require: but they all teach us, that this Faith is accompanied with
all the holiness which the Gospel enjoins us; so that Faith, according to our
Doctrine, is incapable to justify us, and to overcome the World, if Charity be
not with it; and, it is in vain that I believe in JESUS CHRIST, if I love him
not, and if I do not that which his Gospel ordains me to do.

Thus, when we say with the Scripture, That Faith justifies, that it cleanses
the hearts, that it overcomes the World; we speak not but of a Faith that is
loving, patient, humble and holy in all respects; it is after this manner that
all the Fathers speak of it, and St. John himself in the Text, as it is evident
in the verses that go before, and that follow: For, though he says absolutely,
That those who believe that JESUS CHRIST is the Son of God, overcome the World;
yet, he speaks before and after, of Charity, and of keeping Gods Commandments,
as things inseparably linked with this victorious Faith. You see then,
Christians, what that Faith is which overcomes the World, in the just; it is
that impenetrable Buckler that St. Paul speaks of, that beats back all the
blows which the Enemy aims at us: A man armed with this Faith, may say with the
Apostle, That what temptation soever he shall endure, no assaults shall
separate him from the love of JESUS CHRIST: Nothing shall debauch him from his
duty, nothing shall make him the slave of sin; let the World come with all its
Forces, with all the sweets of Pleasure, with all the corruptions of Interest,
with all the pom^s of Ambition; it will make but vain Enterprises, unsuccessful
Assaults upon a man, armed with this warlike and generous Faith: for, what can
pleasure say to him able to corrupt him? if she promises to his body all she
has of tender and sweet, what will the Just do in this rough assault, where he
has all pleasures to fight against? He will oppose his Faith. I believe in
that God, will he say, who would not live but in penance, while he lived
amongst us, always severe to his flesh, always mortified in his mind; never
in pleasure, and almost continually in grief: who found in the bitterness of
his death, nothing but Gall and Vinegar to sweeten it. What! shall I believe
these things, and in the mean time, abandon my self to those guilty pleasures?
No, I will not.

The assaults of Interest need no less resolution and resistance, they solicit
the faithful Soul with all the persuasions that Gold and Silver are able to
make in this World; being pressed by this assault, what does he? He takes his
ordinary shield, he opposes his Faith. O! (says he) I believe, that God made
himself poor, to make me rich; that he would not possess any thing on earth;
that at his birth he had nothing but straw to lie upon; that during his life,
he had nothing whereon to lay his head; that at his death, he was naked: And,
shall I, to make my self rich, do this injustice? shall I, suffer my self to be
corrupted by my Interest? No, I will not.

Neither shall Ambition have any more advantage over the faithful Soul, how
violently soever it assaults him. Methinks I see Ambition with her glistering
and her pomps, tempting the heart of the Just, flattering him with all her
splendour and grandeur, which use to dazzle others; what will he do in this
assault? that, which he did in the former; He will take Faith, and oppose it
against this Enemy that presses him: What! (says he) that God, in whom I
believe, who abased himself so far, as to become man; did humble himself to the
meanest things, even to death; to the most shameful and infamous death: And,
shall I advance my self by the diminution of his glory? shall I drive on my
fortune, as far as vanity will entice me? No, I will not; it shall never be
said, that my life has belied my Faith. I believe there are eternal Rewards to
crown all my fidelity, if I sink not under these Temptations that the World
leads me in o: I believe there are everlasting pains to punish my baseness, if
I do sink under them: What then! should I be so far out of my wits, and besides
my senses, as to resolve to do it? No, the World must stay, till I believe
these things no more. Thus it is, Brethren, that Faith speaks, thus it is that
she fights, thus it is that she triumphs, when she is right: when Faith is, as
it ought to be, animated with the Spirit of all virtues; and, when we are
satisfied by the effects, that we have this Faith. We have it not, Christians,
when we yield so easily to the first solicitations of Pleasure, of Interest,
and of Ambition: Alas! how can your Faith be victorious over the World, while
you are still Slaves to Passion, which is the World it self? and whilst you
observe the Laws and Maxims of the World, more religiously than those of God.

The Faith that is victorious over the World, confesses JESUS CHRIST on all
occasions, loves him at all times, and serves and follows him through all
things; in good earnest, Christians, do you do so? Alas! how easily may it be
seen, with never so little reflection on our selves, that we have not this
Faith? since within us, all is full of Revolts, Ingratitudes, and Infidelities
toward CHRIST, whom we crucify and defame daily, as St. Paul reproacheth in
the sixth of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Is that believing in JESUS Christ with
a victorious Faith, when we believe in him to crucify him, and disgrace him,
by the disorders of our shameful lives? Take my Brethren, take other courses
more worthy of him, and of your selves; live conformably to the belief of his
Gospel, let his love and his will reign in your hearts, as well as his Truths
in your minds: in a word, let your works and your life be suitable to the
holiness of your Faith, and then you will have a victorious Faith, and you
shall be in the number of the just ones, of whom St. John says in our Text,
That they are born of God, that they triumph over the World, and that they
triumph by Faith. God give you that Grace in this life, that he may crown you
in the next with GLORY.

Unto this Great GOD, Immortal, Invisible, Adorable FATHER, SON, and HOLY
GHOST, who gives us these glorious Hopes, be Honor, Blessing, and Eternal
Magnificence. AMEN.

THE END.

