A NARRATIVE Of the PROCEEDINGS Of a great Council of JEWS, Assembled in the
Plain of Ageda in Hungaria, about 30 Leagues distant from Buda, to examine the
Scriptures concerning Christ; on the 12th of October 1650.

By Samuel Brett there present.

Also, A RELATION Of some other OSERVATIONS in his Travels beyond the Seas; and
particularly, in Egypt, Macedonia, Dalmatia, Calabria, Apuleia, Cicilia,
Assyria, Sclavonia, France, Spain, and Portugal; the Islands of Cyprus, Candia,
Pathmos, Delphos; the Cities of Carthage, Corinth, Troy, Constantinople,
Venice, Naples, Leighorn, Florence, Millaine, Rome, Bottonia, Mantua, Genoa,
Paris, etc.

Printed at LONDON for Richard Moon at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door, 1655.

To the READER.
THere was nothing I more desired, then to travel beyond the Seas, and to know
the various manners of the Nations of the World: for which, through God's
providence, I had an opportunity offered me, to my great satisfaction, being
Surgeon of an English Ship in the Streights, where, for a cure that I did
for Orlando de Spina of Gollipulo, an eminent man in those parts, I was by him
preferred to be Captain of a Ship of Malta, which was set out by the said
Orlando, and committed to my command against the Turks in the Arches, in
assistance to the Venetian service: in the which service I spent about nine
months, till the tempestuous season of the year enforced me to return into
Harbor again. And in this time of employment, I made five fights at Sea, and
two at Land; being chosen by lot to invade the Turk's Country, with a certain
company of Soldiers collected out of our Fleet, to do some execution upon the
borders of the Enemy, and to get some provision for our relief; in all which
fights (although very perilous) God gave me the Victory. The whole time I
spent beyond the Seas, before and after this employment, was almost four years,
not staying long in any one place. But first I traveled to all the Sea-towns of
note for Merchandising, to know the Trade of the places, and the convenience of
their Harbors, that I might be able to do some profitable service in Merchant
affairs. Also I traveled into several Countries, and the most eminent Cities
and Towns therein, viz. Egypt, Macedonia, Dalmatia, Calabria, Apuleia,
Cicilia, Assyria, Sclavonia, some parts of Spain and Portugal; to the Islands
of Cyprus, Candia, Pathmos, Delphos; to Carthage, Corinth, Troy,
Constantinople; besides many other Towns and Places: but my longest abode was
in Italy, and therein at Venice, Naples, Leighorne, Florence, Millaine, Rome,
Bottonia, Mantua, Genoa, etc. And at last looking homeward, I came into France,
taking a brief veiw of many eminent places in that Kingdom. And at Paris I
found many of my Countrymen, (of which though some be persons of great
quality, yet) God knows they are in a low condition. And now I shall give a
brief account of some of my Observations, during the time of my abode beyond
the Seas.

Some OBSERVATIONS in my Travels beyond the Seas.
AT Paris our Countrymen live peaceably, and enjoy our Religion without
disturbance. There is a place allowed them, with necessary accommodations for
the exercise of Religion. Doctor Steward did often preach to them: and for
their form of worship, it is the same that was formerly in England, with the
Book of Common Prayer, and the Rites therein used; and also they continue the
Innovations that were practiced by many of our Clergy; as, Bowing at the Name
of Jesus toward the Altar, etc. which I know gives offense to the good French
Protestants, who to me did often condemn those Innovations for Romish
Superstitions: doubtless, they would do our Church, and our Religion more
credit there, if they did use less Ceremony. As for the French-Papists, truly
they are more civil to them, then was expected: for the Opinion of the World
where I have been, is but mean of that Nation. And I believe the Italian may be
their Cousen-German, for both of them are false and faithless enough. And this
consideration (God having taken away Orlando my noble Friend, who did always
much countenance me) did lessen my affection to continue in that service; for
my Soldiers were all Italians (except a few Greeks:) and I never saw much
cause to be confident in their fidelity; but it was chiefly for fear of him,
that they were so tractable to me.

As for Religion, in most parts where I have been, it is generally the same
with the Church of Rome: but for the Grecians (for amongst them I was) they are
neither pure Protestants, nor pure Papists; I mean, neither only Protestants,
nor only Papists, but their Religion is a mixture of both: for though they
hold some Fundamentals with us, yet they follow many of the Romish
Superstitions; and (according to my observation) they follow more the Religion
of Rome, then the Protestant Church; and they are much poisoned with Heresies.

But of all Nations, according to my observation, none are more zealous for the
Religion of Rome, then the Spaniards, who, I think, for this, are more
Romanists then the Romans themselves; for with them there is an Inquisition,
and in Rome I never heard of the same dangerous snare: there I had as much
freedom, as I could desire; and more courtesy then I could expect, without any
temptation to apostate from my Religion.

As for the Occurrences that I met with, they were many: but these four were
the most considerable:

First, The strangling of the great Turk by the Janissaries, at which time there
was great fear and trouble in Constantinople; but they enthroned his Son, and
this brought a peaceable settlement: and with him there were cut off diverse
Basha's heads; all whose heads (excepting the great Turk's) lay three days in
Chargers before the Palace Gate, for the public view of the people; which they
say is the custom for the Noblemen that are beheaded.

The next thing is, The flowing of the River Nylus in Egypt, the manner
whereof is this: it begins to flow about the fifteenth of June every year:
the people know the time thereof, and expect it accordingly; and this is after
their Harvest, which is usually ended about the beginning of May. As for Rain,
there seldom falls any in Egypt. During the time the River is up, all the
Country appears like Islands. Their Towns are seated upon Hills, and their
lower Grounds are all covered with Waters; and the Inhabitants use small Boats
to pass from place to place about their affairs: and because they know the
yearly flowing of Nylus, they provide for the safety of their Cattle till the
Waters are wasted away again. There are also certain Pillars of Stone set up,
with diverse marks upon them, by which they know the degrees of the rising, and
the usual height that the Waters do ascend unto; and if the Waters do ascend
above the highest mark, they do expect some strange consequence thereof. But
the greatest wonder is, the present cessation of the Plague upon the flowing of
this River. There died some thousands of the Plague the day before the flowing
of Nylus in Grandcairo, as they certified me; and a day or two after, not one
person more died of the Infection. This I observed, that the Land is full of
unhealthy fogs, mists, and vapors, which cause the disease; and it seems the
Waters of Nylus do purify it again.

In the Kingdom of Grandcairo, alias, Pharaoh's Town, is the City, and it is
greater then any elsewhere I did behold; but Memphis is the neater City: and
being there, I went to see the Land of Goshen, where the Israelites did
inhabit: this is a very pleasant and fruitful Land for Pasture, such, as I have
nowhere seen the like. At this time also, I had an opportunity to see the
Red Sea, and the place where (as they informed me) the Israelites did enter
their Journey through the same: there also they showed me the great Mountains
that enclosed them, when Pharaoh pursued them with his great Army; and the
Hills where the two Armies lay in sight one of another: and there I found the
true reason why it is called the Red Sea; not because the Water is red
naturally, but because the Sand is red; and this was clear to me, by plain
demonstration: for I put some of the Water into a clean vessel, and there I did
see it had the same color of other Water; but the Sand is reddish, and gives
the same color to the Water.

I shall omit many other things concerning Egypt; only this, it is under the
Turk's Dominion, and the Natives are his miserable slaves.

Thirdly, You may expect some news from Rome, where also I was, and did behold
their great Solemnity, it being then the Anno Sancto, as they there call it,
that is, the year of Jubilee.

There I beheld the Pope in his glory, and how in great state he was carried
about the City: the streets were thronged with the people; and as he passed by,
they made them even to ring with acclamations and rejoycings: he was carried by
some eminent men, having a rich Canopy over him. He made his Crosses in the Air
with his fingers, and threw his blessings amongst them. And truly these
delusions were so prevailing with the people, that (poor souls) they seemed to
me to rejoice, as if Christ himself had been come to Rome, and brought them
down the foelicities of Heaven.

At one time I beheld in Naples (perhaps it will seem strange, but it is true)
about eight thousand Pilgrims going to Rome, for their absolution; all which
the Viceroy of Naples maintained three days at his own charge; and on the
fourth day, they did present themselves before him at his Palace in Prilgrim
Weeds, (viz.) with leaden Pictures of Saints in their Hats, with leather
Collers about their Necks, which fell down half way over their Arms, and their
Staves in their Hands; and thus they marched away from Naples, in the posture
of an Army toward Rome, and so farewell Rome: Vidi, satis est vidisse.

I omit to recite many other occurrences, which by conferrence I shall
willingly communicate to my Friends; they being too many to commit to writing:
only now the fourth remarkable thing remains to present you withal; and that
is,

The proceedings of a great Council of Jews assembled in the Plain of Ageda in
Hungaria about thirty Leagues distant from Buda, to examine the Scriptures
concerning Christ; on the twelfth of October 1650.

It has been much desired by many honest Christians, that this Narrative of
the Jews Council should be published, which I did intend only to communicate to
private friends: the chief Argument by which they have persuaded me to do it,
is, because they do conceive it to be a preparative and hopeful sign of the Jew
Conversion; and, that it will be glad tidings to the Church of Christ; and
therefore I have yielded to satisfy their desires therein. And thus it was:

At the place abovenamed, there assembled about three hundred Rabbis, called
together from several parts of the World, to examine the Scriptures concerning
Christ: and it seems this place was thought most convenient for this Council,
in regard that part of the Country was not much inhabited, because of the
continual wars between the Turk and the King of Hungaria: where (as I was
informed) they had fought two bloody Battles: yet both Princes, notwithstanding
their own differences, did give leave to the Jews to hold their Council there.
And for their accommodation there, the Jews did make diverse Tents for their
repose, and had plenty of provision brought them from other parts of the
Country, during the time of their sitting there. There was also one large Tent,
built only for the Council to sit in, made almost foursquare; the North and
the South part of it, being not altogether so large as the East and West part
thereof. It had but one Door, and that opened to the East; and in the middle
thereof, stood a little Table and a Stool for the Propounder to sit on, with
his Face toward the Door of the Tent. The said Propounder was of the Tribe of
Levi, and was named Zacharias; and within this Tent round about were placed
diverse forms for the Consulters to sit on. It was also enclosed with a Rail,
that stood a distance from it, to prevent entrance to all strangers, and to all
such Jews as could not prove themselves to be Jews by Record, or could not
dispute in the Hebrew-tongue, which many had forgotten which lived in such
Countries, where they are not allowed their Synagogues, as in France, Spain,
and those parts of Italy that do belong to the King of Spain, viz. the Kingdom
of Naples, with the Province of Calabria, and Apuleia; the Kingdom of Cicilia,
and Sardania; in which places, if a Jew be found, and he deny the Popish
Religion, he is in danger to be condemned and executed for it; and yet profit
and benefit allureth them to dwell in those Countries, notwithstanding their
fears and dangers: and themselves are willing to forget, and so neglect to
teach their Children their native Language, rather then they will lose their
opportunity of profit: and some have burned the ancient Records of their Tribe
and Family, that they might not be discovered by searching, or otherwise. And
for this defect, that they could not prove their Tribe or Family, they were not
permitted to come within the Rail, but were commanded to remain without with
the strangers that remained there, to see the issue of their proceeding, which
were above 3000 persons, and they were for the most part of them Germans,
Almaines, Dalmatians, and Hungarians, with some Greeks, but few Italians, and
not one English man that I could hear of besides my self.

I was informed, that the King of Hungaria not favoring the reformed Religion,
did give no encouragement to any Protestant Churches to send any Divines
thither; but he did allow, that some Assistants should be sent from Rome: and
their coming thither did prove a great unhappiness to this hopeful Council.

When the Assembly did first meet, they spent some time in their mutual
salutations; and, as their manner is, they kissed one the other's cheek,
expressing much joy for their happy meeting: and all things being provided for
their accommodation, they considered of the Jews that were to be admitted
Members of this Council; and they were only allowed to be Members, which could
by Record prove themselves to be native Jews; and for defect herein, I observed
above five hundred refused: though doubtless they were true-born Jews, yet they
could not by Record prove themselves so to be; and for this they were not
admitted to be Members of the Council; but they did abide without the Rail with
the strangers that were there: and the number of them that were accepted to be
Members, was about three hundred Jews. And this was all that was done the first
day.

On the second day, the Assembly being full, the Propounder stood up, and made
his speech concerning the end of their meeting: And, This, said he, is to
examine the Scriptures, concerning Christ, whether he be already come, or
whether we are yet to expect his coming. In examining this question, they
searched the old Testament with great care and labor, to be resolved of the
Truth thereof, having many Bibles with them there for this end. And about this
Point there were great Disputes amongst them. The major part were of Opinion,
That he was not come: and some inclined to think that he was come; being moved
thereunto by their great Judgment, that has continued now this 1600 years
upon them.

I remember very well, one of the Council in his conference with me, seemed to
be very apprehensive of the great and long desolation of their Nation, ever
since their destruction by the Roman Emperors; and he imputed this their
affiction to their impenitency, and comparing their present Judgment, with
their other Judgments they had suffered before. The same he ingenuously
confessed, that he did conceive it was for some great wickedness; and that
their Nation was guilty of the blood of the Prophets sent from God to their
Nation, and the many Massacres that had been committed by the several Sects and
Factions amongst them. For (said he) we are no Idolaters, neither do I think we
were guilty of Idolatry since our captivity in Babylon; and therefore (said he)
I do impute this our calamity and present judgment, to the forenamed causes.
And this was the sum of that which was disputed amongst them the second day of
their meeting; and so they adjourned till the next morning, which was the third
day of their meeting.

When being assembled together again, the point that was chiefly agitated was
concerning the manner of Christ his coming. And, This, some said, shall be like
a mighty Prince, in the full power and authority of a King, yea, in greater
power then ever any King had; and that he will deliver their Nation out of the
power of their Enemies, and their Temple shall be rebuilt again; and, that the
Nations shall be of their Religion, and worship God after their manner. For
they hold, That the Messiah will not alter their Religion, whenever he
comes. And further, concerning his Parentage, they did agree in this, that he
should be born of a Virgin, according to the prediction of the Prophets; and
they agreed also, that he may be born of such a Virgin, which might be of mean
note amongst their Nation, as was the Virgin Mary. And here some of them seemed
to me to incline to think that Christ was come. Therefore when they came
together again the next day, the Propounder demanded of them, if Christ were
already come, and who they thought he was: and to this demand, they gave this
answer, That they thought Eliah was he, if he were come, because he came with
great power, which he declared by slaying the Priests of Baal: and, for the
fulfilling of the Scripture, he was oppressed by Ahab and Iezabel: yet they
esteemed him to be more then a mortal man, because he so strangely ascended up
into heaven. And because this opinion was contradicted by others, the day
following they took into examination the same question, to answer them that
said Eliah was not the Messiah. They of the contrary opinion did urge the care
and love of Eliah, for the good of their Nation, in that he left them Elisha
his disciple to teach and instruct the people; which they expect to be the care
of their Messiah. These were the chief Arguments they had to defend their
opinion: and the same day toward night, it came into question amongst them,
What he then was that said he was the son of God, and was crucified by their
Ancestors. And because this was the great question amongst them, they deferred
the further consideration thereof, until the next day.

When meetting again, the Pharisees, (for some of this Sect were amongst them,
that were always the enemies of Christ) they first began to answer this last
nights question; and these by no means would yield that he was the Christ; and
these reasons they gave for their opinion.

First, because (said they) he came into the world like an ordinary and
inferior man, not with his scepter, nor Royal power; wherewith they affirmed
the coming of Christ should be Glorious. 2. They pleaded against him the
meanness of his birth, in that his father was a Carpenter; and this they said
was a dishonor, that Christ should not be capable of. 3. They accused him to be
an enemy to Moses law, in suffering his disciples, and in doing works himself,
that were prohibited on the Sabbath day: for they believe that the Messiah will
punctually and exactly keep the law of Moses: and where the Gospel does
testify of Christ, that he did fulfill the law, they reject the Testimony
thereof, because they do not own the Gospel. But I observed, these reasons of
the Pharisees, did not satisfy all that heard them, but there still remained
some doubt in some of them concerning Christ; for there stood up one Rabbie
called Abraham, and objected against the Pharisees, the miracles that Christ
wrought whilst he was upon earth, as his raising of the dead to life again,
his making the lame to walk, the blind to see, and the dumb to speak. And the
same Abraham demanded of the Pharisees by what power he did these Miracles. The
answer the Pharisees returned to him, was to his purpose: They said he was an
Impostor and a Magitian; and Blasphemously traduced him of doing all his
Miracles by Magic: thus, said they, he first caused them to be blind, to be
dumb, to be lame; and then by taking away his Magical Charm, they were
restored to their former condition. Nevertheless this answer gave little
Satisfaction to the said Abraham; but thus he replied, that he could not charm
those that were borne in that condition, as blind, etc. and borne also before
Christ himself was borne; as it appears some of them were: this seemed to him
an absurd paradox; and truly the pressing of this argument, did almost put
them to a nonplus, till at last they had this evasion (though weak and vile)
they were (said they) by other Magitians convinced to be so in their mothers
wombs; and that although himself were not then borne when they were born with
these evils, yet he being a great dissembler, and more cunning then any
Magitian before him, power was given him by the Devil, to remove those charms
which others had placed: and there was one Pharisee named Zebedee, that of the
Pharisees there did most opprobriously revile him, and Vehemently urge these
things against him; but I conceive he did it not to the well-liking of many
there that heard him, even members of the Council. And as the Pharisees that
day played their parts against him: so did the Sadduces also endeavor, (for
some of that sect were also of the Council) to render Christ vile and odious to
the rest of the Jews that were assembled there. I observed it was with them as
it was once with Herod and Pilate; though they two could not agree betwixt
themselves at other times, yet they could agree together to crucify Christ;
for the Pharisees and Sadduces, though they be much divided in opinion among
themselves, yet did they at this time too much agree to disgrace and to
dishonor Christ with their lies, calumnies and blasphemies; for the Sadduces as
well as the Pharisees, did in other things accuse him for a grand Impostor, and
for a broacher of corrupt doctrine: in that in his Gospel he teaches the
resurrection from the dead, which they there denied to be true doctrine: but it
is no new thing to see factions dissenting, to agree in some evil design
against others, as I found it by experience: being at Rome in the year 1650.
which was the year of their Iubilee, there was a great strife between the
Jesuits and the Friars of the order of Saint Dominicke, both which were
against the Protestants: and although their differences have been by the care
and vigilance of the Pope, so smothered, that the world has not taken much
notice thereof, yet this fire broke out into a flame greater then ever it was
before, (as they certified me there) both by public Disputings, and by bitter
Writings one against another, opening the vices and errors of one another
Faction, thus seeking to disgrace one the other; which caused the Pope to
threaten to excommunicate the authors of all such black and libellous books,
that did tend to the dishonor of his Clergy and Religion, to make them infamous
to the world. But this by the way.

We are come now to the seventh and last day of their Council; and on this day,
this way the main Quere amongst them: If Christ be come, then what rules and
orders has he left his Church to walk by? This was a great Question amongst
them: and because they did not believe the new Testament, nor would be guided
by it, they demanded some other instruction to direct and guide them in this
point: thereupon six of the Roman Clergy (who of purpose were sent from Rome by
the Pope, to assist in this Council) were called in, viz. two Jesuits, two
Friars of the Order of S. Augustine, and two of the order of S. Francis: and
these being admitted into the Council, began to open unto them the Rules and
Doctrine of the holy Church of Rome, (as they call it) which Church they
magnified to them, for the holy Catholic Church of Christ, and their doctrine
to be the infallible Doctrine of Christ, and their Rules to be the rules which
the Apostles left to the Church for ever to be observed, and that the Pope is
the holy Vicar of Christ, and the successor of Saint Peter: and for instance in
some particulars, they affirmed the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
the Religious observation of their holy days, the invocation of Saints,
praying to the Virgin Mary, and her commanding power in heaven over her Son,
the holy use of the Cross and Images, with the rest of their Idolatrous and
superstitious worship; all which they commended to the Assembly of the Jews,
for the Doctrine and Rules of the Apostles. But so soon as the Assembly had
heard these things from them, they were generally and exceedingly troubled
thereat, and fell into high clamours against them and their Religion, crying
out, No Christ, no Woman-God, no intercession of Saints, no worshipping of
Images, no praying to the Virgin Mary, etc. Truly their trouble hereat was so
great, that it troubled me to see their impatience: they rent their clothes,
and cast dust upon their heads, and cried out aloud, Blasphemy, blasphemy; and
upon this the Council broke up: Yet they assembled again the eighth day; and
all that was done then, was to agree upon another meeting of their Nation three
years; after which was concluded upon before their final dissolution.

I do believe there were many Jews there, that would have been persuaded to
own the Lord Jesus: and this I assure you for a truth, and it is for the honor
of our Religion,

(...)
