A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF A GREAT ENGAGEMENT Which happened between the English
Squadron, under the Command of Vice Admiral HERBERT, and the whole French
Fleet, near the Coast of Ireland, on the First of May, 1689.
With Allowance.
HIS Majesty's Naval Forces having taken the Seas, under the Command of
Vice Admiral Herbert; In order to Curb the Insults of the French, and to hinder
their Attempts upon the Kingdom of Ireland, etc. After several Successful
Enterprises, and suppressing the French-Capers and Privateers, rescuing several
Prizes they had taken, and were carrying into their Harbors, Braving the Naval
Forces of the French-King, with a small number of Ships in his chief Harbor,
etc. And resolute to prosecute the Glorious War against the Disturbers of
Christendom; the English understanding the French were gotten to Sea under the
favor of the Night, and contrary Winds that hindered ours for standing in or
bearing up with them, and mistrusting they made for Ireland, they stood to that
Coast to prevent their landing any Forces to Distress the Protestants: On the
First of May Instant, the English got sight of them lying in the Bay of Bantree
in the West of Ireland, near the County of Kerry, and Resolving forthwith to
enter the Bay and attacque them, the Wind unluckily Chopped about, and blew hard
at West North-west, so that we could not but with abundance of Difficulty turn
into the Bay.

But resolving by any means to get in to them, with Nine of our Ships, the
Admiral himself leading them, they advance; which the French perceiving, with
full Sail before the Wind, they make up and meet us: The French Fleet consisted
of Twenty Nine Sail of Men of War, besides Tenders; Ours but Nineteen in the
whole, whereof Five only could fully come up to Engage. Our Admiral had
immediately Seven of their best Ships upon his Quarter, and the French Admiral
lying on the other Broadside of him, but notwithstanding the Inequality, our
brave Admiral never stirred off the Quarter Deck, Encouraging his Men both by
his Orders and Example; the rest of our Ships that could come up Charging them
Board to Board, discharging their Broad-sides, Grapling, and courageously
Fighting on the Decks, thundering in their Vollies of Small Shot, Killing their
Men in great numbers, and renting their Ships, Masts, and Rigging, thereby very
much disabling them, continuing resolutely Engaged till Night parted them. And
although the English, much inferior in Number, and wanting the Weather-gage
which greatly hindered them, did not gain the Advantage they otherwise might
undoubtedly have had; yet nothing was wanting that might restify their
continued Gallantry and Bravary, and to show the French that they are not to
dispute with them the Sovereignty of the Ocean. As to particulars of the Loss
on either side we are wanting, however it is reported on all hands the English
have not lost one Vessel; yet under the favor of the Engagement, the French
having Landed a few Men retreated, dispairing (notwithstanding the advantage of
their Number) of any answerable Success: Though our Admiral resolves to stick
close to them, and in a little time we doubt not (under God) to make good the
Justice of our Cause, and pull down the Pride of that Antichristian Monarch,
who has so long disturbed the Peace of the whole Christian World.

LONDON, Printed by W. Davis. 2689.


