LICENSED, TO. L'ESTRANGE,

October 11. 1677.

THE Triumph OF LOVE OVER FORTUNE.

A Pleasant Novel.

Written in French by that Great Wit of France M. St. Bremond.

AND Translated into English by a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, near the Piazzas. 1678.

The Triumph of Love over Fortune.
THE Sun had newly past the vernal Aequinox, the Earth breathed Sweets, the Air
was mild and temperate, the Face of Heaven smiled, and all the World looked gay
and youthful, when a King of Spain (whose Name History mentions not) accepting
readily the tempting invitation of that charming season, resolved to take the
Country-Air, and please himself with those divertisements a short recess from
Madrid fairly promised him. He was a Prince famed for Gallantry and
Magnificence; and of his Courtiers who could pretend to either, there was not
one he took not with him to Aranjues; where, besides the pleasure they
frequently took in Hunting, they were entertained with Balls and Dances,
Opera's, Races, Tournaments, and other rare divertisements, wherein the Lords
and Grandees of his Court wholly applied themselves to excel each other.

Aranjues is a House of pleasure, seated most deliciously, distant from Madrid
a short days journey between that City and Toledo, well built and neatly
furnished; but neither Furniture too rich, nor Building too Magnifigent for a
Palace-Royal and Residence of Majesty. The curious, who travel as far as
Madrid, never forget to take a turn to Aranjues to view the Walks and Gardens
there, as worth their sight; where the Bowers, the Waterworks, the Grottes,
the Fountains, Labyrinths, and other Ornaments entertain them with a pleasing
verdure; and by the joint favors of Art and Nature appears a charming Beauty.
To complete all, what can more delight the Eye than the fair Rows of Trees
there of a prodigious height, in a Country which, for twenty Leagues about,
scarce produces those of ordinary growth?

The King took more delight in that house (as fitted more for Liberty) than his
Palaces of Prad^ del Campo, and the Buen Retiro, standing hard-by the Gates of
Madrid. The splendour he lived in there was attractive enough to bring thither
all the Nobles of his Kingdom, had they wanted inclination to follow him where
e're he went: But he was a Prince who, to the height of State and Power, added
so many charming qualities of personal Excellency, 'twas difficult to judge
whether his Subjects love, or duty to him were the greater.

Never was Reign happier than his. He was a comely Person, handsome and witty to
admiration; Young, tall, nimble, and capable of all that is brave, or great; of
noble inclinations, worthy the Crown he wore. Those leisure-hours his glory and
cares of State allowed him, he bestowed in Love and Gallantry: and no Man ever
acquitted himself better, and came off with more applause.

The Spaniards have in all Ages been observed much inclined to jealousy: the
Women there are slaves to that passion, before they know what it is to love.
Hence it is they are such early Lovers: it is natural, especially for Women, to
long for that which is forbidden them. Revolt is with them a certain effect of
Restraint: and a Husband jealous (though of the most honest Wife on Earth,) is
upon the point of being made what he most fears to be.

In this King's time, the Court of Spain had put on a new Face, the course of
things, at least in matters of gallantry, was wholly altered, and Maxims
introduced (quite contrary to those formerly in vogue, but) in favor of the
Gallants: And their Party being strongest, the jealous were forced to slacken a
little the rigor and strictness of Ancient Customs to make way for New. The
Ladies had free access to all entertainments, and needed not those subtle
Intrigues, and Multitude of Confidents they formerly used to carry on their
Amors; the Races, the Walks and the Plays, were the ordinary Rendezvous to
make and appoint, and sometimes to complete and perform Assignations.

What a brave time was this for the Spanish Ladies! they think of it to this
day with sorrow it is past: and declare with indignation that the Name of this
King, which those of his time suffered to be buried in oblivion, deserved to
have been engraved in Letters of Gold over the Chamber-Doors of all the gallant
Ladies of his Court, and transmitted to Posterity to be had in perpetual
Veneration.

Amidst the pleasures of Aranjues, Love, jealous perhaps to see this Prince so
long free, and not sensible of the power of his influence, resolved to find him
employment by engaging him in an Amor the more difficult to manage, as having
in it no pretense from Ambition or Fortune to countenance the pursuit: And the
truth is, it gave him more trouble than an hundred others he had been engaged
in. This was not an Amor with the Daughter, or Wife of any Grandee of his
Kingdom: He had already past through all the Degrees of his Nobility; not a
Lord in his Court, but by a Wife, a Daughter, or a Kinswoman was related to the
King. But the present Engagement was more extraordinary, as very remote from
any thing of Pomp, or of Grandeur. 'Twas in a Garden, from among the Roses and
Lilles, Love picked out a Beauty to charm the King: a Beauty to which Aranjues
gave Birth.

Among the Courtiers (who made it their business to find every day some new
divertisement for the King) one resolved to entertain him with a Shepherd who
played excellently on the Flute. The King, a great Lover of Music, (especially
on those Country-Instruments) took extreme delight in hearing him play.

And finding that the Shepherd, besides his skill in Music, had in all his
actions an Air and Grace free from any clownishness, he was so taken with him,
that he admitted him of his Music, and gave him (as the rest) a Pension of two
hundred Patacoons a year.

This generous bounty of the King had put another Shepherd into a transport of
joy, but was received by Antonine with a calmness and moderation which
astonished that Prince, and forced him, after a stricter examination of his
Shepherd, now his new Musician, to say, the Body of that plain Shepherd lodged
a large and noble Soul. Some Lords taking notice of the pleasure the King took
in viewing him, (though they did not comprehend his thoughts of him) told the
King, that to perfect the divertisement, he must see dance to the Flute, the
Gardiner's Daughter of Aranjues, the prettiest Maid of all the Neighborhood:
The King immediately longed to see her, and commanded she should come before
him.

She came dressed like a Nymph: and Antonine scarce began to play on his Flute,
but she fell a-dancing; and with that grace, that cadence, those gestures so
proper and so taking, that she charmed the whole Court. She was a Girl about
fifteen years of age, having alittle of the Country Mien, and Air, but nothing
rustic, and a very pleasing Face.

The King (none of the most insensible) first felt the force of her charms;
every step she made, each gesture, every action of the little Country-Lass were
so many Magic Spells to inchant this Prince. He felt his heart seized with an
unaccountable sudden joy, as she drew near him in dancing, or looked upon him;
and 'twas not in his power to forbear, once or twice, discovering his Passion
by Exclamations the whole Court took notice of.

This was the only pleasure he took all that day; apleasure that troubled all
the rest they would have diverted him with at Aranjues. The little Maid was
scarce withdrawn with the Shepherd, but the King fell into a deep melancholy,
which put him wholly out of humor. He had observed a familiarity betwixt 'em,
which, though usual among Country People, seemed to trouble him though he knew
not why. The Ladies he had most esteem for endeavored to divert him, but in
vain; for he spent the rest of the day in walking alone, to enjoy the pleasure
of his new Idea's.

He was restless all night, and could not sleep, he thought a thousand times of
the little Country-Girl, and indeed could think of nothing else; he fancied her
so beautiful and charming, so innocent, so Country-like, that his imaginations
finished the work Love had but begun.

The Sun had scarce appeared in his Chamber, but he got up; and being dressed,
went a walking in the Garden, where he sent for the Shepherd to furnish himself
with a pretense for seeing the Girl, whom he presently gave order for. Antonine
played on the Flute, the Girl danced the king charmed anew with new graces he
fancied he discovered every moment in her, was more and more affected, and, in
a word, deeply in love with her. No sooner had this Passion taken possession of
his heart, but his jealousy of the Shepherd increased. He saw the Girl smile
on him, and observed a tenderness expressed in every look she gave him; and that
she took pleasure in speaking to him: and that the Shepherd discovered some
little complaisances of a Lover, both when he played, and when he came near
her, which, convinced the King there was between them a correspondence of
affection. This vexed the King at heart, and the more because his passion was so
new he durst not yet reveal it: At last, unable to endure the torment of his
own impatience, and unwilling to be longer witness of the Shepherd's happiness
to which he thought himself contributary, he sent away the Gardiner's Daughter,
but kept the Shepherd with him. He continued walking without speaking a word to
any but Don Augustine, Marquess de Las Tarrillas his Confident and Favorite, to
whom he revealed the secret of his affection, with expressions and sighs which
sufficiently evidenced he had never been so deep in Love. The Marquess having
observed the King had till then been taken only with Beauties eminent for Birth
and Merit, was surprised to see him on the sudden fall so low. He was a
dextrous Courtier, a great Master of the Art of pleasing Princes; but in spite
of all his policy and complaisance for his King, he could not forbear telling
him (with that liberty which brought him into favor) that an Engagement, that
so ill became his Quality and Character, would occasion much discourse in a
Country naturally too satirical: There are, Sir, adds he, in your Court more
accomplished Beauties, more Noble and Illustrious, whose charms will not stain
the splendour of your affection. Yes, replys the King, there are Beauties who
love my Quality, not me; whose kindness terminates in themselves, who pretend a
passion for me, only to serve their interest, and raise their fortunes. Who
consent to my desires out of hopes to be advanced by the affection of a King:
Take these hopes away, and assure your self of a repulse. Ah, Don Augustine,
it is a misery for a delicate and tender Lover not to know whether he ows his
Conquests to Merit, or to Fortune; or at least whether they are not gained more
by what appears without, than what moves within. But, Sir, said Don Augustine,
consider it is a Gardiner's Daughter. Yes, a Gardiner's Daughter, replys the
King; and pray, adds he in some heat, what were such and such, before I made
them what they are? And how many Grandees are there this day at Court who owe
their rise to Love; and had it not been for the gallantries of my Ancestors,
had perhaps been less than the Father of this charming Maid. Consider with your
self what pleasure it will be to me to gain the love of that innocent Girl, who
peradventure knows not what Love is, till I teach her; who desires not Riches
or Titles; whose kindness will be an effect of my passion, and her affection a
Creature of mine.

Don Augustine finding by this discourse 'twould be in vain to endeavor
diverting the King from a passion he had so deeply espoused, applied himself
wholly (as is usual with those of his Character) to please him in serving his
passion, and preserve himself the honor of his Confidence; telling him, he
needed only to have the Gardener spoken to, who would think himself too much
honored that his Majesty should vouchsafe his Daughter a look. Yes, replys the
King; and should the Father be for me and deliver me his Daughter, think you
that Sacrifice would satisfy my passion? No, no, Don Augustine; the passion I
have for that amiable Creature is not such as you imagine, which a bare
fruition may satisfy, I must have her affection, or nothing, and cannot expect
any rest till I have gained her heart. I confess the Enterprise appears
difficult to take a Place by formal Attaques, where Art, Wit, and perhaps Merit
will be useless: but this, if I succeed, will render the Conquest more worthy
my affection, and heighten the pleasure of having obtained my desire. You speak
of Beauty, adds he, having walked some paces without saying a word, is there
any thing so pretty in all the Court? and had you observed her stature, her
parts, her mien, the grace attends all she says, all she does, durst you have
told me there is any thing so charming in the World? Examine her better, view
her more strictly, and you will see there is not a finer Girl under Heaven. She
has not the breeding of our Ladies, but is that a fault? is not pure Nature
more amiable?

After a discourse so full of Arguments of Love, which the Marquess thought not
fit to contradict, the King asked who the Gardener was, and whom the Shepherd
belonged to. The Marquess being ignorant of both, could not give any
satisfactory account; but had order to inform himself particularly where the
Gardener dwelt, what Family he had, and how descended; and to take it into his
special protection and care: and to enquire who the Shepherd was, and whether
he visited the Gardiner's Daughter.

A Master is never served with more cheerfulness than in his Amors, as the
best Scene for the Servant to play his own Game in, especially having hopes
effectually to answer the Master's expectation, as Don Augustine had. He sent
that very day in search of Dorothy's Father, and after several discourses about
his Family, let him know he was in a fair way to come to as good fortune as a
Man of his condition could wish. He asked him if he knew Antonine; and was
fully informed by the Gardener concerning that Shepherd: then he bid him have a
care of his Daughter, whom he was to look upon as the Author of his good
fortune, without giving further light whether the Marquess, or any other were
concerned in the advice. This was so managed by order from the King: And the
Expressions (like infallible Oracles) coming from the Mouth of the Marquess de
las Torrillas, whose Countenance was sufficient to raise the fortune of the
greatest Subject of Spain, so transported the Good Man that he knew not how to
make his acknowledgment for joy. The Marquess, to make good his words by
suitable effects, put into his hand a Purse of an hundred Pistols, the most
certain confirmation he could possibly have given the Gardener of the News he
had told him. He returned home, so fully assured by what he had in his hand, of
the favorable influence of his Stars, that he thought himself the happiest, if
not the richest Man upon Earth.

The Favorite having executed his Commission, like a worthy Confident, goes to
give his Master an account; and acquainting him with the Particulars of the
Gardiner's Family, told him, he was fully informed he was a very honest Man,
who lived very privately, not admitting into his House any one might bring a
scandal upon him: And that his Daughter Dorothy had the Reputation of a Maid so
free from intrigue that she had never been suspected to have been engaged in
one. And what of Antonine, says the King? Antonine, Sir, says the Marquess, is
the Son of a rich Shepherd near Tolledo, who was recommended to the Gardener,
and lodges at his House. Antonine, replys the King sighing, does he Lodge at
Dorothy's Father's? Yes, Sir, said the Marquess, very much surpised to see how
the King received the News of it; but I believe there is no cause to fear him.
More cause, replys the King, more a great deal than you think. What, a
Shepherd, answers the Marquess? Yes, a Shepherd, says the King; a Shepherd who
has all the good qualities requisite to gain the love of a Shepherdess. Had
you viewed him with the Eyes of a Lover, you would have quickly discovered what
it is to be such a Shepherd. Don Augustine, adds he, no Rival is contemptible; to
slight him, is to lose all. But, Sir, says the Marquess, you are his Master,
and may rid your hands of him when you please: These sort of Lovers have not so
strong inclinations as we. Give him but a better Employment in another place
than he has here, he will yield up his Shepherdess to you, and quit all his
pretensions to her. You think so, replys the King, but I do not. But should I
comply with my affection in taking your advice, what will the World say of my
removing the Shepherd after the favor I have showed him? will they not say I
have banished him? And the Wits, who claim a sovereign jurisdiction to censure
all actions, when they see me court this Girl; will they not say presently, I
was jealous of Antonine? No, no, I am concerned in Reputation to let him stay
with her at the peril of having my passion made public by removal of him: if
he be a professed Lover of her, it is my part to endeavor gaining her from him.
But I must first know how far he is advanced, whether she is pleased with his
addresses, or barely permits them, or loves him in good earnest. These
Mysteries are never well discovered, but by those who have been in Love; a mere
Confident cannot penetrate them: Therefore get two Suits made me after the
Country-Fashion; and let them be brought me tomorrow at my rising: I will go
in Person to the Gardiner's, to observe Dorothy and Antonine.

Any Man but the Marquess would have boggled, and been scandalized at a design
so contrary to the Spanish Gravity, and unsuitable to Majesty; but he was so
well acquainted with the Gallantries of his Prince, and so verst in the
management of them for the King, who loved adventures and disguises, that he
was ready to fall a laughing at the Frolic: but reflecting they had no
acquaintance, nor correspondence at the Gardiner's, he apprehended some
mischance which might be laid to his charge. He represented it to the King as
he carried him the Habits on the Morrow, telling him he exposed the Majesty of
his Person to affront, by adventuring disguised into a Man's House he was not
acquainted with. The King who loved not to be crossed, made him a short answer,
that in matters of Love he expected from a Person of his Character a great deal
of Complaisance, but no Counsel; and that the advice he commonly took in those
Cases, was only such as his affection suggested him. He put on one of those
Suits, and the Marquess having taken the other, they went down a privy Stair
which brought them to a Walk in the Garden; where they were no sooner entered,
but they saw Dorothy picking Flowers. The jealous Prince, ravished with joy,
made signs to Don Augustine to follow him without noise; and went with him into
the Muses Bower, at the corner of the Walk, where they hid themselves from her.
It Is an excellent opportunity, says the King to his Confident, we must follow
her to see who the Nosegay is made for.

The patience of the Monarch, on this occasion, was admirable; but must be
considered as an effect of his Love. At last Dorothy goes out, taking the way
of the Long Walks, to the astonishment of the Parties concerned, especially the
Amorous Prince, who more curious than ever to know whither she went, followed
her with no small perplexity and agitation of heart. It was not long but he
might guess at her design; for they were scarce past the second Walk but they
heard Antonine's Flute, which the King thought not half so sweet then as
formerly. He looked twice or thrice on Don Augustine without saying a word; but
not able to conceal his jealousy longer, You see now, says he, whether I have
not reason enough to fear this Rival. Ah, Don Augustine, my Curiosity is like to
cost me dear: but it is no matter, let us go and see all. They went beside the
Walks to avoid being seen by her: at last they saw Dorothy making up to
Antonine, and presenting him with the Nosegay; which the Shepherd receiving
with actions full of Love, and of Joy, took her by the hand, which she
permitted him to kiss; a great Favor in Spain, and signifies something more.
This vexed the Jealous King at the heart, to that degree of Impatience he was
just making up to them. But Dorothy having not stayed a moment longer with the
Shepherd, the King advanced no further, but returned toward the Palace.

He was pensive and melancholy, and past those shady Walks musing of the
happiness of a Shepherd, which a King was forced to envy. He acquainted the
Marquess with his thoughts; the Marquess told him, the best way to quiet his
Spirits was to send away the Shepherd. But who can assure me, replies the King,
that by removing him from Dorothy's Person, I shall remove him from her
affection. A months absence, Sir, says the Marquess, will assure you of it.
Absence, answers the King, too frequently strengthens affection; and I am not
now to learn opposition heightens Love. But I am content for the pleasure of
the Experiment, to try the means you propose. Give him a Place at Buen Retiro,
and let him be sent away this day.

Don Austin undertook the business. And having put off his Disguise, went about
Antonine's Commission, which was presently dispatched. The Office they gave him
was to be Porter of his Majesty's Palace of Buen Retiro, as the most proper for
a young Man of his Character. They who carried him the order for it, made him
understand it as an effect of the King's Bounty to him; though he did not take
it so, but answered those who congratulated his good Fortune, that He knew not
what belonged to being a Porter, that the King might honor another with the
Employment, who might deserve and perform it better. As for him, he had kept
sheep all his Life, and would do nothing else. They pressed him however to
undertake the Employ; but the King having ordered no violence should be offered
him, and the Shepherd having desired to speak with the King before he should be
sent away, they let him go.

The Shepherd went to the King, fell down at his feet, and with all humility
begged of him not to overload and oppress him with his Bounties, but permit him
to continue (as he had found him) a Shepherd; and not force him to quit a
Condition he had devoted his Life to, and preserred before all others, assuring
His Majesty he was content, he was satisfied with what he had, and envied no
Man. The King as soon as he perceived Antonine come toward him, fell
a-laughing; but when he heard him speak, he sighed; not for Jealousy, but for
very trouble it was not in his power to be so happy as the Shepherd. How happy,
thinks he, is this Shepherd, to have all the desires either of Love or Fortune?
As he made these Reflections, he viewed him from top to toe. And admiring a
young Man of that Condition should have sentiments so extraordinary, he had
judged him to be quite other than he appeared, but that he looked upon it as (an
effect though) a Miracle of Love. This Prince had a Soul too Noble and
Generous, not to make his Jealousy vail to the merit of Antonine; so that he
could not prevail with himself to send him away. He called for Dorothy, and the
better to penetrate the secrets of her heart, told her, She might now take her
Leave of Antonine, for he was sending him away to Buen Retiro, where he had
business for him, and had given him a good Employment. The poor Innocent was
thunderstruck at this; her Blood flushed into her face to complete the
Embellishment of the most Charming Beauty on Earth: She suddenly made answer,
She was sure Antonine would not accept of the Employment, because he had
promised her he would die rather than part with her. But I would have him go
thither, replies the King; it will be his advantage, and the making of his
Fortune; And will you be against it? No, Sir, says she; but I humbly beseech
your Majesty to command my Father to let me go along with him to look to the
Garden there. You love the Shepherd then I see, says the King: And Dorothy
making him no answer, he rose; and not able to endure longer so tormenting a
Dilogue, left her with Antonine. The Marquess (who was present there) followed
the King, admiring no less the patience of his Prince, than charmed at the
passion of the two Countrey-Lovers. Well, Don Austin, says the King to him,
when they got a little out of the Crowd, was ever Lover so unfortunate as I?
Here is a Rival, and a Rival beloved. I must of necessity either conquer my
passion, or send him packing. Yet such is my weakness, I cannot do the one or
the other. The Favorite complying with the humor of his Master, answered,
'Twas in truth something rare to see a Prince in Love (as he was) express so
much Goodness and Favor for a Shepherd, who stood in his way, and might cross
his Designs: But that sometimes particular Engagements require particular
Conduct. Hitherto, Sir, adds he, you have loved like a King: variety is
pleasant, and to change sometimes is very delightful. Perhaps you may find
pleasure in devesting your self of Majesty, and addressing your self to a
Countrey-Girl, after the manner of those of her Character who court her. The
King was willing to do it; and to let the Marquess see how kindly he took the
overture, he told him, That in Love-Policy the first thing a Lover is to do, is
to accommodate himself to the Condition and humor of his Mistress: And that
those Charming bonds of Sympathy, which linked hearts into so close an union,
had their beginning from thence. However, they concluded Dorothy should be
taken from her Parents, and placed with some Lady of the Court, where the King
might see her with more convenience and less noise.

The Marquess willing to have the honor of managing the Intrigue, and loath any
other should pretend to the Advantage he promised himself from it, proposed to
the King, That Dorothy should be placed with the Marchioness his Wife; her
Appartment being next the King's, (who was every day there) and the most
convenient of any in the Palace. The King had thought of it before; but the
Marchioness, though young and handsome, made great profession of Virtue, and
stood much upon her Honor, which made the King fear she would be hardly
induced to accept a share in that Confidence he was willing to repose in her.
No man knew her better than the King, having been formerly in love with her,
though without any considerable success; which had not a little contributed to
the haughtiness of this Lady, and gained her the Reputation of an Extraordinary
Merit. So rare are the Examples of Beauties whose Virtue is proof against the
Passions of Kings: we must seek them in former Ages. In our days faults
committed with Princes, are so far from being reputed crimes, that the
offenders triumph in their weakness, and make their Infirmity their Glory.

The Marchioness de las Torillas might have pretended to the honor of the
Virtuous Ladies of Ancient Times, and the King after the experience he had of
her Virtue, had reason to fear she would not be pleased with the Employment.
But the Marquess, the most zealous of Favorites to do a Master service, had
that confidence in the kindness his Lady had for him, and made the King believe
so much of the power he had over her, that this Prince, who desired it as much
at least as the Marquess, gave him leave to propose it to his Lady.

The Marquess took his time. Man and Wife can guess pretty near the good hour
they may obtain what they desire of one another. Don Austin was of opinion the
Lucky moment was much about the time of first waking in the morning. After some
little endearments and caresses, for prologue to the ensuing discourse, he fell
a-talking of Love; how it takes us when we least think on it, and sometimes by
objects that little deserved it: that this had happened to the King, whose
affection had stooped so low as the Gardiner's pretty Daughter. That in truth
it appeared a blemish to his Honor, which till now had not permitted him to
place his affection on any object unworthy it. But that Love is Blind, and
Kings are Men as well as others. He past then to the obligations they were
under to their Prince, who daily bestowed new Favors upon them: And when he
came to the point of acquainting her with the King's desire to have the
Gardiner's Daughter with her, he endeavored to gild over the proposal with the
advantages it would bring them, to have in their Family a young Innocent thing
who would be at their dispose; and by the passion the King had for her, was
like to be one of the greatest Ladies at Court, and improve by that means their
Credit and Favor. The haughty Marchioness had not the patience to let him
finish a discourse so injurious to the Glory she pretended to; but rejecting
all that fair show of Honor and Fortune to be purchased on such shameful
conditions, she told him, He was a dirty and pitiful Fellow to undertake a
business of this nature, and but think a Woman of her Quality and Virtue could
act so base and unworthy a part. This confounded Don Austin, and had utterly
defeated him, but that the King, who could not sleep, came in to his aid. He
was impatient to know the answer of the Marchioness, and entering her Chamber,
found her very angry, and little disposed to grant his request. She gave him
almost the same Language she had given Don Austin, but tempered with the
Civility and respects due to Majesty: But as she complained what small value he
had for her, after so many reasons to esteem her, she added he was Master
there, and might dispose as he pleased of her Apartment; but she hoped he would
give her leave to retire, that he might have the more room, and she not
incommode him. The King who never quitted a design he had espoused, heard her
without the least interruption. And when she had done, he spoke her so fair,
and gave her such smooth and insinuating Language, that he made her believe it
would not reflect upon her Honor to grant him his desire. In a word, he
obtained her consent to take Dorothy for one of her Maids, and promised her she
should be no further concerned.

The King triumphing for the conquest he had gained over the Marchioness, the
most haughty and tender of her Honor of all the Ladies of his Court, told the
Marquess, He must go speak to Dorothy's Father. The Gardener brought his
Daughter to Don Austin; and thought himself so much obliged for the Present of
the hundred Pistoles, that he would in acknowledgment have brought him his Wife
had he desired it.

Antonine was then tending his Sheep, and, at his return home, sufficiently
surpised not to find Dorothy there, and to hear she was gone to wait on the
Marchioness de las Torillas, he stayed not a moment at the Gardiner's, but
would go learn of Dorothy what made that Lady take her into her Family. He had
discovered it was the Marquess would have honored him with the Employment of
Porter of Buen Retiro; and knowing he was seldom guilty of too much generosity,
nor reputed very obliging, he suspected him for the favor he would have done
him. And now, thinks he, the King has the goodness to allow me to stay here,
the Marquess must prefer Dorothy to wait upon his Lady?

Antonine, whose Wit (as well as Birth) was too high for the Condition of a
Shepherd, though he wore the habit, presently discovered there was design in
the Business: That the love he had for that Maid, and the kindness she expressed
for him had been taken notice of: And some were grown jealous of him. But Don
Austin was the Man he suspected, having no thought the King was concerned.
Antonine goes to Court, enters the Marchioness Apartment, and making use of
that liberty the King's Favor allowed him, he runs up and down, and at last
finds his Mistress, walking alone in a Chamber, where the Marquess had newly
left her. He takes her aside, and being scarce able to speak for the trouble he
was in, Dorothy, says he, you know I love you, and therefore may believe none
more gl^d than my self for your good Fortune in being placed with the
Marchioness de las Torillas. You will never have a Fortune answerable to your
merit and my wishes: But, to deal plainly with you, this design of taking you
from your Father's bodes me no good. I am too sensible of it; I will not tell
you why, nor how, for I cannot if I would: but there is something in it makes
me terribly afraid. Nor that I can think you will change your affection with
your Fortune: And that being made higher than you were, you will slight a
Shepherd, who slights all for you. I have a better opinion of your Kindness and
Constancy, and know you better principl'd than to give me cause to suspect you
of any thing so mean. But, Dorothy, the Court is a dangerous place for a young
thing as you are, and you quit the Innocence of our Woods to follow the Court.
You are here in a House, where doubtless I cannot have the same liberty as at
your Father's; nor see you but in the crowd, nor speak with you but before
witness: What a torment will this be to a Shepherd that loves you as I do? who
desire to see you every moment, and have always something to say to you. To
these Amorous reasons he added a thousand considerations, which made great
impression on the young Maid, as spoken by one who had the gift of persuading
her what ever he pleased. She was just going back with him to her Father's, but
Antonine told her she must not be too hasty. And as he was upon acquainting her
with the measures she should observe, word was brought her the King would speak
with her, and stayed for her in the Marchioness's Chamber. Antonine, who
thought himself so much in the King's Favor, that he might without offense
bear Dorothy company, was willing to follow her, as well to make an end of what
he had to say to her, as to satisfy the curiosity he had to know what the King
would have with her. They came to the Marchioness's Chamber, where they found
only Don Austin and his Lady, which was no small help to make the Shepherd
believe his first suspicions were not ill-grounded, That the Marquess had a
mind to Dorothy, and would have got rid of him by sending him to Buen Retiro,
and had placed her with his Lady, on no other design but to part him and
Dorothy; and to make the easier prey of her Innocence, used the King's Name and
Authority against him and her. To complete his trouble, and convince him
thoroughly of the misfortune he dreaded, they were scarce entered the Chamber,
but the Marquess took Dorothy by the hand, and led her into another Room where
the King stayed for her, unseen by Antonine who was left alone with the
Marchioness. This Lady observing the countenance of the Shepherd, fell
a-laughing to see him look so pale and wan at his Mistress being taken from
him. And to prevent the suspicion of being party to the design, she resolved to
divertise her self with discoursing of it; and to clear her Reputation she came
up to a window where Antonine was, and asked him smiling, how he durst trust
Dorothy with the Marquess? I know not, Madam, answers he, but believe I must
take my measures in that particular from you, who are equally concerned, and (I
persuade my self,) have power enough to prevent any thing of that nature you
had reason to fear. The Marchioness surpised at the answer, would try a little
further, telling him Don Austin was Master there, and his will was a law to
her. I may, replies the Shepherd, say as much of Dorothy, and with a great deal
more reason: For I have not any right over her, nor is she obliged to give me
an account of her actions. But you love her, answers the Lady, and Lovers have
great rights to their Mistresss. Don Austin, Madam, replies Antonine, is your
Husband, and Marriage has higher rights than Love can pretend to. The
Marchioness, charmed with these reparties so much above the capacity of a
Shepherd, looked upon him with admiration, viewing him a pretty while without
saying a word. But to bring him in play again: Don Austin, says she, has found
a pretty young Girl he likes better than me, and if he loves her, must I take
it ill? No, Madam, answers Antonine, if you love him not: But I who love this
Girl with an unparalled passion, should, I confess, be at my Wit's end to see
another partake with me the happiness of being loved by her. You are jealous
then, Antonine, says the Lady not able to forbear laughing. I really am so,
Madam, answers he, not that I think I have any reason for it on this occasion,
but that in truth I cannot forbear it on any: And should Don Austin design no
more than divertisement and do all this in jest, as I am persuaded he does, yet
is he guilty of the highest Cruelty imaginable, in tormenting a poor Shepherd
who has no pleasure of Life but the Love of his Shepherdess, wherein Don
Austin gives us disturbance without any reason. The more the Marchioness heard
Antonine speak, the more willing she was to give him occasion of speaking. She
had heard say he was very gentile in his Expressions, and had a particular
grace in speaking, which was reported the reason of the Kings loving him as he
did; but she would never have believed he had the Wit she perceived in him, his
discourse having more than surpised her.

Don Austin coming out of the King's Chamber, took his Lady aside, praying her
to send away the Shepherd; for if the King found him there, he would think she
had kept him with her of purpose to cross his designs. Antonine seeing the
Marquess come out, thought Dorothy was alone, and asked the Lady whether he
might not be allowed to see her. She told him, No; And that, if he might, she
would not advise him to'r. It seems then, Madam, says Antonine, Don Austin
has forbid it, and came in for that purpose, being jealous I would endeavor
it; and you are willing to comply with him. No, no, answers she ready to burst
with laughing, I Will secure you from Don Austin. He Is not the Man y' are to
fear: But it is enough, Antonine, withdraw. What say you, Madam, you will secure
me from the Marquess, and would have me withdraw: Can I be so unfortunate,
(adds he with a lamentable tone,) to have any other to fear? I know not,
answers she, but should it fall out so, as possible it may, you must be
cheerful as you can: It Is no news for Lovers to have Rivals, and you may have a
Rival may be more for your advantage than misfortune. The Marchioness let fall
these last words out of negligence and mere carelessness, to manage (as she
might) an affair which procured at once her vexation and her scorn. These
haughty Ladies who glory in loving no body, and not admitting love from any,
are jealous of all the World, when others are jealous only of those they love.
The Shepherd fixed his Eye on her awhile, as if he would have read in her
Countenance the truth of what she had said. More for my advantage, Madam!
replies he, Can it be for my advantage to be robbed of all I love in the World?
The more potent the Rival, the greater the misfortune; and I should be very
sorry he should prove such as you say. Oh Heavens! cries he, not giving her
time to answer, should he be the Man I imagine! and should I have been born to
so much misfortune! He pronounced these words with so vehement action, and so
loud a voice, the Lady was afraid the King had heard him; and that she might be
charged with having spoken too much, the Shepherd having fully discovered what
she thought she had not half told him. She took him by the hand, and moved with
the tears she saw him shed, bid him (with an air of Complaisance) trouble
himself no further, but come again, and he should speak with Dorothy who could
better inform him. Ah! Madam, answers he, I am undone, I know too much from you.

With that he went out so oppressed with grief he was scarce able to stand: The
Marchioness was troubled to see him gone, because she had not given him more
comfort at parting; but she was so astonished at what she had heard that she
could hardly believe her senses. She had not only never seen a Shepherd who
could discourse as he had done, but never known any so tender a Lover. She
could do no other all day than think with what grace and what transports he
expressed his passion: And she observed in his sentiments something so noble, so
rare and so moving, that without being guilty of downright inhumanity, she
thought it impossible not to be affected with them. But by persuading her self
of this truth, she found her heart unquiet, and did nothing but sigh all the
night long. She saw not the consequence of it, or at least would not see it.
She who had the haughtiness and height of Spirit to despise and reject the
addresses of a Crowned Head, could not fancy her self capable of the weakness
to make account of a poor Shepherd. She had indeed pitty'd his tears, but she
thought that was all.

The King the hottest Lover in the World, being never at ease but when Dorothy
was in sight, yet unwilling notice should be taken of his violent inclinations
for her, gave order for some days all the Divertisements of the Court should be
in the Marchioness's Apartment, where very few had entrance; and of those few
who were admitted, poor Antonine could never make one, though he endeavored to
get in all the ways in his power. This troubled him the more, as having not
been able to rest day or night since his last discourse with the Marchioness,
nor ever likely to be at ease, till he could speak with his Mistress.

The Marchioness who would have been very glad to see him, admiring he was not
come to her for many days, knew not what to think on it. She spied him one
morning walking under her windows, and having made signs to him to come up
presently, gave order to an old Housekeeper, her Confident, to let him into her
Chamber as privately as possible. Antonine, says the Marchioness, methinks of a
Lover so passionate as you, you are soon comforted for the loss of your Mistress.
I cannot yet think her altogether lost, Madam, answers he, nor guess at the
reason they were so cruel to deny me the favor of seeing her. You must look
you out another Mistress, Antonine, says the Lady, and such a Shepherd as you
are may have your choice. Look out another, Madam, replies Antonine, with a
tone that sufficiently evidenced his grief and surprise, she must be first
false to me, and I very clearly convinced of it: Besides, I know not whe^^^^
after all I should not rather choose ceasing to live than to love her. But,
Madam, adds he like a Man in afright, is it from her you give me this advice;
and has she no more mind to me? I do not say so, answers the Lady, I believe
Dorothy loves you: But 'twere better for you to think of another in time, and I
tell it you as a Friend. As long as Dorothy loves me, replies the Shepherd,
'twill be impossible for me to change. And did you but know what it is for a
Lover like me to quit his Mistress, you are too generous, Madam, to advise me
to it: But if Dorothy, adds he in a very pressing and curious manner, be not
false to me, why should I quit her, Madam, unless you take it ill I should make
love to her in your Family. No, Antonine, answers the Lady, you are too expert
and disscreet a Lover to be found fault with for making Love: I will give you
no trouble in it. But --

She stopped there. Ah! Madam, says the Shepherd, seeing her make a stop, what
torment have you put me to for three or four days, that you have left me in
doubt whom I am to fear! The Marchioness bid him come again at nine a clock at
night, when the King went to Council, and she would let him see Dorothy, who
would tell him what she was loath to let him know, being very unwilling to be
the first should give him so ill news.

Antonine content with this hope, though racked with suspicion, returned home
to wait with impatience the hour was assigned him.

The Marchioness was more charmed than ever with the merit of the Shepherd. She
found in him the Character of so tender and passionate a Lover, she confessed no
heart could be so insensible not to be affected with him. And for her part, her
haughtiness in slighting Love, must own an abligation to the Court for
producing no Lovers, but what were corrupt: And she doubted now and then,
whether it were not pardonable in a Lady of her Quality and Honor, to love a
Shepherd as Antonine. These doubts and Reflections were so strong and so
piercing, her heart which at first felt only the point of them, found it self
at length very deeply wounded: But she would not yet complain of it, because
the wound, though dnagerous, had something of pleasure in it which charmed away
the pain. In these virtuous Souls so little accustomed to love (...) touch
proves an incurable (...) they rely upon their haughtin^^^ and their Greatness
of Spirit, which often abuses them, and is sometimes the instrument which
betrays them to Love. The fair Marchioness full of her New Ideas, was drowned
in an Amorous amusement from morning till night, when the King entered her
Chamber with Dorothy by the hand, and prayed her she would for a little while
take his little Mistress into her care, and he would presently return. The
Lady's thoughts were at that time so distracted, she heard not a word the King
said, and knew not what to answer him. He was not well pleased with it; and
discovering a coldness and melancholy in her countenance, he would have asked
her the reason; but was hastened into the Council by business of extraordinary
importance. Dorothy remained with the Marchioness, who taking an exacter view
of her than formerly, thought her handsomer than ever; or that she appeared so
at least to her who already began to be jealous. She asked her if she had not a
desire to see Antonine: to which Dorothy having answered with a blush, 'twas
long since she saw him, and she would be very glad to see him. Now, the Lady
replied, she should see him that evening, but the King must not know it: she
had hardly done speaking, but Alice the Housekeeper came in to let her know
Antonine was at the door. The Marchioness bid Dorothy go into the Closet, to
surprise him the more. She was willing to have the pleasure of seeing him a
moment in private, and make him sensible the obligation he had to her for the
goodness she expressed toward him. And it was no small favor for a Lady, who
in point of honor had refused to intermeddle with the Amors of a King, to
make her self the Confident of a Shepherd and a Gardiner's Daughter. So much do
we differ from our selves as occasions moves us, so easy a matter is it to
dispense with scruples our passion are inclined to remove.

You are very punctual, Antonine, says she, as he came in, and if I mistake
not, are come a little sooner than I appointed you. Time seems long to those in
Love, Madam, answers he; and they are so fearful of coming too late to see
their Mistresses, they are always the first at the place of Rendez-vous. I have
promised you, says the Lady, to let you see your Mistress this evening, but do
you know what a hazard I run, and what trouble I shall create my self, if this
should be known? Get you into that Closet for fear of being seen; and if
Dorothy comes to you, think very much your Friend. Antonine, not to lose
moments so precious, expressed more by actions than words how sensible he was of
the favors she did him; and opening the Closet-door was extremly surprised at
the sight of the fair Dorothy dressed all over with Jewels. The young Lover
ravished with joy, run presently to him. But he received her with that coldness
and sadness, her heart was almost froz'n with fear: And she forbore her
caresses to quarrel him for expressing no more joy at the sight of her after so
tedious an absence. He sighed and made no other answer: Dorothy more troubled
than before, asked him as one affrighted, what the matter was he used her so:
The Shepherd was unwilling to be the first should reproach her for what she
perhaps did not yet know; and and he had need enough to be better informed of,
not to accuse her without cause. He asked her first, whence she had all those
Jewels he saw about her. Dorothy answered the King had given them her, and very
ingenuously told him all the Visits and fine promises he had made her, and in a
word all that past since her coming to the Marchioness. Antonine heard her out
without saying a word, then turning another way in a mortal affliction, he lift
up his eyes and hands to Heaven without further explaining himself. But Dorothy
frightened at the action, prayed him so earnestly, adding so many caresses and
tears to her prayers, that the Shepherd could no longer deny her the
explication she begged of him, who was sufficiently concerned without her
entreaty to ease his heart a little by speaking his mind. Dorothy, says he, the
King is in love with you. Well, I know it, answers she, but if he loves me, he
loves you too; and what harm in that? What harm, replies the dejected Antonine
with a deep sigh; None, but that I shall never see you more, but die with
despair. And why should you die, says she, alarmed at these words; and why see
me no more, when the King who loves you, takes so much pleasure to see us
together. Yes, replies Antonine, do not you see that these three or four days I
am not allowed the liberty to enter this Appartment? But it is over, I am
undone, and you are to expect no more of me but my death. Poor Dorothy oppressed
with grief at this Discourse, gave free course to her tears, and embracing him
tenderly, asked him what reason he had to wish for death, since she loved him
above her Life. What am I the better for your Love, answers the Shepherd, when
my Rival is possessed of you all day, and courts you, and is a King and can do
what he pleases. Ah! how unfortunate am I! Never fear the King, says the
innocent Dorothy, for he has promised me he will never do any thing to
displease me. Antonine asked her, on what account he made her that promise; she
told him, it was upon occasion of some little Favors he would have obtained of
her. A cruel explication for one so deeply in Love! He looked upon her with a
languishing Eye, and dying away for fear of hearing more than he desired to
know, he fell into a mournful and sad silence; he was just expiring for grief,
when on the sudden he heard the King's voice in the Marchionesses Chamber.
Nothing could have happened more effectual to fetch him again, than the
approach of his Rival, jealousy being the passion that best quickens and most
heightens the courage of a Lover.

This Prince was under an Amorous impatience too strong to permit him to stay
long in the Council: Affairs of State, and of Love never agree well, not that
they are incompatible, or that a Great Genius is incapable to bear at once the
burden of both. But this is very rare, and it is commonly seen he that acquits
himself well of the one, is a little negligent of the other. This Prince having
very able Ministers, relied on them for the conduct of the State, that he might
entirely apply himself to his affairs of Love. He was much addicted to that
passion, and more sensible of the Pleasure that attended it, than ambitious of
the Glory of good Government: while they treated in his Closet of the most
important affairs of his Crown, his mind was in the Marchionesses Chamber,
where he had left his Heart with his Mistress; but he was not a little
surprised not to find her there at his return. He asked the Lady what was
become of her, she answered very coldly she knew not. I thought, Madam, answers
the King, having left her to your Care a few minutes, I might have had a better
account from you. I desired it of you, it is an innocent Creature, and knows not
how to behave her self; you might without wrong to your self have instructed
her a little, and told her she was to wait my coming. But I perceive what the
matter is -- I did not think, Sir, replies the Lady, that in leaving with me a
Gardiners Daughter, you desired I should be her Governess. No indeed, says the
King, but if you should be her Governess, think you that to be employed so on
my account could be a dishonor to you. Ah Sir! answers she, with an affected
smile, I come of a Blood -- And you might have come (says the King,
interrupting her angrily) of the best Blood of Castile, and have esteemed it an
Honor, to serve a King as I am in any manner whateever. With that he went out
very little satisfied with the proceedings of the Marchioness, and sent for Don
Austin to make his complaints to him. Antonin and Dorothy were in very great
perplexity having heard part of the discourse, but the Shepherd was the more
troubled of the two. The Lady bid Dorothy come into the Chamber, that if the
King came back again, as she feared he would, he might find her there. As for
Antonin she thought it not convenient to let him come out for fear of being
seen, and perhaps met by the King who was not far off: the mean time she fell
to instructing Dorothy what to say to the King, if he should question her for
the little Eclipse she had been under: but she was forced to cut off her Lesson
short, for the Amorous Prince impatiently desirous to know if she were
returned, came presently back and entered the Chamber with anger in his Face and
much discomposed, but at the sight of Dorothy his Choler vanished, and he
recovered his good humor.

The Marchioness would have helped Dorothy to make her excuse, and at the same
time make her own peace with the King: But he could not hear her, but said he
was satisfied; but entreated her to lend him her Closet, to pass a few minutes
with Dorothy there. This put the Lady into an extraordinary perplexity, with
all her coldness and indifferency she could not forbear blushing; she knew not
on what pretense to deny him; the key was in the door, and she was ruined if
the King found Antonin in the Closet. Poor Dorothy was no less disordered, and
though she thought she had no cause of being in fear for her Shepherd; yet she
could not rid her self of the fear that follows things done in private. Had the
King taken notice of her looks, they had all been undone. She had not then
learnt the Art of concealing or commanding her passion: but by good fortune the
King's Eyes were fixed on the Marchioness, who assisted with the readiness of
Wit, which never fails an able Woman at need, entreated him to stay a moment
till she had put the Closet in a condition to receive them, every thing being
out of order there. The King though in never so great haste (believing Ladies
Closets are often full of several things that belong to their dresses, and they
are very willing Men should not see, and that this was the cause of her
blushing) gave her leave to put it in order. She went into the Closet, and not
well knowing where to hide the poor Shepherd, she put him under a bed of
Repose, where he lay cooped up in a very narrow room. This done she came out to
make way for the King, who entered with Dorothy and made her sit with him on the
same Bed. Well Dorothy, says the King, you will never love me. The poor Girl
who knew not what was become of Antonine, surprised to miss him in the Closet,
looked all about, sometimes this, sometimes that way, without answering the
King, who continued his discourse; I may tell you I sigh and die for love of
you, you can give me the hearing without pitying my sufferings for you.
Dorothy heard not a word he said, 'twas kindness thrown away; she was troubled
for her Shepherd, and her sense as well as mind was wholly taken up with
thinking what was become of him. The King thinking 'twas the Ornaments, the
guilding and rarities of the Closet amused her, took her by the hand to make
her look toward him; Look upon me, and answer what I ask you, you little
Baggage, will you never love me? Yes, Sir, says she, if you will promise me not
to send away Antonine from Aranjuez. And who told you, replies the King, I
design to send him away -- No, Sir, says she, I was not told so, but I know not
why they will not let me see him, and I am afraid if I love you, you would not
have me love him too: And if I allow you to love him, answers the King, will
you love me in good earnest, or at least as well as your Shepherd? Dorothy made
him no answer, not knowing how to resolve that point without having Antonine's
advice in that case. The King fell a-laughing, and pressing her farther, Is it
possible, says he, you should think it so hard a matter to allow a King a share
with the Shepherd in your heart. Any other but you would have quickly ended the
difference, and no other but my self would be content with what I ask. You are
not just, Dorothy, you demand of me what I ought not to grant you, and you make
a business and a difficulty to grant me what cannot but be for your Glory. You
are afraid I should send away Antonine, you complain you cannot see him; you
would, if you love me, have me allow you to love him too: these are strange
conditions. And yet if I ask you whether you will love me as much as him, you
will not answer me. What are you afraid of? I would not have you consider me as
your King: among Lovers matters should be equal at least. Let Us come to
Articles, Dorothy, adds he smiling, and if I grant you yours, you must not
refuse to sign mine. Antonine shall stay at Aranjuez, you shall see him and
love him: This is for you. Now for my part, you must love me as well as him,
and do me the same favors you do him, and if in time you find my care and my
passion for you greater than the duties he pays you, without bringing my
Character or your duty to me into account, you will be content to be entirely
mine.

This Prince, who was infinitely witty, would not make use of a Courtgallantry
to gain the affection of an innocent Countrey-Girl. He was above it, and made
use only of plain native simplicity, so much the more delicate as it suited her
capacity and wrought more effectually on her. The truth is, it shook her. So
that the Monarch to take the advantage of the agreement, began with kisses which
she could not refuse him after the promises he had made her in favor of
Antonine: But the Shepherd scarce heard the smack of 'em, but all in a rage he
pinched her by the Leg. This so frighted the poor Girl, that she skrick'd,
which astonished the King. He asked her what the matter was; she told him
something had bit her. By good luck for Antonine, there stood between the King
and Dorothy a little Bitch of the Marchioness's which came with them into the
Closet; the King thought her guilty of the assault, and with great animosity
drove her out of the Closet. But Dorothy, having had time to recover her self a
little from the fear she had been in, judged her hurt came by the hand of a
Man, rather than the teeth of the little Bitch: And reflecting immediately on
Antonine, she made no doubt but 'twas he, and that he lay hid under the Bed of
Repose. The King having assured her she need not fear being bit any more, would
have been at his former sport; but Dorothy would not agree to it, having
understood by her Shepherd's action what she had already done had not pleased
him. The Prince pressed her, and asked why she would be so cruel; but all was
lost labor, she would not be brought to it for fear Antonine should bite her
the second time. You know our Agreement, Dorothy, says the King seeing her
obstinacy, I shall not be obliged to keep my promise with you if you refuse
what I demand of you. You must love me as well as you do Antonine, and express
the same complaisance for me as for him, if you have a mind I should allow him
a a sight of you, and not send him away from Aranjuez. Dorothy much troubled at
these threats, knew not what to answer. In the mean time she granted nothing,
but defended her self still against the King's importunity, who thinking her
lightness an effect of her humor, and attributing to it her refusing him so
obstinately what she had granted at first without any difficulty, he easily
flattered himself with hopes to obtain it another time, and without pressing
her further that evening, retired.

Antonine no sooner saw him gone, but he crept out of his prison, grievously
tired with staying so long there. Dorothy, to make him amends was liberal of
her caresses, but found him not so well pleased with her as to return them: His
heart smarted still with the sound of the kisses the King had received of her,
or at least given her, which made Antonine requite her caresses with
reproaches. The Marchioness came in presently, and observed a little coldness
between the two Lovers, which she took no great care to remove. And Don Austin
coming in from the King, there was a necessity of parting.

The fair Ladies went out of the Closet, where they locked in Antonine, and the
Marchioness went to Dorothy's Chamber not far from her own; and having resolved
to stay there till the Marquess were abed, that she might return to Antonine,
she made Dorothy relate all that past in the Closet.

The Shepherd waited with impatience enough to know what they would do with
him. He could have been content to pass that night in the Closet, in hopes of
an opportunity to see Dorothy in the morning, having not yet told her half what
he had to say to her, being just upon losing her, not by any falseness of hers,
which he knew her incapable of, but through her innocence which madded him. He
had a thousand reflections on what had past that evening, and the conjectures he
drew from them were very displeasing: when on the sudden the Marchioness,
opening the door softly, entered smiling, and having shut it after her, Well
Antonine, says she, with a low voice, you are my Prisoner. It Is true, Madam,
answers he, I am so, and it is no small honor for a Shepherd to have so fair a
Lady (as you are) to his Jailer. This Answer was a little too Gallant for a
Lover, who should have then been full of trouble and care, but he thought
himself obliged to some sweetness and complaisance, toward a Lady who had been
so much his Friend. You are condemned to stay here all Night, says the Lady. I
shall not complain of my sentence, Madam, replies the Shepherd, and would to
God it were all the ill I am like to suffer here. The Lady presently understood
he reflected on the King, but having a design to turn the discourse another
way, she made as if she had not apprehended him; there shall no ill befall you
here, says she, unless the Marquess chance to awake, and have the curiosity to
come and see what I do thus late in this Closet. What would he say to find you
alone with me here at this hour, and what would you do, if you had not time to
hide your self? I know not in truth, Madam, says Antonine laughing, what I
should do, but what could he suspect of a poor Shepherd? Do you think because
you are but a Shepherd, answers she, a Husband could rest satisfied? The
Marquess, Madam, answers Antonine, is too well assured of your Virtue, to have
any cause to fear the most presumptuous attempts. The most severe Virtue,
replies the Marchioness, may be liable to suspicion (with Men less jealous, and
less interested than the Marquess) when exposed to a Shepherd, so handsome as
you; and really my Judge must be very indulgent and favorable, who knowing you
have been alone with me at this hour locked up in my Closet, and my Husband
asleep, will do me Justice, and think no more of the business. I must consess I
expose my self a little, but I am usually gained by merit, and find so much in
you, I do not repent it. Antonine failed not to answer this excess of Goodness,
in the most acknowledging, and most obliging expressions. He thought it a great
happiness to have gained the esteem of such a Lady. Yet could not this ease him
of his sufferings on Dorothie's account, though his pain was somewhat abated by
the hopes he had this Lady would pity him, and espouse his interest.

The Night was far gone, and the Marchioness, who had more than one reason to
undress and go to Bed, told Antonine, she had for love of him sent back her
Maids to their Chambers, and that for once he must be her Chambermaid.
Antonine undertook the Office with a great deal of joy, and did it with so much
neatness and Gallantry, that of all she had seen him do, the Lady most admired
him for this. Being but a Shepherd, and a Shepherd that pleased her, she was
not very shye of him, nor observed the measures she would have done with a Man
of another Character. The time, place, and employment she gave him, permitted
her not to keep the distance and privacy usual in those cases: And these secret
affairs, though innocent, inspire a Liberty into those employed, they believe
they are allowed to do any thing. The Marchioness laughed, and so did Antonine;
she permitted her self to be undrest, just as he pleased, giving him occasion
to press very far, had he had the courage: But he was young, and knew not how
to use the complaisance she had for him. He had put her at last into a
condition to want her Nightgown; and if the Beauties he saw did not charm him,
they at least diverted him, and made him forget for some moments the troubles
of that Evening. The Marchioness, though brown, had an excellent Complexion,
and a Neck made to inspire Treason into the admirers of other Beauties;
Qualities the more esteemed in Spain for their Rarity. Her Eyes were beautiful,
and black, but so quick and piercing, you could scarce endure to look
steadfastly on them. Her Mouth, her Nose, her Teeth, and the rest of her Face
had not the least blemish: Her Height, her Air, her Mien, were answerable, and
it was not without reason the King had been in love with her, being
unquestionably the handsomest Lady in the Kingdom. She looked from time to time
upon Antonine, to observe in his Countenance what effect the sight of some
Beauties not ordinary wrought in him; and seeing him one time very busy, she
put him back, whether out of anger or shame, I know not, and resuming her
serious Mien; I cannot tell, says she, what people would judge of me, if it
should be known at Court, I had allowed you this liberty, I were utterly
undone. Be sure you let Dorothy know nothing of it, for she is an innocent
Girl, and will be presently jealous perhaps, and then tell it the King.
Antonine answered her, Discretion was a virtue not altogether unknown to
Shepherds: I believe it, says she, especially to such Shepherds as you, who are
not born to be unhappy: After this, she bid him adieu, and having locked him up
in the Closet, she went to bed where she did nothing all night but dream of
him, and sigh. She called to mind all he had said, and all she had seen him do
that Evening, and found not his Discourse only, but the least of his Actions
were so unlike those of the Character he bore, she could not possibly believe
him a Shepherd. Her heart at least too proud to stoop so low, endeavored to
make her believe him a young Gentleman of Quality, who had disguised himself
for love of Dorothy. Happy Maid, says she, sighing, how few Women in the World
but would be jealous of thy good Fortune, to have the affection of a Lover, the
most tender, and most deserving on Earth! Never was Love more gallant and
passionate; never were sentiments more elevated and noble than his. Who can but
be affected with them? what Virtue can withstand so many Charms? These were her
thoughts, of which she was so full, the Idea of Antonine, entirely took up all
her reflection, that she minded not her sighs which she gave free vent to, with
such violence that they awaked the Marquess; who asking her what she ailed, she
was so surprised she knew not what to say, but that she was not very well. Don
Austin, who was fond of her beyond measure, and knew her subject to vapors,
imagined that hindered her rest, and would have gone to the Closet for a Viol of
Essence, very good for that Distemper: but the Marchioness told him that was
not the thing that troubled her. But Don Austin would not be persuaded from
rising to fetch the Essence, believing his Lady, to save him trouble, would not
own her Distemper. This put the Marchioness to her shifts, so that to stay him,
she told him, 'twas only a Dream had frightened her, and kept her from sleeping,
and that nothing else troubled her. The Marquess having acquainted her there
was no notice to be taken of Dreams, being an effect only of a wandering
imagination, of which no account is to be made, asked her, what she dreamed.
She seemed very loath to tell him; but being very much pressed by the Marquess,
who said he would ease her of the conceit of it; to satisfy him, she had
presently this dream. (For before she had dreamed of nothing but Antonine:)
Alas! Sir, says she, with a deep sigh, I thought I was with Child, and brought
to Bed of an Infant so big and so monstrous, I died for very grief. With that I
awaked, much troubled to know what ill this dream signified; and having prayed
Heaven to be merciful to me, I made a Vow not to lie with you for nine days.
Don Austin, to comfort her, made the most favorable interpretation he could
imagine of the dream, running over all he knew in Story, Sacred and Profane, of
the dreams of Daniel, King Ahasuerus, and many others he told her of, to let
her see 'twas good to dream of being delivered of an extraordinary Child: But
like a good Man he was willing she should perform her Vow, and to have it over
the sooner, promised she should begin that very day.

Any Man but the Marquess would have nullify'd the Vow as against the laws of
Matrimony, or at least, suspected it feigned to color some Amorous treason;
but he who was firmly persuaded of the Virtue and Piety of his Wife as an
Article of Faith, would have been very scrupulous to entertain the least doubt
of the sincerity of her intentions. 'Twas time for him to get up if he meant to
wait upon the King at his rising: And as he was dressing, he discoursed his
Wife all the while about the vanity of dreams, that she might be undeceived,
and make no more such Vows. He gave not over talking till he went out of the
Chamber, and had so tired his Lady with the discourse, she wished from her heart
she had never spoken to him of a dream. And she was not a little glad to be rid
of him. He was no sooner gone, but she took her Nightgown, and slips softly
into the Closet where she found Antonine asleep on the Bed of Repose. She would
not awake him, that she might view him at more leisure. And sitting on a stool
by him, there was not a feature in his Face but she examined narrowly, and Love
at the same time imprinted it in her heart. She fancied a thousand things of
his Person, imagining sometimes this, sometimes that; and out of love or
curiosity did so long to be satisfied, that nothing but the fear of awaking him
could have kept her back. At last, between struggling with, and yielding to
motions more prevalent than all her considerations of Honor and Decency, she
adventured (not without blushing) to kiss him. The Happy Shepherd awaked at it,
was surpised at the sight of her, much more at the favor she had done him.
You load me with favors, Madam, says he half asleep. If you knew, answers
she, leaning upon him in a very languishing manner, all the kindness I have for
you! but do not abuse it: For you see, adds she, opening her Nightgown, to let
him see she had no more on, with what complaisance and familiarity I use you.
You see me just as I came out of Bed, and if you are not discreet, it is the
last time you shall see me so.

The troubled Antonine made a sorry return for so Charming Overtures; he put on
a very serious face, and full of respect, like a right Countrey-Shepherd. The
Marchioness was that day handsomer than ever he had seen her. Antonine wanted
neither Eyes not Wit, but he was young and and played the Innocent. So much
Favor on the sudden having peradventure confounded him. But by little and
little, he began to be familiar, and the Marchioness who was almost out of
conceit with him, began to have some hopes of him: but the Housekeeper
interrupted very unseasonably, and hindered the consequence of the pleasant
Conversation, by coming to tell her Lady, that Dorothy in great haste and
earnestness desired to see her. The Marchioness gave her small thanks for her
pains, letting her see by her looks how unpleasing her message was. But there
was no remedy; she must give place to her Rival: And turning toward Antonine,
she asked him, if he would be glad to see Dorothy: Antonine had the civility
not to appear very desirous of it, though he longed for nothing more. But the
Marchioness who needed no instruction, seeing his Civility, and satisfied with
his indifference, (though but affected) to make him sensible what complaisance
she had for him, bid the Housekeeper let Dorothy in. Antonine prayed her to
stay and hear their discourse: The Marchioness looked upon him, and with a
malicious smile, I know, says she, you desire nothing less than what you ask;
and if I had a mind to punish you, I would stay; but be not afraid on it, it is
not my design. And I am more concerned for your Amors than to take pleasure in
being an Eyewitness of your caresses to another. With that she went out of the
Closet, and got her to Bed again. The Housekeeper let in Dorothy into the
Marchioness's Chamber, where having paid her devoirs and desired leave to go
into her Closet, she went to her Antonine. The Shepherd received her with a
more pleasing air than the night before: the anger of Lovers is very
short-lived; but the truth is, the Favors of the Marchioness had not a little
contributed to put him in good humor. In the mean time the Marchioness had a
sad part to act, and had dearly paid with sighs and vexation for the imperfect
pleasure of that morning, had not the King, who was in search of Dorothy, sent
in the Duenna to know if she were with the Marchioness. She could not have
wished a better pretense for parting the two Lovers. And not to lose the
advantage of it, would have presently sent Dorothy back into her own Chamber to
keep the King there; but he came in, telling her (upon the news he had from Don
Austin she had had an ill night on it) he thought nothing but Love could have
broken ones sleep, but since it happened the most insensible Persons could not
rest, it was some comfort to him for the many ill nights that Passion had
caused him. The Marchioness, who wanted neither Gallantry nor Wit, returned him
an answer suitable to the subject. But the King thinking she needed rest, told
her, he would not add a new disturbance to that she had been afflicted with;
and taking Dorothy by the hand, led her into her Chamber. The Marchioness
happily delivered at once of two Persons who troubled her more than all the
World besides, run straight into the Closet to bring her dear Shepherd the
news; but he was no less grieved at it, than she was joyful. It was not in his
power quite to conceal from her the rage he was in for jealousy of the King.
He spoke with some heat of the Amorous persecution that Prince afflicted a
young Maid with; insomuch that he let fall a word, That it was the part of a
Tyrant rather than a Just Monarch, to force one to love him. The Marchioness
did but laugh and railly at him to be so passionate. But taking notice of those
last words, and the action he expressed them with, she discovered a boldness and
hardiness in his countenance, which did but too clearly evidence the Greatness
of his Soul. 'Twas not the first time she had suspected him to be of quite
another Quality, than what he pretended to, her passion and opinion of Honor,
having persuaded her he was not of ordinary Birth. But in the transport he was
in on that occasion, there flashed out such a fire out of his Eyes, which with
the liberty he took in speaking of the King, appeared so extraordinary, that
she begun thenceforwards to use him as she believed he deserved. And after she
had for some moments fixed her Eyes on him, Sir, says she, for I cannot call you
Antonine any longer; I am your Friend, and you cannot doubt it: If the freedom
I use with you deserve any confidence from you, deny me not a request I am
making to you. Let me know the truth of a thing you can no longer conceal from
me. This Shepherd's Habit you are in, suit better with your love to Dorothy
than your Birth: you have not sufficiently disguised your self from me, or
rather I have too long, and too studiously observed you, not to see your
actions, and your words, the Air and Grace of your Person, belie the habir you
have taken: Had you confined your self to playing on the Flute, and keeping
Sheep, you might have past for a Shepherd; but when you meddle with oaths
things you are discovered with half an eye. Hide your self no longer from me,
who trust my self with you. I confess, I am much concerned in it, and this
makes me so curious: If you fear only my revealing the secret, assure your
self, I will keep it as religiously as you could desire from the best Friend
you have in the World, for I am certainly she.

Antonine, who was a little disordered at the Ladies first words, having by
this time recovered himself, fell a-laughing, and told her it was her excess of
goodness made her use him better than he deserved, that he was no more than the
Son of a poor Shepherd near Toledo. And that if there were any thing in him
extraordinary beyond those of his condition, he was beholding for it to Nature,
not Birth. All this could not persuade the Lady from the opinion she had of his
Quality; but she told him that she would, if he desired it, still call him
Antonine, and use him in public like a Shepherd; but as for her particular,
she very well knew the difference she was to make; And that he might have
already concluded from the freedom she had used with him, she had not been long
deceived. Antonine made but a weak defense, telling her at last, she might rest
assured, if there were any thing in his Life that deserved confidence, she
should be the first that he would impart it to. The Marchioness understanding
what it meant, pressed him no further: And Dinnertime being come, she sent for
it into her Chamber, as being indisposed, that she might have the pleasure of
seeing Antonine dine with her. The Duenna told them, the King did as much with
Dorothy, having dined in his Chamber, to have her Company the whole day.

The Marchioness was ravished at the News, and Antonine began to be less
troubled at it. Not but that his passion for Dorothy was still very great, but
that the thoughts he then had of the King, had filled him with rage and
vexation, that he was glad of the opportunity he had to be revenged of Dorothy,
or at least to be even with her. He saw her Innocence could not long hold out
against the love of that Prince; and he was so mad at her for it, he began to
form a design to abandon her quite. But how unjust are Lovers in these cases?
What could a poor innocent Girl do, that had in a manner not seen the World
above three days, who knew nothing of Love, but what he had taught her, nor
could distinguish what did, from what did not belong to a Lover; but believed,
that, except one thing, all was free for the King, as for Antonine; what could
she do? Besides, she was to deal with a King, who was a great Master of the Art
of Love, and infinitely witty: which with the advantages of Majesty might have
prevailed with a Maid more experienced, and more difficult, than Dorothy to be
gained.

In that unquiet condition the Shepherd's Heart had reason to be in, 'twas no
small comfort to have the kindness of a fair Lady, as the Marchioness, to
qualify his misfortunes: she was a charming Woman, excellently skilled in the
Art of pleasing, and forgot nothing that might tempt him to a desertion; sighs,
kindnesses, languishing looks, tenderness, obliging actions, all the most
pleasant poisons of Love were made use of, and to very good purpose. Here was
cause enough of fear for Dorothy, had not her good fortune delivered her from
the King; and it is uncertain what would become of her, had she staid a moment
longer out of the Marchionesses Chamber. Such power has a fair Lady in Love
over Hearts, however engaged or indifferent: That Women how deeply soever in
Love with another, can resist the Engines and Artifices Love inspires her to
make use of.

The Duenna had acquainted them with Dorothie's coming, that they had time
enough to put themselves in order, though any other but Dor. might have however
found cause enough of suspicion in the very eyes of the Marchioness: But
Dorothy was innocent, and had too good an opinion of her Shepherd, to whom
without his asking her, she presently gave account of all that past in the
extraordinary visit His Majesty had made her. She was so ingenuous not to
conceal from him the favors she was forced to grant him, having terribly
threatened to ruin him, and send him away where she should never see him, if
she were not as complaisant to him as to Antonine. The Shepherd from time to
time shrug'd his Shoulders as she talked, and when she had done, asked if this
were her faithfulness to him. Dorothy who thought she had done nothing against
the duty of one in Love, in complying a little to divert the strange menaces
the King used, would have justified her conduct with reasons, which quite drove
poor Antonine to despair. That is, interrupts he, had the King put it to your
choice to have me banished your sight, or comply with his passion; you would
have preferred the shame of yielding your self up to him, to the displeasure of
my absence. What would you have had me have done, replies she, with some tears
to see him speak as he did. The Marchioness was present at this Comedy, and had
all the divertisement of it. Antonine and Dorothy continued long in dispute,
without her taking either party. But the King coming so suddenly, that the
Duenn^ had scarcely time to tell her Lady, he was like to have surprised them
all three. He went into the Closet, and having complemented the Marchioness,
sat him down on the bed there, and she went out, leaving him and Dorothy
together, who resolved to repair her fault: for let the King beg, threaten,
fret himself never so much; say, do what he please, she would not so much as
let him kiss her hand, which put him almost beside himself; and made Antonine
glad at heart. Well done Dorothy, thinks he, this is brave, thou revengest me
to purpose for the torment he has put me to.

The King finding Dorothies humor so strangely altered, since he parted with
her, being not above an hour or two; imputed it to some ridiculous counsels the
Marchioness, with whom he found her, might have given her in some unseasonable
Principles and Precepts of Virtue. He turned all his anger that way, and as he
went out of the Chamber he made it sufficiently appear to the Lady, he was not
well satisfied with the good offices she had done him: He past by her without
saying a word, quite contrary to the obliging carriage he always used toward
her. The Marchioness was extremely surprised at it, and applying her fear to
that she was most careful of, she fancied the King had discovered Antonine in
the Closet, which made him look so angry: she ran strait to Dorothy to know the
News, and perceived by the Relation, her rigours had put him out of humor.
This was presently confirmed by Don Austin, who came in shortly after to tell
her, the King had complained bitterly of her, for the ill instructions she had
given Dorothy: And that if she took not heed, she would ruin him. Time was,
when a complaint of this Nature would have been very offensive, but it was in
the days of Yore; she had now changed her humor, and was become more
tractable. She easily defended her self against the King's Charge, and expressed
that zeal for the concerns of his passion, that she told Don Austin he might
assure his Majesty, it should be no fault of hers, if he were not successful.
There was reason enough for it, she did her own business by it: and had the
King known how far she was engaged on his part, and concerned to promote his
interests, he would never have suspected her of the injury he charged her with.
Don Austin went directly to bring the King the News, and the Marchioness stepped
immediately into the Closet, to laugh with Antonine, who could not heartily
thank her for making a party against him, yet, knowing the reason of it, he
could not be much displeased.

The Marquess came the second time to tell his Wife, the King was well
satisfied with the expressions of her good will; and prayed her if she would
not do him service, which he would not adventure to desire of her, yet that she
would not make a Confederate against him. She not only promised this, but
added, that upon all occasions the King should find her for him, and that she
would never speak to Dorothy but for his advantage. Persons of her Character,
where they allow themselves liberty, become more indulgent to others in like
cases. Don Austin was the first that gave her thanks, being so well pleased
with her that Evening, that had it not been for her Vow, he would have done
somewhat extraordinary that night, to let her know how much she had obliged
him, in espousing the interest of a Monarch, whom next her, he loved the best
of any living, this was excellent divertisement for the Marchioness: At last
the visit and conversation of the too grateful Marquess, was so long, she began
to be a weary of him, and very willing to be rid of him. His stay was no less
troublesome to Dorothy, who having left the Closet when the Marchioness came
forth, wished him gone presently that she might return. But the Marquess having
been so taken up all day with State Affairs, that he had not time to pay his
Lady the duties of a kind Husband, thought himself that day more than ever
obliged to keep her company in the Evening, after the complaisance she had
expressed in what concerned the King. The Marchioness and Dor. rose from their
Seats, they walked about, they held their peace, but all to no purpose, he
stirred not till it was time for his Wife to go to bed, and he would not leave
her till he saw her a-Bed, and past some kind complements to comfort her
against the rigor of her Vow, praying her particularly never to make the like
again. Dorothy was forced to retire and go to Bed, though much troubled, and
angry, she could not see Antonine. But he was reserved for the Marchioness, who
had no sooner lodged her Husband safe, and commanded the Duenna to make all the
doors fast, but she got up, and told her dear Antonine, hemight come out of the
Closet, the coast was all clear, and they had the whole Chamber for themselves.
Yes, Madam, answers the Shepherd, but if the Marquess should come on the
sudden, and I not have time to hide my self, what would he think? Alas!
nothing, says she, what should he fear from a Shepherd, so discreet and so
honest? I know not, replies Antonine, laughing; but what you told me yesterday,
(it would be very hard not to suspect something, if any found me, (as very a
Shepherd as I am) locked up with you at this time of night) made such
impression upon me, that I begin in good earnest to be afraid. Fear nothing,
says she, laughing also, I am a good virtuous Lady, and Don Austin believes me
so, and the pity I have to see you so ill lodged in the Closet, makes me
willing to give you half of my Bed if you dare lie there, I mean upon the Bed,
for it would not be handsome for a Shepherd as you are, or a Lady as I am, it
should be any otherwise. And to let you know what a Favor I do you, I can tell
you it is more than the King in the height of his passion could ever obtain from
me. It was doubtless, Madam, says Antonine, because you were afraid he would
not use the Favor discreetly enough, and are well assured of the respect I
bear you. It Is rather, says she, playing with him, that I loved not the King,
that he had not the Art to please me, and that Antonine -- She stopped there.
Antonine, Madam, answers he, is happier than all the Kings upon Earth, in that
he has gained the Favor of so fair a Lady as the Marchioness De las Torillas:
He has nothing more to wish for but a Heart to offer and dedicate wholly to
her. But alas! I have it not. Ah! Cruel, says she, interrupting him, why do you
mind me of it? why speak you of a thing I do all I can to forget? Permit me to
fancy, adds she, with tender and languishing looks, that you neither love nor
will love any but me: And if it be not altogether true, yet allow me to say so,
and deceive my self, which in this I am very willing to do.

I know not what this happy Shepherd thought then, but I believe him in some
perplexity. He was forced in honor to answer civilly so much kindness and
tenderness! the Lady was the most obliging, as well as the most Beautiful of
the Court; and had such a winning way with her, a Man must be very ill-natured
to deny any thing she desired: It is easy to guess how two Persons so well
agreed, spent the rest of the Night. You may presume Antonine strained a point,
and committed a little treason against his allegiance to Dorothy. And if the
Fidelity of any Lover be proof against such a temptation, it deserves to be
Chronicled.

The King had not so good a night as Antonine, fretting and vexation fell to
his Majesty's let, and having not slept till toward morning, he lay a-bed
longer than ordinary. Dorothy would fain have made use of that time to see
Antonine, but the Duenna had her Lesson; and told her, That her Lady had been
ill all night, and must not be disturbed. Dorothy replied, she would make no
noise, and only go into the Closet. She might have as well held her peace. The
Duenna found reasons enough to deny her, till the King came to talk with her;
and soon after the Marquess, who sent in the Duenna to see if his Wife were
asleep; she brought him word, her Lady was newly awake; and he entered the
Chamber, and told her, she must needs rise, and go to Belviso, where the King
dined that day: The Marchioness excused her self, pretending she was
indisposed. But the Good Man her worthy Spouse told her, if she would but
endeavor to go so far, being but a walk, where the Air and Divertisement would
certainly recover her, she would very much oblige the King, who would not go
without her, and scarce believe she was ill, having that morning a complexion
more fresh and more beautiful than ever. The Marchioness could not forbear
laughing to see how Don Austin cajoled her. And finding whatever she did she
was not to expect being at liberty that afternoon, she chose rather to please
the King, and avoid the occasion of giving perhaps some umbrage, by pretending
an indisposition, which by her Husband's report she could not sufficiently
feign. She took her time to give Antonine notice of this Walk, and acquaint him
what a trouble it was to her to leave him, putting it to his choice to stay
there or go along. Antonine told her, he must needs get forth, and appear at
his Lodging, where Dorot. Parents were doubtless much concerned what was become
of him, having not layn there these two nights. The Marchioness wished him to
come again at night, and she would give the Duenna orders, so that he should
need only to apply himself to her for entrance.

Belviso is a House of Pleasure within two miles of Aranjuez, the most
agreeable and charming in all Spain. It Is a little enchanted Castle in the
middle of a Lake, at the point of a Valley, than which nothing can be more
delightful to the Eye. The Castle both without and within is equally rich,
painted, and gilded all over, which glitters admirably in the Sun. It Is all of
wood, and so curiously carved, that there is nothing more rare and more curious
for Invention or Work. All the Chambers may be lowered or raised at pleasure,
by Screws and Machines. And though but four, and a Hall in the middle, they
have a way to make them appear twelve several Chambers, different not only in
Furniture and Ornament, but in Figure.

The King being arrived at the side of the Lake, embarked in a Cannot with the
Marquess, his Lady, Dorothy, for whom the Entertainment was designed, with two
or three other Ladies, and some principal Lords of the Court to go to the
Castle. In the mean time they were troubled Antonine appeared not. It Is not the
King was so concerned, but Dorothy and the Marchioness, who looked a good while
round about them to see if he were come. Dorothy had never been in that Castle,
and the King would in Person give her the pleasure of seeing it; and for love
of her, set all the Machines of those moving Chambers a-work. He was scarce got
to the third, but Dorothy disappeared, not by the force of any Machine, but
because she stayed in the second Room; the King not willing some Lords about
him should take notice of the concern he was in for her, went forwards, hoping
in so small a place he could not long want her. And indeed he found her in the
second Room speaking to one of the Pages. He surpised them, and asked Dorothy
laughing, if she had any office of Gallantry to employ that Page in, that she
was in so private discourse with. She blushed a little, and fell a-laughing
too, at the King's not knowing the Page. This made the King fix his Eye upon
him; and with no small surprise discover him to be Antonine. And how long is
it, says he to him, that you are turned from a Shepherd into a Page? Antonine
answered, But from that very morning, having a desire to see the Castle; and
finding there was such order given, that there was no getting in but in his
Livery, he had borrowed a Page's Coat for the purpose. The King said no more to
him; but scarce took any pleasure the rest of the time he spent there, having
almost always this Shepherd in his Eye, speaking constantly to Dorothy: which
put the King in no small trouble and perplexity with his forcing himself as
much as possible to hide the concern he was in. His passion for Dorothy had not
yet been much taken notice of, and he was willing to observe some measures in
public; so that he found it very difficult to be in private with her there.
Antonine making use of the liberty the King allowed him, followed him
wherever he went, as well as the Lords and Ladies of his Train, and seemed to
affect keeping close to Dorothy more than ever. The King might have got rid of
him by sending him to Land; but 'twould have been too apparent, and what
pretense soever he had taken, they would have guessed at the true cause. So
that the very maxims of Decency forced the King to permit a Shepherd, under his
very nose, to cross his desires, to torment him, and ravish from him
undisturbed what he best loved in the World, without the Kings daring to
complain of it, or express the least resentment: Only he spoke of it to the
Marquess his sole Confident, who had prayed him to let him know the cause of
the disorder that appeared in his countenance. This Faithful Minister of Love
as well as State, having learnt what it was, resolved at any rate to ease him
of the sight of the Shepherd, at least for some time. He thought of several
ways to do it, but knowing that Women are generally better than Men at such
matters, he went to his Wife; and taking her into another Room, asked her, if
she could not device some means to take that Shepherd aside, who troubled the
Entertainment, and get him kept out of the King's presence, without sending him
to Land, which the King for some reasons was unwilling to do. The Marchioness
very officiously proposed two or three ways, which indeed were neither proper
nor approved by the Marquess. At last she told him, That to disabuse the King,
and wipe out the ill-impressions he had taken of her conduct as to Dorothy, she
would serve him on this occasion, and take Antonine into another Room, under
pretense of making him play on the Flute, and would keep him there as long as
he pleased; but she feared 'twould be to his cost, and that the World was
malicious enough to talk of such a thing. Don Austin fell alaughing heartily at
the apprehensions of his Virtuous Wife, and embracing her with extreme
kindness, told her, Her Reputation was so friendly established, it would never
be suspected, though there were no more Virtue nor Honor in the World. That
she might take his word for it, who was most concerned. And that it could not be
at least a Shepherd could do him any injury. Having said this, he prayed her to
do as she proposed; adding she would do the King a singular pleasure, being no
longer able to endure the sight of the Shepherd. The Marchioness failed not to
do it; and with an Address her affection, more than any design to please the
King or oblige her Husband, inspired with, she drew Antonine aside from
Dorothy, and took him to another Chamber, where she stayed with him till they
went back for Aranjuez. The King was never the better for it: Dorothy did but
fret and vex when she lost sight of Antonine, and her Eyes discovered the
trouble she was in, not to know what was become of him.

The Sun was set when they came to Aranjuez. And the King having a desire to
take a turn or two in the Garden, the whole Court followed him, except the
Marchioness, who had designs in her Head; and having accompanied her Husband
awhile, told him she was not very well and must withdraw. The Marquess more
civil and kind than she wished, brought her to her Chamber, and bore her company
till she was quite tired with him. She undrest her self, she went to bed, she
complained her Head ach'd, and that she must go to rest; and not knowing what
to say or do more, she ordered the Windows should be shut, that the light might
not trouble her in the morning; but Don Austin's Love was the same in the dark
as in the light. But she must send him away at last, telling him the trouble
she was in he should be there in the dark, and she not able to speak to him,
increased her malady and kept her from sleeping. The good Marquess charmed with
the kindness of his dear Spouse, took his leave of her, praying her she would
send for him, if she grew worse in the night. The Marquess was scarce gone, but
the Duenna came in to let her Lady know Antonine was in her Chamber; the
Marchioness bid her let him into hers, and immediately the Duenna led in a
Shepherd who was not a little surpised at the darkness of the Lodging: the
Marchioness imagining his surprise at the Novelty, fell a-laughing as soon as
she heard him come near the Bed; and reaching out her hand to him, Fear
nothing, says she, this is all done for you, and you know you are not in an
Enemies Country; she made him sit on her Bed, and going on with her discourse
told him the Darkness was a Friend to fearful Lovers as you are. But you are
very mute methinks Antonine, why do not you answer me? She had scarce said
this, but in comes the Duenna almost out of breath, to tell her the Marquess
was coming with a Flambo, and was just at the Chamber Door. Go hide you in the
Closet,says the Marchioness to her Shepherd: but finding he stirred not, she
was astonished, and pushing him with her hand, do not you hear what they say,
Don Austin is just here, go hide your self, unless you will ruin both me and
your self. With that the Marquess entered, who told his Wife he was very sorry
he must disturb her, but he had lost a Paper of great importance to the King,
and must needs have left it on her Bed. The affrighted Marchioness being then
so angry with Antonine she wished him hanged, told him, you come the most
seasonably in the World to chastise a Fool; an Insolent Fellow came into my
Chamber the very moment you were gone, and has put me into a most terrible
fright, sitting upon my Bed, and I cannot remove him. The Marquess astonished at
the insolence, ran toward the Beds Feet; and in the Wrath he was in against
such an impudent Rascal, not willing to be at the pains of examining who he
was, he looked only for a stick, to baste him into better manners, and teach
him the respect due to his Wives Bed; when he heard the Kings Voice who was
disguised like a Shepherd, and fell a laughing to see himself upon the point of
being banged, and bid the Marquess open his Eyes and moderate his fury: What a
deadly blow was this to the Marquess! he turned pale and dismayed, he could not
speak a Word: at last having recovered his Spirits, Ah, Sir, is it thus, a King
as you are keep his Word? Have you done me so many Favors, only to rob me of
my Honor? Ah Heavens! (cries he quite distracted,) have I lived thus long to
see my self loaded with Infamy by a Prince for whom I would have lost my Blood!
Having said this he withdrew. The King would have staid him, that he might
clear himself before the Marchioness of the unjust suspicion he had of him, but
he had not the patience to hear him. The King followed him, that he might
disengage himself from a Lady, who had more reason than the Marquess to
complain of him; though in truth he was not in fault toward the one or the
other, as will appear by the truth of the adventure.

For the King staid not long in the Garden, having not been well satisfied with
Dorothy all that day, and being full of suspicion and jealousy of her, he let
her go where she pleased, not doubting but a rendezvous had been agreed on at
the enterview between her and Antonine at Bellviso; To see whether his
suspicions were well-grounded, he resolved to put a trick on her, and going to
his Chamber took the Shepherds Habit he formerly made use of, and put it on.
His design was to go pray the Marchioness to help him to deceive Dorothy, and
send her to him under the name of Antonine. He came for that purpose into her
Apartment, and within some paces of her Chamber he found the Duenua going in
search of the Shepherd; and being prevented by him, mistook him for Antonine;
it being then so dark she could not distinguish them, so that she brought him
to her Lady in the manner you have heard.

Don Anstin was so enraged, he resolved to die or retire from Court never to
appear there again. The King knew the appearances which deceived him, were
enough to give him mortal displeasure, unless he disabus'd him. But he knew not
how to do it, without giving him light into the Correspondence between his Lady
and Antonine, which would make the matter much worse and ruin a Lady he had
still some respect for. He was sorry he had not hid himself, that he might have
diverted himself about the adventure with the Marchioness, without making the
Marquess jealous. But that which induced him to be so malicious, as not to get
out of the way when she bid him, was the pleasure of being revenged of a Woman
who had played the Lucrece with him, and yielded to a Shepherd: If he could
have believed she would have put the confidence in him to take their measures
together, to disabuse Don Austin on his part, and pass over the adventure in
raillery; he had certainly gone into the Closet at first, or advised with her
afterward what course to steer: but he knew her humor too well, and that she
would not hearken to his Proposals. Therefore that he might not lose his
labor, or oblige people against their wills, he contented himself to tell the
Marquess he had not designed him any wrong: that he might believe it when he
took the pains to assure him of it: that he had always had a great esteem and
affection for him and his Lady, and made it sufficiently appear, that his
disguisement was purely on the account of Dorothy, whom he would have
surpised, and not the Marchioness. Surprise Dorothy, answers the Marquess
sighing, in my Wives Bed! he stopped there, which made the King laugh, who had
the goodness to say a great deal more to undeceive him; but it served only to
render him more suspicious. I should never have believed, Sir, says the
Marquess, you would have made use of the pretense of an innocent Girl, to
oppress me with grief and with shame: this proceeding is not just toward a
Servant, who has made it the business of his life to study your Glory, and the
good of your Estate. The King could not forbear laughing at his reproaches,
which cut Don Austin to the heart, being mad to see him take pleasure in
triumphing to his Face for the injury he had done him; so that he let fall some
words which past the respect due to the King. You are a little out, says the
King calmly, but I pardon the passion that blinds you; you accuse me without
cause, you reproach me unjustly. Had I had designs upon your Wife, I had not
need to have disguised my self; I might have hid my self when you came in, and
have chosen a better time. But I did not bestow her upon you, to do you this
unkindness; I keep my Word to my very Enemies, if you have reason to distrust
your Wives Virtue, inquire better who does you the wrong, and find out the
mystery before you accuse any. All men have their failings, much more all
women; and he that trusts so tender a Sex, and so capable of a Passion they
place their Glory in, is deceived at last. Think of what I say, you may one day
find it true. Ah Sir, says the Marquess, I am but too well assured I am
deceived; but if not by you, whom should I fear in the Kingdom? is there any
other my Wife would vouchsafe to turn her Head for? You see this, answers the
King, showing him the Shepherds Habit, you may guess what it means, and I was
mistaken for another. Shepherds, Sir, replies the Marquess, are for
Shepherdesses, and I shall never be jealous of them. Were I assured of your
part, I would still take my Wife for the honestest Woman of the Kingdom. And I
assure you, says the King, as my business was not with the Marchioness, no more
was hers with me. And you are to take heed the mischief you fear, if it be not
already done you, come not from a party you least suspect. The King did not
design to say so much, but the Marquess forced him to 't by bringing Dorothy
into discourse. And the King being very tender of that point could not forbear
speaking his mind. The Marquess stood mute a while, not knowing what to think
of the Shepherds Habit, on which the King grounded his suspicions and
conjectures, that he was taken for another, but fancied he meant Antonine,
because his Wife had for the Kings satisfaction, and almost against her will,
past part of the Afternoon with that Shepherd in a Chamber alone. He was about
to laugh at the conceit, and resuming the discourse to gain further
explication, Could you hope, Sir says he, to make me jealous of any one wears
such a Habit as this? the King made no answer, letting him understand by his
silence what he was to think. But the Marquess desiring to be further satisfied
in a point of this importance, What Man, adds he, of that condition durst once
look upon my Wife? That durst Antonine, replies the King somewhat briskly, whom
the Marchioness, if you must needs know it, vouchsafes to fix her Eyes upon. If
Antonine, answers the Marquess, came into my Wives Chamber, it was not on her
account; and had I seen him set on her Bed, and that he had been with her all
day, and all night, it should never have broken my rest. I believe so, says the
King, had you seen them in bed together, you would scarce believe any thing.
Sir, replies the Marquess, I should take her to be Dorothy; and I must be broad
awake to believe her my Wife. The King made him no answer, and the discourse
was carried on so far, that at last they promised one another mutual Offices of
Friendship, and agreed to watch Antonine narrowly, and give one another
intelligence, of all passages that concerned either, to find out who was
deceived. The King made the proposal, Don Austin accepted it with a great deal
of indifference, thinking the King had done it only to amuse him.

The King no sooner left him but he returned to his Wife, who at first sight of
him fell to exclaiming against that Prince, who not content to have made her
Apartment the Scene of an Amorous Intrigue, came disguised to surprise her when
he knew she was sick a-bed, and had no help at hand, but her Voice, and her
Tears. That it was an action unworthy a King, who had so much reason to know
her, by the proof he had made of her virtue: But she saw clearly enough, that
the complaisance of a base Husband was the thing encouraged him to make a new
attempt upon her honor, and they were agreed together to destroy her. It being
impossible the King would have ventured coming into her Chamber, as he did, had
he not known the Windows were shut, and no light in the room. And he could not
know this but from him. The Marquess much troubled to hear himself charged with
so much baseness by his Wife, of whom he thought he had reason to complain, did
all he could to justify himself to her. But all to no purpose, the more he
justified himself, the more guilty she made him; calling him Traitor, a Man of
no Honor, unworthy to possess a Lady so virtuous as she. But all this noise
could not keep the suspicious Don Austin from resolving to have the honor to
lie with her that night, for he thought her dream of the monstrous Child boded
him no good. And a Vow so much to the purpose, attended with a little
indisposition, which obliged his Wife to have her Chamber Windows shut up, and
the King's coming to her in a Shepherd's Habit, gave cause for conjectures
which pointed directly to his Forehead: he needed no more motive to have her
absolved that Evening of so delicate a Vow.

He sent presently to pray the Bishop of Carthagene, his particular Friend, to
do him the honor of coming to his Lodgings: the Bishop came, who not only
absolved the Lady from her Vow, but according to the duty of his Character,
applied himself to make Peace between the Marquess and his Lady, and happily
effected it to the satisfaction of both.

And their Union after the Bishop's Benediction, being greater than ever, they
began to ask one another in good earnest, the whole truth of the story. The
Marchioness was to speak first, of common right, as having more cause of
complaint than Don Austin: She told him it was most true, that in the dark, as
he had left her, she heard one come in without saying a word, which surprised
her very much: But more, when she found he came and sat on the Bed, which made
her, trembling for fear, call in Alice to her aid, and that he came in himself
the next moment. Don Austin believed all this to be true as the Gospel, not
thinking it possible his Wife could have the Conscience to tell a Lie the next
minute after receiving Episcopal Benediction. He told her on his part, the
conference he had had with the King, who assured him, he had no other design
but to surprise Dorothy, which in truth might be true. But the most pleasant
jest of all is, adds he, he would fain have made me jealous of Antonine. And
because he has reason to be jealous of that Shepherd, he would have all the
World be so too; And since he cannot get rid of him, he would set on another to
do him that piece of service. The Marchioness hereupon played her part
excellently well, making a thousand exclamations, clapping her hands, lifting
her eyes to Heaven, laughing with all her force, and doing all other Actions of
a Woman amazed at the strangeness of the News, which afforded them matter of
discourse most part of that Night.

In the mean time, the Marquess according to the agreement between the King and
him, to watch over Antonine, failed not at his rising to give the necessary
orders, as to Dorothy; as for his Wives part he feared nothing. The King on the
other side eager for the sport, and desirous at any rate to convince the
incredulous Marquess, of the new Title his Wife had given him, placed his
Scouts abroad to observe Antonine's motions toward the Marchioness. But she
was beforehand with him, having that Evening sent orders by the Duenna to the
Shepherd to retire, and not approach the Palace, especially her Apartment till
notice from her. So that the Spies for some days could give their Masters no
account. But absence is the greatest of torments for Lovers, and the loss of
the company of what you love, is little less then the loss of Life. Antonine
was in torment not only on the account of Dorothy, but of the Marchioness, who
served for a kind of amorous consolation for him, when he could not see
Dorothy. The Marchioness was no less afflicted; and Women, as it is said, being
more violent in their passions than Men, it is credible, this Lady, who loved
the Shepherd so well, had a very ill time on it. She had none but Alice, her
Universal Confident to comfort her. And the poor old Wretch was as much
afflicted as her Lady, to see her languish, and grow melancholy: She would by
all means go seek out Antonine, to make her cheerful, promising the
Marchioness, to bring him in so safe and so secretly, that no one should know
of it. But the Marchioness had more Wit than to run such a hazard, and chose
rather to go see him at his Lodging, than expose him to discovery, by being
surprised in hers. She asked the old Duenna, if ever she had been at the
Gardiners? and Alice having made Answer, she was acquainted with him, and his
Wife one of her best Friends; I tell you, says the Marchioness, the reason of
my Question, and the design I have laid. I know your fidelity, and the
affection you have always had for me, therefore I confide in you. I will go see
Antonine at his Lodging, I take that to be the surest course: Dorothy is much
about my pitch; I will take a suit of hers, and I doubt not but I shall be
taken for her, when I am seen go to her Fathers: we need only order things so,
that when I am got thither, Antonine may have notice, and the Gardener and his
Wife both sent out of the way, for they would wonder at the visit. This must be
done to morrow Morning, when the Physicians have prescribed me a Bathing for my
pretended indisposition. The Duenna answered, all this would be easily done,
that the Gardener went at three a Clock in the Morning to work in the Garden,
and she would undertake to give Antonine notice of the honor intended him, and
take out the Gardiner's Wife along with her a-walking till Dinnertime. All
this was accordingly resolved, and executed. The Duenna having the charge of
her Ladies Wardrobe, provided that Evening a Suit for the purpose. And at six
in the Morning came in to awake her, telling her before Don Austin, that the
Water was ready, and she might presently bathe her self. The Marquess who had
first advised her to it, encouraged her to rise, because she seemed somewhat
loath: with much ado she took her Morning-Gown, and entered the Bathing-room,
where she found a Suit of Dorothie's ready for her, which she put on, while the
Duenna trudged away to Antonine to dispose things there for her reception.

The Scouts were night and day abroad, both the Kings and the Marquess's, or at
least had order to be so. But Favorites are commonly better served than their
Masters: Don Austin was fallen asleep again, when one of his Spies came to tell
him, he saw Dorothy go in at her Father's. At this time of day, thinks the
Marquess, Dorothy takes the pains to go to her Father's, there is design in the
case; I must carry the King the News, it is worth the trouble. With that he got
up in all haste and dressed himself, for fear of the birds being flown e're he
could get from the King to the Gardiners. He had not the patience to carry his
Wife the News to the Bathing-room, hoping to treat her with the whole story at
his return. He got to the King's Chamber, desired audience about urgent
business, was admitted, and immediately fell a laughing; You may imagine, Sir,
I would not have come thus early to disturb your Rest, had I not a particular
business to acquaint you with. The happy Antonine is this moment in the Arms of
the Marchioness. I am not surprised at it, says the King, laughing also, and if
you had no more to tell me, you needed not to have taken the pains to be so
early up; for I am persuaded, they have been long ago very well agreed. No,
no, Sir, says the Marquess in railery, I am come to tell you, according to my
duty, that Dorothy is gone thus early to give her Parents a visit, wherein you
may believe Antonine shall have his share. But what, replies the King, if you
have for once, taken Dorothy for the Marchioness: I fear no mistake, Sir,
answers the Marquess, for besides that, I left my Wife but now in her
Bathing-room; the news I bring you, was told me by two of my Servants, who know
Dorothy very well, and saw her go in at her Fathers. The King said not a word
more, but got up and was dressed, and would go in Person with the Marquess to the
Gardiner's. They got thither in a moment, and finding a little Girl at the
door, asked who was within: She answered, none but Antonine and Dorothy, in a
Chamber she showed them. What a transport of Fury did this put the King in, who
till then feared nothing! he ran to the Chamber, and finding it shut, knocked at
the Door, with that violence, and rage, as if he would have stormed the
besieged: no body opened, nor answered; the King extremely incensed, had no
longer patience, but commanded two of his Servants to break down the door. He
was obeyed, and entered in first, and next him Don Austin. But the Gallant was
got out at the Window, and no body left but the fair Lady, sitting in a corner
of the Chamber; with more confusion than fear, wrapped up in her Manto, to see
the unhappy Catastrophe. The King broke out into bitter Language against her,
and had perhaps gone further, but that the Marquess minded him of his
Character: However, he resolved toput to open shame that little Traytress (as
he often called her) taking her by the Manto, in which she kept her self
muffled. At last he snatched it off, but who was more surprised, he, or Don
Austin, to see it was the Marchioness? The King was extreme glad, and seeing
the Marquess thunderstruck, without speech, or motion, could not forbear
laughing. Now, Don Austin, says he, you see how people are mistaken, is this
Dorothy, or the Marchioness? With that the enraged Husband, not able to endure
the King's Railery, and the insupportable affront his virtuous Lady did him,
fell upon her without respect to the King's Presence, with that violence and
anger, the King had much ado to get him from her. He drew him out of that
Chamber, and as they went from the Gardiners, met Antonine in Custody, having
been taken by the care of the Marquess, who to make good his News to the King,
had given order for apprehending him, if he endeavored to escape. The sight of
Antonine doubled his fury, and he had certainly stabbed him with his Poniard,
had not the King, in his turn, minded him where he was, and of the respect due
to his Character.

Poor Antonine was put into the Tower of Aranjuez. The King lost no time to go
see Dorothy, and tell her the whole Story, of which he hoped to make advantage.
But the poor Innocent having with astonishment heard the King, fell a-crying
when she understood Antonine was in Prison. She fell upon her Knees, and prayed
him if he loved her, to set Antonine at liberty, and not do him any harm. The
King having reproached her, for having so little resentment against a Shepherd,
guilty of such falsehood to her, who in contempt of the kindness she had for
him, had thrown himself into the Arms of another; told her, he could not set
him at liberty so soon, but must give at least so much satisfaction to Don
Austin, who had cause to take away his Life, much more to have him kept
Prisoner. Dorothy somewhat comforted by the King's promise to do Antonine no
further harm, and moved on the other side with the reasons she was told she had
to be angry with her Shepherd, was not very earnest for his Enlargement. The
King finding her more complaisant than ever, past part of the day with her:
While they were together, the Captain of the Guard came to know his pleasure,
how Antonine should be used. The King bid him give him what he called for, but
not permit any to see him or speak to him, except such only as brought a Ring,
which he took out of his Pocket, and showed the Captain, that he might know it.
Dorothy having observed all this, waited an opportunity to get that Ring into
her hands. By good fortune, the King having slept little the Night before, and
been awaked early that Morning by the Marquess, could not forbear falling fast
a-sleep in Dorothy's Chamber, who failed not to slip her Hand in his Pocket:
And with a great deal of dexterity took out the Ring. The King awaked not long
after, and having spent some time with her went to Bed.

Dorothy was no sooner at liberty, but she went very joyfully to the Tower,
where Antonine was prisoner. And having showed the Officer the King's Ring,
entered without difficulty: Antonine was surprised to see her; she fell
presently to complain of him, but the Cunning Shepherd quickly appeased her;
And having real kindness for her, and seeing she slighted the passion of a
Great King for love of him, he resolved to marry her, and not part with her
till she had engaged her self to be his Wife, and received his engagement to be
her Husband; lest the King taking advantage of his Imprisonment (as he had
reason to fear) should rob him of her. They were quickly agreed, and past that
night like Fortunate Lovers.

The King slept soundly, and little dreamt of the designs against him, of which
he was likely to be the more sensible, as the hopes of obtaining his desires
were more probable than ever, when he parted with his Mistress. At his rising
they told him, a Gentleman prayed Audience upon business of importance. The
King ordered him admittance. The Gentleman falling presently on his knees.
Great Sir, says he, I come to beg Pardon for a Gentleman, whose Youth has made
him commit a fault pardonable in those of riper Years. You beg my Pardon,
Friend, says the King, bidding him stand up, for a Gentleman I know no more
than the Fault you have mentioned. Sir, answers he, the Shepherd you committed
yesterday to Prison is Don Alphonso de Leon. Antonine, says the King,
interrupting him, much surpised at the news, Is he of the House of Leon? Yes,
replies the Gentleman, he is a Younger-Brother of that Illustrious Family, who
arrived incognito at your Court, came to take a turn at Aranjuez: And as he was
walking in the Garden, the Master, as the custom is, presented him with a
Nosegay by his Daughter, whom Don Alphonso found so charming, he fell that
moment passionately in love with her. We were engaged that very day for Toledo:
but he feigned himself indisposed; and having taken no rest that night, he
looked very ill the next Morning. We would have persuaded him to return to
Madrid, where he might have the help of able Physicians, rather than stay at a
Place where he could scarce have one pitiful Surgeon to let him Blood. For
three or four days he obstinately insisted, the Air at Aranjuez would be enough
to recover him. And that he should not want Physician or Chyrurgeon. In the
mean time he could neither eat nor sleep; he was so tormented with his Love,
which was his only Distemper, and at length much prejudiced his health. But
fearing the business would at last come to light, and having ever had
confidence in me, who am his Governor, he took me one day aside to acquaint me
with the Secret, praying me, if I loved him, I would be so kind to him, as to
find out the means to stay some time at Aranjuez. I omitted nothing that could
be said to divert him from the pursuit of so extravagant a Passion. I
represented to him a thousand inconveniences would attend it; I minded him of
the Glory of his Birth, and the blemish it would be to him to amuse himself
with an Engagement so much beneath him: and at last threatened to write of it to
his Parents. But all to no purpose. He fell down at my feet, begged of me upon
his knees and with tears in his Eyes, that for a Month or two I would permit
him to please himself in his folly, swearing he would die or kill himself, if I
forced him from Aranjuez. I knew not what to do; I was almost distracted, and
wished I had never been concerned with him. At last, after long resistance, I
yielded to his prayers and tears, and consented to one Months stay at Aranjuez;
and that he should play what part he pleased there, but not under the Name or
Character of what he really was; least, if that came to be known, it might
prove an indelible stain to him and to me. The fifth day we left Aranjuez, with
design, according to my Promise, to return both together in a very short time.
We went to Toledo, and having sent away all our People to wait our coming at
Cordova, in the way to Sevile, where we designed to go; we bought us two Habits
of Shepherds, and returned to Aranjuez. Our design was to send him to the
Gardiner's to live with him, and offer him very good terms, in hopes he would
not know him in that disguise. In our way to Aranjuez we lay at an Inn, within
two leagues of this Place, where the Host was a friend of the Gardiner's, and
very ready to serve us, after a small present I made him. This Man recommended
him under the Name of Antonine, the Son of a Rich Shepherd near Toledo, who
desired to have his Son kept at some distance from him, and offered a very good
allowance for his maintenance. Antonine was very well received by the Gardener.
I stayed at that Inn, and came two or three times a-week to see the young
Shepherd, but could never prevail with him to come away, putting me off still
from one Month to another; till yesterday in the evening, the Gardener sent me
an Express to bring me the news of his misfortune. I will not trouble your
Majesty with the surprise and grief it put me to, I stayed no longer than
while. I could put off my disguise, as no longer useful; and resume my former
Habit, and came immediately away to the Gardiner's last night, where I was told
all the passages.

The King no less charmed than astonished at the circumstances of this Story,
resolved to do Justice to the prejudice of his Affections; and to declare that
Don Alphonso de Leon, whose passion was so strong and so tender, deserved
better than he to enjoy the fair Dorothy; he took the resolution from that
moment not to cross him in his Amor. He got himself dressed to go carry the news
to that Charming Maid, and to give her full liberty to dispose of her Heart as
she pleased; thinking himself obliged by such a Sacrifice, to repair all the
trouble and injury he had done that young Gentleman. But he was strangely
astonished; when, coming to Dorothy's Chamber, he was told she lay not there
that night; and that they knew not what was become of her.

He thought first she was gone to see Antonine; but then finding little reason
for that, he fancied she was gone to her Father's, but could not guess for what
end. Yet the jealousy he was not yet rid of, for all his resolution against
it, had made that impression within him. It persuaded him against all
appearance his first thoughts were true, and that she was certainly gone to
Antonine: And to satisfy himself, he must go to the Prison to know the news.
He asked the Officer, who had been to see the Shepherd: He told him, Not any
but the Marchioness's Maid, (so they called Dorothy) who had been all Night
with him, and was there still. The King redden'd to hear him, and asked him in
some heat, if he had not given him order no body should see the Shepherd?
Except those, Sir, answers the Officer, who should show me your Signet, which
that Maid brought me. My Signet, says the King, putting his Hand in his Pocket:
he found it was gone. And being highly offended with the boldness of the little
Less, he went into the Prison to complain of her, where he saw the two tender
Lovers, falling presently at his feet. Antonine was the Speaker, and begged the
King's Pardon, for two Loving Youths, who placing all their happiness in the
Enjoyment of each other, had united by indissoluble Bonds, what Love had
already strongly chained together.

You should not (answers the King, making them both stand up) by desiring my
Pardon, have robbed me of the the glory I designed my self, by preventing your
Petition with my Bounty: I am not come hither as a Rival jealous of your
Happiness, to cross your Love any more; but I come as a Prince to do Justice to
the most tender Passion in the World, which, (however it trouble me) I must own
to have charmed me.

You shall be married, Don Alphonso, adds he, embracing him, and I shall be
very sorry (having the esteem I have for Dorothy) to hinder her good Fortune.

Antonine hearing these last words, could no longer doubt, but the King had
been fully informed who he was: and falling the second time on his knees, would
have excused what his excess of love made him do. The King embracing him again,
answered, He could not condemn a passion himself had been subject to; that the
Beauty and merit of Dorothy deserved better fortune than her Birth promised
her. That it was no news to see (not Genlemen, but) Princes to choose Consorts
out of Cottages: That Love wrought far greater miracles: and as for Birth, it
was no obstacle in their Case, who are in a condition to bestow Honors, and
Dignities.

This Discourse was received with thanks and acknowledgments, from Don Alphonso
and Dorothy. After which the King having sent for rich Clothes for the one, and
the other, he led them to the Palace, where he was pleased to have their
Nuptials celebrated, with all the splendor and Magnificence due to the Quality
of a Gentleman of the Ancient and Illustrious Family of Leon. The King Honored
Dorothie's Parents with Titles of Nobility, and made her Father Governor of
Aranjuez. The poor Marchioness was put into a Nunnery, and after two years
penance, her Husband who notwithstanding the accident at Aranjuez, had a love
for her still, set her at liberty, and took her home to himself, where they
lived the rest of their days in a fair correspondence, if you consider with how
much reason they had been parted.

FINIS.
Books Printed for J. Magnes, and R. Bentley in Russel Street, in Covent Garden.
PLAYS.
TArtuff, or the French Puritan, a Comedy, written in French by the famed Wit
of France, Monsieur Moliere, and made English by Mr. M. Medburne.

Plays written by Madam Behn.
Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom.

Abdelazar, or the Moor's Revenge.

The Town Fop, or Sir Timothy Taudry.

Plays written by Mr. Howard.
All Mistaken: or, the Mad Couple.

The English Monsieur.

Plays written by Mr. Crown.
Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph, a Masque Acted at the Court.

The Country Wit.

The Destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus Vespatian. In two Parts.

Andromache, a Tragedy.

Plays written by Mr. Lee.
The Tragedy of Nero.

Sophonisba, or Hannibat's Overthrow.

Gloriana, or the Court of Augustus Caesar.

The Rival Queens, or the Death of Alexander the Great.

The Plain Dealer, written by Mr. Wicherly.

The Mistaken Husband, part of it written by John Dryden, Esquire;

Dryden's Notes of Morocco.

Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One, written by Mr. Dursey.

The Fond Husband, or the Plotting Sisters, by Mr. Dursey.

Generous Enemies.

Some Engsl^^^ Novels.
Happy Slave, in Three Parts Complete.

Count Brion: or, the Cheating Gallant.

Zelinda, a Romance, by Monsieur Sidery in 12.

Covent Garden Drollery, in 8.

The Disorders of Love, in 12.

Mayer's Letters.

Some Books of Devotion.
Dr. Andrews Devotions.

Dr. Hatten's Psalter in 12.

Moral Essays, on many Importunate Duties in 12.

Thomas a Kempis.

Lipsions of Constancy.

The Education of a Prince in 12.

The Triumphs of Love, over Fortune, a Novel.

FINIS.

