A DISCOURSE UPON THE NATURE OF Eternity, And the Condition of a separated
Soul, according to the grounds of Reason, and Principles of Christian RELIGION.

By WILLIAM BRENT of Grayes Inn, Esquire, now Prisoner in the Gate House.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Moon, at the Seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
1655.

The Preface to the Reader.
EMpedocles of Agrigentum being demanded why it was so hard to find out a wise
man, gave this reason; because (said he) none can find one out, who is not so
himself; thereby inferring, that unless there be a proportion between the
object and the power, it will never be able to produce the effects flowing
from it.

Upon this ground it may be well concluded, that it is impossible for any to
give a true description of Eternity, who has no subsistence but in time; and
certainly, although some spirits sublimated by the daily contemplation of
Eternal things; may perhaps be able to show us some imperfect Ideas, of those
perfect beauties whereon they are enamoured, yet it is a mere extravagance in
me who have employed the best part of my time in quest of transitory and
fading things, to undertake the handling of a subject which cannot be worthily
expressed by less then an Angel, nor be conceived in this life by human kind.

Whilst Hannibal was with the King Antiochus in Ephesus, where they were
busied in making preparation for a war against the Romans, he was invited by
some of the great Kings favorites to hear one Phormio a Philosopher read a
Lecture of military discipline, and the duty of a General, and having
performed it with the applause of all the auditory, HANNIBALL being demanded
his opinion of the man, answered that he had indeed formerly seen diverse mad
men, but never any one so mad as PHORMIO, who having, never viewed troops on
their march, never spent one night in the trenches, or performed the least duty
of a Soldier, would notwithstanding take upon himself to order an Army and
prescribe rules unto a General.

It is certainly much easier to comprehend all millitary knowledge which is
contained in the finite number of some precepts drawn from reason and
experience; then fathom the bottemless Abyss of Eternity, which holds no
proportion at all with the narrow limits and shallowness of humane reason, and
consequently to undertake the handling of this subject is a much greater
madness then that of PHORMIO.

This being so, I doubt not but there will be some, who unsatisfied with what I
shall set down, will question upon what grounds I have adventured to publish my
conceptions upon Eternity, so many excellent pens having already employed
themselves in the deciphering of it) and will conclude, that as his error is
to be pitied, who contrary to his expectation, (fails) by the weakness of
his forces to perform what he has undertaken; so his madness is
unexcusable, who undertakes what himself knows, is not to be performed.

I will not go about to justify my self against their reprehensions, which
perhaps have truth for their foundation; all I shall say is, I have written
this only for my own private use, that I might at times of leisure view the
discoveries I have made of that Country to which I tend; and on which time at
the shutting in of my lives course will land me, and I have published it not as
conceiving I could better what has formerly been written, but out of an
opinion, that my conceits (though short of what others have delivered) might
hit the humor of some one or other, and waken him from that lethargy wherein
the World holds the most part of men during their lives, that he might look
about in time and provide himself for that Eternal habitation; those who are
stung with the Tarantula, cannot be cured but by Music, and I have heard that
it is not always the best Tunes help the diseased Patients, but such as (how
extravagant soever) simpathize most with their inclinations.

Reader! having given thee this account of my self, I proceed briefly to set
down the substance of this short Treatise: in the first place, I shall
endeavor to let thee know what Eternity is; in the second, to describe what
our condition will be in it: and in the last place, to set down such Rules as
may (being observed) render us perfectly happy in that fixed condition, wherein
Eternity will place us: all I require from thee is, that if thou approve not
what I write, thou will (at least) approve the good will wherewith it is written.

Farewell.
A Discourse upon the Nature of Eternity etc.
ONe of the Maxims wherein Philosophers (notwithstanding the many different
opinions among them) do accord is this; Nihil est in intellectu, quod non
prius fuit in sensu; that is, nothing is in our understanding which has not
first gained it is admittance through the senses; our souls during the time of
their imprisonment in our bodies, seem to be so narrowly coopt up by our
senses who guard all the avenues, by which any intelligence of the great
workmanships of nature may be convaied to them, that they get notice of
nothing, save what is brought them by their mediation.

Well may the exterior objects assisted by the Sunns light fill the air with
the representation of their seveverall species, but the understanding will not
be able to know any thing either of the shape or color, unless they pass
through the eye into the common sense, and be transmitted to the fancy.

The warbling Choristers of the air, may well cause both the woods and valleys,
echo, with their melodious soundes; and all the famous Orators display the
utmost charms of winning Rhetoric: but if our ears deny them entrance to
the brain, they will at last die in the air where they were formed, without
giving us the last information, either of their harmony, or meaning.

All the rare spices of the East may well evaporate themselves to nothing
before our eyes, without leaving any other sense of their rich perfumes, but
what our smelling shall convey unto us. And if another Monarck far surpassing
Assuerus in the richesse, and extent of his Dominions, should unpeople the
three Elements, to furnish out a sumptuous feast that might show forth the
greatness of his magnificence, we were not able to distinguish any of those
exquisite dainties, and delicious wines, farther then what our tastes should
dictate unto us.

Infine our Souls, notwithstanding their immateriall substance, and the
faculties of will and understanding, whereby they think themselves equal to
the Celestial Spirits (were but those gates dammed up whereof our senses are
the Porters) would (like the Egyptians during the three days darkness
wherewith God plagued them) be forced to sit still, nor could the Heavenly
gifts of reasoning and resolving avail them ought toward the discovery of
truth or goodness, which are the only object of their functions.

The spotts we now discover in the Sunn, the valleys in the Moon, and Stars
that moove in an Epicycle about the Planet Jupiter; had been Eternally
concealed from all mankind, had not the invention of Galileus perspectives by
aiding the weakness of our sight, discovered them unto our eyes and I am
verily persuaded that all those rare effects of nature which we now attribute
to simpathy, to antipathy, or other occult causes, are indeed only material
quallities, but too subtle to be perceived by our senses, which is the cause
that all our rarest wits are at a fault in quest of them, and pay us only with
obscure terms instead of truth.

Eternity alone is that can never fall to be the object of our senses; the
infinity of it is duration cannot be comprehended by their finite powers, and
time does hurrie us away so fast over the race of our mortallity, that we have
not the leisure to contemplate its stable firmness, not subject to those laws
of ruin by which Heaven and earth shall one day perish. This truth is
excellently confirmed unto us by the Apostle, when he says that neither eye
has seen, ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man, to conceive
the excellencies of what God has prepared in store for those that fear him.
Eternity is surely one of the most precious of all those blessings, and the
Trisagion or thrice holy, so much renowned in the Greek Church, as a Hymn
delivered to them by the mouths of Angels, Sanctus Deus, sanctus fortis,
Sanctis immortalis, puts immortallity in the last place, as complement of the
Divine perfections.

When Moses moved with a holy curiosity, desired he might behold the face of
God, he was answered it was impossible to see that and live; all this beloved
Patriarch could obtain, was license to view the glory of his hinder parts in
passing by; and what is thereby meant save only this; that we may be
permitted here on Earth, to contemplate the Divine perfections in the
Creatures, which are the least, and meanest effects of his power, being
produced during the continuance of fleeting time, but that all sollid joys,
together with his beatificall vision, are reserved only for such as fix their
habitations in the blessed dwelling of Eternity.

Saint Paul being through special favor wrapped into the third Heaven that he
might take a taste of those Celestial pleasures, thinks it not lawful to
utter the Arcana, that is, the sublime, and hidden things which he learned
there; the greatest height we can attain unto whilst we are here, is to
contemplate the mysteries which shall be there revealed, per speculum in
aenigmate, through a glass, in a dark riddle: what is this glass, but faith,
by whose assistance our faint eyes are able without dazeling, to look upon the
Sunn of truth, even God himself, and expound those riddles that pass the
reach of humane understanding?

Relying therefore upon this guide, I shall begin to search into the Nature of
Eternity, because her Maxims, are like a clew of thread let down from Heaven
to lead us with security, and humbleness into the understanding of Divine
mysteries; that so we may not stray in the wild maze of self opinion, wherein
the greatest part of humane kind do wander endlesly, and lose themselves, at
last being intrapped in the pernicious snares, of overweaning pride, or stupid
ignorance.

When the Divines endeavor to describe the Deity unto us, they make us of
three sorts of Attributes: the first, as they call them negative, the second
relative, and the third positive: the first, show what he is not, and the
second what he is in relation to us, or to some other being, but the third
which should declare unto us, what he is in himself, fail to perform it,
because all terms Explicate only our conceptions, and we can conceive
nothing but what is infinitely short of his perfections: they call him
increated and immortal, that we may know his essence is incompatible, with
whatsoever has either ending or beginning; they term him Creator and
Redeemer, thereby informing us that all the blessings we enjoy here or expect
hereafter are but dependancies upon his power. But when they tell us of his
virtues, and of his wisdom, they intend not that we should thereby understand
such virtues or such wisdom as are in us; not an affection, or habit of his
will inclining him to pursue always the dictates of a right reason, nor a
perspicacity of judgment enabling him to distinguish upon all occasions the
real truths, from those that seem so; which notwithstanding is the proper
meaning of those terms, whereas the Divine virtues, and wisdom are neither
qualities, nor habits, but the very essence and being of God himself, which
cannot be known or comprehended by any other nature inferior to him.

It being therefore admitted that we can never write or conceive any thing
worthily of the Divine Nature, how is it possible, I should be able to
explicate the Nature of Eternity, which is the measure of his duration, and one
of the most excellent of all his attributes? God himself seems to glory in it
when being asked his name by the great Patriarch Moses he gives him only this
description of himself, Ego sum qui sum. I am he that am, without mentioning
either his power, his justice, or any of his other attributes, giving us
thereby to understand that all his other attributes depend upon his being
(according to the order of our conceptions) as their foundation; that other
things have an existe^ce whose beginning flows from his power, and whose
continuance is an effect only of his will; that nothing has a stable
independent being save only he, and that in fine, no happiness or perfection
is to be prised, if the enjoyment of it be not secured unto us by Eternity.

This measure of Gods being, cannot (by any positive terms which we can use)
be comprehended, or defined, nor can it be illustrated to humane
understandings, by other means then by considering the nature of it
negatively, and comparatively, unto those things which have a being during the
continuance of time, the first of which considerations shall be of the infinity
thereof; which (as I said before) is a term purely negative, and represents
nothing at all unto our imaginations, the only conception we can frame upon it;
being of something, not circumscribed by ends, or bounds, as are all the
objects which present themselves unto our senses.

We are astonished when we consider the vast extent of this habitable earth
which has sufficed to the production and nourishment of the innumerable number
of men now living, or that have had a being since the Creation of the World,
and we are notwithstanding satisfied both by the demonstrations of
Cosmographers, and relations of Navitors, that a full third part of it is yet
undiscovered. The immence quantity of waters in the Ocean, seems to pose
Arithmeticke, to number all the several drops of water contained in it: but
above all the Heavens incircling round this ball made up of Earth, Water, and
the other Elements, and exceeding it so far in bigness, that all of it
together bears in comparison to them but such proportion (according to the
Astronomers computation) as a point in middle of a circle, to the circumference,
does with its unmeasurable greatness out vie the force of humane
understanding, to conceave any idea of its dimensions; and yet when we
consider, but with the least attention these great workemanships of God, and
search into the nature of them, we must needs be satisfied they are not
infinite; for that consisting (as our senses can inform us) of finite parts;
themselves must likewise be of the same nature with the parts whereof they are
composed: who is it that perceives not when he takes up a shovell full of
earth from the ground, or but a dish of water out of the Sea, that those
portions of the two Elements are finite, and that our not being able to find
out their certain quantity, proceeds not from any contradiction in their
natures, to be surveyd or measured, but only from the weakness of our
forces? who is it that can doubt when he perceives the Sun draw nearer to us
but that the distance between us and him is finite? since were it otherwise,
it were not capable of increase or diminution. And who in fine can make a
question but that the Heavens are circumscribed by certain bounds, and limits,
when he beholds them to be perpetually measured by the Sunn, Moon, and the
other Planets in their several motions, according to whose different races,
we give beginning and ending, unto our hours, days, months, years, and to
our ages.

Archimedes was of opinion he could have moved the world, had there been any
other place out of it, upon which he might have fixed his instrument; and I am
certainly persuaded that when we shall be freed out of this cage of earth
wherein our souls are enclosed during this life; we shall with ease be able
to surveigh and comprehend, the Heavens, the Earth, and all the other
workmanships of nature that now appear to be so far beyond the reach of
humane understanding. And yet when our enlarged souls shall have the power to
circle earth, sound hell, and measure all the vast extent of Heaven, how little
or rather nothing at all will that appear, being compared unto infinity? if
we were able to number all the drops of water in the Sea, and count the
sands upon the shore, and if for every one of them we were to live an age
before we died, yet were this term as nothing being compared unto Eternity,
since time would at last consume all that large stock of our subsistence, and
Eternity when that were past would still continue constant in the full
possession of all its being.

Aristotle was of opinion the world wherein we live had no beginning, and
should never have an ending, persuaded thereunto by the incessant vicissitude
of generation, and corruption, and the settled course of Nature which
perpetuates all the several species, or kinds of things, notwithstanding the
continual decay of the individualls, whereof they are composed; if this
imagination of his were true, it would then follow, that the duration of the
world, should be indeed perpetual, but not infinite, and that it would have
nothing in it approaching to the pure simplicity of an Eternal being. For if
time be divided (as reason, experience, and the opinion of all Philosophers,
assure us it is) into past, present, and to come, how can that (though nere so
far extended) be without end? whose very being consists in a perpetual flux
of ending and beginning; or how can that be without bounds? whose two parts,
that is, the first and last, are not at all; and whose third part (wherein
only it subsists) is circumscribed within such narrow limits, that we can
hardly think a thought, during the term of its duration: and what resemblance
can there be in it of Eternity; the one being in a continual motion, and the
other in a constant quiet; the one perpetually changing, and the other never
subject to alteration, and the one in fine subsisting only in the short
instants of the present time, whereas the other comprehends all times past,
present, and to come, in the pure simplicity of a present being. From this
ground, there arises another consideration of the Nature of Eternity, that is
of the indivisibility thereof, which I make the subject of my next reflection.

Indivisibility is a term also negative, which represents unto us only
something that cannot be parcelled out by portions as the things of this
inferior world way be. Divide, et impera, that is divide and govern, is a
maxim succesfully practiced by the Politicians, when making use of the private
dissentions either of a City, or Commonwealth, they obtain and preserve
thereby their Dominion over all the differing parties: and we may also, with
the same truth affirm this other, Divide and destru^, divide and destroy; God
who is Creator of whatsoever has an existence, being himself one by the
simplicity of his Nature, has placed the subsistence of all things in unity,
and has therefore by a working peculiar only to himself, united the
contraries of heat and cold, of draught and moisture, unto the making up of all
the several bodies, either sensible or insensible, which are contained in the
rich treasury of nature; whilst they continue united by this bond, so long
they are said to be; but if the union be once broken, either by external
violence, or the inward working of the different qualities whereof the body is
composed; then does it forthwith lose the former being, and becomes some other
thing, according to the nature of the new form which it acquires. As long as
our bodies remain fit to entertain our souls, by the due temperature of the
humors, and disposition of the Organs to receive her operations, we continue
to be men; but when that cease either by inward distemper or outward force,
we then leave to be so, our souls becoming separated forms, and our bodies
returning to the common mass of matter, from whence they are extracted; the
same we see happens in beasts, plants, and in all other inanimate bodies, of
what Nature or quality soever: so as there can be no conclusion truer then
this, that whatsoever is already divided, has left to be what it was
formerly, whatsoever may be divided is subject to decay and ruin; and
whatsoever is indivisible, must also of necessity by reason of the simplicity
of its Nature be Eternal.

Eternity is therefore indivisible, and all those happy persons who have gained
that blessed part, are allwaies in possession of their whole being, they lose
nothing of what is past, they want nothing of what is future, but the present
in that Celestial Country does comprehend after an unexpressible manner, all
those three different, and incompatible parts, into which time is divided. And
hence it is, that all the happiness found there, is true, and solid; because
those different goods are united in that fixed Mansion, which being here
divided, mislead the greatest part of humane kind in the search they make
after the chiefest good, and feed us only with appearances instead of truth.

Good is the simplest of all other beings, and is therefore not to be looked
for here, where nothing does subsist but is compounded; and all those things
which are so eagerly pursued by men, for the resemblance they have to good, are
but like glowormes, which cheat us as we wander in the night, and casting
forth a luster equal to that of the most precious Gemmes, are in themselves
naught else but rottenness and putrefacti(...)

(...)ee are divided almost into as many (...)ns, as persons, and every one
seeks (...)sse (which is the chiefest good) a several way, in the variety of
their own appetites, neglecting Eternity, which is the only place where it
resides.

Some hunt after power and sovereign command, expecting to find true
contentment in Authority; but alas! how infinitely are they misguided by
ambition? the cares of governing, and dangers that accompany a Scepter, so far
outwaigh the happiness found in it, that Augustus Caesar, who enjoyed the
Empire of the world, in the most settled times it ever saw, made it his daily
suite unto the Senate, that he might be restored unto the quiet of a private
life: and Diocletian having generously cast off the yoke of ruling others,
refused to return again unto the glorious servitude, professing that he
found more pleasure among the Cabages growing in his solitary garden, then
twenty years command over the Roman Empire had yielded to him.

Others there are, whose thoughts are wholly taken up in gathering wealth, as
if that were the only thing to be desired, never considering (so grossly are
they blinded by their covetousness) that the content of riches consists not in
the hoording up of treasures, but in the liberal distribution of them; that
the sordid ways of gathering money, renders them odious to others, and the
restless care of keeping it, destroys the quiet they would establish in
themselves; that their continual negotiation about gain, hinders them from
enjoying the happiness of life; and that in fine, when they have reaped the
plentiful harvest of al their labors, they must resign it unto others, who
longing to enjoy the precious spoil, think their lives tedious, and their
deaths welcome. I forbear to mention the infinite number of mischiefs which
the possession of riches has brought upon the owners: how many are there who
(like Seneca) have in hoording up treasures been careful to get together the
instruments of their own ruin? finding at last by experience, that to be the
occasion of their deaths, wherein they had established the contentment of their
lives: this is a truth so evidently certain, that not Philosophers only and
votaries, have been able to discover the imposture of them, but even whole
Nations have agreed upon it. The inhabitants of the Balearicke Islands (now
called Majorca, and Minorca) drowned al their gold and silver in the Ocean; and
the Spartans (one of the most flourishing Commonwealths that ever were)
banished those mettalls out of the confines of their territories, forbidding
the enjoyment of them to all their Citizens; as being incompatible with true
contentment.

Some place their happiness in pleasure, and shunning whatsoever has the show
of trouble, give themselves wholly up to sensual delights; fond fools, who
blinded by their bestiall appetites, think themselves happy men in practicing
those actions, which deprive them of the dignity of being reasonable creatures,
and cast them down into the rank of beasts; unworthy of enjoying souls made
after the Divine likeness, since they employ their whole time in giving
satisfaction to their bodies. And yet how short are those few minutes of
contentment which they enjoy, whilst they abandon themselves to their
debauches, being compared to those of trouble, which necessarily accompany the
pleasures they hunt after? the drunkard will assure us that the pain he
suffers in his head, and stomach, is of much longer continuance, then was the
taste of that delicious wine wherein he made a shipwreck of his reason; the
passion whether fained, or real, which a libidinous man acts, or suffers for a
desired beauty, and the solicitous endeavors, used by him for obtaining of his
prey, far outwaigh the momentary pleasure he enjoyes, which notwithstanding
is attended with remorse of conscience from within, and the apprehensions of
danger, and dishonor from abroad. Diseases (the effect of their disorders)
take up a settled quarter in their bodies, and render that the constant mansion
of grief, and pain, where they intended to have given admittance unto naught
but joy, and pleasure; and for a complement of their misfortunes, their vices
like a raging fire, consuming all those excellencies which God and Nature have
bestowed upon them; brand them with a perpetual blot of infamy to all
posterity, and fix an everlasting guilt upon their souls.

Sampson had a prodigious strength infinitely surpassing that of other men,
seconded by an excess of courage, which rendered him victorious over Lions, and
triumphant in the discomfiture of an host of men; his single person was of
more value then an army, but when he suffered himself to be conducted by his
passion, the love of Dalila having first blindfolded his reasons eyes, deprived
him after of his corporeal sight, betrayed him to his enemies, and reduced him
to so great a height of misery, that to be freed from the contempt to which he
was exposed, he was constrained to employ his matchless force, in working his
revenge by his own ruin.

Sardanapalus (last of the Assyrian Monarchs) saw himself peaceably settled in
the chief Empire of the world, but having once given himself over to his
effeminate pleasures, the fire of lust first kindled in his own heart, quickly
destroyed the respect of him in the minds of neighbor Princes, and his own
subjects, and after taking hold on the magnificent Pile he had caused to be
erected, reduced to ashes both his person and his Empire.

Alexander (justly surnamed the great, for his unparalleld courage, conduct,
and fortun) was mounted to so great a height of glory, that he despised the
world, as a place too narrow to bound the limits of his conquests, and yet the
murder of his friend Clitus, which he committed in his drunkenness, rendered
all these prosperities so unsavory to him, that he attempted the killing of
himself, and begat such an aversion against him in the minds of diverse of
his subjects, that they prepared a poison for him, which cutting short the
course of all his victories, buried his triumphs, together with his carcass in
the grave.

Solomon received from God the gift of an incomparable wisdom, above all the
men that ever were, and with it a confluence of all those blessings, which
might raise humane nature unto the greatest height of happiness, whereof it is
capable during this mortal life; but the inordinate love of women, to which he
was addicted in his latter time, deprived his issue of the greater part of his
terrestiall kingdom, and himself (as some do probably conjecture) of the
Eternal joys of heaven.

Why should I farther instance the single punishments of particular voluptuous
persons? it is so prodigious a madness for man to place his chiefest good in
sensual lust, that it has drawn down fire from heaven for the consuming of
whole Cities, and water from the earth, and firmaments, which was upon the
point to have extirpated mankind, all the different Elements conspiring to
revenge that insufferable wrong is done to their Creator, when we neglect his
image engraven in our souls, to satisfy the fleshly part of us, which is
nothing else but dust and ashes.

And to conclude, even Epicurus the Philosopher, who placed the chiefest good
of man in pleasure, did notwithstanding (if we believe Seneca, rather then some
others who have slandered him) esteem, that pleasure to consist in the golden
mean of temperance, and not in the exorbitant use of wine, of play, of
gluttony, and women.

I have exceeded in handling this particular the brevity I had proposed unto my
self, because these are the Meteors, which by the glittering brightness of
their deceitful light, dazzle the eyes of our unweary youth, and like so many
wandering fires mislead us in our search for happiness, through the blind paths
of ignorance, and folly, until at last they train us into the dangerous
precipies of wickedness, and infamy, from whence we are not able (without
particular assistance of the Divine grace) to free our selves, for all Eternity.

All other things so greedily grasped at by worldly men, may be reduced unto
the before mentioned heads, of power, of riches, and of pleasure, nobility,
fame, and respect, are the attendants upon power, sufficiency, and plenty,
wait upon riches, health, strength, and beauty, are necessarily required to
the completing of our pleasures, and therefore what false appearance soever of
happiness, they may hold forth to our deluded minds, they cannot possibly
give us that true content, which is not to be found in these principal things,
whereunto they are but accessories.

Power, riches, pleasure, and the rest, have indeed some resemblance of good,
but are not that which they resemble for good; or happiness (being the same)
consists not in possessing many different things, but in the union of all
together, whereas they are so far from being one, that they are inconsistent
with each other.

The weight of business, and distance kept by Sovereign Princes, for
maintaining the reverence due to their calling, permits them not the sweet
delights of pleasure, to which the freedom of equality is requisite, and the
vastness of their expense, in wars, in treaties, for intelligence, and other
things incident to their Authority makes them the neediest almost of all other
men. The wary closeness of the rich miser, inconsistent with popularity,
hinders him from being powerful, and his daily employment about the increasing
of his store, debarrs him from the use of pleasure, which cannot be had without
the expense of time, and money. The seriousness of great affairs disturbes
the quietness of pleasures, and the prodigality of luxury, wastes the estates
of those that are addicted to it.

In fine, which way soever we turn our selves, to seek contentment in
satisfaction of our lustful appetites, these divided goods which cannot dwell
together in one subject frustrate our expectations, and enforce us to confess
with the wiseman, that whatsoever has a subsistence during the continuance of
time, is vanity, of vanities, and naught but vanity. For if by a particular
indulgence, of God, and Nature, these divided (and as I have already showed)
incompatible blessings, of power, riches, pleasure, respect, nobility, fame,
plenty, beauty, health, and strength, should fall to be the portion of one
man; what were all these advantages without security in the enjoyment of them,
but vanity, and mere vexation of our spirits? and what security can this life
possibly afford, amid the daily apprehensions of being deprived of them before
we die, and certainty to lose them, when we descend into the grave?

Our blessed Savior therefore advises Martha not to divide her thoughts, in
the sollicitous quest of many things, since what was necessary was only one,
And that we might not be to seek, what that one, single, necessary thing
should be, himself informs us in another place what it is, when he commands
us, to seek first the Kingdom of Heaven by just and righteous actions, which
being once obtained, we shall enjoy all other blessings as coessentiall with it.

Is power the object of thy wishes? thou shall be there (as the Apostle
assures) coheire with him, to whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given. Is
honor or command thy chiefest good? it is so liberally dispensed to all the
inhabitants of Eternity, that the Prophet David seems to charge God with
prodigallity in that particular, when he cries out, Nimis honorati sunt amici
tui Deus; nimis confortatus est principatus eorum! my God! thy friends are too
much honored, their principallity is too much strengthened, or established.
Do thou desire fame or riches? behold the same Prophet tells thee, Gloria,
et divitiae, in domo Domini, glory, and riches, are in the house of the Lord.
Art thou delighted with the magnificence of royal feasts? the King of Kings
has by his only Son sent down from Heaven, invited all mankind to a
delicious banquet in his eternal palace, where having seated all the guests
that come upon his invitation, according to their several degrees, himself
will minister unto them. Is thy heart ravished at the sight of some
accomplished beauty? those who reside in that Eternal mansion, out shine the
Sunn in greatest height of all his glory.

In fine, whatever else it is that does delight thee shall there be present;
because all thy souls faculties which can find nothing in this inferior world
but is too mean and narrow for them, shall there be fully satisfied, according
to the large extent of all their powers, being absorpt in contemplation of the
first truth, and the enjoyment of the chiefest good; and yet all this shall
be, not by the various diversity of several objects, but by their blessed
admission to the presence of God himself, who being the first cause, contains
emminently the perfection of all other beings, in the simplicity of his own
nature, communicating freely all his excellencies to those happy persons, who
are made pertakers with him in the infinite, and indivisible Eternity.

Having considered the vast diversity there is between Eternity and time, by
reason of the infinity of the one, and the strait limits wherein the other is
shut up* and circumscribed; the entire firmness of the one, and the minute
parts whereinto the other is divided, it follows that we should raise our
thoughts unto the contemplation of those excellencies, which an Eternal being
has, by the comparing of it unto that which we enjoy, during the succession
of time.

Those who employ themselves in quest of that, which we vulgarly call the
Philosophers Stone, have not as yet found out the way of fixing Mercury, which
is the cause they fail in their attempts of making gold, notwithstanding the
many laborious, and chargeable experiments, have been used for the effecting
of it; and all that have endeavored to establish their contentment, in the
perishable goods of this inferior world, have found themselves deluded by
their hopes, because they were not able, to fix the fleeting instants of the
present time; whose continual motion, is of all other things, most destructive
unto the happiness of life.

What an uncomfortable voyage would that man have, who were bound out in quest
of some particular wave, in the midst of the Atlanticke Ocean, how improbable
that he should make discovery of what he sought for? and how impossible to
settle there, considering the perpetual agitation of the waters, in that
restless Element? And yet such is the fatal blindness which possesses the
greatest part of humane kind, that we consume our lives in seeking to find out
a permanent bliss, amid the various diversity of worldly things; though all
our predecessors for above fifty ages past, who have preceded us in that
design, have perished in it, without being able to inform us any thing, save
only this, that they have met with nothing in their several wanderings but
vanity, nor reaped ought but the vexation of their spirits; and that times
course (as certain, though not so rapid as that of the Ocean) fails not to
ravish from us all those pleasing objects, in the pursuit of which, we
entertain our lives; and fancy in the obtaining of them, a contentment, which
is no where to be found, but in the happy region of Eternity.

That harmless innocence which is the precious treasure of our Childhood, is
violently snatched from us by the heat of youth, that inconsiderately ingageth
us, to seek contentment in satisfaction of our lustful appetites; and when
the access of years and judgment at man's estate, has made us see the vanity
of that employment, ambition, pride, and covetousness, present us with the
specious baits of honor, power, and riches, and train us by those sweet
allurements from contemplation of Eternity, to employ the strength, and vigor
of our age in purchase of them, as if they could bestow true happiness on
their possessors; until at last (if death prevent us not before) we find our
selves arrived at the utmost period of life, (old age) where though experience
discover to us the true nature of those transitory things we first admired,
yet we can reap no other fruit of all her counsels, but only sorrow, and
despair, when we consider the grosnesse of our errors, and miscarriages for
the time past, and the impossibility of amending them in that to come.

And hence it is the royal Prophet David takes occasion to reproach mankind of
dullness, and heaviness of heart, that forsaking the only necessary thought
and study of Eternity, give themselves over unto the love of vanity and the
pursuit of lies; filii hominum usque quo gravi cord; ut quid diligitis
vanitatem et quaeritis mendacium? as who should say, you sons of men, how long
will you permit your hearts and your affections to be waighed down by the
inordinate sollitude for earthly things? behold, the pleasures which you love
and court for satisfaction of your youth, are only vanity, and those more
sollid employments you search after for the entertainment of your elder years,
are but a lie; promising contentment, and giving naught but care, vexation, and
repentance.

If Julius Caesar could have foreseen that all his victories, and triumphs
whereby he subjected unto himself the Roman State. (That proud mistnesse of
the known world) would but have served to make him fall a glorious victime in
the Senate house; he had not prosecuted certainly with so much ardour as he
did, the cutting off all those, who opposed themselves to the accomplishment of
his ambitious designs. King Pirrhus had sure followed the council of his
friend, and betaken himself unto the quiet pleasures of a peaceful life, had
he been well informed that all his thoughts of conquests and the inlargment of
his Empire, should perish together with himself, by the hands of a weak
woman, in the attempt he made to surprise the City Argos. Saladine (that
great victorious Sultan of the East) would not have spent his life amid the
toil, and dangers that attend a martial employment, had he but thought at
first, as he did afterward, at the hour of death, that he should carry
nothing of all the spoils and riches he had gotten away with him, but only a
poor shirt to shroud his carcass.

The rich man in the Gospel would not have joyed in his full barnes, and store
houses sufficient for the expense of many years, had he but known that he
should never live to see the birth of the succeeding morn.

In fine, the business of the world would cease, and we should look with
horror, and aversion, upon those gilded follies, and pleasing vanities, in
quest whereof we spend our lives, disturb the Elements, and alter the whole
frame of nature, were but their mask pulled off, and we made sensible of that
which is confirmed unto us by the experience of all our predecessors; to wit,
that there is nothing in this inferior world can give a satisfaction to our
soul, whose frame is equal unto that of the celestial spirits; and that
allthough by an excess of bestiallity, we could so plunge our souls into the
mass of our terrestiall bodies, as to set up our rests upon the enjoyment of
those things which are the object of our senses, yet age and sickness, would
like unbidden guests, trouble the mirth of all our entertainments; and time
(the absolute commander of all sublunary things) consuming by degrees the
matter of them, would violently snatch us from their embraces, and put in
execution that irrevocable decree pronounced by God against material things,
to wit that whatsoever is composed of dust and ashes shall again return unto
it.

So that if we examine the true cause of things, we must conclude, that the
ill conduct of our lives, and all the miseries, vices, and disorders, that flow
from thence; are an effect of the continual motion of time, which representing
unto us these exterior objects, under several disguises, keeps us from
penetrating into the true Nature of them, and suggesting to our deluded minds
vain hopes, and fears, does by those false alarmes disturb our reason, and
brings upon us a forgetfullnesse of what is past, a mistake of what is present,
and a gross negligence, in not providing of our selves for what is to come.

For remedy hereof, antiquity was used to set up trophies and monuments of all
great, and virtuous actions, as also to expose the bodies of Malefactors who
were executed, unto the public view on poles, or gibbets, that so posterity
being put in mind of what had past, might be invited to imitate the one, and
avoid the other. King Phillip (Father of the great Alexander) gave command unto
a Page of his to wake him daily with this admonition, that he should call to
mind he was a man, fearing lest he might otherwise be transported by the
false luster of his greatness, and prosperities, as to mistake (which his Son
after did) what himself was, and forget the condition of humanity, wherein he
had been placed by God, and Nature. And (the great Doctor of the Church) Saint
Jerome thinks it a matter of that consequence for us to employ our selves in
the consideration of what is future, that he assures us confidently (by
warrant of the sacred Scripture) we should never sin, did we but carefully
ruminate on the last things that do attend us. Memorare novissima tua et in
aeternum non peccabis.

See here the true condition of our being during the succession of time. Let us
now alter the Scene and from this theater of confusion, and disorder, raise up
our thoughts unto the contemplation of Eternity. It is an instant always
present, never decaying, whose infinity comprehends all times past, present,
and to come, and whose simplicity presenting us at once with whatsoever can be
good or perfect, united in their first cause, whereof (unless our sins debar
us from his sight) the Divine Nature we shall be then made glad beholders;
cleares up the foggy mists of ignorance, of forgetfullnesse, and of mistake,
which hang between our understandings and the truth of things; fills all the
powers and faculties of our souls with the enjoyment of their desired objects,
and does establish us in the secure possession of our bliss beyond the reach
of fortune, or of time which shall not there have power to traverse our
contentments with the desire of ought that's past, or the apprehension of ought
to come.

When we have once maturely waighed these sollid truths, we shall begin to
loath this prison of our bodies subject to the perpetual injuries of time, and
death, and shall cry out with the Apostle, Infaelix ego homo: quis me liberabit
de corpore mortis hujus? unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body which belongs to death? and with the same Apostle, fixing all our
affections and thoughts upon Eternity, we shall continually desire to be
dissolved that we may live with Christ in his Eternal habitation: and when we
shall receive the summons to dislodge hence, brought us by age, diseases, war,
famine, pestilence, or any other officer, of time, clad in the hideousest
dress that death can wear; we shall with joy prepare our selves unto the
journey; and with the Prophet David say, Laetatus sum in his quae dicta sunt
mihi, in domum domini ibimus. I am rejoiced in that which has been said unto
me, we will go into the house of the Lord.

It seems (being a man according unto Gods own heart) he had well studied
the Nature of that celestial mansion, whose quallities, he does so excellenty
describe in the 2 following verses. Stantes erant pedes nostri, in atriis tuis
Jerusalem, Jerusalem quae aedificatur ut civitas, cujus participatio ejus in
idipsum. Our feet were standing in thy Courts Jerusalem. Here they are
running, forced to accompany the motion of time, but they shall there be fixed
in an Eternal rest, never to be disturbed by time, or fortune, Jerusalem that
is builded as a City, whose portion consists in the thing it self. All other
places are but Innes, where we are entertained as passengers during our
pilgrimage, and therefore have their buildings subject (as are those they
harbor) unto decay, and ruin, but this City being the permanent place of our
aboade, has its foundations laid upon the never fading basis of Eternity. And
if you ask, what is the stock or treasure of the inhabitants in that blessed
country? he forth with tells us that their portion consists in the thing it
self; what is the thing it self? but that which is without dependence upon
any other; and what is that? but he who being to declare himself unto the
Patriarch Moses, says he is, he that is, even God himself, in whom is
comprehended the fullness of all things, and without whom is nothing, but the
privation of good and happiness

Let us endeavor then so to comport our selves that we be not engaged amid
these fading transitory things, but may be able to say with the Apostle; our
life is laid up with Christ in God; and let our only traffic, and
negotiation, be to hoord up treasures (according to the counsel of our blessed
Lord and Savior) where neither rust, nor mothes, can come to wast them, nor
thieves, break in to steal them from us. We need not be to seek where that
should be, since he informs us that it is in Heaven, the only proper seat
and mansion of Eternity.

In the precedent discourse I have endeavored to describe (although
imperfectly) the Nature and condition of Eternity, which is the true and proper
habitation of our souls, who have no commerce with time, but only by their
union with our bodies. A blessed country, but such a one as does not equally
agree with all constitutions, to some it is an Ocean of pleasure, rest, and
happiness; to others, an abisse of everlasting horror, trouble, and confusion;
the reason of which difference, proceeds from the diversity of those several
dispositions and affections we carry with us at our parting hence. For the
clear understanding whereof, it is necessary that we consider the Nature of
our Souls, and examine what are those things which subsist in, and together
with them, after the dissolution of our bodies.

The Heathen Philosophers guided only by the light of nature, did (some of
them) believe the soul of man, to be immortal, they perceived well that she
was capable of many operations, even in this life, without the mediation of the
body; that she gave a being within her self, unto an infinite number of
things, abstracted from the several notions of time, place, figure, or any
other property incident unto material things; which kind of being because it
sorted not unto the things themselves in their own Nature, they must
necessarily receive from her, and they did thence infer, that she could not
communicate such a being unto them, unless she had an immateriall being in
her self. They saw the act of judging, was an action purely her own, whereby
she produced several conclusions (which are new beings) out of those premises
that present themselves to our imaginations; and knowing the infallibility of
this argument, ex nihilo nihil fit, that of nothing there comes nothing, they
were fully satisfied the soul had a being, independent from the body, since it
was able to communicate a being unto other things, without the help of any
Organes which depend upon her.

From the assurance of her being, they collected also her immortallity; for
having by the strict observation of all natural causes, found out that nothing
whatsoever could lose its former being, and acquire a new one (which we term
death in living creatures) but by division, and that, that same could happen
but two ways, viz. either by dividing the matter from the form, or by
dividing the matter within it self, they inferred thence; that since both
these ways were incompatible with the soul, she was not capable of a real
change, and consequently not of death (which of all others is the greatest) not
the first, because that she is immateriall, nor the second, because she is a
pure form, and that all forms are by their being so incapable of division, of
increase, or diminution, according unto these two Maxims among them, forma non
suscipit majus and minus, and this other in indivisibili non fit mutatio.

Upon the same grounds also they inferred, that all the resolutions, or
judgments, and all those Sciences, and Arts, whether speculative, or practicke,
which are in the soul during this life, shall remain also in her after her
separation from the body; these being things which depend only on her, and
which are (in a kind) part of her self, so as without them she would lose
something of the perfection of her being. And to conclude, because they saw
nothing among all the works of Nature, which did not at some time or other,
unless (it were hindered by exterior causes) attain unto a fullness, and
maturity whereby it was enabled to reach that end for which it was ordained, and
found the reasonable soul alone, which has for the object of her
understanding the truth of all natural causes, and their effects, was not able
at any time during this life, wherein she is united with the body to
comprehend the utmost truth may be discovered in any art, or science
whatsoever; they thence inferred, that she was to enjoy a being after the
dissolution of the body, wherein she might at freedom exercise the power of
reasoning, wherewith she is endued, and not only retain those sciences she
has acquired here, but also be able to conceive all other truth, and
knowledge whatsoever, which may be deduced out of them, by that concatenation
and dependence, which the verity of one proposition, has upon that of another.

I have delivered these speculations of the Philosophers with this brevity,
without setting down the many arguments used by them for proof of their
assertions, and answer of the objections have been framed in opposition to
them (wherewith whole volumes might be filled) because they have been since
the most part of them confirmed unto us by the tenets of Christian Religion;
the truth whereof (being revealed by God himself) is not to be disputed by
mankind, and I have taken this short view of the condition of our souls, only
to this intent, that in the sequel of the ensuing Discourse we may upon these
grounds be able the better to discover, how far the ordinary working of
natural causes, does cooperate with the Divine justice in the reward of
virtuous, and the punishment of vicious persons.

For the clear understanding whereof we must know that all living creatures
whatsoever (except man) being destitute of reason, suffer themselves without
repugnance to be directed by the rules of Nature. (That is, the ordinary power
used by God in governing the world) which does sweetly guide them to the
performance of those actions, and the obtaining of that end, whereunto they are
ordained. But man (whose portion is a reasonable soul) assumes the conduct of
himself, and blinded by self love, or overweaning pride, forsakes the
general end of other things (which is the honor and glory of their Maker) to
pursue his own particular good and follow the inordinate affections of his
own corrupted Nature; the true cause of which mistake is this that follows.

Those who have curiously searched into the composition of man, observe, that
he may be considered in a triple capacity, according unto every one of which
he has a several good, that he proposes unto himself, and endeavors to
attain unto during this life. The first is, that of a living creature composed
of a material body, and a form that does communicate unto it life and motion.
The second as he is endued with a reasonable soul, capable of Discourse, and
knowledge, participating thereby of the Nature of intellectual spirits, which
plaseth him in a rank above all the material creatures of this inferior
world. And the third, as he is the workmanship of God created by him out of
nothing, after his own likeness, that he might serve him with obedience and
perseverance, during his temporal being, and be the witness, and pertaker of
his glory in Eternity. The chiefest good of man according to the first, are
riches, and corporeal pleasures, called by the Apostle, Concupiscentia carnis,
and oculorum; Concupiscence of the flesh and eyes.

According to the second the vanity of humane knowledge accompanied with the
forgetfulness of God; or the ambitious desire of obtaining Power, Honor, and
command, called by the same Apostle, superbia vitae, pride of life; those who
consider him according to the third capacity, esteem their chiefest good to
consist in the uniting of their wills with God, and in procuring the
advancement of his glorious Name.

Now the vast distance there is between these ends which men propos(...) unto
themselves, causes the great diversity we see daily between them in the
direction and conduct of their lives, each one desiring to obtain the object
of his wishes, by actions suitable unto it. Those of the first rank, abandoning
themselves to sensual lusts forget the dignity of humane Nature: and abase
themselves into the rank of beasts. Those of the second, denying to
acknowledge him from whom they have received all those advantages wherein they
glory, imitate the Devils in their pride, ungratitude, and rebellion against
their maker. Those only of the third rank, entering into the true knowledge of
themselves, and of the end for which they were created, submit their wills unto
Almighty God, and endeavoring to imitate the Angels in their prompt obedience,
make themselves during this life, fit to enjoy their society after the
dissolution of their bodies.

From the great contrariety of men's judgments, resolutions, and of the actions
and habits, that flow from, and are acquired by them, arises the different
condition of our souls when they are separated from our bodies. The Coral we
see daily, grows in the Sea, and I have read, that being under water it may
(by reason of its softness) be molded into any shape, or figure whatsoever;
but being once exposed unto the open air, it forthwith hardens, and is no more
capable of change, and alteration: the like happens unto our souls, who
while they do continue in this Sea, of the world, are susceptible of the
different affections of good, and bad; according to the several appearances of
things, which working on our fancies, incline our wills unto the following, or
forsaking of them; but having once finished their voyage here, must always
wear the dress of those affections they have at parting hence, and reap
their harvest in Eternity suitable unto the seeds they have sowed here;
according to that saying of the Apostle; quaecunque seminaverit homo, eadem and
metet, whatsoever a man has sowed, the same also he shall reap.

Let us examine the condition of one who has abandoned himself unto his
sensual lusts, and placing his chief good in them, has employed all the
affections and faculties of his Soul, in compassing those objects of his
wishes, his stock of time is now exhausted whilst he endeavored only to
beguile it with the variety of choice delights; and death finding him busy in
the caressing of his body, has violently snatched it from him. The stately
Palaces, vast Treasures, and ravishing beauties, whereof he thought himself
the owner, are now in the possession of another, and the poor Soul is exposed
naked upon the confines of Eternity. Let us with the eyes of contemplation
accompany her thither, and see what are her thoughts, what are her
entertainments in that Country wherein as yet she is a stranger. This rude
alarm has roused her now out of that pleasing slumber, wherein she
retchlessely consumed the time allotted her to labor, and she is come unto
the land of rest, wherein she must for all Eternity, subsist upon the stock
she has brought with her: she now begins to take a view thereof, and summing
her accounts, she finds that all her large possessions, sumptuous Buildings,
Friends, and Riches, have parted with her at the hour of Death, that all her
pleasures are vanished like a Dream, that her body for whose solace and
delight all these were coveted, is mouldring into dust, and ashes; and that in
fine of all that she has done; of all that she has seen, suffered, or
enjoyed, there remains nothing with her but her own inordinate judgments,
and affections, which like a raging fire burn her without consuming, whilst
all her powers and faculties are racked incessantly, when she considers the
excellency of what she has forgone, the unworthiness of what she has
pursued, and the impossibility to retract her choice.

All that which a most violent passion is able to produce in the most capable
subject, is nothing in comparison of her afflictions. We read that Pompeys
wife (she who was daughter unto Julius Caesar) died suddenly with the excess
of grief caused by the love she bare unto her husband, upon the sight but of a
bloody garment; which she knew had been that day worn by him; and if we may
believe the Poets, that same passion drew Orpheus to Hell among the Ghosts, and
Fiends in search of his Euridice, as being company much more supportable unto
him, then were his cares, and sorrows occasioned by her absence: but alas!
what comparison is there between the cause of their afflictions? they sorrowed
for their separation from those they loved but for a time, as being well
assured, that although time would not restore life to those had lost it: yet
he would certainly unite them to their loves by giving death to those that
sought it: whereas Eternity (though infinite and boundless) cannot in all the
vastness, of extension, furnish this soul with the least ray of hope, that
she shall meet again with those deceitful pleasures, wherein she had established
her contentment.

The miseries we suffer during our union with our bodies, have ever with them
this double comfort: viz. that either they themselves will change their Nature,
or we change our opinions touching the Nature of them. The course of things
we see is variable, and we may probably imagine that as our joys have
passed, so also will those things that do afflict us; or else; that the
acquaintance we shall make with misery; will in time so far alter the Nature
thereof, that we shall be no longer troubled at it. The strongest Poisons, do
in tract of time, become natural food to those that are accustomed to them; as
heretofore, we read, it happened unto that King, from whom we have the name
and use of Mithridate; whereas the miseries of an Eternal condition, can never
receive ease by any alteration, either in the things themselves, or in the
minds of those that suffer them: Because Eternity is nothing else but a fixed
instant always permanent; and time is so essentially necessary unto change,
that it cannot be wrought but by his means, according to the before recited
Maxim. In instanti non fit mutatio.

The torment which Mazentius mentioned (by Virgil in his Aeniods) used to his
captives, has some imperfect weak resemblance of this poor souls condition;
that Tyrant used to fasten them unto dead bodies joining their hands, their
feet, their mouths, their eyes, and all their other parts with those of putrid
carcasses. Let us consider what were the thoughts of those poor miserable
wretches, who though living in themselves were by this union hindered from
exercising any the actions of life; and notwithstanding their natural aversion
from stench, from rottenness and from corruption, were yet forced to converse
only with them, exchanging all the happiness of life, to entertain those
dismal objects, which presented them with naught but ghastlienesse, and
terror.

That unto which those wretches were compelled by outward violence is an
imperfect representation of what happens to this soul by her depraved habits,
and affections, she has made choice of bodily delights, and pleasures, as her
chiefest good; she has employed during her life the faculty of her
understanding in the contemplating, and that of her will in the enjoyment of
them; the often reiteration of these acts, and judgments, have powerfully
imprinted them within her, and being thus disposed her temporal union with the
body has been dissolved; and she is become a dweller in Eternity; where (as I
have already showed) she is not capable of alteration, she very well
perceives the base unworthiness, and vanity of those delights; and the
impossibility of ever coming to enjoy them, but cannot quit her inclinations
to them, which not permitting her to exercise her faculties on objects worthy
her self, fill her with notions of earthly, fading, and corruptible things:
whereon (beginning to be now sensible of her own natural perfections) she
cannot cast a thought, but does replenish her with horror, with confusion and
afrightment.

The condition of a soul puffed up with pride of humane knowledge, or the
ambitious desire of Power, and Command, after her separation from the body, is
yet much more deplorable, then that of the other. The failings of the one have
proceeded from a gross ignorance of the true good was to be followed, and from
a soft compliance with the body; whereas this other has offended out of
malice, and contempt of the first cause, from whom she has received her
being; the one is to be looked on as a simple Malefactor, whereas this other
cannot be considered but as a Traitor, and a Rebel, who has attempted to
invade the rights of her Creator; and endeavored to find out a wisdom, and
establish a power which should be independent of him. Their passions are
proportionable unto the causes from whence they spring, so as if the one give
her self over to the weak passions of grief, and lamentation, this other
falling from the height of her ambitious pretenses, must needs abandon her
self unto despairer to rage, and fury; she has been so far blinded during
this life by the opinion of her own wisdom, and sufficiency, or dazeled with
the false luster of her dignities, and Power, that she refused to stoop to the
Divinity, and acknowledge him the only giver of them: she has therefore
proposed her self unto her self as the maine end of all her actions, and
having thus established a chief good opposite unto that of all the other
Creatures, and settled in her self the notions, and affections thereof, she
has been separated from the body. When coming to discover the true Nature
and cause of things, she finds that whatsoever has a being, depends on God,
as the first cause, and are willingly subordinate unto him as the end, for
which they were created; that her self is like a Prodigy in Nature, whom all
the other Creatures exprobrate with this her vile ungratitude, Treason, and
Rebellion against their Maker; what can she do having thus proudly contemned
her God? and being her self forsaken and detested by all other things, but
seek out a retirement in her self, where her proud thoughts despoyled of that
false greatness they had fancied; feed her continually with envy, rancour, and
dispite, against her fellow Creatures, and the Deity.

Her case (in my opinion) has some resemblance with that of Bajazet King of
the Turks, he who was overcome and taken Prisoner by the great Tamerlane:
this proud Prince saw himself master of the better part of Asia, and having
swallowed in his ambitious thoughts the Monarchy of the whole World, had
besieged the Grecian Emperor in his Imperial City which he was upon the
point of taking: but in the midst of all his flattering prosperities he was
invaded by this Tamerlane, who having defeated him in a great battle, caused
him to be shut up within an iron cage, in which being enclosed, he exposed him
unto the mockery of all his Army, and used him as a footstool to tread upon,
whenever he had occasion to get on horseback; what were the thoughts of this
proud Tyrant who having lately had the disposal of a World of men, and being
regarded by them as a Deity; was suddenly become the scorn of Boys, and
Lackies? and having formerly fancied to himself the Empire of the World, was
forced to serve another as his footstool? All his past greatness, Power, and
Prosperities, had now no other subsistence, but in his Memory, where they were
always present, not to give ease to his afflictions, but to increase the
anguish and the trouble of them, by inspiring him with thoughts of rage, and
fury against God and men, by whom his expectations had been so foulely
disappointed.

Such we may fancy to our selves are the ravings of this poor soul; though
with this difference, that Bajazet was able to avoid the trouble of them, by
dashing out his brains against the iorn bars of that his Prison, whereas
this soul can never quit her self from being persecuted by those stings of
conscience she carries with her as her torturers for all Eternity.

Alas! how imperfect is that apprehension we have of the acts which a soul
exercises after her separation from the body; by comparing them unto those
we are capable of during this life? he that should estimate the motion of the
primum mobile; according unto what he sees performed here by a snaile; would
not fall shorter in his conception of the Rapid swiftness, wherewith that
Sphere is whirled about this Globe of Earth, then we shall do in ours, if we
resemble the affections of joy, and grief, which we have here during the
union with our material bodies, to those a soul has when she is severed
from it; whether we shall consider her huge activity, when she is purely an
immateriall substance, in comparison of what she has when she is clogged
with flesh and blood; or the perfection of her operations, when she beholds
clearly the things themselves in their own Natures, without help of those
Ideas, or imperfect represent aions of them in our fancies, which we are
forced to use during this life: or lastly, the exemption from time, and place,
by which our actions here are all restrained, but can have no commerce at all
with her, who is above the reach of time because of her Eternal being; nor can
be circumscribed in place, as having neither quantity nor matter, The
affections of joy, and grief, as they-reside in the intellectual appetite of
man, are but impulses of our wills upon our other faculties, which carry us on
to the enjoying of the one, or shunning the other, with more, or less
violence, according to the measure of the impression we receive touching the
good, or evil of them; the force whereof depends upon the active motion of the
soul, and therein that of one separated, hugely surpasses what she has
here, while she is mingled with the mass of our terrestrial bodies; powder
whereof we have the daily use, when it remains united in the Mass whereof it
is composed, is easily restrained by the weak closure of a Tun, or Barrel;
but if it once take fire will cause an Earthquake, and shake the frame of
Nature if it be hindered in its course toward the region of fire, which is the
proper center, whereunto it tends. The soul has some resemblance unto this her
passions, or impulses; during her union with the body, are weak, and feeble;
but being once divided from it, she then has an activity surpassing that of
fire, which makes her passions or impulses, become so strong and violent, that
they bear no proportion at all with those which we have here, and enjoy
nothing common with them, but their appellation. Their force is also very much
increased, by the clear sight she has of things in their own Natures, without
the help of any Species, drawn from the things, or the conversion of her
self unto the Phantasmes, from whence arises the certainty of knowledge,
incompatible with doubt, or with opinion (which are the greatest enemies to
action) since no man ever vehemently covets, or fears a thing, of whose Nature
he is uncertain. And, lastly they are beyond measure heightened, by the
exemption from time, and place, which she enjoyes during her state of
separation; whereby she comprehends (after a sort) all time and place, within
her self. A little time, and a small place, are capable only of little
alterations, we are not sensible of the falling of one drop of water, whereas
in time it has the force to pierce the hardest Marble; and the Sunes beams,
which being divided into sundry places, have scarce the Power to warm us, do
(when they are united, by a glass) become a fire that burns and scorceth.
What shall we say then of a passion, which has Eternity, and an infinity of
place for bounds of its continuance, and situation? all degrees of comparison
are here exceeded, and we must needs acknowledge that all the miseries
whereof a man is capable during this life, are a mere nothing, in respect of
what these wretched, wretched, souls, are forced to suffer toward the
expiation of their crimes, for all Eternity.

What I have here set down has been to explicate the miserable state of
those unhappy souls during Eternity (according to the ordinary course of
natural causes) who deviating from the true good for the enjoyment whereof
they were created, have pursued their own vicious inclinations, and
affections, in stead thereof. But who is he that can be able to discover the
immense greatness of those punishments, which the strict justice of an offended
Deity, will inflict upon them, for their ungratitude against him? here all
expression is dumb; and we must needs acknowledge our hearts are too too
narrow to comprehend the vast abisses of his judgments, as well as the
ouerflowing torrents of his mercies. Yet since himself has by his only Son
been pleased to communicate something concerning them unto mankind; I shall
with reverence draw near; and without prying curiously into the hidden secrets
of them, attempt to take a short imperfect view of the proceedings, which the
Divine justice will order to be made against these Malefactors for the
condign punishment of their offenses.

How deplorable is the condition of these souls according unto what I have
described already? and yet how happy were it in respect of what it is, were
they but left alone to be tormented only by themselves? for they have scarce
begun to make a sad acquaintance with their miseries, when they are suddenly
environed with a multitude of Devils; whose ugly shapes cause an affrightment
in them equal to that of the employment upon which they come, and that is to
convey them unto the dreadful judgment seat of God. These fiends do now begin
to glory in the success of their temptations, and whilst they drag them to
the place where they are to receive the sentence of their condemnation,
practice upon them all those barbarous cruelties, which an insulting merciless
enemy, can use against a Captived wretch delivered over to his rage, and fury.
They now have executed their commission, and these poor guilty souls tremble
with horror to see themselves presented before the dreaded* majesty of him,
whom having formerly rejected for their Advocate and their Redeemer, they must
now submit unto, as Judge of all their actions, and deportments; those rays of
glory which streaming from his sacred person, replenish all the Saints and
Angels with unspeakeable content, and rleasure, fill them with an excess of
horour, and despair, by making them reflect upon the innocence wherein they
were created, the happiness for which they were ordained, the base
unworthiness of that for love whereof they have cast off the first, and
forfeited the latter; the prodigious ugliness of those affections wherewith
they now are filled instead of them; and lastly, that all this must be
proclaimed and justified against them before the dreadful Majesty of God, in
presence of the Saints and Angels, by their own consciences, produced as
witnesses against them to their Eternal shame and infamy; so that encompassed
with a Legion of these torturing thoughts, as well as Devils; they know not
whether of the two has greater torment, either the expectation of the
sentence, or the Execution of it.

And yet that same is wonderfully terrible, for they are thereby banished from
the presence of Almighty God, and doomed to live in Everlasting Fire provided
for the Devil and his Angels, from all Eternity. A dismal mansion, whether
we shall consider the place it self, which is a Region belching out
perpetual flames, and yet covered with an impenetrable darkness, or the
society of the inhabitants thereof (who are the Devils, implacable enemies of
humane kind) whose malice keeps them perpetually busied in the invention of
new torments, whereby to ad unto the greatness of their afflictions; or lastly,
their entertainments whilst they abide there, which (as the Son of God
himself informs us) are weeping, and gnashing of their teeth for all Eternity.

I shall not go about to reckon up the sundry kinds of punishments inflicted
there, on several persons according to the Nature of their several crimes;
the sulphurous potions which the drunkard shall there be forced to swallow
down instead of the delicious wines, wherein he placed his greatest
happiness; the loathsome food wherewith the glutton shall there be crammed,
in lieu of his choice feasts, and sumptuous banquets, the scorns, indignities,
and contempts, to which the proud ambitious man shall be exposed, in exchange
of of that respect, and honor he sought for here, and all those different
kinds of tortures which the Divine justice, dispenses with an admirable
order, amid that horror, and confusion, according to the different crimes
whereof those souls have here been guilty; these have already been
copiously deciphered by other excellent pens, and cannot be comprisde by me
within the compass of this short discourse, nor do I comprehend, how these
material things may (by the ordinary course of Nature) work any alteration in
the immateriall soul, when she is separated from the body (for I speak
nothing of her condition after the resurrection, when she shall be again
united to it) but I must needs conclude her torments far exceed the force of
humane and understanding to conceive; when I consider, the infinite Majesty of
that God, for satisfaction of whose justice they are appointed; the absolute
unlimited Power of him by whose order they are inflicted; the huge activity of
a separated soul by whom they are suffered; and the endless continuance of
Eternity, during all which they are to be endured.

We have accompanied these miserable souls unto the brinke of that infernal
lake, wherein who ever falls is irrecoverably lost for all Eternity; unhappy
persons, to have at all received a being, since they must there exchang the
mome^tary pleasures they have enjoyd in giving satisfaction to their own
unbrideled appetites, to live in everlasting flames, tormented by the Devils,
and the sting of their own consciences, more cruel to them then those hellish
monsters, amongst whom they are confined by the Divine justice, for their
punishment, and our example.

Let us now alter the Scene, and quitting these sad spectacles of horror, and
affrightment, turn all our thoughts upon the contemplation of a soul, who
during life has proposed God unto her self as her chief good, and entering
into a serious consideration of the unspekable benefits she has received from
him, in her creation, in her redemption, and continual preservation, has by
an act of generous gratitude cast off all thoughts of Lust, of Vanity, or
Pride, whereunto she was inclined by her concupiscences, and affections, to
sacrifice her self entirely unto the performance of his will, and pleasure;
the Divine grace seconding these good dispositions, has so illuminated her
with the resplendent beams of Heavenly light, that she has been enabled to
discover some little glimps of those admirable perfections of her Creator, the
sight whereof has ravished all her Powers, so that enamored on his Celestial
beauty she has conversed during her union with the body only in Heaven, all
her thoughts, wishes and affections being continually present there where she
had placed her only treasure. Death, whose grim visage affrights the most
courageous spirits, is welcome to her, and she does quit with joy the base
attire of flesh, and of corruption, that she may put on immortallity. Let us a
little consider the blessedness of her condition in this state of separation.

Knowledge, whose object is the true Nature, and cause of things, is so hard to
be attained unto during this life, that the Philosophers (who have employed
themselves in search of it) have a great part of them despaired of being able
to find it out. The Academicks (a sect of them much renowned in ancient time)
pronounced boldly that there was nothing whatsoever, could be known; the
Scepticks (proceeding something more warily) held that no demonstration could
be made, and did therefore continue doubtful, denying their assent unto the
truth of any proposition. And those Philosophers (who following Aristotle) have
established in our Schools a form of learning, do (by a tyranny they
exercise over our reason) command us to admit without proof so many grounds,
or principles; upon which they establish the Doctrine they deliver, that diverse
of our choicest modern wits, have thence taken occasion to dispute against
them, and to endeavor the overthrowing of all that structure they have built
upon them.

This inextricable laberinth wherein truth is shut up, being impervious by
mortal men, caused Socrates after all his study in search of her, conclude,
that he was ignorant of all things else save only this, that he knew
nothing, and the despair of being able to find her out, made Aristotle throw
himself headlong into the Ocean, after he had long sought in vain to find
the reason of its Ebbs and flowings.

But she who does so carefully conceal her self from those that live,
exposes freely all her beauties to be viewed over by this separated soul,
and fills her with the fullness of that knowledge in one instant, whose
smallest portion we scarcely gain by the continual study of many ages; the
contemplation whereof is a contentment infinitely surpassing all those
pleasures which we are capable of during this life. The Queen of Sheba, upon
the fame only of Salomons great wisdom, thought it well worth her labor to
quit the pleasures of her Court, and exposing her self unto the trouble,
toil, and dangers incident to a long voyage, came from the farthest part of
all the East to find him out, that she might have the satisfaction to become a
hearer of it. Alexander the great, prised at so high a rate those notions of
Philosophy he had received from Aristotle during the time he was his Pupil,
that he was used to say, he had a greater obligation to his Tutor then to his
Father Phillip, and yet he had from him received his being, and power,
sufficient to make himself the wonder of succeeding ages, by reason of his
glorious victories, and conquests: and Archimedes (the great Artist) had all
his powers, and faculties, so wholly taken up, by the contentment he found in
speculating of those demonstrations he had invented touching the Symetry and
proportion of bodies, that all the rage, and fury, was practiced, at the taking
in of Siracusa, and the destruction of these innocent inhabitants, which
peopled that unlucky City (whereof himself was one) could not divert him from
the pleasure of it, or once afford him leisure to make answer unto a Soldier,
who asked his name, with an intention to have presreved him.

If this small dawne of knowledge has appeared unto the eyes of the beholders
with so glorious a luster, as made it preferrable before the sumptuous
magnificences of a splendid Court, the glittering brightness of a Crown, and
Scepter, or life it self, what shall we say of that excess of pleasure
wherewith this soul is filled, when she enjoyes the fulness of all
knowledge, and clearly sees the causes, Nature, properties, and qualities, of
all the workmanships of God? when she beholds his admirable Wisdom, Power, and
Providence, exercised in the continual upholding of this huge fabric? and how
from the great contrariety and strife there is between the parts whereof it is
composed, he draws the preservation of the whole, by a perpetual Series of
generation, and corruption: how death which seems to be ordained for
destroying the society of humane kind, is the maine Basis whereupon it restes;
because the fear thereof witholds vicious persons from falling headlong into
the depth of wickedness, and the hope of it animates virtuous men to persist
constantly, in the rough craggy ways of good, and virtue. Those rare effects
of Nature that puzzle all our choicest wits in searching out their hidden
causes, are then made easy to her, and she does plainly understand, whether
the fluxes and refluxes of the Ocean, are guided by the motion of the Moon, or
the impulse of that continual wind, raised under the Equator by the Sun,
whether that constant inclination of the Loadstone toward the North, whereby
we are enabled to make discoveries of the remotest creekes and corners of the
Sea, is caused by an attractive quallity residing in the poles of the earth,
which being somewhat different from those we fancy in the Heavens, produces
that small variation we observe daily in the Compass, or by those streams of
atoms, drawn by the Suns great heat between the Tropickes, which flowing
ever more from North to South, and penetrating all the subtle pores, whereof
the stone is full while it remains within the Earth in that position, does in
continuance of time beget this property, which we can imitate by often heating
of an iron, and placing it to cool (while yet the por(...) thereof are opened
by the fire) d(...) North, and South. Or lastly, whether that quallity,
together with the power whereby the same is by a touch communicated to the
needle, and that whereby it attracts iron to it self, depend on causes whereof
as yet mankind is ignorant, whose knowledge is by providence reserved to the
discovery of posterity in that age which shall succeed us, as the experience
was to those in that which went before us. Whether the cherefull light, which
we see darted by the Sun from East, to West, is but a quallity communicated
by him in an instant to all the air, throughout the vast extent of our
horison, or is the body of the fire it self, which being the most active
Element, and flowing from the Sun, as from its fountain, into the liquid
Element of air, prevents by its vast distance from us, huge expansion, and
active swiftness, our feeling, and our sight, from being sensible of any thing
which might inform our understanding, touching the measure of its heat and
motion. Whether the never ceasing turns we have of day, and night, proceed
from the perpetual motion of all the Heavens, carried about by the great
violence of the primum mobile, or from the motion of the Earth on its own
Axis, exposing all the several parts of it successively, to be enlightened by
the Sun; Whether the Planets are fixed; each of them in a several Sphere,
whose motion does direct their courses; or (which some think they can
demonstrate of the Sun) moove all of them (except the moon) upon their
several Axes like the Earth. How far their different influences, and aspects,
govern all sublunary bodies, causing the birthes and periods, of States, and
Monarchies, and the particular happiness and miseries of private men.

But above all she is entirely satisfied with seeing, how the infalibillity of
Gods prescience, infringeth not the liberty of man's free will. How nothing
here below, happens by chance, but that his providence disposing sweetly all
those things which he has wrought, permits the miseries of good, and
prosperities of wicked men for the advantage of his service; by exercising and
instructing of the one, and by reclaiming of the other, and how in fine by the
inscrutable Meanders of his judgments he orders so, that all the villainy,
and wickedness is practiced here, cooperates unto the good of his Elect, and
the increase of his own glory.

In these employments she might with joy spend an infinity of time, were she
not taken off by others of much more delight, and consequence. For she no
sooner leaves times region and comes upon the confines of Eternity, but she is
attended by a troop of Angels, appointed to convoy her unto the glorious Court
of her Creator, and she receives by them an invitation is sent unto her by God
himself, like unto that we read of in the Canticles. I am hiems transiit
imber abiit, and recessit sunge amica mea and veni. My friend the winter of thy
chilling cares, and fears, is past, the showers of all thy tears are now
blown over, arise therefore and mount up unto the ever blessed dwelling of
Eternity. Who can express those ecstasies of joy this summons causes? or fancy
to himself the least Idea of those pleasing raptures wherewith she is
possessed, when she beholds the beauties of the imperial Heaven, which now
stands open to receive her?

Those holy Saints and pious men, who have endeavored to inflame us with the
love of virtue by hope of the reward to come; accommodating their expressions
to our conceits, describe it to us like a spacious City, built all of Gold and
precious stones, whose gates are each of them composed of one entire Pearl,
whose walls are made not for defense but ornament, because her enemies are all
destroyed, and she established in security, above the reach of time or fortune
whose houses are of Jasper, and of Porphyrie, inlaid with Rubies, Diamonds, and
Carbuncles, where Gold and pollished Marble, are not employed but for the
meanest uses. Every of whose inhabitants is a great King, and has Dominion
over all the works of Nature, a beauty that out shines the Sun in greatest
height of all his glory, an activity surpassing that of lightning, accompanied
with youth, and health, which never shall decay for all Eternity. Within the
circuit of those walls, they represent unto us a large field, beautified with
all the choice variety of flowers that can be thought on, whose fragrant smell
sends forth a most delicious perfume to the senses; in midst whereof passes
a purling stream of living waters, which who so tastes, shall never thirst for
all Eternity: where a continual spring preserves all plants, in the full
freshness of their prime and verdure, where an Eternal day suffers not the
least Eclips of night, or darkness, there all the blessed dwellers in this
Heavenly Country do entertain each other in perfect love, and concord, with
fullness of all joys, and pleasures, whose complete happiness can never be
disturbed, by the unwelcome presence of an enemy, or the sad parting of a
friend.

What a mere nothing, are all the flattering shadows of content we graspe at
during life, being compared to those of this Celestial mansion, which I have
here described? yet these are the outside only of their joys, not to be
prised at all, if once compared to that wherein consists the Essence, of their
perfect bliss, and happiness. Gold, Marble, precious stones, fair fields,
cool springs the company of Saints and Angels, Sovereign power, beauty,
activity, youth, health, impassibility, and immortallity it self can never
satisfy the immateriall soul, without the vision of her Lord and maker, this
is the center whereunto she sendes, the object of her powers, and faculties;
this being once obtained, brings with it full repose, and quietness, which all
created things can never do. And this is here communicated freely to her,
whereby her understanding is fully satisfied, with the clear knowledge of all
things, by sight of him who is both the first cause, and truth it self. Her
will finds also here what ever object it desires, in the secure possession of
all good things, which are united in his Nature who is good it self.

Who can describe the infinite advantages, prerogatives, and dignities, that
do accompany this blessed vision? words are too feeble to express, and humane
hearts (though nere so large) are too too narrow to conceive them.

Let us conclude; that as that man who does partake of wisdom is truly wise,
and who has courage becomes valiant, even so this blessed soul, being
ingulf'd in contemplation of the diety, by the strict union which that causes
of all her faculties to him, is in some sort a God, enjoying all perfections by
participation, which God himself has by propriety.

The Conclusion.
Reader having finished these two first heads of this Discourse, to wit, a
description of what Eternity is, and what our condition will be when we shall
come to be pertakers of it; there remained in the last place, that I should
according to my promise, have set down such rules for the conduct of our
lives, whilst we are here, as might (being observed) render us perfectly
happy when we should come to be inhabitants in that our country.

These rules I meaned should have comprised within them all the virtues, which
may be well reduced into two heads; that is to say, those which have for their
object the Divinity it self, and those that serve for the well ordering, and
disposing of our actions.

The principal ones of the first kind, are those we call the Theological
virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, whereof, the first breeds in us a perfect
resignation of our understandings unto God, by assenting with humillity and
constancy, without doubt, or hesitation, unto those truths which he has
pleased to reveal to us for the salvation of our souls: the second makes us
with patience and perseverance, continue in the way of virtue; expecting to be
made pertakers of all those blessings he has promised to his servants; and
the third causes, an entire union of our will with his, which is the greatest
height of Christian perfection, and the assured means to attain unto an
everlasting bliss.

Among those of the second kind (being the moral virtues) the chiefest are,
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, (commonly called the Cardinal
Virtues) which serve for the well ordering and disposing of all the faculties,
passions, and affections, of our Souls. Prudence, which ought to preside in
all the consultations of our understanding; Justice, to govern all the
resolutions of our will; Fortitude, to keep in due subjection the passions
comprised under the general notion of the irascible part of man; and
Temperance, to bridle the exorbitancie of our concupiscences, and affections.

I had intended to have described at large the Nature, and the quallities, of
all these virtues, and to have showed, how all the other may be deduced out of
these seven, by reason of the connection, and relation they have unto each
other; and I had meant, in the contexture of that Discourse, to have set down
the way, and means, to purge our Souls from all the depraved inclinations,
and habits, which are opposite unto them, that being thereby cleansed, from all
the rust and filth of sin, they might become capable subjects of being
illuminated by the Divine grace, and be enabled to discover his admirable
goodness, and perfections, whereon being enamoured, they might by fervent acts
of charity unite their wills entirely unto his, and thereby mount unto the top
of Christian perfection, which is the assured means of being happy in Eternity.

I say I had intended, for (although I had spent some time in the digesting,
and ordring of this matter) yet I was put unto a stand in that design, by a
reflection which I chanced to make upon a saying of that glorious Saint, and
Doctor in the Church of God, Saint Cyprian, who writing unto some of the
Ethnicks, touching the lives and studies of the Christians speaks thus,
Philosophi factis no verbis sumus, nec magna loquimur, sed vivimus, that is,
we are Philosophers in our actions, not in our words, nor do we speak great
things but practice them. It seems this holy man thought it much fitter for a
Christian, to exercise himself in virtuous actions then in describing the
Nature of the virtues.

Now this opinion of so grave and reverend a Father of the Church, having at
first caused me to doubt, whether I should proceed to perfecting the work I
had in hand; I took a resolution sometime after to give it over, upon the
reading of a passage, reported by some writers in the life of Origin, (that
prodigy of wit and learning) they set down that being in his old Age sensible
of diverse errors he had run into (which made his followers be condemned as
Heretics) he came into the Church with an intention to expound some passage
out of the Scripture, for the instruction of the people; and to that purpose
opening the book, he chanced to light upon a passage in the Psalms of David;
wherein the holy Prophet speaking of God, says thus, Peccatori dixit, quare tu
enarras gloriam meam, and assumis testamentum meum, in os tuum. In English
thus, He (meaning God) said unto the sinner, wherefore do thou show forth my
glory and do assume my testament into thy mouth. The pennitent old man,
taking this reproof as spoken to himself, burst forth into a flood of tears,
which took from him the use of speech, and retiring out of the Church,
abandoned all the thoughts of teaching others, that he might spend the short
remainder of his life in the reforming of himself.

The reasons which prevailed with this great Doctor, have wrought the same
effect with me, and I resolved to quit the farther busying of myself in an
employment, wherein I was forbidden to meddle by reason of my sins; and which
I was unable to perform, because I am a stranger to the practice of those
virtues I should write of, and so might justly fear that inconvenience would
thereby happen, whereof we are forewarned by our Blessed Savior in the
Gospel, to wit, that if the blind shall lead the blind, they both will fall
together in the pit.

Here therefore I give end to this Discourse, with this advertisment only
unto the pious Reader, that if he shall desire to have his heart enflamed with
the Divine love, he must first necessarily cleanse it from all affections unto
fading, and transitory things. Suetonius in the lives of the twelve first
Caesar's, relates, that when the body of the Emperor Titus was placed in the
Funeral pile, to be consumed with fire (according to the custom of those
times) his heart (after his body was reduced into ashes) did many times spring
out of the flames, and being at last opened by those who wondered at the
strangeness of the accident, it was found to be full of poison; which hindered
the operation of the fire upon it. Even so our Souls, while they continue
fraught with the inordinate love of earthly things (which are the mortal
poison of the Soul) resist the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and suffer not
themselves to be inflamed by the Celestial fire of charity, which he does
never fail to kindle in those hearts are fitted to receive it.

The readiest way for the devout Reader to effect this, is wholly to employ his
thoughts, and studies, in the continual meditation upon Eternity, wherein if he
be farthered by any thing which I have here set down, I then desire, that as
I have made him partaker of my meditations, so he would also make me pertaker
with him in his Prayers.

FINIS.

