A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN, And
CITIZENS of LONDON, AT THE Church of S. Mary le Bow, the Fifth of November 1684.

By FRANCIS BRIDGE, D. D. Rector of S. Mildred Breadstreet.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1685.

Smith Mayor, Martis ximo die Novembris 1684. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI
Secundi Angl' etc. xxxvi.
THis Court does desire Dr. Bridge to Print his Sermon Preached at Bow-Church
on the Fifth of November instant (being the Anniversary day of Thanksgiving for
the Deliverance from the Powder Treason) before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen,
and Citizens of this City.

Wagstaffe.

TO The Right Honorable Sir JAMES SMITH, Lord Mayor Of the CITY of LONDON.
MY LORD,
I SHALL make no Apologies, nor plead my unwillingness to appear in public. The
whole design of my ensuing Discourse, was to Preach up Loyalty and Submission
to Government: Upon the first notice therefore of Your Lordships Command I was
resolved to comply, lest I should contradict my Sermon by my own practice, in
not showing my self (what I truly am)

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant, FRAN. BRIDGE.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Lord MAYOR, November V. 1684.
PSALM. 58.10, 11. The Righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: He
shall wash his feet in the blood of the Wicked.

So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the Righteous: Verily he
is a God that judges in the Earth.


THE Book of Psalms is justly by one of the Ancients styled (...). Dionysius
Hierarch. Eccles. c. 3.4.
The Choice and Flower of all things in other Books is Epitomized and briefly
contained in this, and (in regard of the Poetry thereof) more movingly
expressed. But although this due Character ought to be given of the whole Book
in general; yet there are some particular Psalms written upon more solemn and
remarkable occasions, which may more deserve and require our attention. This
Psalm bears a different title in the front, Mictham, a word derived from (...)
a Golden Song of David, (...) destroy not. By which is declared the sum of
those petitions which are contained in Psalms that have such Titles as this is.
David was now in some wonderful fear of death and destruction, therefore he
prays unto the Lord, neither to destroy him himself, nor suffer the Sons of
wickedness to lay hands on him.

In this Psalm is contained both the Character and End of wicked men, and the
just resentment the Righteous ought to have upon such occasions. In the sequel
of this Discourse I shall not think it impertinent to reflect upon the former
part of the Psalm, and take notice how the Character of David's Enemies will
suit with those sons of Belial, Children of Perdition, whose very principles
are nothing but Rebellion and Destruction; ruin of Persons, and subversion of
States makes up a great part of their Zeal and Religion, whose defeat and
overthrow we this day joyfully commemorate: Our Souls have escaped out of their
Net, and they themselves are caught in the same Snare they privily laid to
entrap their honester Neighbor. Thus the Day and the Text suit well together;
we have seen the vengeance, we have washed our feet in the blood of the wicked,
we may safely say, There is a reward for the Righteous; Verily there is a God
that judges in the Earth. Such Deliverances, and such remarkable Vengeance are
as great instances of Divine Providence as any in the World. Such Discoveries
as these come not by chance; wicked purposes so closely contrived, could not be
unravelled by Humane Strength or Policy. It was an Almighty Goodness that made
bare his Arm for our rescue; it was the Lords doing, and it ought to be
mavelous in our Eyes. It is not necessary I should recite the particulars of
our Danger, it being a story so well known, that few here present can pretend
to be ignorant of it; and of so known Truth, that there is none can endeavor
to persuade men it was a Fable, only a trick of State to oppress an Innocent
Party, but would willingly lead us blindfold to a like Snare, never let us
perceive the Danger, till we are fatally involved in it; then they will
acknowledge and triumph in their own Actions, call them not Cruelty or
Injustice, but a due punishment for obstinate Heretics. They who are resolved
to keep no Faith with us, will have no Compassion on us: The Cruelties of Queen
Mary's Reign are not yet thought all Lies; Such, and no better entertainment
may we expect from them, if we come under their Power; especially if we approve
our selves true Sons of the Church of England as now Established by Law, and
are obedient to that Doctrine and Discipline which they this Day endeavored to
overthrow.

I come now in a closer pursuance of the Argument in my Text (which also will
be more proper for the Solemnity of this Festival) to take notice of the Nature
and Quality of David's Enemies, and see whether they be not Applicable to those
who were most deeply concerned in this days Treachery. In the first words of
the Psalm you may observe, whatsoever pretenses they had to Righteousness and
Equity, Justice and Upright dealing, yet they contrive mischief secretly; they
keep it close, till they find a fit time to vent it; there was a Number of them
too, a whole Congregation in Readiness Court, who sought to undermine and
disparage David in all his actions and behavior: Nay, to show the
unaccountableness of these Men's Enmity, he says in Verse 3. They are estranged
from the womb, before any visible Cause or Provocation could arise, an Enmity
entailed upon their Nature; it comes to them by Inheritance, they derive it
from their Parents; and though they speak Lies, flatter and endeavor to
deceive with pretenses of Kindness, and shows of Friendship; yet they lurk in
secret like a Serpent, and privily lie in wait to oppress the innocent
Passenger, and their poison will soon appear; they cannot hide their Venom;
they will be exercising mischief, although it returns upon their own head, and
proves Fatal only to themselves. Nay, Verse 4. They are like a deaf Adder, that
stops her Ear, which will not hearken to the voice of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely: Whatsoever kindness or respect may be shown to them,
whatsoever persuasions or entreaties may be used, yet is their wrath
implacable, and their malice irreconcilable; nay, many times the more favors
they receive, the greater opportunities they take of doing mischief; like the
Snake which the man in the Fable took into his house almost dead with cold,
cherished it in his Bosom, and revived it with the heat, yet at last it rose up
against him, and had almost slain its Benefactor: And this I account the first
part of the Psalm. In the second part he devoteth these his Enemies to God's
Judgment, and heartily prays, that he would take from them their Instruments of
Cruelty; that he would assuage their malice, and confound their devices;
deprive them of the opportunities to do mischief, by restraining their wrath,
and diminishing their Power, by keeping them (as he does the Devil, 2 Pet.
2.4.) in Chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment; This is comprised
Verse 6. Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of
the young Lions, O Lord, etc. And happy is it for us that God will hear such
Petitions; that he will grant us Security against the subtle and undermining
Adversaries of his Truth, whose delight is in mischief; who take great pains,
compass Sea and Land, run to and fro over the whole Earth, under pretense of
making Proselytes, but in reality seeking whom they may devour. My Text I
account the third part of the Psalm, wherein is described the good Man's
behavior, in such times of Vengeance as are here specified; he will rejoice
that God has vindicated his Honor, and secured his Truth; that the
Dispensations of his Providence are not now so liable to the Cavils and
Calumnies of the Scorner: Not that we should imagine the Righteous Man here
mentioned to be (as his Enemies were before described) a Person delighting in
mischief; that has pleasure and satisfaction in another Ruin; that will
rejoice at his Neighbors downfall, though it contribute nothing to his own
rise, though he received no benefit or advantage thereby. Whatsoever the Jews
might pretend to this, by that Commission God himself had given them for the
total destruction of his Enemies therein mentioned, I am sure the Gospel allows
no such Spirit, no such revengeful Temper, no Fire from Heaven to fall upon the
obstinate and ungrateful Samaritans; therefore in the next words are contained
the Reasons of this Joy.

1. That there is a Reward for the Righteous, that there is a Fruit of
Righteousness, that it is an advantage and security to be Good and Virtuous;
that though such Persons be oppressed for a time, yet they shall not totally be
suppressed; but their Enemies shall fall before them, by hidden and
unaccountable Methods of God's Providence; be consumed as Waters, which run
continually, as a Snail which melts, and be suddenly snatched away, as with a
Whirlwind. There will a time come, when it shall appear to all Men, that the
Judge of the whole World shall do Righteously. Therefore

2. It is said, Verily, he is a God that judges in the Earth; we may safely
trust in him. It is a great temptation to question Providence, when we see the
wicked prosper, and all things in security about them, neither are they plagued
like other men; On the contrary, Just and Innocent persons are plagued all the
day long, and chastened every morning: It is natural to infer (as the Psalmist
did, Psalm. 73.13.) Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my
hands in innocence: To what purpose is it that I have taken such pains to serve
God? that I have abandoned my own inclination to promote his Honor? that I
have obeyed him with so great difficulty? Nay, the greatest cause of my trouble
has arisen from a strict adhering to his Commandments, in that I have not
swerved from his Precepts, or gone on in a way of wickedness and perverseness,
as others have done: How comes it to pass that I am thus destitute and forlorn?
The more I endeavor to please God, the harder measure I meet with in the
World. This is very difficult to flesh and blood, and but few can attain the
meaning of it: The Righteous himself is ready to stumble, and his feet to slip,
when he perceives such unequal distribution of Favors here below, and can
hardly recover himself, till he go into the Sanctuary of God, and there
understand the end of these Men, Verse 18, 19, 20. of the fore-quoted Psalm;
Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou castest them down into
destruction. How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment? they are
utterly consumed with terrors. As a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when
thou awakest, thou shall despise their image. This the Poet excellently well
expresses, Claudian.
when he describes himself doubtful, whether there were a Supreme Justice, as
long as Ruffinus, a wicked and lewd person, was in such prosperity: But when he
saw his overthrow, and was acquainted with his Destruction, Abstulit hos tandem
Ruffini poena tumultus, Absolvitque Deos: It takes off the charge of Injustice
from Divine Providence, and makes the Wicked and Profane, with horror and
amazement, acknowledge that there is a God that judges in the Earth, that is
able to exalt his Servants, and be fully avenged of all the implacable Enemies
of his Kingdom. An easy Application will make out the Parallel I at first
intended. We have almost every where in the Psalms, Prayers against, and
Thanksgivings for preservation from attempts of this nature. David's Enemies
were numerous, whole Congregations of them; and have not ours been so too? The
best Men have been subject to most Trials; the maintenance of the true Religion
is a great eyesore to all its Opposers; it causes Mutinies, Seditions and
Rebellions, by those who cannot endure the least sense of Duty. David was a
Virtuous and Pious Man, not only God's Deputy, but his Friend too; a great
Soldier, and a gracious Prince; and wanted no accomplishment to oblige his
Subjects to obedience and respect. Yet for all this did he find many
Adversaries, his troubles were innumerable, both from the Enemies of Religion,
and the ambition of his own Family: And have not our Kings been persecuted on
every hand, ever since the Reformation, only because they have been Defenders
of the truly Ancient Catholic and Apostolic Faith? This makes both Papists
and Fanatics conspire their overthrow; and all the mad Sects and Opinions in
the World, however disagreeing in other things, yet concenter in this one
Tenent, to raise all the Tumults and Disorders they can in a well-setled
Commonwealth; and endeavor to break down the Hedge, that all the Beasts of the
Forest might enter in and destroy the Vineyard. This is that which only galls
them, all other pretenses are but frivolous and feigned, and till this
grievance be removed, they will never leave Petitioning or Remonstrating
against the miscarriages of the Government Give me leave to observe but one
thing more before I conclude this point. The Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England was that which the Papists this day so wickedly endeavored
to overthrow: They knew we alone were able substantially and rationally to
oppose them, by the Truth and Antiquity of what we maintain, Doctrines as
Ancient as our Savior and his Apostles; the Government confessedly prevailing
in the Church since the first founding of it, till some pretenses, contrary to
it, were started in the last Age: These subtle contrivers of mischief knew all
other Structures would fall, and like Babels, end in the confusion of Tongues,
Quarrels and Division among themselves. I cannot but wonder how any of our
Dissenters, who have endeavored to destroy the same Establishment so lately,
can excuse their Ignorance or Hypocrisy in giving God public thanks for the
preservation of that which they openly brand as Popish and Antichristian.

2. But then as David's numerous and potent Enemies treacherously and secretly
combined for his Destruction, so did the Enemies of this Day too: All Treasons
and Conspiracies are usually transacted in the dark, they are properly the
works of darkness, they cannot endure the clear discoveries of light, for fear
they should be detected. Was not this our case this Day? was there much more
than a moment between us and Destruction? was not the Deliverance as remarkable
as the Danger? We thought our selves secure from any contrivance of this
Nature; our very Enemies seemed to behave themselves with modesty and
moderation. But alas! they could not long hide their temper, like their Father,
they must appear with their cloven Foot, the truest Emblem of Division and
Dissension: They were not uppermost, and therefore must put the World into a
Combustion; it was not enough for them to be the subjects of another mercy,
unless they themselves had Power and Authority for doing mischief: This they
contrived in secret places, in dark corners of the Earth; they properly thought
to undermine us; their malice was restless and active; an Oath of Secrecy, and
the Sacrament it self were their Preludiums to our Destruction. Their Design
was formed under ground, nearer the confines of Hell, acknowledging the grand
Adversary to be the Author of this device. The discovery of this contrivance
was: highly remarkable, a Letter to secure one person, proved the safety of the
whole Nation, and that by an Interpretation of the King himself, which seems
little less than an Inspiration from God, whose Vicegerent he was. This plainly
proves there are some who are God's peculiar care, as Signets on his Right
Hand, who as public Persons are reserved to be a public benefit. These are
they, who are in Scripture styled Gods: For though their mould be no more
refined, and their End the same with other Men, yet their Character and
Authority is Divine; who so slights them, slights God, and cannot expect to
descend to the Grave without a full and remarkable Vengeance.

3. Once more and I have done; David's Enemies, though they did not indeed (yet
seemed to) speak Righteously: No question they had fair and plausible pretenses
in their mouths: The vindication of the Truth, and the Catholic Cause, were
the Traitors pretenses this Day; They come with Religion in their mouths, but
Rancor and Malice in their hearts. Most of the Rebellions and Cruelties in the
World have been transacted under the notion either of Religion or Reformation:
Holy Leagues, Solemn Covenants; Associations, and the like, have been the usual
Prefaces to such undertakings. The bloudiest of all projects have been ever
colored over with Godliness, because the worse any thing is, the better gloss
it willingly would have. Men of these Principles, however they have been led
themselves by the Spirit of delusion, or endeavor to delude others, are still
very active and busy; they come in Sheeps clothing, pretending Peace and
Friendship, a concernment for our Souls, and a tender regard for our
Everlasting happiness, but within they are ravenous Wolves; would convert us
(as they did the Indians) by Murder and Assassination: What can we say of such
Men, who pretend this, not only Interest, but Conscience; not only Gain, but
Godliness; not only propagating their own Grandeur, but vindicating that
Religion our Savior came to establish. If an honest Heathen were to be Judge,
he would surely esteem Christ's Doctrine (if it consisted in the Jesuits
Politics) to be far more uneasy than the Light of Nature: We were certainly
more at quiet before, when we were left to our Natural principles, than by such
a super-induced Revelation be bound to disturb Societies, kill Kings, translate
Governments, and engage us in all the Broils and Tumults in the World; As if
the Prince of Peace were a Title only to cheat Men into an opinion of his
Dictates; and when they were once so far Trepan'd, to instruct them in all
unheard of Villainies, and unallowable practices abhorred by the more Religious,
though more ignorant Heathen; and however contradictory such practices are to
the peaceable rules of the Gospel, yet they have still the impudence to style
themselves of the Society of Jesus. Good Lord! what a pass are we now come to?
The honest and immediate Successors of our Savior, (nay, and he himself too)
were quite mistaken, they lived but in the Infancy of Religion, discoursed all
things with plainness and sincerity, had no guile or reservation in their
breasts: But alas good men, Prophets and other Penmen of the holy Scriptures
how woefully were they mistaken: A new Sect of Christians are sprung up in the
World, who have received greater Light and improvement, who are of more refined
Principles and subtle Policies, who contradict all you have been exhorting us
to. But I hope all such pretenses to Religion will now vanish, and the works of
darkness be made manifest; such as Envy, Hatred, Variance, Uncharitableness,
Wrath, Bitterness. And whosoever they are that own such principles of
resistance and disobedience to their lawful Superiors, let them undergo the
same punishment with the Rebels of this Day, and be truly styled Papists in
Masquerade, while they own the most mischievous of their Opinions.

Thus have we seen all the Arts and Malice of all the Adversaries of Truth and
Religion, conjoined in the wicked purpose of this Day; it was contrived with
Treachery and Perfidiousness, principles abhorred by all generous Spirits from
the foundations of the World: Nay, they acted with Deliberation, had
Consultations and Assemblies about it; it was not the product of a fresh and
rash Anger, which is commonly styled a short Rage or Madness; they had revolved
it often in their minds, their wrath was of long standing and resolution, they
consulted about it a considerable time, many Months before; they had Oaths of
Secrecy and Seals of Confession, nay, the Blessed Sacrament it self, that
Cement of peace, is publicly profaned to the abetting those horrid Massacres
they designed.

But (God be thanked) the Vengeance is returned upon themselves, their Counsels
are defeated, their purposes disappointed, their Destruction did arise as
suddenly upon them, as they designed it for us; and their unavoidable ruin (the
just reward of all Traitors) did tread close upon their heels, and punishment
from God did seize upon them. This, methinks, should be enough to terrify Men
from attempts of this nature, if they did but consider, that God Almighty will
take the matter into his own hands; and though the hands of Magistrates may be
weakened upon Earth, their Power impaired, and their Authority lessened, yet he
himself will avenge their Quarrel: No Traitor can exempt himself from
Destruction, one way or other; God who is Truth has said it, and God who is
Power is able to perform it; Though hand join in hand, the Wicked shall not go
unpunished, Prove. 11.21. And who knows what their punishment shall be?
inscrutable as to the beginning, it shall come suddenly, without observation,
in the manner we know not what it will be, and in the end who knows how long
it shall last; it may reach as far as Hell it self, and from thence I am sure
there is no redemption. Now what is our duty, but to rejoice in this Vengeance,
which was so great and so remarkable; we may (as it were) wash our Feet in the
blood of those that would have destroyed us. (2.) We shall acknowledge the
Providence of God, and the Rewards he affords unto the Righteous.

1. It is a pleasant and easy Task required of us, to Rejoice; our Duty and
Privilege are so closely joined together, that we cannot perform the one
without being made partakers of the other. I shall not think it worth my time
at present, to set forth the lawfulness of appointing set Solemn days of
Rejoicing, as this is, especially when the days of Purim, and the Feast of the
Dedication (which our Savior honored with his presence) were not of God's
immediate appointment: And that which may sway most with us all, and convince
us, it is not Conscience, but Obstinacy, and endeavor to lessen the
Magistrates Power, that the Dissenters thus Argue, when they themselves,
besides (if not contrary to) Establishment, appoint set times of Humiliation
and Thanksgiving; as if it were better, and more Orthodox from a Disobedient
Schismatic, than from the hands of a lawful Magistrate, whom God has set over
us. Taking it therefore for granted, that such appointment of Festivals is
lawful, let us see what we ought to do in them, to Commemorate and Rejoice in
God's Works. The Sabbath, and the Passover were commemorations of those great
Works God had done for his People; and this Day the Destroyer past over our
Dwellings, this is a Day of God's own making. All days indeed are alike Created
by the Lord, whether Fair or Dark, all alike made by Diespiter, the Father of
Days; though times of anguish and perplexity are looked upon as if they were
not, Job 3.6.
Nights rather than Days, as Job said in his hasty fit: Yet when the Sun shines
clearly, and we are under the bright influence of his comfortable Beams; this
is a Day indeed, a Day of Gladness and Rejoicing; and such is our Day, a Day of
God's making, to which he has a peculiar Title. We may well say as they in the
Gospel, ( Luke 5.26.) We have seen strange things this Day. Nay, Ask of the
Days that are past, and enquire from one side of the Heaven to the other,
whether there has been any such thing as this great thing is, or has been
heard like it, (Deuteronomy. 4.32.) Psalm. 126.1. When the Lord turned again the
Captivity of Zion, then were we like to them that dream; we were in a maze,
knew not well what to think of it; it was none of Man's foresight or
contrivance, and at such times every Righteous person ought to Rejoice. God by
black Days calls us to mourning and lamentation, and it would be a Sin as
ridiculous as odious in his sight, in times of War, Famine, Pestilence, etc. to
appear with a merry countenance, in Feasting and Revelling, and all the outward
indications of Gladness and Security: So here God by these Deliverances calls
us to Rejoicing, no heavy burden. The word in the Text (...) shall Rejoice
(says Vatablus) may well be turned into an Optative, let him Rejoice, which is
much at one; for here is either the Practice of good Men, or the Duty couched
in the Exhortation. If the Prophet had bid us do some great thing, should we
not have done it? how much rather when he calls us to Triumph and Exult in his
Mercies? Nehem. 8.9, 10. We have a pattern for such exercises: This Day is holy
unto the Lord your God; mourn not, nor weep: Go your way, eat the fat, and
drink the sweet; and send portions to them for whom nothing is prepared; for
this Day is holy unto the Lord; neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord
your strength. Our Joy must not only be inward, but outward too; we must show
it in our countenances, and in our behavior; we must publish it unto the whole
World, that we Rejoice in the rock of our Salvation, and that

1. By acknowledging and owning of it publicly in the great Congregation,
constitute a solemn Day, in condensis, that we may stand so thick in the
Church, as may fill it from the entry of the Door, to the very edge of the
Altar; for so the Vulgar and S. Hierom's Translation of Psalm. 118.27. seem to
intimate, (Constituite diem solennem in condensis usque ad cornu Altaris.) Open
therefore to me the gates of Righteousness, I will go into them, and I will
praise the Lord. It is not every Rejoicing will serve the turn, it must be a
Spiritual Rejoicing; we come unto the Sanctuary, that is the first place we
ought to appear in, and give public testimonies of our Joy.

2. We are appointed not only a place where to meet in, but a Practice what we
are to do when we are there; that is, Trust in the Lord that judges in the
Earth, and be assured there is a Reward for the Righteous; if we do well, it
shall be well with us; he that has done such mavelous things for us already,
will doubtless complete his Mercy in our future preservation. We may be well
assured the Daughters of the Uncircumcised would have made this a Day of
Triumph; and we are delivered, not only to stand and cry out of the foulness of
the Plot, or those Devilish Monsters Actors in it, or bless our selves for so
fair an escape; No, we ought to serve God in sincerity, and persevere in our
Duty. When we are under the apprehension of danger, we are all Godly on a
sudden; but our Goodness is as the morning cloud, as the early dew it goes
away, Hos. 6.4. is quickly scattered, and gone before the Sun be many hours
high; but by our Obedience alone we shall preserve our selves. To day indeed is
a joyful day, but who knows what the next day may bring forth? the implacable
Enemies of our Peace are still working, the same Designs carrying on; our Sins
are as many, and daring as ever; let us therefore pray to God, that he may be
to us, as Jesus is a Savior, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. If
we can but truly pray, as the Church does, O God, we have heard with, our Ears,
and our Fathers have declared unto us the noble works thou did in their days,
and in the old time before them; it may very reasonably follow, O Lord, arise,
help us, and deliver us for thine honor. Let us plead God's former
Deliverances, and by them have hopes of future Security: Let us make God our
Friend, be fearful only of our selves, and our Sins, which cry aloud to God for
Vengeance, make use of no unlawful means, either of Perjury or Subornation, and
think by that to be Secured: This is a sure way to appease God's wrath, and
more required at our hands than all the Revels and Bonfires of the Night, or
the late over officious and foolish Zeal of some, to burn the Pope in Effigy.
Thus have I done with my Text, and showed you both the Act and the Duty,
Rejoicing, and Acknowledging, and Owning God's Providence in our own
Preservation, and that just Vengeance he executes upon the Wicked.

I have but a few words for the Close of this Discourse, and so I shall dismiss
you.
THere is a clamor in the mouths of many at this day against Popery; nay, and
to take off the imputation from themselves, they charge persons with favoring
that Party, who publicly and solemnly have disowned all their proceedings. I
shall not therefore think it amiss, briefly to Exhort you, to take an estimate
of Men's Affections to Popery by their Doctrines and Principles, and judge them
so qualified, by detesting or owning their Opinions, especially in the business
of Loyalty or Resistance to Government; for by their fruits we shall easily
know them. And I am afraid, by that time we have closely examined the several
Parties, we shall find those who make the greatest noise against them, are the
nearliest allied to them, especially in practices of this Nature, for the
Subversion of an Established Government; and this has made the Jesuits
themselves so often assistant at their Conventicles. Cardinal Bellarmin would
have the quiet and submission of the Old Christians consist in this, That they
had not strength enough to resist; so has a late scurrilous Apostate too
deserved little thanks from the Primitive Martyrs of the Church, in that they
were gentle and meek; it was neither Allegiance or Conscience (in his opinion)
but want of Strength; for else the Emperors had suffered, and not They. Such
persons as these justly admonish the Government to have a care, to keep them
from Power and Authority; for they publicly Declare, they want not Will, but
Force to Execute their Designs. Did not Parsons's Book (under the name of
Doleman) serve the turn of the Papists in the days of Queen Elizabeth; it was
but Reprinted again in a True Protestant Character, and it served the Regicides
in the Year 48. and indifferent well since that time in the late Horrid
Conspiracy. Calvin and Ignatius had their Original much at the same time, and
the chief of their Followers in their Writings have shown the same disaffection
to all Government, unless of their own appointment: And in the late Rebellion
the Popish and Presbyterian Lords were generally observed to combine together.
The Church of England (which is to be destroyed under the fine Notion of
adhering to Popery) has always declared her Reverence and Obedience to
Magistracy; and therefore has always been the common Enemy both of Popish and
Republican Recusants. Our Savior himself sufficiently testified his Submission
to that Government which then presided, although he could have commanded twelve
Legions of Angels; a Power able to encounter and overcome all the Armies in the
World. None could say the Disciples after him Submitted for want of Force, they
that could strike Elymas blind, Ananias dead, and had in a readiness to revenge
all Disobedience, 2 Cor. 10.6. would certainly (if Christ's Kingdom had been of
this World) have had further Commission to stop the violent proceedings of all
their Enemies. It is not always the Anointing of the Spirit required for our
Subjection. Josias a King truly Godly and Religious, and Cyrus a mere Heathen,
are both Recorded by the Prophets of the Lord, Isaiah and Jeremy. David a good
King, and Saul one of the worst of Tyrants, both Anointed. Royal Unctions give
no Grace, but a just Title only; and therefore in Scripture it is not said,
Touch not mine Anointed, while he Rules well, in the Preservation of the true
Religion; while he is endued with extraordinary Virtues and Gifts of the
Spirit, while he pleases the People; but because whatsoever he is, He is the
Anointed of the Lord: Dominion is not founded in Grace; neither Priest nor
People can pretend any thing in setting up the Lords Anointed. The Opinions of
these wild Dissenters, for the Destruction both of Governors and Government,
were derived from Muncer, Knipperdoling, John a Leyden, and the rest of their
Hairbrain'd Prophets, condemned by all sober persons of the Reformation,
particularly by Luther in a Book written for that very purpose, where he
plainly shows. That Magistracy is of God, and necessary for our good; and that
whatsoever befalls us, it is the part of a Christian to suffer the Cross;
Prayers and Tears were the Primitive Christians Arms; they embraced the
Doctrine of the Bow-String, (as it is maliciously represented by one scarce
worthy the name of a Reformed Christian) and we never find them interposing
with Sword and Blunderbus, or any other Offensive weapon whatsoever. I have not
time to enlarge upon this Subject, and what has been said is to vindicate the
Loyal Sons of the Church of England from all Aspersions of this Nature; and
that we may be all convinced, that all the Stirs and Tumults which have been in
our Land have proceeded from the same Principle, whether in Papists or
Fanatics; and till this be quite rooted out, we shall never be free from
Rebellion. King James was this Day destined for Ruin by the Papists: His Son
King Charles the First was reserved out of their Hands to suffer Martyrdom by
pretended Protestants; and our present Sovereign (whom God long preserve) has
had his Troubles and Plots on all hands: But (God be praised) we are still in a
condition to give Thanks, to abhor the Practices and Positions of such Men,
whose only Piety is to make Religion a Cloak for Treason, and turn Rebels out
of Conscience: And let all that fear God rejoice in his Name, in the midst of
this, and all other his Wonders in our Preservation. For the Righteous must
Rejoice when he sees the Vengeance: he will wash his footsteps in the blood of
the Wicked: So that a man shall say, Verily there is a Reward for the
Righteous: Verily he is a God that judges in the Earth.

So let all the Enemies of thy Truth, and thine Anointed perish from thy
presence, O God, even all that have Evil Will at Sion; so persecute them with
thy Tempest, and make them afraid with thy Storm: Fill their faces with shame,
that they may seek thy Name, (O Lord) let them be confounded and troubled for
ever, yea let them be put to shame and perish, that men may know, that thou
whose Name alone is Jehovah, art the most High over all the Earth. But let thy
Truth and thy Righteousness flourish; let the Throne of our Sovereign be
Established, all the Plots and wicked Devices of his Enemies brought to naught;
so shall we always be praising Thee, and continually Rejoicing in thy
Salvation. Amen.

FINIS.
Sermons Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
DOctor Hick's Sermon of Temptation, before the Lord Mayor. 's Sermon at the
Act at Oxford, 4o. 's Peculium Dei, before the Lord Mayor. 's True Notion of
Persecution. 's Moral Shechinah. 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 30. 's
Sermon before the Lord Mayor at the Spittle. 's Sermon at Worcester, May 29.
Dr. Sharp's Sermon at the Yorkshire Feast. 's Sermon before the House of
Commons. 's Duty and Happiness of Doing Good. 's Sermon at the Election of the
Lord Mayor. Dr. Calamy's Sermon, May 29. 1682. before the Lord Mayor. 's Sermon
Sept. 9. 1683. 's Sermon Sept. 30. 1683. before the Lord Mayor. 's Sermon Sept.
2. 1684. before the Lord Mayor. Dr. Smith's Sermon. Dr. Bisbie's Sermon,
Prosecution no Persecution. Modern Pharisees. Two Assize Sermons. Dr. Moore's
Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1682. 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1684. Mr.
Scot's Sermon before the Artillery-Company. 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor,
December. 16. 1683. 's Sermon at Dr. Croun's Funeral. Mr. Lamb's Sermon before
the King at Windsor. 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. 's Sermon, wherein the
Liberty of Humane Nature is Stated, Discussed and Limited. Mr. Wray's Sermon,
The Rebellious City Destroyed, Sept. 2. 's Loyalty protesting against Popery,
and Fanaticism Popishly Affected. Mr. Resberry's Sermon at the Charter House. s
Sermon at Sir Alan Broderick's Funeral. Mr. Payne's Sermon at the Brentwood
Feast. 's Sermon Sept. 9. Mr. Milbourne's Original of Rebellion, Preached
January 30. 's Sermon Sept. 9. 1683. Mr. Battles Assize Sermon at Hertford. Mr.
Leigh's Sermon of the Keeping of Holy Days, Preached before the Right Reverend
the Lord Bishop of London. Mr. Grail's Four Sermons: I. Of True Reformation of
Our Selves. II. Of Pious Reverence toward God and the King. III. Of Just
Abhorrence of Usurping Republicans. IV. Of Due Affection to the Monarchy. Mr.
Gascarth's Sermon at Duke Lauderdale's Funeral.

