A NEW DESCRIPTION of PARIS
Paris



LONDON Printed for Henry Bonwick at the. Red. Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard

A NEW DESCRIPTION OF PARIS. CONTAINING A particular Account of all the
Churches, Palaces, Monasteries, Colleges, Hospitals, Libraries, Cabinets of
Rarities, Academies of the Virtuosi, Paintings, Medals, Statues and other
Sculptures, Monuments, and Public Inscriptions. With all other Remarkable
Matters in that Great and Famous CITY. Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1687.

LICENSED.

June 3. 1686. R. L'Estrange.

TO THE READER.
SOme other Reasons may be given for the publishing this Book in English
besides the Common Reason of all Booksellers, which is the Improvement of their
Trade (there being hitherto nothing of this Subject in our Language) and they
are these; such who have not been at Paris may here read of those beauties
which have rendered that City (of late years especially) so famous: Others who
have had the satisfaction of seeing what is here mentioned, will not find it
unpleasant to refresh their memory with the descriptions given in this Book.
The lovers of those two most beautiful Sister-Arts, Painting and Sculpture,
will be pleased to read of the Excellent Performances in both kinds at Paris.
It is really the Encouragement which is given to these Arts, and their near
Kinswoman Architecture, that makes a City Polite and Beautiful, advances an
Inland Trade, and makes Artists so strive and vye with each other, till by
degrees they arrive at the Perfection of the Ancients. The Curious will be no
less pleased to read of the choice Collections of Medals and all sorts of
Rarities. Nor will others want a serious Entertainment in this Book, to meet
here several Passages of the French History, and to consider the Occonomy and
Government; not forgetting also the Piety of Paris. To one purpose more this
Translation may be useful; and that is, to such Young Gentlemen who go over;
(as some do almost daily) in regard this Book in their Pocket with them, will
be, as their Informer, so their Guide, and lead them directly to such Sights as
they most fancy.

The AUTHOR's Advertisment.
NO Man doubts that Paris is at present one of the greatest and fairest Cities
of the World; the magnificence of her Buildings, her extent, and the almost
infinite number of her Inhabitants; among whom there are those who for Estates
may compare with some Sovereigns; and in sine, the perpetual Concourse of all
Nations of Europe, who come hither with an extreme Affection to study the
French Behavior, and observe the Rarities of the Place: All these things
concur to make it to be considered as a City that has no equal. Yet it happens
very often, that all its true Beauties are not taken notice of by many persons,
and principally the Strangers, who complain that they can never find them out
without making it their particular study, and giving themselves a vast trouble
in the search, no Description having been hitherto Composed to instruct them in
their Enquiries. It is for their assistance, and to satisfy the Curiosity of
Strangers that I have undertaken to describe, by way of Abridgment, the most
noted Beauties of that famous City. This Description will be the more useful
unto them, in regard they may inform themselves of the several Places here
noted, and may view several Things which they would have past by and neglected,
if they had not been admonished of them before hand. To make this work the more
easy and methodical, I have taken the several Quarters and Streets in order,
as far as possible, that so the several Remarks may be seen as they lie.

I undertake not to make an exact description, that were almost impossible to
be effected, what endeavors soever we make. I have therefore only collected
those things which are most observable, and that which deserves to be seen with
somewhat more than ordinary remark: Nor have I designed to search into
Antiquities; for Giles Corozet, Father Breuil, and some others have done that
already, better than any can hope to do it after them; and to them I refer such
as desire to know the Originals and Foundations of places. Those Authors will
acquaint you with the Epitaphs and Histories of Private Persons, which would
have swelled this Volume considerably, if I should have transcribed them here.
Besides, it seems unnecessary for a Strangers knowledge to consider these
things which serve only as private Monuments, and are of no use to the public
History, for which they Travel. They take more delight, without doubt, in the
description of a Cabinet, a Library, or an Apartment built after the modern
way, than in reading the Epitaphs at Saint Innocents, or to pick out the
meaning of them.

Without question some will be surprised to see me undertake a Work so
difficult as this, in sight of so many learned Persons abounding in Paris. But
after all, if I prove not successful herein, yet however I shall esteem it
sufficient glory, if I may inspire into any able Author the design of a Work
which may in some sort answer to the Reputation of this great City.

In the mean time, as I may hereafter inform my self more particularly of some
things which I have not hitherto been able to discover; at the same time I
shall be much obliged to those, who have any particular Memorials, if they will
be so generous to communicate, and thereof advertize the Bookseller who Prints
this, that so they may be consulted if they please.

ERRATA.
In the First Part.
PAge 7. Line 20. read Clagny. p. 50. l. 31. r. Seneterre. p. 70. l. 22. r.
cepit. p. 100. l. 16. r. fluted. p. 109. l. 2. r. of merit. p. 110. l. 2. r. be
beheld. p. 120. l. 13. r. admired. p. 121. l. 2. r. Mande. p. 126. l. 2. for
Lady r. Royal Consort. p. 131. l. 10. r. Mande. p. 132. l. 17. r. Garden side.
l. 31 for the r. three. p. 136. l. 32. r. Marks. p. 146. l. 18. r. Verdure. p.
148. l. 33. r. Portal. p. 158. l. 5. dele (.) p. 166. l. 5. r. is.

In the Second Part.
Page 4. l. 23. for there r. then. p. 8. l. 7. r. St. Victor. p. 54. l. 20. for
more r. some. p. 136. l. 10. r. of Clay. p. 160. l. 1. r. Canons.

A New DESCRIPTION OF The most Remarkable things IN THE CITY OF PARIS.
BEfore I enter upon the matter, it may not be amiss to say something of the
Original of Paris. If this great City be not one of the Ancientest in Europe,
yet at least she may boast, that Caesar speaks advantagiously of her in the
sixth Book of his Commentaries; where he says, that having subdued diverse
Nations amongst the Gauls, he was forced to lay Siege to Paris, which at that
time was wholly enclosed between the two Arms of the Seine, into which place
all the Inhabitants of the Neighboring Country were retired. Here they
defended themselves with so much resolution, and made so stout a Resistance
that he was constrained to draw together all the Force he could to attack and
fight them. It is true he subdued them, but it was not without much Labor, and
after several bloody Fights; and in fine, to reduce them entirely to his
Obedience and to keep 'em so, he built the Great Chatelet, and placed in it a
strong Garrison. Notwithstanding we read in other Historians, that Julian the
Apostate being retired among the Cauls (where he remained a long time in that
part of Paris which is now called the Hotel de Cluny) he built this Fortress,
as a Check upon the People of those Parts who were very uneasy and apt to
rise: after all we must confess there is no great certainty of these things, by
reason of the Ignorance of those Ages that went before us, which have lost or
destroyed those Memorials which should have informed us of the truth, had they
been now in being.

As to the name of this Town; some say it was called Lutetia from King Luous,
who was of great esteem among the ancient Gauls; others, from the Latin word
Lutum which signisies Dirt and Mud; possibly because its Situation, being
between the two Arms of a River, there was continually plenty of Water and
Dirt. And without doubt it is for this reason that the little space of Ground
which lies at the further end of the Petit Pont, between the new street of
Nostre-Dame, and the Street de la Calande, is at this day still called le
March palud. Other Authors say, that the name Paris might well have been
derived from the Greek word (...) which signifies Near, and from the Goddess
Isis who had formerly a Temple in that place where stands at present the Church
of St. Germain des prez; from which place Paris was not far distant. And the
Village of Issy near to Vaugerard might perhaps have also taken name from her,
that Goddess having had a Temple there, served by certain Priests, for whose
maintenance the Lands that lay about that place were appropriated; which Lands
belong at present to the Abbey of St. Genevieve du Mont. In the mean time Isis
was not the only Deity that was Worshipped about Paris, Cybele had also her
Temples there. To maintain which conjecture we may here take notice of the
Discovery which was made some years past in the Garden of Monsieur Berrier, in
the Street called Coquilliere not far from the Church of St. Eustache. As they
were digging there deeper than ordinary to make the foundation of a Wall, they
discovered the ruins of an old Tower, with a Bust of Brass, representing a
Woman's head something bigger than the Lise, and Crowned with a Castle composed
of four Towers, with the ancient sort of Pinacles in such manner as we see 'em
in the old Bass reliefs of Rome, or upon Medals representing the Goddess Cybele
who was invoked for the fruitsulness of the Earth, and whom the Poets called
Turrita Matter. All Antiquaries who saw this Piece did not in the least question
its Antiquity. Among others the Reverend Father du Moulinet one of the
Learned Men of the Kingdom in these things, has printed a small Tract to
prove that this head might have served in some Temple built in this place where
this Goddess was adored. And even in the Library of S. Genevieve they preserve
a Model of this Head taken off in Plaster with all the exactness that could be
from the Original, which is at present in the Cabinet of Monsieur the
Procureur-General de Harlay, which illustrious Magistrate is perfectly
acquainted with the true value of such curious things. There are other
Etymologies beside these, as that of Paris King of the Gauls, whose dominion
extended round about these parts, from whence it comes as some say, that the
Inhabitants of the Neigbouring Villages were called Parisii or Parisiaci.

It would be tedious to speak of the several enlargements of this Town. It is
easily concluded that it was not always of the fame dimensions as it is at
present. Under the Reign of Clouis it was as yet shut up within the two Arms of
the Seine, that is, that it took up no more ground than the Isle du Palais,
which is that part which at present we call the City, with some few houses on
the Bank of the River next St. Germain l'Auxerois; where was at that time a
Wood called la Forest des Charbonniers. But however tho it was then but very
little, it was considered as a Place of very great importance, since in that
partition which the Sons of Clouis made of the Kingdom, they agreed among
themselves that Paris should remain neuter and belong to neither of the four;
further, that if any of them should enter there without permission of the other
three, he should lose all the part which he might otherwise pretend to.

Under the second Race, the Town became a little more considerable: they began
then to build on both sides of the Seine: all about the Church of St.
Genivieve, which Clouis had raised: at the upper end of the Place-Maubert;
where afterward Charlemagne did dispose the Learned Men which he invited
hither out of Greece and Italy; near St. Martins des Champs; and in diverse
other places in the Fields about the Town.

But under the third Race it was much more increased. Philip Augustus caused it
to be paved throughout, and a certain Financier (or Exchequer-Officer) called
Girard de Poussy gave to this use out of his own proper Revenue 11000 Marks of
Silver, and this he did freely without any constraint from the King, in whose
Service he had doubtless attained this great Sum. This was an Example of
Generosity altogether extraordinary; and was done in the year 1185. as Monsieur
de Mezeray tells us in his History of France. This King also caused the several
Quarters to be enclosed with Walls. Those of the University extended from the
edge of the Seine beginning at the Gate of St. Bernard, or the Gate of the
Tournelle, and so up behind St. Genivieve to the Gate of St. James, and then
down again toward the River to the place where stands at present the College
of the four Nations, and where heretofore was the Gate of Nesle taken down not
long since to enlarge the Place. On the North side of the River it was also
enclosed with Walls which had almost the same extent. There was in former times
a Gate near the place where now stands the Quinze-Vingts, which answered to
another called the Porte-neuve, (or Newgate) on the Bank of the River pulled
down some years ago, near which was a very high Tower: another Gate in the
Street Coquilliere, at the end of the Street Grenelle: another in the Street of
St. Denis, near the Fountain de la Reine, which was called the Painters Gate:
another in the Street of S. Martin, at the end of the Street aux Ours: and
another near S. John's Churchyard which was called the Port Bodais, because it
led to the Chateau or Castle of that name, which stood in that place where now
is the Village of St. Maur des Fossez beyond Charenton. Since those times this
great City is much augmented, and continually extended into the Fields, till
not long since for several weighty Considerations, there have been certain
Bounds prescribed, beyond which it is not lawful to raise any buildings. It is
to be observed that Paris being thus bounded, its extent is the more
considerable, in regard there is not to be found in it any place that is not
extreme full of People, and as thick of Houses as can be contrived, in some of
which there are continually several distinct Families in one house, which is
rarely to be seen in other Towns, where every one desires to dwell apart, and
where there are few houses to be found of seven Stories high, as they are all
about the Palais; near the great Chatelet; and round the place called la Halle;
in which Houses the least Rooms are full of Inhabitants and let out at dear
Rates.

This is all that we shall say of Paris in General* Let us now come to
particulars.

The LOVVRE.
Historians say that this Palace was first founded by Philip Augustus in the
year 1214. Who made the great Tower, in which Ferrand Earl of Flanders was kept
Prisoner after that King had won the famous Battle of Bouvines; in which the
Earl who had Revolted from King Philip was made a Captive. This Tower was
standing in the last Age, and had served not only to keep the Kings Treasure,
but also had been built to receive therein the Homage and Oath of Fidelity of
those who held Lands of the Crown; or rather, as one may presume, it was the
Seige Seigneurial (or Head of a Tenure) upon which several Fiefs did depend.
For it is well known that our Ancestors had a custom always to build in their
Chateaux (or Chief Seats) a great Tower, and to raise upon that another lesser,
which they called the Don^on, this they esteemed the Mark of a Seigneurie; and
without doubt this Tower at the Louvre was of the same nature. It was taken
down when Francis the First began that building which at present is called the
old Louvre. But Death hindered that Prince from performing much of what he
intended. Henry the Second his Son, carried on the building after the designs
of his Father, and for the performance he made use of the Abbot of Clugny, and
John Gougeon, both Parisians and the ablest Architects of their Time, since
those few things which we see of theirs pass for the most regular and finest
Architecture of the World. They were preferred to the illustrious Sebastian
Sorlio, who was expressly sent for from Italy, but had the displeasure to see
his designs not followed. In the Hall of the hundred Swisses we see a kind of
Tribune of the Workmanship of this John Gougeon, it is supported by four
Cariatides, of a Design so regular and so well contrived that M. Perrault of
the Royal Academy of Sciences has caused it to be engraved and inserted in the
Translation of the Works of Vitruvius, where he has proposed it as a complete
Model. The following Inscription Henry II. set over one of the Gates.

HENRICUS II. CHRISTIANISS. VETUSTATE COLLAPSUM REFICI COEP. A. PAT. FRANCISCO
I. R. CHRISTIANIS. MORTUI SANCTISS. PARENT. MEMOR. PIENTISS. FILIUS ABSOLVIT
AN. A SAL. CHRISTI. MDXXXXVIII. This being ruined by Age, and begun to be
repaired by Francis I. the most Christian King: Henry II. The most Christian
King, as a pious Son who was mindful of the design of his dead Father, caused
to be finished, in the year from the Redemption of the World, MDXXXXVIII. Lewis
the 13th. whose Designs were always Great and Magnificent, caused to be built
the Great Pavilion which is over the Entrance. The Sieur Mercier had the charge
of that work, in which he followed the first design and form. But being forced
to raise his Work higher than the Body of the Building, upon the Corinthian and
Composite orders, he added a Cariatide Order in imitation of that in the Hall
of the 100: Swisses aforementioned, upon which he placed a double Fronton. The
old Gate of the Louvre is under this Pavillion, the Roof of which is supported
by two Ranks of Ionick Pillars of one piece, placed two and two, and are
extreme remarkable for their bigness. The Court in the middle of this building
is great and exactly square. The King has raised three Wings which are not yet
finished. The Work consists of three Ranks of Pillars, Corinthian and
Composite; the top is in the manner of a Terrasse, which appears of a Beauty
most magnificently surprising. The great Gate is on that side next to St.
Germain l'Auxerrois placed in the middle of a long Facade (or Front of
Building) adorned with Corinthian Pillars two and two of a most beautiful
greatness, which standing off from the rest of the Work make a great Portico on
each side of the Gate, on which stands the Fronton composed only of two Stones,
of one piece, each of which is fifty foot in length; a great Terrasse runs on
the top of this Facade, from which one may discover all Paris. In the old
Louvre, many things are to be seen.

The Cabinet of Pictures.
The place where the Kings Pictures are kept, is in an Apartment near the end
of the great Gallery. It is difficult to find more in number or more rare
pieces in any part of Europe than are in this place. Here are some of all the
most famous Masters of Italy and Flanders and other parts; all which the King
has caused to be graved, of which there are two great Volumes extant; but of
late years they have removed a great part of these Paintings to Versailles to
adorn that magnisick Palace. Yet there still remain several of diverse Masters,
among others the last Supper of Paul Veronnese, a Picture of an extraordinary
greatness, so are the Battles of Monsieur l' Brun, from which they have made
several Pieces of curious Tapestry. The Paintings of Pousin are here preserved
with care, as are also those of several other French Masters, of which he is
the Chief without dispute.

They are continually working in Sculpture in two several places of the Louvre.
M. Girardon has his Workhouse under the Cabinet of Pictures where you may see
some Statues which he has finished for Versailles, those that are in the
Grotto there, were made in this place; here you may see the Model of Cardinal
Richelieu's Tomb, which is to be erected in the Church of the Sorbonne.

At the end of the Court that lies before the Gate under the Pavillion on that
side next the Rue Saint Honor, you ought to view the Statues which are to be
placed on the Tomb of Monsieur de Turenne which the King has caused to be
erected for him at St. Denis. You may also there observe several other curious
pieces, which are all of the design and invention of Monsieur de Mercy one of
the best Statuaries of the Kingdom. He is at present about certain figures
intended for the Tomb of Monsieur the Duke of Noailles at St. Paul's. The Sieur
Renaudin has also his Workhouse near that of M. Girardon, which ought to be
seen by the Curious.

But above all we ought not to neglect before we leave the Louvre to visit the
Hall, wherein the Gentlemen of the French Academy assemble, whom the King
honors with so particular a Protection, that he is willing to have them in his
own Palace. This Illustrious Academy is composed of learned Persons who take
continual pains in perfecting the French Tongue, and meet three times a Week.
The names of the present Members of this Society, are

M. de Besons, Counselor of State. M. Corneille. M. Doujat. M. Charpentier. M.
The Abbot Tallement, chief Almoner to Madame M. The Duke of Coislin. M. The
Abbot Pelisson' Master of the Requests. M. The Bishop of Acs. M. The Cardinal
d'Estrees. M. de Renouard de Villayer, Counselor of State. M. The Abbot de
Furetieres. M. de Segrais. M. le Clerc. M. The Duke of St. Aignan. M. le Comte
de Bussy. M. The Abbot Testu. M. The Abbot Tallement, Prior of St. Albin. M.
Boyer. M. The Marquess d'Angeau, Governor of Touraine. M. The Abbot Regnier des
Marais. M. The Abbot de la Chamber. M. Quinaut Auditor of the Accounts. M The
Archbishop of Paris. M. the Bishop of Meaux, formerly Preceptor to Monseigneur
the Dauphin, and chief Almoner to Madame the Dauphiness. M. Perault,
Comptroller of the Buildings. M. The Abbot Flechier, Almoner to Madame the
Dauphiness. M. Racine, Treasurer of France. M. The Abbot Gallois. M. de
Benserarde. M. The Abbot Huet, formerly Under-preceptor to Monseigneur the
Dauphin. M. Roze, Secretary of the Kings Cabinet. M. Cordemoy, Reader to
Monseigneur the Dauphin. M. The President de Mesme. M. The Abbot Colbert,
Coadjutor of Rouen. M. The Abbot de Lavau, Library Keeper of the Kings Cabinet.
M. Verjus, Plenipotentiary at the Diet of Ratisbone. M. de Novion, first
President of the Parlinment of Paris. M. The Abbot Danjau. M. Barbier de
Haucour. M......
Every other year on the Feast Day of S. Lewis, they give here two Medals of
Gold, for Prizes, the one in Eloquence, the other in Poetry, on which account a
great number of Persons at such times bring in their Compositions in both
kinds, in order to obtain the Reward. The same day all the Members of the
Academy procure a Mass to be sung in Music, after which a Panegyric of St.
Lewis is pronounced by some able Preacher. Monsieur the Abbot Pelisson has
composed the History of the French Academy, and writ it after such a polite and
delightsom manner, that his Book passes for one of the finest and best things
in the French Language. They have some Pictures in their Hall; one of the Holy
Virgin; another of the King in his ^oronation habit; the Picture of Cardinal
Richelieu Founder of the French Academy, that of the Chancellor Seguier who
after the death of the Cardinal became its Protector, and in fine, another of
Queen Christina of Swedeland, who came to these Assemblies, where she showed
her extraordinary Genius for all curious things.

We cross over here and pass into a Hall where we may see two Models made for
the great Staircase of the Louvre, the fairest of which was made by the famous
Mansard, the other by M. du Veau, he who made the designs for the New Buildings
at Vin^ennes, but the first of these excells the other infinitely for the
Grandeur of the gust and hardiness of design.

In the old Tenis-Conrt, in the middle of the Court they are at work about the
Model of a Statue of the King on Horseback, raised on the top of a Rock with
his Enemies subdued at his feet, and four Rivers with their Urns who seem
amazed to see this great Monarch arrived to the highest step of Glory. Nothing
can be greater than this Work; and if it be performed according to the design,
all Europe cannot show a more magnisick Monument. It is of M. Girardons
designing.

The Gard-Meuble or Repository of the Kings Movables.
On the Bank of the River at the Corner of the Street des Poulies is the
Garde-Meuble in an Old house which was formerly called the Horel du petit
Bourbon, in regard the Princes of that Family dwelt there. The outside has no
fine show, but it is within this place that they preserve the precious
movables of the Crown; here one may see a Surprising quantiy of Tapestry both
ancient and Modern, here are some pieces which Francis I. caused to be made
after the Designs of Julio Romano, and which were wrought at Anuers by a famous
Master of that time who had an extraordinary Reputation. These pieces represent
the Acts of the Apostles, and the History of Scipio the Great. This King has
caused abundance to be made at the Gobelins, enriched with Gold and Silver,
after the designs of M. le Brun, of which he has no less than 24000 Else; not
reckoning a great Footcloath in the manner of Turky-work, which is working in a
place built on purpose at the end of the Course d^ la Reine, commonly called the
Savonnerie, which is to be the full length of the great Gallery of the Louvre,
but is not yet finished. Together with these you may see abundance of Vessels of
Precious Stones, as Agat, Onix, Jacinth, Cornelian, Crystal of the Rock,
admirable as well for their Size as Workmanship, several Branches of Coral, but
one among the rest very great, and black as Ebony, which is extremely rare:
Small Cabinets of Crystal of the Rock, and of Amber garnished with Gold and
Jewels. But that which is most observable is a great Ship of Gold enriched with
Diamonds, of most curious Workmanship, made by the Sieur Balin, and valued at
one hundred thousand Crowns. After this you may see the Vessels of Massy
Silver consisting of diverse Basins, upon which the History of this King is cut
in Chis^l-work, they are of such weight, that it requires the strength of two
men to bear 'em upon a kind of Handbarrows made of the same metal and
workmanship. Here are also Tables, Stands, Looking-glass Frames, Branches for
Candles, extraordinary great, Orangers, two great Tubs of Silver which served
at the Baptism of Monseigneur the Dauphin, Branches to set upon Stands,
Chenets, Cassolets or perfuming-pots, and generally all Sorts of Goldsmiths
work for their weight as well as workmanship to be admired; most of which
things were wrought by the famous Monsieur Balin, of whom I have already made
some mention. He was the chief Artist of this Age for Silver Work, and died
about five or six years since. They show here also Embroidered Beds, extreme
Rich, with Hangings for Alcoues of the same fashion. You may see in the same
place the Cup-board of Francis I. of certain pieces of Silver gilt, very well
wrought. In another Room, apart, they preserve a great quantity of curious Arms
of all sorts, among others the Armor of Francis I. which he wore at the Battle
of Pavie, where one may discern on the cuirasse the Blows which he received
before he would yield himself a Prisoner to the Spaniards, to whom he dearly
sold his Liberty. There is also a Fusil or small Gun which the City of Paris
presented to Monseigneur the Dauphin, and which is here preserved because it
was the first Firearms he ever shot in. In fine, the Curious, and all others,
may here find rarities enough to satisfy their eye, for beside the singular
Beauty of the Work, one may here see a mighty quantity of Gold and Silver,
which is a very great entertainment to such who are apt to be dazzled with the
Splendour of the metal and consider that, more than the excellency of the Work.
Of late the King has caused the finest things in the Garde-Meuble to be
removed to Versailles, yet still there remains a great number that are well
worth seeing.

The Palace of the Tuilleries.
Having seen these things you ought to go next to the Palace of the Tuilleries,
which extends it self along the Garden in one continued Line; it is composed at
the ends of two great square Pavilions adorned with Pilasters of the Composite
Order, and of one great Pavilion, like a Dome, in the middle, under which is
the great Hall and Staircase that leads to the Apartments. It is to be
observed that the middle of this Building, namely the great Pavilion, the two
Terrasses, and the two lesser Pavilions at the Ends, were built at the charges
of Katharine de Medicis, who was very skilful in Architecture, as we perceive
by these Buildings, which are all of a most curious proportion after the Ionick
and Corinthian Orders, there are three Ranks of Pillars, with an Attick over
head. For this work she employed Philibert de Lorme and John Bulan, the prime
Masters of their Age. The rest of the Buildings were performed by Henry IV. and
Lewis XIV. who in our days has repaired this Palace as we now see it. There
stood once under the Pavilion in the middle, a great Staircase, which was one
of the finest things of its kind in the whole World, for its disposition, and
for the strange boldness of the Work. Which Staircase was built after the
designs of the forementioned Pilibert de Lorme, but of late, to the great
regret of the Curious, it has been taken down for the meliorating the Prospect
of the Tuilleries to the Court, and for employing the Great Hall to the
enlargement of the Kings Apartment. Which Apartment, as also that of the Queen,
and that of Monseigneur the Dauphin are enriched with excellent Paintings of
the ablest Masters of France. In a Gallery which reaches the whole length of
the Kings Apartment on the Court-side, you may see several Cabinets enriched
with Mignatures and Chissel-work extremely fine, with several Tables of inlaid
Stone-work very beautiful, among others one very large, upon which is the
representation of a Salamander, which was the device of Francis I. and
therefore this is supposed to have been his Table. Here are also some of
Sicilian Marble of one Piece, of a wonderful variety of Colors. This Gallery
has often served for the Reception and Audience of Ambassadors, and at such
times it has been adorned with Rich Tapistry and other precious movables.

In the Rooms below are preserved abundance of ancient Statues, and the Bust of
this King made by the Cavalier Bernin when he came from Rome to draw the
Designs of the Louvre. One may see there also the Plans raised of all the
strongest places of Europe, which have been drawn out with all care and
exactness that is possible.

The other moity of the Building on that side next the Rue St. Honor contains
the Chapel, which is not yet finished; and the Theater, otherwise called la
Salle des Machines: in which the Court was formerly entertained with Comedies,
of which Psyche was the last, which after it had been Acted for many years* did
still draw a world of admirers. But since the invention of Opera's came to us
from Italy, serious Plays though mingled with music and Entries of Ballets
have given place to Song and continued Music on whatsoever Subject it be. This
Theater, without contradiction, is the most magnifick of Europe, not excepting
that of the Duke of Parma so much boasted of. One cannot desire any thing to be
better contrived. Every Person may see and hear extreme conveniently. The Room
behind the Stage for the Machines is very large. As for the Decorations no
Costs have been wanting, all the House is painted in Marble Colors. The
Galleries are supported with Pillars whose Capitals and Pedistals are gilded,
as is also the Ceiling which is curiously Carved.

The Prospect of all this Palace is into the Garden of the Tuilleries, to which
Garden this Palace also serves as a most Magnifick Perspective, every one of
its Allies being answered with a face of the Building of most beautiful
Architecture. This Garden is at present one of the most regular of Europe,
though it be not as yet adorned with Statues, as in time it will be. There is
in it an open Theater; with all the necessary parts thereunto belonging, as the
Ancients contrived them, and which we see in those of Rome: Trees are planted
here which serve in the like manner with the Ordinary Decorations in other
Theaters. It is extreme great and may contain a great number of People. On the
other side of the great Ally stands the Statue of Truth, raised upon a great
Pedestal. It is the Work of a famous Sculptor called Ville Franche, who came
from Cambray. Monsieur le Nostre continued the Works in the Tuilleries, and it
is he also who manages those admirable Garden-Works at Versailles. You must by
no means neglect to see his Cabinet which is very well furnished with Pictures,
and Busts of Marble, most of which came out of Italy; among others one may
easily observe a Picture of indifferent size, done by Dominicain, representing
Adam and Eve in the Terrestrial Paradise, this is esteemed one of the finest
Pieces in all Paris.

We ought to observe that the old Louvre is joined to the Palace of the
Tuilleries by the great Gallery which extends it self all along the River; at
the end which was begun first there are several Paintings and other Ornaments
of the design of Monsieur Poussin, but they being found too small for the Place
where they stand, the Work never proceeded further but remained imperfect as it
is, the beginning of this Gallery is the work of Philibert de Lorme, and the
rest of Metezeau, he who undertook that great service at the Ditch of Rochelle,
which was the chief occasion of the taking that Rebel Town. Upon this subject
the following Epigram was made in his honor,

Haeretico palmam retulit Methezaeus ab host,
Cum rupellanas aggere cinxit aquas.
Dicitur Archimedes terram potuisse movere,
Aequora qui potuit sistere, non minor est.
Over Rochell Metezeau Triumphant stood.
Curbing with a a bold Dike the Rebel Flood.
In Fame scarce Archimedes equal is,
As he could move the Earth, this fixed the Seas.
The Salle des Antiques, or repository of Antiquities, is under the end of this
Gallery, it is incrusted with Marble, and full of Ancient Statues, the best and
scarcest that can be seen. The King has caused 'em all to be engraved by Melan.
And there are two great Volumes of them extant in Folio, besides those other
Pictures of which we have already spoken.

The Apartments under this Gallery are all inhabited by diverse famous Artists
who are employed in the Kings Service, and to whom he has assigned these
Lodgings.

The Royal Printing House is also here, of which the Sieur Mabre-Cramoisy, is
the Governor or Director: where you may see a small Room filled only with such
Books as have been printed here.

Monsieur Silvestre a famous Graver, Monsieur Melan of whose hand the public
has several extraordinary fine Gravings, M Coepel a Painter; M. Herard, M.
Valdor, are lodged here. M. Cassiny has also his Chamber here tho his ordinary
dwelling is at the Observatory, so has Monsieur the Abbot Siry so well known
for those curious Italian Memoires which he has published upon History,
Madamoselle Stella in whose apartment are several curious Pictures of Poussin;
Monsieur Bain, a famous Enamellor, who has found out the secret to make Enamel
as bright and beautiful as precious stones, and who has now under his hands,
for the King, a great Basin of Gold adorned with Mouldings on the Edges, this
will be without all dispute a most exquisite piece when it is finished, as well
for the Workmanship as for the materials, for it amounts to an hundred thousand
Franks, he makes commonly Enameled Watch-Cases, and diverse things of that
sort. Near him is M. Boul who makes a sort of Mosaic works extremely neat, and
which the Curious preserve very choicely; Messieurs Sanson, Sons of the famous
Geographer have also Lodgings in this place; they are continually employed, and
from time to time publish some new thing in Geography.

The Kings Balaneier (or Mony-Stamp) is also kept in these parts. Here it is
where they make those Curious Medals both Stamped and Cast, in Gold, Silver,
and Copper. M. the Abbot Bizot, one of the most intelligent and able persons of
all the Curious in Paris, had the direction formerly of these matters, after
the famous Varin. One cannot desire to see any thing more choice than his
Cabinet, which is completely furnished with Pictures, Medals, ancient and
modern, Agats, Figures in Brass, Porcelains, and a thousand other rarities of
such sort.

The Petite Ecurie, or lesser Stable, takes up the rest of the Buildings, which
is very long, and full of excellent Horses.

St. Germain l'Auxerrois.
Something may be said here of St. Germain l'Auxerrois, the Parish Church of
the Louvre. It is one of the ancientest of Paris, for Childebert was the
Founder as well of this as that of St. Germain des Prez, both which he
dedicated to St. Vincent, he having deposited in these Churches some Relics
of that Saint Which he brought out of Spain. They have here on great Feasts,
very magnificent Ornaments given by the Queen Mother; which are of Cloth of
Gold and Silver very rich: These the Republic of ^enoa presented to that
illustrious Queen and were by her immediately bestowed upon this Church. The
other things most remarkable in this Church are, the Tribune (or Gallery) of
Germain Pilon's designing, who was esteemed in his Age the ablest Workman in
all France for Sculpture and Architecture, and the Chapel of Monsieur the
Marquess de Rosteing, in which are some Busts in Marble of several illustrious
Persons of that Family. In the Room where the Churchwardens Assemble hangs a
very good copy of a Last Supper, by Leonard de Vincy, whch Picture was formerly
placed in the Church and its Beauty never observed, till it was known that the
Cavalier Bernin had admired it. Upon which it was quickly removed and placed in
this Room, for the more choice keeping. The most considerable Persons who have
been interred in this Church are Monsieur Seguin, who was Dean here, very
judicious in the value of Medals: Joachim du Bellay, one of the famousest Poets
of his Age: Monsieur Varin, one of the ablest Gravers of Medals that France
ever had; Monsieur Balin, a famous Goldsmith, of whom we have already spoken,
this was he who invented those Curious Ornaments where the History of the Old
and New Testament are represented in Cartouches of admirable Workmanship. Here
is also the Tomb of Mademoiselle Silvestre represented in Painting on a Black
Marble fixed to a Pillar behind the Quire, after Monsieur le Bruns way. In the
lesser Chapels are to be seen several well esteemed Pictures of le Sueur's
Work.

There is a Landscape in Perspective done by Francisque, worth seeing, in one of
the Houses in the Cloister.

In that great space of Ground which is between the old Louvre and the Palace
of the Tuilleries, are many fair Houses, among others

The Hotel de Crequi, in which lives the Illustrious Marechal of that name. Its
outside makes no great show, but within it is very well funished: above all the
Staircase extremely well designed. In the Street of St. Thomas du Louvre is

The Hotel de Longueville formerly called the Hotel de Epernon, which wants a
whole wing of Building. So much as is finished is of a very beautiful design,
chiefly the Portal, of the Ionick Order, as is all the rest of the House, which
wants a Square or place before it, to give the more advantageous view. The
Apartments are convenient, and the Garden pleasant tho it be enclosed on every
side. You must not forget to see a Ceiling in one of the Chambers, painted by
M. Mignard, highly esteemed.

In the Turn-again-Lane near this place stands the House of M. de Guitry, which
is very handsome.

In the same Street of St. Thomas is also the Hotel de Montausier, formerly
called the Hotel de Rambouillet, heretofore the most delightsom Seat of the
Muses, and which still serves at this day as a Retreat and Sanctuary to all
ingenious Persons by the favorable protection they find from the Duke of
Montausier formerly Governor to Monsiegneur the Dauphin.

Having thus satisfied ones curiosity on the Subject of the Louvre, in which
many particulars may be observed which are not here mentioned to avoid
prolixity, let us begin our next Journey at the nearest place which is

The Quarter of St. Honor.
This Quarter begins at the Rue de St. Denis, where we may see, in the first
place, a handsome row of Houses, built uniform with the same Symetry, at the
Charges of the Canons of St. Germain l'Auxerrois, who raise out of 'em a
considerable Revenue. This place has been enlarged upon the Churchyard of the
holy Innocents, which lies behind. The Charnel-houses which are built round
that Churchyard, were built, as reported, out of the Confiscate Goods of the
Jews when they were expelled Paris under the Reign of Philip Augustus. In
probability there is not any one place in the whole World in which more dead
bodies are interred; which caused the Spanish Ambassador who resided in Paris
during the League, to advise the Citizens at such time when the Famine pressed
them cruelly, to grind the Bones of the dead in this Churchyard to make Bread;
but this Counsel was not followed coming from a drolling Spaniard: M. de
Mezeray, so well known of the Learned for his delicate History of France, is
here Interred. You may see in this Place a Pyramid adorned with Bass-releifs,
much esteemed, on the top of which is erected a Cross, this was set up in the
last Age during the horrible Confusions of the League. There is in the same
place a Skeleton of the Workmanship of Permain Philon. Further on, is

The Cross du Tirouer where, as it is said, Queen Grunehault was, by the
Command of Clotaire, drawn at the Tail of a Wild horse. But this is not well
proved: and it is much disputed among the Historians, whether this Queen was
the most illustrious, or the most wicked of her Age. For there are as many that
speak well of her, as ill. St. Gregory the Great, Pope; Gregory of Tours,
Fortunatus Bishop of Poictiers, Paulus Aemilius, du Tillet, the Bishop of
Meaux, and Pasquier in his Enquiries of France, are all full of her Encomiums.
Those who condemn her are Aimoin, Gaguin, Minister-general of the Mathurins,
Belle-Forest, du Haillant, and Vigner, whose Authorities are of great force in
History. So that it will be difficult to affirm any thing positively of this
great Princess, who has been more spoken of than ever any Queen of France has
been. Something lower are

The Fathers of the Oratory, whose house stands in the same place where
formerly was the Hotel de Bouchages. Tho their Church is not yet quite
finished, it is however already extreme handsome, and of a design very Regular.
They have here on their great Altar a Tabernacle of a magnifick sort of
Architecture, the Pillars are of an admirable Sicilian Marble. It is a Dome
raised very high with four Porticoes, supported with six Pillars of the
composite order which stand out from the Work; the Ornaments of which are
perfectly well wrought, and the Proportions exact. A great Fabric after this
Model might well please the most difficult Persons in matters of Architecture.
The Cardinal de Berulle is Interred in one of the Cha pels, where his Tomb may
be seen, and on it his representation in white Marble. He was their Founder, as
all men know. These Fathers have a very handsome Library. The place in Truth is
a little too dark; but that does not impair its value, in regard it contains a
great number of excellent Volumes both Printed and Manuscript, among which are
a good number of Greeks and Arabians, given them by Monsieur de Sancy,
Ambassador of France to the Port. Who during the time of his Embassy made an
exact search and collection of such Greek Rarities which had escaped the
Barbarity of the Turks Such a Library this could never be better disposed of
than into the custody of these Fathers, there being among them some Persons of
most profound Learning, as appears by their Works, so much sought after and
bought up by all Scholars. One might mention here Father Cointe, and Father
Senault, both which have left the World such excellent Writings, the one in
History, the other in Moral Philosophy; Father Malbranche who composed the
Enquiry of Truth; Father Thomassin who wrote the Discipline of the Church in
three Volumes in Folio; Father Dubois, who by order of Monseigneur the
Archbishop, is now about the Ecclesiastical History of Paris. This
Congregation has also furnished us with the ablest Preachers, as Monsieur the
Bishop of Again, so famous by the name of Father Mascaron, the Course of whose
Sermons were most emphatical; Father le Boust, and Father Hubert who Preached a
Lent at Nostre-Dame to a mavelous concourse of People, and the last year at
Court; not to mention Father Morin, and diverse other famous Preachers who lived
not long since.

As you leave the Fathers of the Oratory, and pass on along the Rue St. Honor,
you ought to visit

The Palais Cardinal, which the People now call the Palais-Royal, because the
King was here Educated when young. The Hotel de Sillery stood formerly in the
little Court which is before the Gate, which Cardinal Richlieu caused to be
pulled down to give the better sight to the Palace, he had then caused to be
built here after the dessigns of the Sieur Mercier, who had been esteemed a
very able Architect, had he raised his Buildings something higher; and that is
the only fault of this Palace, extremely convenient in all things else. It is
composed of two square Courts, of which the first and least is compassed about
with Battlements, and the second is divided from the Garden by a row of Arches
which support an open Gallery which reaches from one Wing to the other, through
these Arches, which are enclosed with Iron Grates you have a Prospect into the
Garden, which was formed as it is by Monsieur le Nostre after the same Model
with the Tuilleries. As for the Apartments they are all most beautiful and
convenient, and all the Court resided here a long time during the Regency.
Above all, we ought to see the Gallery where Cardinal Richlieu caused to be
painted all the famous men of France, From the time of Sugar Abbot of St.
Dennis, down to the time of his Ministry: That is in effect the whole French
History from Lewis the young, to the Reign of Lewis XIII. Monsieur the Duke of
Orleans dwells here at present, tho the House belongs to the King, to whom
Cardinal Richlieu bequeathed it in his Will, together with five hundred
thousand Crowns and that Curious Suit of Tapistry which is exposed on the great
Feast of Corpus Christi.

You must not forget to see the Cabinet of Monsieur the Chevalier de Loraine,
where are curious Pictures of the best Masters, it is near the Garden which
adds not a little to its beauty.

In a Hall belonging to this Palace is the Theater where they represent the
Opera of famous M. de Lully, which draws to it continually a mighty concourse
of People lovers of Music. No part of Europe yields more pleasing Objects, be
it for the Dances, or for the Symphonie, or in fine, for the singularity of the
Habits; but that which is most considerable, is the wonderful agreement of the
French Music with the Italian, which was once thought a thing impossible, and
yet even in this M. de Lully has been mighty successful. Nor has the Age been
ungrateful to his extraordinary Parts, for he draws a very great Revenue from
the Representations of these Pieces. The Verse is ordinarily composed by
Monsieur Quinault of the French Academy: Monsieur Corneille the younger has
also made some things, and Bel^rophon is of his writing. From hence you go to

The Hospital of the Quinze-Vingts, which St. Lewis caused to be built in his
time for 300 blind Gentlemen whom he brought with him out of the Holy Land
where they had lost their Eyes in fighting against the Sarazens. Over the Gate
o^ this Ho^pital there stands a Statue of that Holy King which (tho of ill
Workmanship) resembles him very much, as the Antiquaries pretend.

Further in the same Street is St. Roch the Parish Church for all this Quarter,
in which there is a very exquisite Crucifix wrought by Monsieur Anguerre.

A little higher stands the Convent of the Jacobins, wherein is nothing very
remarkable, unless it be the Library, which is one of the finest in Paris.

After this you may take notice of the Portal before the House of Monsieur
Pussort Counselor of State, it is lately built, of the Ionick Order, with an
Attick over head, in which are the Arms of the Owner. This is a small piece of
Architecture, very well esteemed. The inside of the Fabric is handsome,
especially on that side next the Garden, which is very curious and pleasant.
Near this on the same side is

The Convent of Feuillans, Henry III. first brought them out of Languedo^, in
number sixty, with the blessed John de la Barr^ere, Author of the Reform of St.
Bernards Order. At first they were lodged at the Bo^s de Vin^^nnes, till this
house which was building for 'em should be finished. The great Gate which
fronts upon the Rue Saint Honor, is but newly built; it is composed of four
Corinthian Pillars, that support a Fronton on which are the Arms of France. The
first Court which serves as a Paruis (or open Place) before the Church, is very
well; and the Building over the Gate where you enter is not ill contrived. The
Portal of the Church is one of the most Regular of all Paris, and it was the
first Essay of Monsieur de Mansard. Here are two Orders of Pillars, Ionick and
Corinthian, fluted and set off with Ornaments. Within the Church are some
Chapels handsome enough, among others that of Monsieur the Marquess of
Rostaing, adorned almost like that at St. Germain l'Auxerrois, with Pillars and
Busts of Marble. On one side of the great Altar you may see a Tomb after the
ancient manner. It is of white Marble, with a great Urn of the same, curiously
wrought; tho it has no Epitaph, yet we may conclude from the Arms in the fore
part of it, that it belongs to the Illustrious House of Rohan. The Quire behind
the great Altar, where the Religious Sing, is adorned with Pictures
representing the Principal Actions of our Saviors Life.

These Fathers have very Magnisick Ornaments which with all their Plate also
were given by several Persons of Quality. They have a Library, not very
numerous, but however there are in it very curious Pieces. In their Cloister
you will find diverse Paintings representing the Life of St. Bernard their
Founder. Among these Religious there are some famous Preachers. As the Reverend
Father Dom. Cosme, at present Bishop of Lombez, the Reverend Father Hieresme,
and some others. As you go from hence you pass before the Capuchins, where
there is nothing remarkable, and so on to

The Nuns of the Assumption. These Nuns had their abode formerly in the Street
called Rue de la mortellerie, where they were Hospital-Sisters under the name
of Haudriettes, their House in that place having been founded by one Stephen
Haudry Esquire to the King St. Lewis, to Harbor, and they to serve the poor and
sick, as Historians tell us. But being too much straightened for Room in that
street they removed to this place, where they changed their name as well as
Situation. Of late years they have raised here several Noble buildings,
especially their Church, which is a Dome or Cupulo after the Roman manner, very
high; the inside of which is adorned with Corinthian Palasters supporting a
Cornish, over which is a Row of Windows, between which hang certain pictures
representing the Life of the Holy Virgin, well painted. But the Plafon (or
Painting within the Ceiling) of the Dome is that which is most remarkable, it
was done by M. de la Fosse, and represents the Assumption, with the Angels
carrying and following the Blessed Virgin into Heaven, all which is both for
the boldness of the painting, and the design, the finest that can be, and one
of the most finished things of Paris. The Nuns Quire is very handsome, but is
difficult to see, by reason of the great Grate that divides it from the Church,
which Grate is no ill imitation of that at Val-de-Grace. As you go out you
ought to take notice of the Portico supported by eight Corinthian Pillars, with
a Fronton and a Cornish, the Carving Work of which is not yet finished.

All this Building was designed by M. Herard, director of the Academy of
Painters which the King maintains at Rome.

Having seen these things you need to proceed no further this way, there being
nothing considerable in the Fauxburgh of St. Honor, unless it be the Workhouse
of Monsieur Anguerre, where you may see some works in Sculpture; and a young
Garden or Nursery which in Spring time has very curious Flowers. This last
belongs to the King, who caused it to be made here, from hence to furnish the
Tuilleries with such Flowers as are needful to set of the Parterres, there is
also in this place a great number of Orange Trees, well kept and preserved.

Over against the Nunnery of the Assumption is the Hotel de Luxembourg,
belonging to Monsieur the Marechal of Luxemburg, who inhabits here. The Garden
is extreme pleasant.

Next to this are the Capuchin Nuns, founded by Henry IV. in pursuance of the
pious intention of Louise de Loraine, Widow of Henry III. They live very
austerely. On one side of their Gate, a Fountain has been erected on which are
these two Verses of Monsieur de Santeuil.

Tot Loca Sacra inter pura est quae labitur Vnda,
Hanc non impuro, quisquis es, ore bibas.
Through Sacred Cells has this pure Water passed,
With lips as pure do thou this Water taste.
The Hotel of Vendome is near this, and takes up a long Space in the Street. It
was built by the Duke of Vendome natural Son of Henry IV. who always lived
here. The inside is very beautiful. The Front of the great Staircase which is
of the dessigne of M. Mansard, is adorned with many Pillars which as you come
in make a delicate show. The Garden is great but neglected as is all the rest
of the House. The Duke of Vendome Governor of Provence, and Grandson of him
abovementioned lives at present in the Temple, with Monsieur the Grand Prior
of France, his Brother.

Having thus run through the Street of St. Honor, let us now enter upon the
next Quarter which is called la Butte St. Roch.

The Quarter de la Butte St. Roch.
To view this Quarter in Order, you should begin at the Rue de Richelieu, where
as soon as you enter, you have on the right hand

The Palais Brion.
People give it that name because the Duke of Amville Earl of Brion, for some
time made his abode here. This Building is part of the Palais Royal, and was
begun by the Cardinal of Richelieu, who designed it for his Library. But some
years since the King has given it to two Academies, that of Painting, and that
of Architecture. The first of these was established by M. des Noyers, under the
direction of M. de Chambray Brother of M. de Chant-Loup, from whose pen we have
several excellent pieces in print, among others, The Parallel of the Ancient
and Modern Architecture, Palladio translated into French, etc. This Academy was
re established by Monsieur the Chancelier Seguier, after whose death that
beautiful Catafalque at the Fathers of the Oratory, was erected to his Memory
as to their Protector. Monsieur Colbert succeeded him in this Charge and in the
affection he bore them. Every day here is exposed a naked man, which is the
Model by which the young Scholars design, in order to attain from Nature her
self the great Art of Painting, an Art that requires a most assiduous Study.
The great Hall where they meet is full of abundance of Pictures done by the
most able Masters in the Academy, and of all those pieces that have been won
for Prizes, which are here distributed to raise emulation among the young
Artists*, and of the Masterpieces of those who have desired to be admitted
into the Academy. The Representations and Busts of several persons who have
contributed to the establishment of this Academy are here also preserved. And
in regard Painting is not the only thing here exercised but Sculpture also,
they have got hither from Rome the models in Plaster of the most famous
Statues of Antiquity, as that of Flora, of Hercules in the Palace of Farneze,
of Venus, of the two Wrestlers, and of several others. Here are also several
Bass-reliefs, and Sculptures better than ordinary. The names of those who are
the present Members of this Academy are

Monsieur le Brun, Escuyer, principal Painter to the King, Chancellor and chief
Rector of the Academy.

Rectors.
M. Anguier, Painter. M. Girardon, Sculptor.
Adjuncts to the Rectors.
M. de Seve, the Elder, P. M. des Jardins, S.
Counselors, Professors.
M. Beaubrun, P. Professor and Treasurer. M. Buister, S. M. Mauperche, P. M.
Buiret, S. M. Coyel, P.
Professors.
M. Regnaudin, S. M. Paillet, P. M. de Seve, P. M. Blanchard, P. M. de la
Fosse, P. M. le Hongre, S. M. Coyzevaux, S. M. Houasse, P. M. Tuby, S. M.
Audran, P. M. Jouvenet, P. M. Montaigne, P.
Adjuncts to the Professors.
M. Corneille the Elder, P. M. Rabon. S. M. Monier, P. M. Massou, S. M.
Verdier, P. M. Licherye, P. M. de Mameur, P.
Professors in Geometry, Perspective, and Anatomy.
M. Leclerc, Engraver, Professor in Geometry, and Perspective. M. Friquet, P.
Professor* in Anatomy.
Counselors.
M. Rousselet, Graver. M. Yvart, P. M. Tortebat. P. M. Rabon, P. M. Silvestre,
G. M. Edelinck, G. M. Baptiste Monoye, P. M. Herault, P. M. Vandermeulin, P. M.
Audran, G. M. Guerin. Secretary. M. de S. Georges, Historiogapher. M. Joblo,
Assistant to the Professor in Geometry. M. le Maire, P. M. Vleugels, P. M.
Valet, G. M. Picard, G. M. Huilliot, P. M. Genoelle, P. M. Legros, S. M.
Mainer, S. M. Vignon, P. M. Mazeline, S. M. Hallier, P. M. Garnier, P. M.
Bourguignon, P. M. Mignard, P. M. Lalemant, P. M. Cotelle, P. M. Armand, P. M.
Baudet, G. M. Nocret, P. M. de Trois, P. M. Corneille, P. M. Bonnemer, P. M.
Facus, P. M. Tiger, P. M. Lambert, P. M. le Comte, S. M. de Fredemontagne, P.
M. Lespingola, S. M. Natie, P. M. Cheron, P. M. Parossel, S. M. de la Mare
Richard, P. M. Boulogne, P. M. Allegrein, P. M. Loir, G. M. Masson, G. M.
Manier, S. M. Flamand, S. M. Vancleve, S. M. Vanbecq. P. M. Rabon, P. M.
Beville, P. M. Cornu, S. M. Boulongue, the younger, P. M. le Blon, P. M.
Toutin, P. M. Coypel, P. M. Benoist, P. M. Arnoul, P. M. Giffard, G. M. Person,
P. M. Alexandre, P. M. Prou, S. M. Carre, P. M. Halle, P. M. Lemoine, P.
Decorator.
In a lower Gallery they keep a many Busts and ancient Statues which the King
has sent for out of Italy. There is a very considerable number of them which
are placed in Ranks one degree higher than another as in an Amphitheater; in
which place there stands also a Model in Plaster of that beautiful Pillar
which the Roman Senate Consecrated to the Memory of the Emperor Trajan, which
is the best Monument that remains of the ancient Grandeur of Rome: by this we
may see the Perfection to which the Ancients had brought the Art of designing.
The King caused this Model to be made at a very great expense: It has cost
near two hundred thousand Franks. Francis I. had made the same thing with a
design to have raised such another Pillar at Fontainebleau; but Death
preventing* the Stones ^ay by neglected, and were after made use of to build a
stable. M. Felibien has the care and oversight of these things, to place them
in their proper stations. No man understands these matters better than himself,
as appears sufficiently by his Works. We shall say in its proper place how much
the Learned are obliged to him for those Books with which he has enriched the
Public, as his Dictionary of the Arts; his lives of the Painter, which he has
published in four Volumes, perfectly well writ, besides which we have hardly
any thing on that Subject in our Language: with several other pieces on diverse
subjects of Archi tecture and Painting.

The other Academy established in this Palais Brion is that of Architecture,
which takes up all the Apartments at the further end of the Court. This Academy
the King erected in the year 1672. and placed it under the Authority of the
Superintendant of the Buildings, of which the illustrious Monsieur Blondel is
the Director. Who had the honor to teach the Mathematics to the Dauphin, of
whom we shall speak more at large when we come to treat of his Cabinet. It is
he also who makes the public Lectures of Architecture in this place. The Hall
where the Members of this Academy assemble is adorned with curious designs, and
one may easily distinguish from the rest, the Model which the Chevalier Bernin
made of the Louvre when the King sent for him from Rome on this account.

In the middle of the Court is placed a Horse of Brass a little bigger than the
life. This the King caused to be brought from Nancy. It stands upon a Pedestal,
and remains here till it be removed to some place where it may be more exposed
to public View.

When you go from hence you ought to visit the House of Monsieur de la Fosse,
who dwells cross the way: here you may see several Pieces of Painting in his
way, much esteemed.

Observe as you go that the Rue de Richelieu for the length, and for the beauty
of the Houses, which are all built in a strait Line, is one of the most
beautiful and regular Streets of Paris. It takes its name from the great
Cardinal de Richelieu, who during his Ministry, caused it to be considerably
enlarged, and the Gate to be made at the end which leads out of Town on the
side next Montmartre. In the same Street these Verses of M. de Santeuil, are
engraved on a Fountain.

Qui quondam tenuit Magnum Mother amen a quarum,
Richelius, Fonti plauderet ipse novo,
1674. The Sea did once submit to Richlieu's will,
This Fountain's part of the mighty Empire still.
1674. As you go forward you come to the house of M. Mignard, who has by him
many Curiosities. From thence you go to

The Hotel de Jarz, so called from a Commander of Malta, who bought the Ground
of the Abbot of St. Victor, and built it. It is one of the best Works of
Monsieur Mansard for design.

The Gate is a curious piece, and the Staircase is very light, and
consequently pleasant: The Apartments are large and high. But to say the Truth,
they are not so convenient as beautiful. On the Garden side are contrived two
small Cabinets (or Closets) supported with Pillars with much Art and Industry,
but they are two small for the bigness of the Pillars which support them.

Adjoining to this is the Hotel de Louvois: there are many things to be taken
notice of in this house, but more especially the Staircase, and the Room of
Audience. As for the Apartments they are contrived to the best advantage, and
no man can desire better Furniture than is seen here. Rich Tapistry, Branches
for Candles, Tables, Looking-glasses of Silver, Embroidered Beds, and in fine,
all that can contribute to magnificence and neatness, may be here seen, every
thing in its proper place. The face of the Building on the Garden side, and
that next the Court correspond and are both of a curious Symetry. You must not
neglect to observe as you pass, the Locks on the doors, which are very finely
wrought, and kept with such care that they show like Silver.

Over against this Hotel is a long Gallery, in which was formerly kept the
Library of Cardinal Mazarine, at present in the College of the four Nations.
The Stable was underneath. The Duke of Nevers uses the Chambers that are at the
end, where you may see some Ceiling pieces well Painted. Of late this Gallery
has been broken through, to make room for a new street that runs cross from
the Rue Vivien to the Rue de Richelieu, to which they have given the name of
Monsieur Colbert.

At the further end of the Rue de Richelieu you come into the Street of S.
Augustine, so called from the Religious men of that Saints Order, otherwise
called les petits Peers (the little Fathers) whose house stands at the end and
takes up part of this Street.

In this Street are many very fair houses. About three or four years since the
Sieur Douilly Receiver of the Generalty of Poitiers, built one over against the
Nuns of S. Thomas, on which he has laid out one hundred thousand Crowns: there
is nothing wanting but a little more Room, but it was impossible to have
allotted more to the Work, it being shut up between the Petits-peres, and the
R^e Vivien. Otherwise all is handsome. The Staircase is very light and large,
and the Gate contrived after the manner of a Vault is very well proportioned; I
say nothing of the Movables, for one may well conclude that a house which
appears so well without, wants for no Furniture, and that the beauty within is
equal to that on the outside.

In the same Street stands the Hotel de Gramont. This House has for a long
time been justly esteemed one of the fairest of Paris. It did once belong to
the Sieur Monerot, who spared no Cost to make it Glorious. And it still
preserves its Beauty, for its Furniture is most magnificent, since it came to
the Duke of Gramont. It looks toward Montmartre which renders its situation
extreme pleasant.

Near this is the Hotel de Grante, not all out so magnificent, but very
commodious and pleasant, because of its Garden which is one of the neatest of
Paris, the abode of the Marshall of that name. This Hotel did once belong to
the Sieur Thevenin, who was a very curious person.

Not far from hence is the House of St. Cotte-Blanche. Here was formerly a very
good Library: and it was once adorned with very good Furniture and curious
Pictures, but its Master having changed his Fortune, all these things are now
dispersed.

The House of M. Fremont, and several others that look upon the Fields, are not
unpleasant.

The House of M. de Bois-Franc, Intendant of the Duke of Orleans, which is on
the other side of the Street, is one of the most finished things that can be
seen. The face of the Building next the Court is extreme regular, set off with
a kind of Portico whose Pillars are of the Ionick Order, with Vases on the top
done about with Festons and other Ornaments, all which give you a pleasing
object as you enter. Round about the Court are Busts of Emperors placed between
the Arches that support the Building. The Staircase is very spacious, with a
Balustrade of Wood painted like white Marble, and wrought with a great deal of
design. The Bas-reliefs on the Doors of the several Apartments, tho they be but
of Plaster, are notwithstanding very Ornamental. There is also in this House a
Cabinet (or Closet) of very choice Books. As you go out you ought to observe
the great Gate which is extremely well contrived on a very odd sort of a
Foundation.

The Rue Vivien.
In this Street are several great Houses. That where dwells Monsieur Desmarais,
Intendant of the Finances, and Nephew of Monsieur Colbert, deserves to be
viewed: but above all

The Kings Cabinet.
The House wherein this is kept has but a very ordinary appearance; and one
would hardly believe by the outside, that it contains within so many curious
things.

First, here is kept the Kings Library, which was heretofore at Fontainbleau,
which Charles V. began, and which has been since much augmented by Francis I.
and Catherine de Medicis. But of late years it has been made much more
numerous, in regard that at present here are more than fifty thousand Volumes,
among which are twelve, or fifteen thousand Manuscripts in Hebrew, Greek,
Arabic, Syriack, Latin, French, and almost all Languages. As for printed
Books, there is no rare piece that can be heard of* but you may find here a
Copy. Here are several very ancient Manuscripts of St. C^prian, which Catherine
de Medicis brought with her, as also diverse other very scarce Books, out of the
famous Library of Laurence de Medicis. There are also some pieces of the
History of France, which have been Collected very particularly and are kept
here with great care. The Duke of Bethune, has composed a considerable number
touching the most important Negotiations which have been from the time of
Francis I. to the Ministry of Cardinal de Richelieu. All these Volumes are
curiously bound in Turkie-Leather of a Flame-colour, gilt, and the Kings Arms
on the Covers. Books of Prints have here also their proper places, of which
there are here several great Volumes Collected by Monsieur the Abbot Marolles,
the most curious person of his time, in these matters. The several Masters are
placed in several Shelves, the Italians, Flemings, the Dutch, and the French,
so that without much trouble one may observe their peculiar ways and fancies,
and how these great Masters arrived to perfection in the Art of Painting, by
different Roads. Here are also several Ancient Volumes of Limnings or
Miniatures, well and carefully preserved, in which one may remarque the
singularity of the Habits of our Ancestors, and their odd fancies in designing;
but the most beautiful things of this kind are certain Collections of Animals
and Plants, designed upon Vellum, after the life, by Monsieur Robert, who has
labored a long time to render this Work complete as we now see it. Here you
may see a very great Volume in Folio, containing all sorts of Seafish, this
the States of Holland presented to Cardinal Mazarine, after a good Office
received from that Minister, in a long Negotiation; and after his death it was
placed in this Cabinet. In fine you may view in this Library whatsoever Book
you can desire upon any Subject. Monsieur the Prior of Nogent, Son to Monsieur
Colbert, is the Library keeper, M* Carcavi is Keeper under him, and M. Clement
has under him the care of placing the Books, and keeping the Catalogue.

Books are not the only Curiosity to be seen in this place. The Medals here are
one of the most considerable Treasures. Here are of all sorts, Ancient and
Modern, no less than twenty thousand. Certainly there is not in all Italy a
more considerable Collection, They are placed according to the order of time in
little Cabinets of Cedar, whose Drawers are* gilt and Titled neatly; The sequel
of the latter Greek Empire is so complete, that the Learned M. du Cange has
composed from hence the last Volume of his Bizantine History. As for the
Moderns here are all that can be met with not only of Popes, Kings, Princes of
Grmany and Italy, but of every other Nation, even the very Jettons (or
Counters) which remarque any particular event of History are here preserved.
Here are also a great number of ancient Agates, among others one representing
Constantine the Great Crowned with Laurel, extremely rare for its variety of
Colors, and for its bigness, besides that it was wrought in the time of that
Emperor as all Antiquaries agree. Also several others representing diverse
matters.

But one of the greatest and most singular Rarities of this Cabinet, in the
Judgment of all men, is the Tomb of Childeric the fourth King of France, who
lived in the year 458. and was the immediate Predecessor of Clouis. This
Monument was discovered at Tournay in the year 1653. As certain Workmen were
digging near the Cathedral Church in an old Burial-place in order to lay a
Foundation for a Sacristy; they first discovered the skeliton of a Horses Head,
and after that near the same place a long Stone in nature of a Tomb, which
Stone the Workmen were fain to break before they could remove it; But they were
surprised to find under it the Bones of a Man all lying in their natural and
proper situation. Curiosity urging them to examine this discovery still
further, they found among the Bones a good quantity of Greek Medals of Gold, of
the latter Empire, with a great number of Flies of the same metal, with their
wings half open, and enamelled with Cornelian. The noise of this spread over
the Town immediately, and the Canons of the Cathedral Church came to the place
to consider what these things might discover. In fine, they still found further
a kind of Clasp, a great Buckle, and an Oxes head of Gold also, which last was
apparently the representation of that Divinity which they at that time
Worshipped. There was also a Sword garnished with the same metal. But that which
effectually discovered this to be the Tomb of King Childeric, was a Seal-Ring
of Gold, on which was cut a head, with these words about it, Sigillum
Childerici Regis. We need not say that there was also certain Table-books, with
their needle or pen, of gold, the Iron head of a Battle-axe almost consumed
with rust, with a Ball of Crystal solid and round like an egg which served in
his Sickness to cool his mouth, or for some other use according to the Custom
of that age, now unknown. All these things were collected together with a great
deal of care. And the Arch Duke who was then Governor of the Low Countries,
desiring to have this precious Monument for his own Cabinet, the Canons of
Turney could not refuse him; but that Prince dying, it came to the Emperors
possession. After this the Elector of Col^gne, who had used his utmost
endeavors to obtain it from the Archduke in his lifetime, made now the same
requests to the Emperor, who sent him the Monument as soon as he desired. This
the Elector presented to the King, who caused it to be placed in his own
Cabinet, where it is now preserved as an evidence of the high Antiquity of the
French Monarchy, and the original of the Flowers-de-Lis, contrary to what
Chiflet has writ in his Book called Anastasis Childerici, to which Book
Monsieur de St. Amant has extremely well answered and made it apparent that
those things which they found in the Tomb like Flies, were indeed
Flowers-de-Lis, and not Bees, as that Author imagines.

Under M Carcavi, abovementioned, M. Vaillant is employed in keeping the
Medals, who has been several times in the Levant, to make Collections of such
things. He published in Latin not many years since a History of the Kingdom of
the Seleucides, collected from the Medals in this Cabinet, in which he has
discovered his profound knowledge in this Science, and has at the same time
been mighty serviceable to the Learned in explaining many things, which they
would hardly have understood perfectly without his help.

Here you may see also over the Chimny several other Antiquities, as
Lacrimatories, such as the Ancients used to gather the tears in of those that
wept at Funerals and then place 'em in the Tombs; Lamps; little Idols, and
abundance of such like things.

The Academy of Sciences, meet in this house; for whose use the King caused the
Observatory to be built. The Learned Men who compose this Academy, labor
continually for new Discoveries in Natural Philosopby and the Mathematics, who
being persons of extraordinary Science, the Reader will not be displeased to
see their names and they are

M. Duclos, Physician. M. Carcavi, Mathematitian. M. Huguens, M. M. Blondel, M.
M. Perault, P. M. du Hamel, Secretary to the Academy. M. The Abbot Gallois, M.
M. Mariotte, M. M. Cas^^ni, M M. du Vernay, P. M. Bourdelin, Chemist. M.
D^da^t, P. M. Borelli, M. M. de la Hire, M. M. Pothenot, M, M. Sedileau, M. M.
The Abbot de Lanion, M. M. Couplet, M.
The Names of those Members who are deceased since 1666. About which time this
Academy was first established by Monsieur Colbert, at the Solicitation of M.
Duclos, and M. the Abbot of Bourzay, are

M. de la Chamber, P. M. Frenicle, M. M. Pequet, P. M. Roberval, P. M. The
Abbot Picard, M. M. Gaier, P. M. Marchand, P.
In their Hall is a great Burning-glass, which does wonderful effects when
exposed to the Sun; in a Cabinet near this they have a Momie brought from
Egypt, but of late they have not shown it, it being broke. All their Rooms are
filled with Books, every Author being obliged to give a Copy here, to obtain
his Privilege, which makes the Number augment daily.

The Rue des Petits Champs.
From the Rue Vivien of which we have been treating, let us now turn to the Rue
des petits Champs which lies at the end of the other. The first thing which we
find remarkable in this Street as you enter from the Rue St. Honor, is

The Hotel de la Vrilliere, the abode of Monsieur de la Vrilliere de Chateau
Neuf, one of the four Secretaries of State. This Hotel is one of the fairest of
Paris, and best exposed to view, by reason it fronts full upon the Rue des
Fossez. The Portal is supported with Pillars of the Dorick Order, with two
great Statues upon Pedestals above. The forepart of the house is in manner of a
Terrase, and joins the two Wings. The Court is exactly square; and the outside
of the Buildings has all the (...) be desired, the Ornaments being (...)
exceeding just and regular proportion. For the Apartments beside their Gilding
and Sculpture, they are adorned with most magn^^^ck Furniture, among other
things one may there ^^e a Suit of Tapistry representing the twelve Months of
the year, of a most singular design. The Gallery is full of excellent pictures,
of the ablest Masters. There is one piece of Bassan highly esteemed, and
admired by all the Curious. This Beautiful House is the Design of Francis
Mansard. Almost cross the way is

The Hotel de Emery, in which Monsieur Fouquet dwelt for some time, and after
him Monsieur the Marshall de Turenne: It is one of the most capacious houses
that you can meet with. M. Perrault Controller of the Buildings uses one part
of it, which he has fitted up extreme neatly. After this you come to

The Hotel de Ceneterre, which has this peculiar, that it is encompassed on
all sides with Streets. It is vast and Commodious, and the Garden extreme
pretty. The Sieur le Fevre of Orleans was the Architect that built it. The
Furniture is Magnifick. Going still forward in the same street you come to

The Hotel Colbert, where dwelt the deceased Monsieur Colbert Minister and
Secretary of State, and Controller general of the Finances (or Revenue.) There
appears in this Fabric much regularity with an excellent Gust and very
peculiar. The Court is square, and the Buildings about it of such a neat
contrivance that you can hardly meet with the like elsewhere. The Apartments
are disposed with wonderful Judgment. But that which is most observable is the
Portal on the Court-side, which is formed Vault-fashion extreme skilfully, with
the Kings Bust in the farther part of it, of Chevalier Bernini's hand. This
piece of Work is in its kind one of the best performed and handsomest things
that can be seen. The Library is none of the least considerable Ornaments of
this Hotel, it is one of the fairest that we have at present, for the number of
Books, but chiefly for the very considerable Manuscripts which are not to be
met with else where. Among others there is a very Ancient Bible, of the time of
the Emperor Charles the Bald, with a great many Volumes of Negotiations in the
time of Monsieur the Cardinal Mazarine, which take up all that end of the
Gallery next the House, Monsieur the Abbot Baluze is the Library Keeper, which
Learned Person is so well known through all Europe that it is needless to say
any thing here in his commendation. He has published several Works which
sufficiently discover his profound knowledge, among others Capitularia Regum
Fancorum in three Volumes in Folio; certain Learned Dissertations on several
contested Subjects, and in fine, some Pieces which time had concealed, and
which with great Study and pains he daily brings to light under the Title of
Miscellanea, to which he prefixes proper Prefaces, by which we are acquainted
with the Lives and Merits of the Authors. Most part of these excellent things
he draws from the Manuscripts of this Library. On one side of this House lies

The Hotel de Bouillon la Marq. Of late this is joined to the Hotel Colbert,
and as it is now rebuilt it is much more commodious and neat than formerly.

The House of M. de Menars Master of Requests in the Generality of Paris is in
the same Row next the Rue du Mail. You may here see the famous Library of the
Messieurs de Thou. The Name of those Illustrious Persons to whom it has
belonged, cannot but raise our esteem and curiosity for such a Collection, and
by the printed Catalogue we may easily perceive the number and rarity of the
Books. M. Quesnel who has the care of them, has placed them in the exactest
order that can be desired, and this Library has lost nothing of the Beauty and
Reputation which it formerly had when it belonged to Messieurs de Thou, which
makes us hope that it may also e're long be public as it was formerly.
Returning again from the Rue de petits-Champs, you go to

The Palais Mazarin. There is no place in Paris where you will meet with more
Curiosities. or see richer Furniture than in this Palace. The front of the
Building on that side next the Court is of Brick and Freestone, with two
Statues of white Marble, which show curiously as you enter. The Staircase on
the right hand leads to the Apartments, composed of many Chambers whose
Cielings are adorned with Gilding and Pictures of the best Masters of the Age:
As for the Furniture, it is in all the Rooms Magnific, and it is continually
changed with the Season of the year; In one of the Chambers, all the Goldsmiths
Work, as a great Branch for lights, the Chenets, and several other things, were
all designed by the famous Cavalier Bernini, which is infinitely more esteemed
by the curious than the Metal of which they are wrought. After you have gone
through several Chambers on the same floor, hung with rich Tapistry heightened
with Gold and Silver, you are brought into a Gallery filled on each side with
Cabinets adorned with precious Stones, and Chizil-work in Gold and Silver,
placed upon Tables of Marble or inlaid Stone. You see there also Vases of
Jasper and Alablaster of several sizes, with little Statues in Brass of
delicate Workmanship. The floor of this Gallery is covered with a Turky-work
Carpet all of one piece, and of an extraordinary length. The Apartments below
Stairs are no less magnific than those above. All the Rooms are full of Germain
Cabinets, and China, with Trunks of Japan, wonderfully light and sweet: besides
this here are abundance of Marble Statues brought out of Italy with
extraordinary Cost. In one of these Rooms you may see on a Table, a small
Figure of the same Piece; it is about half a foot high and represents a Cibelle
holding a Book in her hand, this is mightily esteemed. In another Room near
this are several great Tables of Porphyry and Marble; the Lower-Gallery and the
Hall through which you pass to it, are also full of Busts and ancient Statues.
This Galery is of the same length with that of which I have already spoke. In
fine, no one place can show us together so great variety of curious things;
Clocks, Pendulums of an extraordinary nature, Statues of Silver, and Silver
gilt, with Vases of the same, and all these things very numerous. On Corpus
Christi Day some of the Rich Tapistry belonging to this Hotel is exposed to
public View, of which there is enough to hang a whole street.

Before the Gate they place the rich Housses, (or Trappings) embroidered with
Gold and Silver, which Cardinal Mazarine caused to be made against the
Ceremonies of the Kings Marriage; they are surprisingly magnificent. Those
belonging to the Mules and Led-Horses are embroidered upon red Velvet, with the
Arms of the Cardinal in the middle, and several devices in the corners, with
other Ornaments To conclude, one cannot express all the rich and brave things
that are in this Magni^ick Palace.

Further on, is, The House of Monsieur de Saint Pouange, which belongs at
present to Monsieur de Bechamel Marquess of Nointel. This House is very well
Built; the inside is extraordinary neat, and so is the Garden and Staircase,
which last are reckoned among the best of Paris. But that which is chiefly to
be observed, is the excellent piece of Perspective Painted by the Sieur
Rousseau on one of the Court-Walls; it is in its kind the best of the Kingdom,
and one cannot meet with any thing more pleasing to the Eye than that magnifick
Architecture which is there represented. You come next to

The Hotel de Lionne, which the late Monsieur de Lionne, Marquess of Berni, and
Secretary of State, built from the Ground, for which he employed the Sieur de
Veau the Kings Architect. Monsieur the Marshall de Villeroy, and the Duke, his
Son, dwell here at present. The outside of this Hotel is of a very handsome
contrivance, set off with the Ornaments of Architecture. The inward parts are
extreme commodious, and the Garden which lies behind is very advantageous to
its graceful View. There was a design of building a Library here, but the
Masters death arriving too soon, put a stop to the performance.

Near this is a great House newly built at the very corner of the Rue St. Anne,
belonging to Monsieur de Grand-Maison, heretofore Treasurer of the
Extraordinaries of War, who has spared no cost to make it so beautiful as it
is.

Almost exactly cross the Way is the House of the Sieur Baptist de Lully of
whom we spoke when we treated of the Opera, this House is adorned on the
outside with great Corinthian Pilasters.

In the Rue Saint Anne
Is the House called les novelles Converties, (or New Converts) built about ten
or twelve years ago, with the Alms of several Persons of Quality, among others,
the famous Monsieur de Turenne, for the Habitation of those Families who should
embrace our Religion. Their Church is but small, and there is nothing curious
in it to observe.

The Convent des Petits-Peres stands in this quarter, at the further end of the
Rue Saint Augustine. King Lewis XIII. was the Founder, and left 'em wherewithal
to begin the Fabric of their Church which is not yet finished. There is
nothing observable in their house. On the Fountain which stands at their Gate
you read this Inscription.

Quae dat aquas, Saxo latet Hospita Nympha sub imo.
Sic tu cum dederis Dona, latere velis.
1684. The Nymph lies hid which does this Water yield,
So be thou, when you are doing good, concealed.
1684. In the Rue des Fossez, which is near this, is

The Hotel de Pompone, where dwells Monsieur de Pompone, formerly Secretary of
State. This House was heretofore called the Hotel de l'Hopital, and belonged to
Monsieur the Marshall of that name. Not far from these places of which we have
spoke you go to

The Hotel de Soisons belonging to Madam the Princess of Carignan, and Madam
the Duchess of Nemours, Heiresses of the late Monsieur the Comte de Soissons,
Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of the Blood. It was first built by Catherine of
Medicis for her retreat after the death of Hen. II. her Husband, and here she
remained a long time during her Widow-hood. The outside of this House is but
mean, but the Apartments are handsome and extremely well furnished. The Garden
is one of the greatest of Paris, and furnished with very handsome Orangers. Here
is a great Pillar raised in one of the Corners of the Court, with a small
Staircase contrived within it, in imitation of that of Trajan at Rome, Report
says that this was built by Catherine of Medicis, who had great skill in
Astrology, and that she used frequently to go up to the top of this Pillar to
make her Observations. Joining to the Walls of this Hotel stands the Chapel
which serves only for the use of those of the Family. It is called the Queens
Chapel, because it was built at the same time with the rest of the House, and
Catherine de Medicis came often hither to hear Mass in public. Near this is
the Street called Rue de Grenelle in which stands

The Hotel Seguier. This was formerly called the Hotel de Bellegarde, it being
built by the Duke of that name while he was great Master of the Horse of France
under the Reign of Hen. IV. who employed him in great Negotiations and sent him
to Florence in order to his Marriage with Mary of Medicis. Monsieur the
Chancellor Seguier, when he came to dwell here enlarged it very considerably,
and built that beautiful Gallery which takes up one side of the Garden. The
inside is extreme handsome, and the Wain scot Work is of the best kind that one
can desire to see, all is gilt and adorned with Pictures done by the Sieur
Voete, who had the Reputation in his time, of a good Painter. There are also
some Landskips done by other good Masters, which are admirable. That which was
very remarkable in this Gallery during the life of Monsieur the Chancellor, was
a great number of Porcelain Vessels that were placed all round the Gallery upon
the Corni^^^, and which made the finest show that could be. It was difficult to
find in any one place a greater quantity, and better collected. Here were also
Cabinets placed between the Windows on both sides. At the end of this Gallery
you enter on the left hand into a Chamber which was richly adorned with
Tapistry, where were several rich pieces of Goldsmiths work, among others, a
great Frame curiously wrought in which stood the Picture of the late Monsieur
the Chancellor done by M. le Brun.

You might also have seen here a Cabinet of Ebony enriched with ancient Agates
representing the Emperors heads, and in a little Cabinet near this, a great
number of Animals very considerable, some in Vases, and some in Pictures,
wrought by the best Masters of Italy, and by those who dwelt at Limoges in the
last Age. Madame the Chanceliere, who deceased not long since, had here a
Cabinet of Crystal most delicately cut, with abundance of Watches and Clocks,
enriched with precious stones: few Houses in Europe had a greater quantity of
Silver Vessels. You might have seen here a whole Service of Silver gilt most
magnificently, each piece being extraordinary both for the bigness and
workmanship. But that which was the greatest Ornament of this Noble House was
the numerous Libary, valued at near two hundred thousand Crowns. Which Library
was first begun by Monsieur the President Seguier, and by him given in his Will
to his Nephew, Monsieur the Chancellor. It was situate over the Gallery of
which we have already spoken. We need not say that it was full of very curious
Books, that may easily be supposed since it was collected by the ablest man of
his Age, and to say all, by him whom the French Academy made choice of for
their Protector after the decease of the great Cardinal de Richlieu, in whose
House they always assembled till such time as the King settled them in the
Louvre, where at present they remain. There were in this Library a great number
of very rare Manuscripts, whose names we find cited by Authors who have here
made use of them. We may expect one day to see a Catalogue of them, which was
never yet made public. But this will not be till the Inventory be finished,
and then all these choice Books which have been so long collecting together
with so much pains by the greatest men of their time, shall be exposed to
public Sale, and dispersed among those who will give the prizes demanded. Such
was the state of this Hotel during the life of Monsieur the Chancellor Seguier,
who held that great Office for many years with universal applause, and that
during very unsettled times:

At the end of the Rue de grenelle, you come into the Rue Platriere, in which
Street stand two fair Houses.

That of Monsieur de Bouillon, and that of the late Monsieur de Herval,
Controller-General of the Finances. The last of these was built with much care.
You may see there several good paintings of Monsieur Mignard, and a Bed with
its Furniture extreme Rich. This House stands in the place where were formerly
the Stables belonging to the Hotel de Epernon.

In the Rue Coqueron at the end of the Rue du Bouloy, is

The Hotel de Gesures, whose outside is neat and Furniture within very handsome.
It did once belong to Monsieur de Fontenay-Mareuil, so well known for his
famous Embassies, and above all for that to Rome.

Further on is the House of the Sieur Monginot, built but four or five years
since. On which he has made a considerable expense. It looks very great on the
Court-side, and the Apartments which are disposed in enfilades (or through
Prospects) are magnificently furnished with Tapistry, Chenets of Silver, and
all the Furniture for the Chimny of the same; In fine, all is extreme neat, and
nothing seems wanting, unless it were a little more light to the Staircase,
but as it is placed it is impossible to make it lighter.

The Church of St. Eustache.
This Church was formerly but a small Chapel dedicated to St. Agnes, and
depended upon the Chapter of St. Germain le Auxerrois. The present Fabric was
begun to be built in the year 1521. and the first Stone was laid by the Provost
of Paris, by name John de la Bar. It is at present the greatest and most
spacious of the Kingdom. The Grandeur of the Building, the number of the
Pillars which in truth are a little too thick crowded together, and the height
of the Roof, with the Chapels that are round it, considered altogether, render
this Edifice Majestic. Among other things the two Chapels which are on each
side of the great Gate ought to be observed. One of which is appropriated to
Baptism, and Painted by Monsieur Mignard, the other for Marriage, and Painted
By Monsieur de la Fosse: Monsieur Colbert did contribute to their decoration.
In the Chapel of Marriage stands the Model of the great Portal which is to be
raised before this Church, which Work will be very expensive. The Pulpit is
well wrought in imitation of that at St. Estienne du Mons, but it falls short
of that. Overhead is a great Picture representing the Apparition of our Lord,
painted after the manner of Monsieur le Brun; this Picture was given by
Monsieur Colbert, as seems by his Arms at the bottom. Adjoining to one of the
Pillars in the Nave on the left hand as you enter, you see a great Bas-relief
of white Marble on a Foundation of black, which is the Epitaph of the famous
Monsieur de la Chamber, so renowned for his Writings, this is contrived in a
Medaillon held up by Immortality, and to make her more obvious and better
understood, over head is a Cartel or Scroul with these words out of the
Scripture graven therein

Spes illorum Immortalitate plena est. Their Hope is full of Immortality. This
curious piece is the Workmanship of the Sieur Baptist Turcy, who wrought after
the design of Monsieur le Brun. The other things in this Church are of no great
consideration. Monsieur the Chancellor Seguier, and Monsieur de Bullion
Sur-Intendant of the Finances under the Ministration of Cardinal de Richolieu,
were Benefactors to this Work. Monsieur de la Mothe le Vayer, formerly Tutor to
Monsieur, and so well known for his rare Writings, and Monsieur the Abbot of
Bourfay of the French Academy, are enterred here.

IN the Rue Coquilliere which is near St. Eustache, stands the House of
Monsieur Berrier Secretary of the Council: in whose Garden was found the Bust
of Cybele, formerly* mentioned. The Portal, tho it makes no great show
outwardly, yet within it is of singular beauty, adorned with Corinthian
Pilasters of an admirable Gust. The Guard des Sceaux (or Lord Keeper of the
Seals) de Chateau-neuf dwelt here.

These are the principal things that are to be seen in this Quarter.

Behind St. Eustache lies the Rue Montmartre, near the further end of which
Street stands the little Church of St. Joseph, in whose Churchyard is interred
the famous Moliere, so well known for his Comedies.

Near St. Eustache is the great Market called la Halle which place ought to be
avoided as much as may be, because of the continual Crowd of People that
frequent it. Formerly they executed the Criminals here as they do now at the
Greve. And we read in the History of Charles VI. that the Provost of Paris,
named Montaigu, who was also great Treasurer, had in this place by means of the
Duke of Bourgoyn his head chopped off; to the great regret of the Parisians, he
being a very good man. But the King abhorring this cruel Act of Injustice,
which had been done in his Name during the time of his distraction, restored
his Memory and Family again to their former honor; and the Celestins of Paris,
to whom he had given his House of Marcoussy, went and took down his Body from
the Gibbet at Monfaucon, four Months after his Death, and having performed his
Funeral Offices in the most Magnificent manner they could, they interred his
Body at Marcoussy, where they raised him a Monument, which remains at this day.
This was a rare example of gratitude and generosity in Monks, as is well
observed by Juvenal des Vrsius Archbishop of Reins, a faithful Historian of
that Kings Reign.

Near the Rue Montorgueil is the Hotel de Bourgogne; which House the ancient
Dukes of that name formerly gaveto the Brotherhood of the Passion established
in the Church of Trinity-Hospital in the Rue S. Denis, on condition that they
should represent here interludes of Devotion; but since those times Peoples
Relish being changed, they have since represented here other Plays of Profane
Subjects. And at present the Italian Comedians are possessed of this House,
since the union of the two Companies of French Players, which the King caused
three or four years ago. This Theater is perhaps one of the Ancientest of
Europe, for it is thought that there have been public Shows in this place six
hundred years ago. In former times Comedies were only represented by wandering
Companies of Pilgrims of the holy Sepulcher of Jerusalem, who were since called
Jongleurs. These having no certain Residence used at the corners of Streets, to
relate the Adventures which they had met with in their Travels, and People
being concerned at their stories, and commiserating the several dangers they
had passed through, would give them very liberally considerable Alms. The
ancient Dukes of Burgundy, seeing People take some pleasure in hearing them, he
gave them a Room in his Hotel, where all people might come and hear them with
better convenience than in the Street. But in time, these Masters of devout
Subjects degenerated into profane Tales, and in effect so very profane that
they became mere Farces and very irregular representations. In such sort that
Christianity could not honestly permit them. Thus it lasted during the
ignorance of those Ages. And it was this that still gives occasion to those who
do not consider the difference between this ancient sort of Comedies and those
now acted, to consound all together. Whereas in truth the nature of Comedy is
so far changed, by the care of the great Cardinal de Richelieu, that there
remains nothing of that which made it Condemned.

Adjoining to the Rue Montorgueil, is the Rue Mont-martre, and diverse little
streets run from one to the other, the Principal of which is the Rue de Cleri
in which stands the House of M. Bertelot, Intendant of the Household to Madam
the Dauphiness. It is composed of two joining Courts, of a very particular
design. The Furniture is very handsome.

Near this is another House belonging to the Sieur Rolland, built after the
designs of Monsieur des Argues a famous Architect: by the outward appearance
you may easily conclude that it belongs to one of an excellent Judgment. But
the inside and the Front next the Court surpass all the rest. Nothing can be
more regular nor better proportioned than the Staircase, which is raised upon a
very odd sort of Plan, and where the Architect had need of all his Art and
Study to have made it as it is.

This is all of note in this Quarter. Some other things there may be of which I
have not spoke; but they appear of so little Consideration that they are not
thought worth mentioning. In the next place we pass to

The Rue St. Denis.
This Street begins at the great Chatelet, which stands at the end of Pont au
Change* as we have already said. In this place the Civil and Criminal Courts
are held for the City and Prevote (or Provostship) of Paris; which Jurisdiction
is at present divided into two parts, according to the course of the River,
into the old and new Chatelet; and the Officers know their several Divisions.

The great Butchery, which is near the great Chatelet, is the oldest of all
Paris, nay heretofore it was the only one. It did heretofore belong to a
Community of Townsmen, who made among themselves a kind of little Republic,
which bore such Credit and Authority among the Inhabitants, that often times
there happened great Disorders through the discontent of these People, who
under the Reign of Charles VI. took part with the Factious. At present this
Butchery is reunited to the rest of Paris. Further on is

The Hospital of the Nuns of St. Catherine, These are bound to entertain for
one night such poor Maids as are in want. They are also obliged to bury the
Bodies of those that are found dead in several places, and who are to be
exposed some days at the Chatelet to see if they can be known.

Near this is the Church of St. Opportune. This was formerly a Priory of Nuns
depending on the Abbey of Almaneche in Normandy, within the Diocese of Seeze,
but at present it is a Collegiate Church of eight or ten Chanons, who here
perform the Ecclesiastical Offices. Going still forward, you come to

The Fountain of the Holy Innocents.
This Fountain stands at the corner of the Rue aux-Fers, a Street full of
Mercers and Silk-men. It is the admiration of all that are skilled in
Architecture and Sculpture, and without doubt it is one of the handsomest
objects in its kind that can be seen, by reason of the Basses-tailles extremely
fine, both for the design and performance; most of the Figures represent Nymphs
in diverse Postures pouring Streams of Water out of their Urns. The Chevalier
Bernin, who was of a Gust difficult enough, admired this Work, and prosessed
that he had not seen any thing so fine in all France. It was made by the famous
John Gougeon, who finished it in the year 1550. In the upper part you may read
this Inscription

Fontium Nymphis. To the Nymphs of the Fountains. A little beyond stands the
Church of the holy Sepulcher, which was first built for the Pilgrims of the
Holy Sepulcher of Jerusalem, who were here entertained for some days. At
present it is a Collegiate-Church the Collation of whose Chanons belongs to the
Chapter of Notre-Dame. The Altar is very handsomely wrought, and the Picture
over it was Monsieur Colberts gift, and Painted by Monsieur le Brun.

The Church of St. Leu, and St. Giles is a little further. In one of the
Chapels here is interred the Mother of Monsieur the first President de
Lamoignon, whose Tomb of Marble is a well wrought thing and designed by
Monsieur Girardon, on it is a Bas-relief much esteemed. The Picture over the
great Altar is also highly valued, it being the work of one Porbus a famous
Painter.

A little higher is the Hospital of St. Jacques, on the other side of the way.
It was founded by the Alms of certain Citizens who obtained a License of Lewis
Hutin in the year 1315. It was formerly appointed for the entertainment and
lodging of those who passed this way in their Journey to St. James in Galicia.
At present the Revenue is annexed to the Invalides.

We say nothing of the Hospital of the Trinity nor of the Church of St.
Savior, there being nothing curious in them, no more than there is in the
Houses of the Penitent Nuns, and of those called Filles-Pieu which were built
and endowed by St. Lewis; yet at the Church of these last you may observe the
great Altar, which they have built of late after the same manner with that of
St. Martin des Champs.

The Kings Statue.
In the Hotel de St. Chaumont, where dwells Monsieur the Marshall de la
Feuillade, we ought to see the Kings Statue, which that illustrious Marshall
has caused to be made at a great expense representing the King in a Roman
Habit Crowned with Laurel. It is about eleven or twelve foot high and but of
one block of Marble, the greatest that was ever yet seen at Paris. The Pedestal
on which it must be placed will be very high, and on the four sides will be
several Bas-reliefs in Brass, representing the History of diverse great Actions
in this Kings Reign, as, the taking of Bezanzon, the famous Passage of the
Rhine, the general Peace of Nuneguen, and the satisfaction which Spain made to
the King in the year 1661. in relation to what passed at London about Monsieur
the Marshall de Estrade at that time Ambassador from France into England. Four
Captives laden with Chains lie at the bottom on a heap of ancient Arms. But of
late the design of the Statue it self has been changed; it will be of Brass,
and in that habit which he wore at his Coronation, and which is always
preserved in the Treasury of St. Denis, with Immortality behind him Crowning
him with Laurel. This Monument is of a design most magnifick, and the Sieur des
Jardins has continually been employed about it for above three years past. It
is not yet known in what place this curious Statue will be fixed, where it may
best be exposed to the public view, and such a place is now under
consideration. It is said however, that Monsieur the Marshall de la Feuillade,
who has been at all this expense to demonstrate to Posterity the Gratitude he
has for the Kings Favors, has very lately, for the sum of fourscore thousand
Crowns, purchased the Hotel de la Ferte-Senoterre, to make a Square, in the
midst of which he intends to place this Statue. Monsieur de Santeuil Chanon of
St. Victor, one of the ablest Wits of this Age for Inscriptions in Verse, is
now composing an Inscription for this piece which will acquaint Posterity with
the Wonders of the present Reign.

A little higher you will see a Fountain, lately built with these verses
engraven upon it, Qui fontes aperit, Qui slumina dividit, Vrbi,
Ille est quem domitis Rhenus adorat aquis.
At whose command Rivers to Fountains turn,
To him does Rhine submit his Captive Urn.


The Gate of St. Denis.
Of all the new Gates which the Eschevins have built since they first undertook
by the Kings Order to beautify the City of Paris, this is the most
magnificent. It is built upon the same Foundation where the old Gate stood,
which was very inconvenient This new building is threescore and eleven foot
high and of the same wideness. The overture of the Gate it self is four and
twenty on each side. This overture is accompanied on each side with Pyramids
charged with Trophies of War, under their Pedestals on each hand they have
contrived a lesser Gate, as an additi^n to the great one in the middle;
overwhose Arch ^ a Bass relief, representing on the town side, the ^assage over
the Rhine, and on that side next the Fauxbourg, the taking of Maestricht: and
lastly, to render the whole more intelligible, under each Pyramid these
inscriptions are engraven upon Tables of white Marble on the side next the City,

EMENDATA MALE MEMORI BATAVORUM GENTE. The Dutch being Corrected. The Prefect
and Aediles caused this to be set up, in the year from the Redemption of the
World, 1672. Quod Diebus vix Sexaginta Rhenum, Vahalim, Mosam, Isolam
Superavit. Subegit Provincias tres, Cepit Vrbes munitas Quadraginta. That in
scarce sixty days, he passed the Rhine, the Wael, the Maes, and the Issel.

That he conquered three Provinces and took forty Walled Towns.

On the side next the Faux-bourg, as follows

QUOD TRAJECTUM AD MOSAM XIII. DIEBUS CEIPT. In Memory of the taking of
Maestricht in thirteen days. The Prefect and Aediles caused this to be set up,
in the year from the Redemption of the World, 1673. The Freese on each side
has this Inscription in Letters of Gold.

LVDOVICO MAGNO. To Lewis the Great. This Gate is of a most magnificent
appearance, and is in its kind one of the fairest Works of the World. The Top
is uncovered after the manner of the old Triumphal Arches which are seen at
Rome. Monsieur Blondel designed all the new Gates, and also all the other
Imbellishments that are raised in Paris of late years; the Inscriptions also
are his, which make that Learned Persons ability, appear extraordinary in all
things.

In the Faux-burg we ought to see The House of the Fathers of the Mission of
St. Lazarus. Of late years these Fathers have raised much building for the
entertainment of their numerous Society. Formerly this was a Maladrery, that
is, an Hospital for Leprous People. But that Disease being ceased in this last
Age, these Lazer houses have been converted to other uses, and this here being
fallen into the hands of Father Vincent de Paul, Institutor of the Mission, it
is become the head or principal Seat of all his Congregation. Whose Institution
is to go abroad into remote Villages and there to instruct the poor Peasants,
and also to teach the young Clerks the Ceremonies of the Church; hence it is
that at the four times appointed yearly for Ordination, all those who are to be
presented to the Archbishop for Orders, ought first to pass here eleven days
in exhortations and instructions, during which time these Fathers are obliged
to entertain them freely, for on this condition they enjoy the Revenue of
diverse Lands that lie about their House.

The Rue St. Martin.
This Street is one of the longest and straitest of Paris. In the beginning of
it, you find the Church of St. Jacques de la Boucherie, remarkable for its high
Tower, built out of the Confiscate Money of the Jews when they were expelled
Paris. It is said that Hamel a famous Chemist was here interred, who found out
the secret of the Philosophers Stone in the Reign of Philip Augustus. But it is
more credible to believe those who think that the Jews being driven from Paris,
he made use of that Money which they had entrusted in his hands and with it
built the great Tower of this Church, and the Charnel-houses of St. Innocents,
as we have already observed in its place. John Fern, Physician to Henry II. is
also here interred. He was without dispute one of the learned Men in that
Science that ever was in France, as one may easily conclude from those
wonderful Cures which he performed in the Royal Family, chiefly on Catherine de
Medicis. By which one may see the power of Art over Nature it self, when a
Person has once attained the true Mastery in that Profession. His Epitaph is
is behind the Quire in these words.

Deo* Immortali Opt. Max. and Christo Jesu Hominum Salvatori Sacrum.

Johanni Fernelio Ambianensi Henrici II. Galliarum Reg is Consiliario and primo
Medico nobilissimo atque optimo reconditarum and penitus abditarum rerum
Scrutatori and Explicatori subtilissimo, multorum salutarium Medicamentorum
inventori, verae germanaeque Medicinae restitutori, summo ingenio exquisitaque
Doctrina Mathematico, in omni genere Philosophiae claro, omnibus ingenuis
artibus instructo, temperatissimis sanctissimisque moribus praedito, Socero suo
pientissimo Philibertus Bariotius, supplicum Libellorum in Regia Magister,
magnique Regis Concilii Praeses, affinitate gener, pietate filius, moerens
posuit. Anno a Salute mortalibus restituta, 1558.

Obiit. XXVI. Aprilis An. M. D. LVIII.

Vixit Annos LIII.

Sacred to the Immortal God, and to Jesus Christ the Savior of Mankind.

To the memory of Joh. Fernel of Amiens, Counselor and chief Physician (I may
add the noblest and the best) to Henry II. King of France, the searcher out of
the most hidden and abstruse matters, and the most ingenious explainer of them,
the inventer of many excellent Medicines, the restorer of the true and genuine
art of Physic, an incomparable Mathematician, an universal Philosopher, and an
absolute Scholar, and besides all this of a holy and unblameable life: to the
memory of his most pious Father-in-Law, Philibert Bariot Master of the
Requests, and President of his Majesty's great Council, in Affinity his
Son-in-Law, but in Duty his Son, with much sorrow erected this in the year from
the Redemption of the World, 1558.

He died April 26. in the year 1558. Aged 53.

The Crucifix which stands over the Door as you enter into the Quire, is the
Work of Sarazin, and much esteemed.

The Church of St Mederic was formerly called S. Peter's, but St. Mederic, a
Monk of S. Bennet's Order, Native of Autun in Burgundy, dying here in the
reputation of Sanctity, this Church took his name, after the same manner as
other Churches had done on like occasions. At present it is Collegiate,
composed of twelve Chanons who are obliged to go to the grand Processions at
Notredame, by reason this Church depends on that Cathedral.

St. Julien des Menestriers. Where at present a Community of Priests inhabit.
Formerly this was an Hospital erected by two famous Musicians or Minstrels in
the year 1330. for the Relief of poor sick Women.

Cross the way stands the Hall or Office of the Company of East India
Merchants, remarkable for certain Figures over their Gate. After that you come
to

The Hotel de Vic, which has been repaired very lately, and does now belong to
diverse particular persons. Next you have

St. Nicolas des Champs, founded by King Robert whose Palace stood near this
place, on the very same Ground where now is S. Martins. This is the
Parish Church of a very large Parish, and full of People. M. Gassendi, one of
the most famous Philosophers of this last Age, is here interred in a Chapel
belonging to Monsieur de Monmort. Monsieur Bernier so well known for his
profound Learning, and for those famous Travels which he made into the Indies,
where he abode some time, has translated his Works into French for the ease
and satisfaction of those who do not understand the Latin Tongue. Near this is

St. Martin des Champs. This Monastery is compassed about with high Walls and
Battlements after the ancient fashion, with Towers from space to space as they
built in old time; the Church and rest of the Covent, have all the marks of
great Antiquity. But the great Altar is according to the Modern, and designed
by Mansard. It is composed of four Corinthian Pillars of Marble, of a
disposition and proportion worthy so great a Master. The Order of St. Bennet
have been a long time possessed of this house. And Monsieur the Abbot de
Lionne, Son of the Secretary of State, is Prior hereof, which is a very
considerable Revenue. Some think this house was founded by Philip the first or
by his Father, King Robert, both which kept their Court in this place. But we
read in some Authors that there were here even at that time very ancient
Buildings, and that those Kings did only repair them for their own habitation.

The Gate of St. Martin, as well as the Fauxbourg on this side of the Town,
take their names from the Priory of which we have been speaking. This Gate was
built in the year 1674. almost at the same time with that of St. Denis. It is a
kind of Triumphal Arch, consisting of three passages, of which that in the
middle is higher than the other two. The work has about fifty foot of Front,
and as much in height, the Architecture is of that sort which is called
Bossage rustique, carved with Bas-reliefs over the Arches, above which is a
great Cornish of the Dorick Order, and over that an Attick on which are these
Inscriptions:

LUDOVICO MAGNO. To LEWIS the Great.

Besanzon and the Franch Comte being twice taken, and the Armies of the
Germans, Spaniards and Dutch being routed. The Prefect and Aediles caused this
to be set up in the Year from the Redemption of the World, 1674.

On the side next the Faux-bourg, you may read this,

LUDOVICO MAGNO. To LEWIS the Great.

Who having taken Limburg, silenced every where the vain threats of his
Enemies. The Prefect and Aediles caused this to be set up in the year from the
Redemption of the World, 1675.

The Rampart that leads from this Gate to that of St. Denis, is planted with a
large walk of Trees, which in some years time will make a most pleasing place
where to take the Air. The design is to continue it round about the Town,
behind the Temple and so to the Port St. Anthoine. The Work is already so far
advanced that Coaches may conveniently pass from the Port St. Denis to the
Bastille. The Public is obliged for these advantageous Works to M. Blondel who
designed it thus.

In the Faux-bourg you may see the Church of St. Laurence, formerly an Abbey of
the Benedictin Order, but at present a Parochial Church, whose Parish extends a
good way into the Town. The Portal of this Church is very handsome, and the
Altar is of a very particular design, contrived by the Learned M. le Pautre so
well known for his excellent Works in Architecture. The Ornaments and Statues
belonging to this Church deserve to be well observed.

The Fair of St. Laurence begins on the Feast day of this Saint (Aug. 10.) and
usually lasts a whole Month. Not long since it was used to be held in the
Faux-bourg, but the Fathers of Saint Lazare having built up in a piece of
Ground belonging to them, certain Houses and Shops proper for this purpose, the
Tradesmen found it convenient to remove thither, which yields those Fathers a
considerable Revenue. Over against this is

The Convent of the Recollets a neat Place. Here you ought to see some
Paintings of Father Luc, a great imitator of Raphael, among others the Picture
belonging to the great Altar. Their Library is also very handsome, and the Books
neatly bound.

Behind this Monastery stands the great Hospital of St. Lewis. It was sounded
by Henry IV. in the year 1607. For those who were visited with the Plague. At
present the Convalescents (or those sick who are recovering) of the Hotel-Dieu,
are removed hither for some Weeks, to take the Air.

Mont-Faucon is in the adjoining Fields. This was formerly the place where they
Executed Malefactors, but serves at present for their Buryingplace.

After we have gone thus far, we ought to return again, and enter the Town at
the nearest Quarter.

The Rue St. Avoye.
Saint Lewis whose Piety was resplendent in all things, built in this Street an
Hospital for old decrepid Women, who were attended by Beguines or Maids who
observed the Rule of St. Begue a Native of Flanders, whose Church being
dedicated to St Avoye, this Street took the same name, and has kept it
notwithstanding the alteration of the Hospital which has been since converted
to a Monastery of Nuns of the Order of St. Augustine.

Before you enter into this Street you ought to visit the fair House of the
Sieur Jaba in the Rue de St. Mederic. It is very regularly built, the front on
that side next the Court is adorned with Pilasters, and the Gate is in Bossage
with Sculptures, which make a very handsome show. The inside is after the same
manner; and this house being taken all together, may pass for one of the
handsomest that we can see. Here are some very good Pictures. And the Master
knows such as well as any in Paris.

From hence we pass into the Rue St. Avoye, where in the first place you come
to the House of the Sieur Titon, neatly built.

A little higher and near the Fountain, in a House at present belonging to M.
de Marillac, which promises no great matters by the outside, you ought to see
the Stair case, the only thing in all the house that deserves your particular
observation. If you examine it as you ought, you will find that there can be
nothing imagined finer, and that the disposition is extreme singular. All the
Curious do agree that there are but few things in Paris that come near it, and
tho it be but of Plaster, it notwithstanding excells those which have been
built with much care, and richer Materials.

Further on the same side of the Way is the Hotel de Montmorency, which still
keeps the name of those illustrious Masters to whom it formerly belonged. Here
lives at present Monsieur the President de Mesmes. Tho the outside be Gothic,
yet the apartments both above stairs and below, are of a very handsome
disposition, the Rooms are en enfilade, and look upon the Garden; here is also
one of the best furnished Libraries. And really this house has some delights
which you will hardly meet with elsewhere.

Cross the way is the Hotel de Avaux, built by the deceased Monsieur the Comte
de Avaux, so well known for those famous Embassies in which he was formerly
employed. The Building is great and raised with magnificence. The Court is
exactly square, enclosed with four Wings of Building adorned with great
Corinthian Pilasters, reaching from the ground to the top of the Edifice, which
makes the fairest and the greatest object one can desire; as you come in you
see into the Garden through the doors, quite cross the house.

Passing still further, in the Rue Michel le Compte, which lies on the left
hand, dwells a Sculptor named Bertrard, in whose house you will find some
pieces very well designed; he is best in Bas-reliefs of Plaster for
Chimney-pieces, and he has made some that are well esteemed. Returning again
into the Rue de St. Avoye, at the end of that Street you come to

The Temple.
This old Building still keeps the name of the Knights Templers of Jerusalem to
whom it formerly belonged. It is well known what a cruel disgrace befell them
under the reign of Philip the fair. The Croisades (or Pilgrimages to the Holy
Land) being ceased, by reason of the Turks general Invasion in all parts of
Palestine, these Knights whose Institution was to conduct the Pilgrims to the
Holy Places, thought themselves excused from that Office any longer, in which
there was such apparent Danger: Hereupon they amassed up vast Riches, and
withal became so proud and dissolute, that as Historians say, Pope C^ement V.
and Philip the fair agreed together to ruin and utterly abolish the whole
Order, as a punishment for their Crimes and scandalous Debauchery. They began
with the great Master, who with two of his Companions the most illustrious of
the Order, the Pope under a specious pretext sent for out of the Isle of
Cyprus. As soon as they were come to Paris they were committed to Prison, and
being cruelly tortured till they confessed those infamous Crimes which were
pretended to be proved against them, they were at last condemned to be burnt
alive at the place now called the Greve.

It is reported, but with no great assurance, that at the instant of their
Execution, Molay, who was the great Master, cited the Pope and the King to
appear before God in a years time. Whether this Circumstance be true or not,
certain it is that the Pope died in less then forty days and the King hardly
lived to the years end.

From that time the Temple came to the Kings possession by Confiscation, who
for some time kept here their Court, but afterward gave it to the Knights
Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem, who at last made this their Provincial
House, for the French Province. Monsieur the Commandeur de Vendome, is at
present Grand Prior, which brings him yearly a Revenue of above 20000 Crowns.
This place is very spacious, enclosed about by ancient Walls; supported with
Towers; the House which the Grand Prior inhabits, was built of late time by
Monsieur de Souvray Grand Prior also; he was Son of the Marshall de Souvray,
Governor to Lewis XIII. But death prevented him from completing the Edifice;
so much as is done is of the design of the Sieur de Lisle, an able Architect,
who had built quite round the Court, and made a Gallery supported by Pillars,
of which we see the beginning, had the Master lived; the Lodgings are at the
further end of this Court, with two Stair-cases in the two Pavilions of the two
Wings. All these things are of a very handsome Symmetry.

Within the enclosure of the Temple you ought to see the house of Monsieur
Fremont de Ablancour, a Jeweller. Formerly there were many Jewellers who
inhabited in this place, and made counterfeit Jewels very neatly, but of late
years they have not been admitted to be here any longer. Yet it is still to be
observed that all the Artists who work here are exempt from the Jurisdiction of
the City Companies. And this is the reason that abundance of People who are no
Free men and have not served their time, take refuge within the Privilege of
this Place. Over the way is the Monastery of

The Nuns of St. Elizabeth. Whose Portal has two rows of Pilasters, with
Statues and other Ornaments well contrived. The inside of the Church is very
well.

The Gate that leads into the Fields on this side the Town is taken down, and
there is no doubt but another will be raised in the place, as handsome as the
rest which have been new built elsewhere.

The Rue du Grand Chantier.
To see this Street in Order you ought to begin at the little Rue des Deux
Ports, in which you will see a new-built house, belonging to the Sieur Provost
one of the Kings Secretaries, who has bestowed a great deal of Care and Charges
to make it so handsome as it is, in one of the vilest places in all Paris. On
the Court-side it is adorned with Ionick Pilasters, and Sculpture well
performed. The Staircase (which stands in the middle of the Building, is) as
light as it can be according to its Situation. But that which is most singular,
and the handsomest thing in the house, is a great Closet, the Wainscot of which
is set off with Pilasters gilt, the Pannels between which, are of inlaid Work,
representing Vases full of Flowers, and which is still more observable the
Cieling piece and the Parquet are of the same workmanship. All these pieces
appear so much the finer as they are the scarcer to be met with, they being
almost the only things of this kind in Paris.

In the Street at the end of this you have the House called Les Billetes. Here
formerly dwelt a Jew who by a most execrable impiety, burnt the Consecrated
Host, having struck it through in several places with a Penknife. But by a
singular Miracle it was gathered up by an old Woman, who unexpectedly came into
his House at that time, and by her was carried to the Curate of St. John's
Church, where ever after it was preserved with great Veneration. This wicked
Jew was for this Fact burnt alive, and his House given to the Carmelite Fathers
where they have since that continued. The Learned Papirius Masson whose
Writings are so well known among all Scholars, is here interred. The Knights of
S. Lazarus do here use to make their Assemblies. And the Members of the French
Academy perform here the Funeral Services for those who die out of their
Society.

The Rue des Billetes ends at the Rue S. Croix de la Bretonnerie, so called
from a Convent that stands there, founded by St. Lewis in the year 1268. In
which he placed Religious Mendicants of the Order of St Augustine, but since
that time several eminent and pious persons having conferred upon them
considerable Maintenance, they no longer beg, because they will not hinder
those who have greater need, but live upon their Revenues. The Wainscot Work of
their Altar is very pretty, but that which is most remarkable is a Bas-relief
of Marble over the Seats where the Religious sit, this was done by Sarazin and
is highly esteemed. From hence you enter into

The Rue du grand Chantier; the first thing that you see here is,

The Hotel de Guise, built by the Princes of that Family, who bore so great a
share in all the Transactions of these last Ages, that what relates to them
makes the greatest part of the History of that time, especially in the Reign of
Henry III. who put to death Henry Duke of Guise and the Cardinal his Brother,
in the Castle of Blois, where the Estates were then assembled, and this he did
in order to cure those Tumults and disquiets which at that time so much
disturbed the Peace of France. This Hotel takes up a great deal of Ground. The
Gate is built after the old manner with two great round Towers. The Apartments
are very handsome, since the considerable Reparations that have been made of
late. Once we might have seen here most magnific Furniture, among which was a
Suit of Tapistry representing the twelve Months of the year, of most exquisite
Workmanship; this is at present at the Kings Garde-Meuble (or Wardrobe) and
Monsieur Colbert has caused it to be Copied. Mademoiselle de Guise, who at
present dwells in this Hotel, has one of the best furnished Cabinets in Paris
for Curiosities. In it are several pieces of Filagrame enriched with Jewels,
and several Miniatures extremely fine. You may see there also diverse pieces of
Wooden Work of St. Lucie, representing several Subjects of Devotion, cut
extremely fine; not to speak of several other Curiosities little inferior to
these. Cross the way is

The Church of the Fathers de la Mercy, a neat place. The Portal will be very
handsome when finished, and the Altar is of a sort of Wainscot not ill wrought.
The Institution of these is to go into Barbary and redeem Captives, like the
Mathurins. And this they do by the assistance of Pious People who furnish them
with considerable Sums for this purpose.

The Hospital of the Enfans Rouges (or Red Boys) built for poor Orphan
Children, by Margaret Queen of Navarre, Sister of Francis I. in the year 1534.
It is of late years united to the Hospital General.

It is observable that this Street is full of handsome Houses, among which there
is one at the Corner of the Rue de Quatre-fils designed by Mansard. The Front
is extreme handsome, and set off with many Vases. Near this is the house of
Monsieur de Grand-Maison where you will see very handsome pictures, and a
considerable quantity of Porcelanes, of the finest and best sorts. The Master
to whom this House belongs, is of a very delicate Gust for curious things.

At the end of this Street you see the great square Tower of the Temple, with
four other round ones, very high and discovered a great way off. They served
heretofore for an Arsenal, before that near the Celestins was built.

The old Rue de Temple.
This Street begins at the Rue St. Antoine. The first thing to be seen is

The Hotel de Effiat, a great building very well raised, composed of four wings
with a great Court in the middle. It was built by the late Marshall of that
name Sur-Intendant of the Finances, and great Master of the Artillery of France
under Lewis XIII. Monsieur Pelletier Controller General of the Finances dwells
here at present. After this you come to

The House of M. Amelot de Bisueil Master of Requests. Here the Curious must
rest themselves, and take time to consider all the fine things that are here,
for all that is in this House deserves to be exactly viewed and considered. The
first door you come at gives you a pattern of all the rest: It is adorned with
Statues, the Joiners Work it self is wrought with very good Bas-reliefs, and
the Locks are of very curious and particular Art. The Court is in truth
something of the least, but the Entry or passage on the right hand is
extraordinary. It is adorned with Pillars and Busts, and paved with Marble.
Still the Staircase is more beautiful yet. Above it is open in manner of a
Lanthorn, with a Balcony gilt and a Plafon over all full of Sculpture and the
best designed Ornaments, and two great Statues in the Pallier. After this you
enter into the great Hall, open on both sides, with Pictures between Window and
Window, representing Flocks and Herds in Grottoes on the Seaside, of a very
singular design, and very pleasing to the sight. That which deserves to be
considered most attentively is the Plafon, in the middle of which is a great
Picture done by an excellent Master, about this is a Freeze full of Ornaments
made of Stuc, upon a Ground of Gold, marvellously well wrought. Here you may
see ancient Vases adorned with Triumphs, Sphinxes, Brasiers, Vizards, and in a
word, all sorts of Grotesque, very odd and fanciful, and yet extreme handsome. A
great Cornish runs round this Hall, whose Carving is admirable, at the further
end is the Chimny of the same Workmanship all gilt, and over it a great Trophy
after the old Roman manner. After this you enter into an Anti Chamber, where
are several great Looking-Glasses, and from thence into a Chamber whose Plafon
and Ornaments are still more rare and rich than all we have yet mentioned; the
Furniture is of Crimson Velvet, embroidered with Gold and Silver, and the
Tapistry within the Alcove is embroidered extremely rich. The Parquet of the
Estade is of inlaid Work, where in the middle among diverse Ornaments are the
Arms of the Master of the House. On the left hand is the Chapel, which is in
Truth but little, but to make amends, it is adorned as much as possible with
all things convenient. The Pictures that are in it are painted by very good
Masters. On the right hand you enter into the Cabinet, the last Room of this
Apartment, and the most beautiful of all. It is furnished instead of Tapistry
with Wainscot, exquisitely well gilded; on the Pannels of which are Vases with
Festons of Flowers after nature, and diverse little Birds flying about, after
the manner of Vanbouck one of the ablest Masters of his time for this sort of
Work.

The Plafon and the Chimny are adorned after the same manner. All the Chambers
of which we have been speaking look upon a Court, whose sides are adorned with
Architectures, Figures and Perspectives, painted in Fresquo. On the other side
is the second Apartment joined to this. Where first you find a magnificent
Chamber after the Italian manner, whose Plafon is opened Cupulo-wise, right
Angular, with a Balastrade above, very well gilt. Over the Chimney is a
Basrelief painted over like Brass, it is of extraordinary Workmanship, and
represents Jason Sacrificing on the Sea shore in order to obtain a happy return
to this Country, after he had got away the Golden Fleece. From this Chamber you
go into the Gallery, whose sides are set off with Corinthian Pilasters, and
with Pictures representing the Story of Psyche, painted by Corneille; so also
was the Plafon, which is one of the finest that can be seen.

On the right hand is a small Library, whose Ornaments suit perfectly well with
the disposition of the place. In fine, nothing is wanting to this House, all is
surprisingly neat, and you see nothing but what is Magnifick, and what deserved
admiration, for even those things which in other places are of the least
account, have here their peculiar Beauties, as the Window-Boards, which are of
Cedar inlaid with Ebony and Ivory. The Locks and Bolts are of polished Steel,
so delicately wrought as if they were of Silver; not to speak of the Movables,
as the Tables and Looking-glasses, which are enriched with Tortoise-shell and
Ivory, and adorned with Mouldings of Brass gilt, and carved (...) delicately.

One cannot see in any other place more curious Painting finished with more
pains than here. In short those who have examined all the Beauties of this
House do all agree that a greater number of delicacies cannot possibly be
collected in so small a place, and that the Master to whom they belong could
not have brought 'em into this condition without a very considerable Expense,
and a perfect knowledge and skill in the choice of what is truly excellent.
This curious Building is of the Sieur Cottard's designing.

Over against this stands the Hotel d'O, at present converted into a Convent of
Nuns of the Order of St. Austin.

On the left hand, in the Rue des blancs-Manteaux, you see the Convent that
gave the Street this name, in which is nothing singular unless it be the
Pavement of the Quire which is all of Marble. At present it is inhabited by
Monks of St. Bennet; formerly they were called Guillimins, being first founded
by St. William, who ordered them to wear white Cloaks, which they afterward
left off.

There is nothing more considerable in the old Rue du Temple.

From hence you enter into the Rue Barbette, where you have the Hotel de
Estrees. This stands near the place where was formerly the Palace of Isabel de
Bavieres, Wise of Charles VI. King of France, not far from which place happened
the Murder of Lewis Duke of Orleans, Assassinated by the Duke of Burgundy,
which caused all those Divisions between those two Houses, and was the Original
of those horrible troubles, which troubled France, during many years, and never
ended till toward the conclusion of the Reign of Charles VII.

Near the Capuchins du Marais in the Street called Rue de Touraine is a great
piece of Perspective, in the Garden of the Sieur Turmeny. It is a Sun-dial
placed on a Piece of Rustic Arehitecture among Trees, which at a distance
makes a very handsome show.

Over the Fountain in the Rue de Poitou, not far from hence, you may read this
Inscription, Hic Nymphae agrestes effundite civibus urnas,
Vrbanas Praetor vos dedit esse Deas.
1675. You Country Nymphs pour here your Water down
The Provost makes you Deities of the Town.
1675.

From the old Rue du Temple yo go to the great Street of St. Lewis, passing
through the Rue de la Couture St. Gervais, in which is a magnific house built
by the Sieur Aubert, where lives at present the Venetian Ambassador. This house
is one of the fairest and most capacious, and the Staircase one of the best
contrived that can be seen. All the Ornaments of this building are very
becoming.

The Rue St. Louis.
The first thing you discover at the end of this Street is, the Convent of the
Nuns of Calvary, of St. Bennet's Order. The Church is very handsome: the Altar
adorned with Pictures representing in three pieces the History of our Savious
Passion. As you go on you come to

The Hotel of the Cardinal de Bouillon, Great Almoner of France. This was
formerly called the Hotel de Turenne. Here is a piece of Architecture of the
invention of the Sieur des Argues, worthy of admiration. Here is at present a
numerous Library, and magnific Furniture. On the same side of the way is

The Hotel de Guenegaud, great and very well built, with several other Houses
as far as the place Royal, which are all of an agreeable Symmetry, and make
this Street very uniform throughout.

Of late years they have built here a Fountain, and placed upon it two Tritons,
in Sculpture, under whom are these Verses of Monsieur de Santeuil:

Foelix, sort tua, Naias amabilis,
Dignum, quo flueris, nacta situm loci,
Cui tot spendida tecta
Fluctu lambere contigit.
Te Triton geminus personat aemula
Conoha, te celebrat nomine Regiam,
Hanc tu sort superba,
Labi non eris immemor.
O happy Nymph, happy thy lot
Who have this beauteous Province got,
Where all thy Waters as they flow,
New luster to the buildings owe.
Two rival Tritons sound thy praise,
And high thy watery Empire raise;
But Nymph take heed, thou do not grow
So proud, that thou forget'st to flow.
The Place Royal.
This place was built in the Reign of Henry the Great: The Houses that are
erected about it, are very beautiful and of the same symetry. They take up all
that Ground which was formerly the Gardens belonging to the Palais des
Tournelles which stood on the side of the Rampart, in which Palace Francis II.
and several other Kings his Predecessors kept their Courts. But after that
unhappy accident which befell Henry II. who was wounded to death by the Earl of
Montgemmery in the fatal Turnament then celebrated in the Rue St. Antoine upon
the Marriage of Isabel of France to Philip II. King of Spain, Catherine of
Medicis Widow of the deceased King sold this Palace, which had been first built
by Charles V. to diverse particular Persons, who turned it into many Tenements;
but the whole Street which runs along near the Rampart still keeps the ancient
name.

The place of which we were speaking is exactly square, composed of six and
thirty Pavilions raised of the same Symmetry; the materials are of Brick and
Freestone, raised upon a long row of Arches, under the shelter of which one
may walk round the place. In the middle of these Buildings they have left a
great void piece of Ground, which at present is about to be converted into a
Garden and is to be enclosed with a Palisade of Iron, into which none may enter
but those belonging to the Houses about the Place, who only are to have keys.
Report says this Work will cost a hundred Pistolls for every House, which we
may easily believe, if we consider the vast quantity of Iron which it will
require. In the middle of this Garden stands the Statue in Brass of Lewis XIII.
on Horseback raised on a great Pedestal of white Marble, on the four sides of
which you may read the following Inscriptions.

In the forepart

POUR LA GLORIEUSE ET IMMORTELLE MEMOIRE To the Glorious and Immortal Memory of
the most Great and most Invincible Lewis the Just, XIII. of that name, King of
France and Navarre, Armand Cardinal Duke of Richelieu his Principal Minister in
all his Illustrious and Happy Designs, being laden with Honors and Benefits
from so Generous a Monarch, has caused this Statue to be erected as an eternal
mark of his Zeal, Fidelity, and Gratitude, 1639. On the hinder part, next the
Minimes.

LUDOVICO XIII. CHRISTIANISSIMO GALLIAE ET NAVARRAE REGI, SEMPER AUGUSTO,

HANC STATUAM EQUESTREM To Lewis XIII. Of France and of Navarre, the most
Christian King, Armand Cardinal and Duke of Richelieu His chief Minister of
State, 1639. On the right side.

POUR LOUIS LE JUST. SONNET.
QVe ne peut la Virtue, que ne peut le Courage?
Jay domte pour jamais l'Heresie en son fort,
Du Tage imperieux ^'ay fait trembler le board,
^t du Rhin ^usqu' a l'El're a cru mon heritage.
Je sauve par mon bras l'Europe d'eselavage:
Et si tant de travdun n'eussent haste mon sort:
Jusse attaque ^' Asie, and d'un pieux effort,
Jeusse du saint Tomb^^^ vange le long servage.
Armand, le grand Armand, (...) exploits,
Port de toutes parts mes Arms (...)
Et donna tout l'eclat aux rayons (...).
Enfin il m'eleva ce pompeux monument.
Ou pour render a son nom, memoire pour memoire;
Je veux qu'avec le mien, il vive incessamment.
To LEWIS the Just. SONNET.
What cannot such a Soul, such Virtue do?
Rebelling Heretics I did subdue:
Spain and her Armies trembled; nor could those
Of Germany my Victories oppose.
Europe from Bondage by my Power was freed:
And had not Death forbid the glorious deed,
I had to Asia born my Arms, and there
Rescued from Turks the Sacred Sepulcher.
Richelieu! Great Richelieu Soul of my Renown,
Guide of my Arms and Splendour of my Crown;
He did the Glories of my life contrive
And in this Statue made me still survive.
For which Memorial I this other give,
That with my Name, his may for ever live.
On the left side.

QVod bellator hydros paccm spirare rebels.
Deplumes trepidare aquilas, mitescere pardos,
Et depressa jugo submittere colla Leones,
Despeclat Lodoicus, equo sublimis aheno,
Non digiti, non artifices facere camini,
Sed Virtus and plena Deo fortuna peregit.
Armandus vindex fidei, pacisque sequester,
Augustum curavit opus; populique verendam
Regali voluit Statuam consurgere circo.
Vt post civilis d^pulsa pericula belli,
Et circum domitos armis civilibus hosts,
Aeternum demina Lodoicus in Vrbe triumphet.
That Lewis from his Brazen Horse does view,
How Rebel Water Snakes for Pardon sue,
Plucked Eagles trembling, fiercer Leopards meek,
How Lions to the Yoke submit their neck:
Is not what Art, nor Furnace did bestow,
But what to's valor, and his God we owe.
Armand Religions friend, on whom depend
Both Peace and War, the Noble Work designed:
And placed this Statue in this Royal Square.
That after all the toils of Civil-War,
And Foreign Foes subdued, this Monarch might
For ever Peaceful and Triumphant sit.
This Horse is one of the most beautiful pieces that can be seen. The famous
Daniel de Voltere, an Italian, one of the ablest Sculptors of his time, made it
for Henry II. but it was never set up for that King, by reason of those many
troubles which overflowed all France during the following Reigns.

The most considerable Houses, and in which you will find most Curiosities, in
this place, are

The Hotel de Richelieu, in which are very excellent Pictures of diverse
Masters, but above all of Rubens, a famous Flemming, whose Works are highly
esteemed by the curious, because of that beauty of design, and vivacity of
coloring, in which he has been more successful than all other Painters. You
will see in this Hotel more than in all Paris beside: and with these very rich
movables.

The House of Monsieur the Marquess de Angeau, Governor of Touraine. On the
Wall of this House is a piece of Perspective representing certain Architecture
in Forest, in a very exquisite manner. With this you may observe at the further
end of the Garden a Pavilion not ill built. The great Staircase is very
lightsom, and all the rest of the House extreme neat. All which does
sufficiently declare the Master to be a person of a delicate Gust.

Almost over against this on the other side of the place stands the Hotel de
Chaunes. One entire Wing of the Building has been raised of late years, in
which may be observed much Regularity. At the bottom of the Court lies the
Garden, in which you have some Waterworks, and at the further part of it a
piece of Perspective which answers to the Gate, and as you enter makes a
curious show. Monsieur the Duke of Chaunes, Governor of Britanny dwells here.

The Convent of the Minims.
These Fathers were settled here in the year 1590: Their Church is one of the
neatest and lightest in Paris, and tho the Portal is not finished, yet that
hinders not but that it is very remarkable, in regard the famous Mansard made
the design. The Pillars of the first Order are Doricks; but these Fathers
having occasion for a Tribune they caused one to be raised over this Portal,
and adorned it with Pillars on the outside, which do not at all agree with that
part which was begun by such an able Master. Their Altar is also of the better
sort, contrived with Corinthian Pillars of black Marble, flatted, the only in
all France of this manner. The Ornaments are not superfluous; the Statue of the
blessed Virgin is on one side of it, and that of St. Francis of Paula the
Founder of this Order, on the other: both these Statues are well wrought. There
are several Chapels in this Church well worth seeing, as that of M. the Duke
of Vie-ville, whose Altar is all of Marble, in which Chapel there are several
Tombs of diverse Persons of that Family, of the same materials; That of Monsieur
le Camus, the Wainscot in which is gilt very neatly; on one side of the great
Altar is the Chapel of St. Francis of Paula, where the life of that Saint has
been painted by the Sieur Viete. Over against this is the Chapel of Monsieur
le Jay first President of Parliament; and lastly that in which is the Tomb of
Madame the Duchess of Angoulesine, curiously adorned with Marble Figures.

Within the House, you ought to see tho Library, where are some Books of no
small value. But that which is most remarkable is a Collection of Rituals,
gathered by M. de Launoy, Doctor in Theology, one who has justly passed for
one of the ablest Critics of our times in Church-Antiquities, who by his
profound knowledge has cleared many things of which we had but very obscure
Notions. He lies interred in the Church belonging to these Fathers, to whom he
bequeathed by his Will two hundred Crowns, and half his Library The following
Epitaph was made for him by Monsieur Clement Counselor in the Court of Aids
and is to be placed on his Tomb.

D. O. M. 10. 1678. Hoc Monunentum amico jucundissimo poni curavit Nicolaus le
Camus Supremae Subsidiorum Curiae Princeps. Sacred to Almighty God.

Here lies John Launoy, Native of Constance A Parisian Divine, Who being the
constant defender of Truth, and of the Rites of the Church and King, spent his
life innocent and unblamable. He despised Riches, and was contented with a very
little, as knowing he must quickly leave it. He writ many things, free from
either hope or sear. He acquired a very great Reputation and Respect among good
men. He resigned his Soul to his Savior in the seventy seventh year of his
age, March 10. 1678.

To his dear Friend, Nicolas le Camus Chief Officer of the Exchequer erected
this Monument.

There are also in this Library certain pieces of Optics made by the famous
Father de Niseron, a Parisian, one of the most knowing Men in this Science that
has perhaps ever appeared in this Age. He has left us a Volume of that Art,
very much esteemed; it was he also who caused to be painted in the Dortoir of
this House, the Figures of St. John, and the Magdelain, which Figures extend
the whole length of the two Galleries, and which they cannot see in their true
proportion, but from a point marked for you to stand in. This Learned Person
had enriched the Public with many other things had not death taken him from us
in an Age wherein he did but begin to discover his wonderful wit and parts.

The Refectory of this Convent is very handsome, and of late years has been
painted round about with Landskips and Solitudes, which entertain the thoughts
of the Religious while they are at their meals with Ideas remote from the
affairs of this World. It is well known that these Fathers live in great
austerity, and that the design of their institution has taken in almost all
that is rigorous in the other Orders.

Before you leave the Marais du Temple, you ought to observe that the greatest
part of the Houses in this Quarter have been built within these fifty or sixty
years, and that the Ground on which they stand was formerly a marish and
employed in great Gardens which furnished Paris with Roots and Kitchen Herbs.
At present it is a handsome Quarter, whose habitations are very conveniently
built, and therein a great number of Persons of Quality inhabit.

The Rue St. Antoine.
After you have seen the Maraise du Temple, you ought to pass next to the Rue
St. Antoine, one of the longest and handsomest Streets of all the Town, and
which is ordinarily appointed for Shows and Entries for Ambassadors. It was
through this Street that the Queen made her first Entry, and through which that
famous Carousel in the year 1661. made their glorious March. The Popes Legate
who came hither in the year 1664. for whom a most Magnifick Entry was
appointed, passed this way to the Church of Notre-Dame. In the past Ages this
Street was also used for the like matters. Our Kings did here use to run at the
Ring, and make their Justs and Tournaments, but since the fatal Accident that
befell Henry II. these Sports have been left off. To see this Street in Order we
ought to begin at

The Greve.
This is the only place in Paris where they make the public shows of Joy and
Triumph. Here are made the Bonfires on the Eve of St. John Baptist, and at
other times when France has gained any Victories over her Enemies.

The Hotel de Ville takes up one side of this Place. It was built in the Reign
of Francis I. who laid the first Stone himself. The Architecture is however a
little Gotique; that is to say, it is not altogether according to the gust of
the present age, in which the old Roman and Greek proportions are studied with
more care and exactness, Artists endeavoring every day to re-establish this
curious Science in the same perfection that it had under the Reign of Augustus.
The Statue of Henry IV. is placed over the Gate, represented on Horseback in
Demi-bosse, upon a Ground of black Marble. The Horse was copied from that of
Marcus Aurelius at the Capitol. The Court is but small and enclosed with
Buildings of the same symmetry. Under one of the Arches at the further end of
the Court there is a Statue of the King in the Habit of Hercules, treading
under foot that Discord which would have disquieted the beginning of his happy
Reign. On the Pedestal which is of Marble as is also the Statue, they have cut
some Inscriptions, but such as are not thought material to be repeated here, in
regard they contain nothing remarkable, nor recount any passage of History that
can be useful to the curious.

In the Rooms there are some Pictures representing the Prevosts des Marchands
and the Eschevins of the past Age, and of this also in their proper habits. At
the two ends of the great Hall over the two Chimneys there are placed the
Portraits of the King in his Royal Robes and his Scepter in his hand. In this
Hall they Assemble to elect their Prevosts des Marchands and Eschevins. The
Windows that look upon the Greve at public Shows and Rejoicings, are filled
with Persons of the greatest Quality, who are sometimes treated here very
magnificently at the Charges of the City.

To make the Entry into the Greve more convenient, they have within five or six
years last past opened a way from the Pont de Notre-Dame to this place all
along the River, which they have adorned with a very handsome Key of Freestone.
They have also built on this Key several Houses of the same Symmetry, inhabited
by good Tradesmen. This beautiful Enterprise was begun under the Prevost-ship
of Monsieur Pelletier, at present Controller-general of the Finances, and all
that was performed under his administration has been as well for the Public
good, as for the Beauty of the City. The People have as an eternal mark of
their acknowledgment, given this place the new name of le Quay Pelletier,
though through a modesty that has had but few examples, he himself would never
suffer his name to appear in any of those Works which have been raised by his
order. As you enter on that side next the Bridge of Notre-dame you will see the
following Inscription in black Marble, over which is the Kings Picture in a
Medaillon.

AUSPICIIS By the Favor of Lewis the Great the Provost and Aediles have made
this Bank which was before dirty and unpassable, a fair Street and the Ornament
of the City. In the year from the Redemption of the World, 1675. As you go from
the Greve you pass by the Church of St. John, formerly a Chapel depending on
that of St. Gervais, and which was built, as some will have it in the Reign of
Charles the Fair in the year 1326. That which deserves particular observation
is the Vault that supports the Organs which is of a manner really very hardy,
and the little door next the Cloister which is of the Ionick Order.

The following Epitaph will not be unpleasant to the Curious to read, for they
will find it extraordinary, it is near the Crucifix of this Church.

Cy repose Alain Veau, celui auquel l'integrite and fidelite au maniment des
Finances sous le Roi Francois I. Henri II. Francois II. and Charles IX. a pour
une heureuse recompense acquis sans envy, ce beau titre de Tresorier sans
Reproach. Il deceda le I. de Juin 1575.

Passant priez Dieu pour lui.

Here rests Alain Veau, whose Integrity and Fidelity in his management of the
Finances under King Francis I. Henry II. Francis II. and Charles IX. has as a
happy recompense gained him, without Envy, the glorious Title of the Treasurer
without Reproach. He deceased June 1. 1575.

As you pass by pray for him.

A little further is the Church of St. Gervais, It is one of the ancientest
Parishes in Paris, as may be seen in the History of St. Germain, Bishop of this
Town, who lived in the year 578. In favor of which he wrought here a Miracle
as Fortunatus Bishop of Pottiers reports in his History. The Body of this
Church is very well built, but according to the Gothic way, with high raised
Roofs, and Chapels round about; in one of which under the Croisee on the left
hand, you may see some Paintings after the manner of le Sueur who was one of
the best Painters of this Age, next to the famous Poussin, and of whom we shall
have occasion to speak more at large hereafter; the Paintings in the Windows
which represent the Martyrdom of St Gervais and the Picture over the Altar are
of his hand. The Tapistry which they expose here on the great Feasts are very
well wrought; the Originals from which these were Copied are in the Nave of the
Church, and were painted by the said le Sueur and Champaigne. They represent
the History of St. Gervais and St. Protais, and the manner how their holy
Bodies were found at Millain through the Prayers of St. Ambrose, who mentions
this matter in his Epistles.

But this is not that which ought most to employ the Curious, the magnificent
Portal will entertain their view with much greater pleasure, and make them
acknowledge that they cannot elsewhere see any thing more handsome or regular.
It is composed of three Greek Orders, one over the other, viz. of the Dorick,
the Ionick, and the Corinthian, whose proportions are so handsome and so exact,
that in the judgment of the famous Cavalier Bernin himself, there is nothing
more finished and perfect in all Europe. The Pillars are fluted, without any
other Ornaments than what are proper to themselves. These three Orders compose
a Fabric of a very great height and perfectly pleasing to the sight: Had the
place before it been larger, nothing had been wanting to set off this Work in
all its magnificence. The Reputation of this Building belongs to the Sieur de
Brosse, he who made the designs for the Palace of Luxemburg, and the Temple at
Charenton. However we must not think him the only Artist, we must know that
Clement M^tezeau was employed with him; this is he who undertook the Ditch of
Rochel, as has been already mentioned when we treated of the Gallery at the
Louvre, and who was one of the ablest Architects of his time. He was born of a
considerable Family at Dreux, and was much esteemed by Cardinal de Richelieu,
who perfectly well understood Persons merit. Monsieur de Fourcy, Counselor in
the Parliament, and Intendant-general of the Buildings under Lewis XIII. Father
to Monsieur the President de Fourcy, a person more renowned at present for his
Merit and Probity, than for the dignity of his Charge, was at that time
honorary Churchwarden of this Church; It was he that undertook this great
Work, together with M. de Onon and M. de Saint Genis, his Colleagues in the
Office. Lewis XIII. laid the first Stone, and in a very little time this
mavelous Structure was finished as we now see it.

From this Church of St. Gervais, to the middle of the Rue St. Antoine is
nothing considerable. You pass before the Churchyard of S. John where is at
present a Marketplace. Here formerly stood the Hotel of Pierre de Craon who
murdered the Constable Olivier du Clisson in the Reign of Charles VI. whose
House was demolished and rased to the Ground in the year 1392. as a punishment
for that Fact. After this you come to

The Hotel de Beauvais, which shows a very handsome Front to the Street, adorned
with three Balconies. The Masons Work is en Bossage with very neat Ornaments.
The Gate is large, and tho the Court be but very small it is however compassed
about with Buildings where the several Orders of Architecture are well
observed. The Staircase is supported with Pillars, and embellished with many
Ornaments. As for the Apartments they are extreme pleasant and compassed about
with a long Balustrade of Iron, leading quite round the Court, into which the
doors open.

As often as there has been any great Sight to be held in the Rue St. Antoine,
this fair house has been made use of by those of the Royal Family. At the
famous Carousel that was in the year 1661. a great number of Princesses and
Ladies of the Court placed themselves here to see that magnificent Train pass
by from the Place Royal where they assembled to go to the open place before the
Palace of the Tuilleries, in which they were to perform their Courses.

Over against this stands the Church of little St. Antoine, which has nothing
in it of Beauty, and its very simplicity has made it sufficiently known that
it formerly served for an Hospital; and was founded for those who were
afflicted with that Epidemical Disease called St. Anthonys Fire. A Distemper
which has been now ceased this two or three Ages. The Confraternity of St.
Claude has been a long time established in this Church, but it is much decayed
from what it was in former times, for it is evident that under the Reign of
Charles VI. their Founder, all the great Lords of the Court, caused their names
to be here enrolled after his Example, and made considerable Presents in favor
of this Saint. The Community of these Fathers is but small and does not
ordinarily exceed the number of twenty Religious men, they are Chanons regular
of S. Augustine, and bear on their Breasts the Letter T. much like a Cross. The
head of their Order is in Dauphine not far from Vicnne. On the same side of the
way is

The Hotel de St. Pol, where formerly our Kings inhabited, as some Historians
would make us believe But at the same time others would have it that the Palace
des Tournelles was so called before it was rebuilt by Francis I. who caused a
great number of small Towers to be placed there upon the Walls. In short, this
Hotel is at present inhabited by Madame de Chavigny, widow of the Secretary of
State so called. It is one of the greatest Houses in all Paris. The Apartments
look upon the Garden and are magnificently Furnished: The Pictures and such
like beautiful Ornaments are here in abundance. The Court is great and can
contain many Coaches. However one thing is wanting in this House and that is a
great Staircase. Monsieur de Chavigny had a design to have built one, and
continued some other Works that seemed imperfect, but Death suffered him not to
perform what he proposed. However that hinders not but this house is
notwithstanding one of the most capacious and convenient; it is also most
delicious in Summer, by reason of that pleasing Odor which comes from the
Orangers especially in the lower Rooms next the Garden*

The great Jesuits.
The Church of these Fathersis dedicated to St. Lewis, and is one of the
fairest and best adorned of all Paris. It is built after the Modern, with a
great Dome or Cupolo raised over it. The Corinthian Order is observed
throughout the whole Work, very regularly, and the Portal is extremely well
placed, in regard it stands exactly over against the end of the Rue St.
Catherine: It is composed of three Orders of Corinthian Pilllars placed over
one another, which a French measure containing about six foot English.
make in all about twenty two Toises in height. Here is no want of Ornaments,
for all parts of this Structure are so filled up with Palms, Feuillages, and
Ciphers that it makes such a confusion as is not at all pleasing to the Curious
in Architecture. You see by the Inscription on the Freese of the first Order
that Cardinal de Richelieu was a Benefactor to the Fabric of this Portal

SANCTO LUDOVICO REGI LUDOVICUS XIII REX BASILICAM: ARMANDUS CARDINALIS DUX DE
RICHELIEU, BASILICAE FRONTEM POSUIT, 1634. To Saint LEWIS, Lewis XIII built
this Church: Armand Cardinal and Duke of Richelieu built the Front of it, 1634.
Lewis XIII. laid here the first Stone, being accompanied by M. de Gondy, the
first Archbishop of Paris; on which Stone was engraven the following
Inscription,

D. O. M.

Sacred to Almighty God, To Saint Lewis who designed* to Convert the whole
World into the Temple of God, Lewis XIII. Erected this Temple: that whom France
Honored as a King, and loved as a Father, it might here venerate as a Saint.
In the year MDC XXVII.

The inside of this Church answers well to that without. A Gallery runs round
over the Chapels having a Balustrade of Iron on the top of the Cornish, by
which Gallery you may go round the Church. The great Altar is composed of three
ranks of Corinthian Pillars of black Marble, whose Capitals are of Brass gilt.
On each side of the Altar are the Statues of St. Lewis and Charlemagne. But to
say the truth, this Altar is a little too low, which makes it sad and obscure.
Yet it being on the Festivals enlightened with a great number of Candles the
defect is the less taken notice of. The Tabernacle which they expose on such
days is of Silver set off with Feuillages and other Ornaments Silver and gilt,
and the Workmanship is of greater value than the materials. One cannot see in
any Church of Paris, a greater number of Reliquaries, Silver Vessels,
Candlesticks, Branches, Perfuming-pots, and such like things all of Silver or
Silver Gilt. Nay there are some all of Gold; but that which is most remarkable
is a great Sun of Gold enriched with Diamonds and great Pearls, of a very
considerable price. The Ornaments are almost of as great Beauty, among which
there is one that represents the adoration of the three Kings embroidered with
Pearls, and others of very rare workmanship, where Gold and Silver have not
been spared. In fine, nothing is wanting to the magnificence of this Altar;
besides these Fathers have such able Sacristans that they invent every day some
new manner of Imbellishment. All the Chapels are adorned with Marble Pillars,
and Pictures of those Saints to whose memory the several Chapels are
Dedicated. On the left side of the great Altar, under an Arch, is the heart of
Lewis XIII. supported by two great Angels under a Crown of Silver gilt. You may
see there these two Inscriptions, on the Pillars of each side; viz. on one side

AUGUSTISSIMUM LUDOVICI XIII. The most August Heart of Lewis XIII. the Just
King, the magnificent Founder of this Church is here in the hands of Angels,
and in Heaven in the hand of God. Over against this is placed the other
Inscription which shows that this Monument was raised by the pious care of Anne
of Austria his illustrious Queen.

SERENISSIMA ANNA AUSTRICA The most serene Anne of Austria, Mother of King
Lewis the XIV. and Queen Regent, 1643. There are four Bas-reliefs of white
Marble, representing the Cardinal Virtues, very well wrought.

Under the Dome, on the same side stands a Magnificent Monument erected to the
Memory of Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Conde: which Monument Monsieur Perrault,
who had been his Intendant, out of a generous gratitude, and with a great
expense, caused to be raised to the Glory of that Prince. It consists of the
four Virtues in Brass as great as the life, upon Pedestals of black Marble;
with Bas-reliefs also in Brass* representing the renowned actions of that
Prince. These last are placed about the Chapel instead of a Balustrade, upon a
Foundation of black Marble. On each side of the Overture which serves as a kind
of entry are placed two Cupids, one of which holds a Shield in which are the
Arms of Bourbon, on the other a Table on which is graven this Inscription

HENRICO BORBONIO CONDAEO To Henry of Bourbon, ^Prince of Conde, and first of
the Blood Royal, whose heart is here buried, John Perrault President of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer and formerly Secretary to the Prince, seeking to
allay his grief for the public and private loss, erected this in the year,
1663. All the Pieces are of Brass and perfectly well wrought, Monsieur Sarasin
whose Work it is, has in this Monument discovered his excellent Genius in
designing. Here is enclosed the heart of that Generous Prince, which in truth
the Fathers Jesuits had gained long before his Death. All men know what a
particular affection the House of Bourbon have always had for this Society. The
Cardinal of Bourbon, Uncle of Henry the Great was the first who established
them at Paris. He bought for them the Hotel de Amville for the sum of 13000
Livers, which the Receivers of the Abbey of St. Germain advanced, and at his
Death he left to these Fathers his whole Library which consisted of very good
Books. But till the Reign of Lewis the Just they never had but a small Chapel,
and no very commodious House. That great King, whose Piety was extraordinary,
begun their Church as we now see it, and Cardinal de Richelieu contributed much
to its Perfection as we have already said. Father Marlange Native of Lions, of
this Society, gave the Design, but the Work was carried on by Father de Rant, a
Lorrainer, who cast away many things which were in the first design.

I shall not say any thing here in praise of this Society, to do that were not
only to deviate from the Subject of this Book, but it is really an Argument
reserved for much more Eloquent Pens than mine. I will only acquaint the Reader
that those of this House who are of greatest Fame, are Father Bourdaloue, whose
Sermons are extremely frequented, and heard with much profit and applause. His
true Character is Morality, which he teaches with such Eloquence, so delicate,
so lively, and so penetrating, that he does even ravish his Auditors: Father
Girou in a different way of Preaching is no less famous, and deserves no less
praise: Father Menetrier, who together with his Learned manner of Preaching,
enjoys several other excellent Talents; he has published a great many Volumes
upon the Art of Blazon, which he has reduced to certain Principles infinitely
more clear and more Methodical than ever any other Author that writ before him,
expressed on this Subject; Not long since he published the Original of Opera's,
and he has promised some other things which no doubt will be received by the
Public, with no less applause than those already Printed: Father Jourdan is
also of this house, he has composed the Original of the Royal Family of
France, consisting of three Volumes in quarto, and Printed by Cramoisi, in
which one may find many particulars touching the French History, which the
modern Authors have neglected or not discovered,

In that little place which lies over against this College they have repaired
a Fountain, formerly called the Fountain of Biragues, upon which this
Inscription is graved.

Siccatos latices and ademptum fontis honorem Officio Aediles restituere suo.
Ob redi^um aquarum, 1627. This Fountain which did dry and useless grow, ^as now
from the Aediles learnt again to flow. For the return of the Water, 1627. The
Rue de la Couture St. Catherine.
In this Street which stands just opposite to the Portal of the Jesuits Church,
you see

The Church of St. Catherine, which gives name to the Street. It was built in
the Reign of St. Lewis. Here are some Tombs very considerable; that of the
Chancellor d'Orgemont, who lived in the Reign of Charles V. and is much spoken
of in the History of that Reign; that of the Cardinal of Biragues, Native of
Millain, who lies buried near his Wife: he was Chancellor under Charles IX. and
Henry III. and very famous for his great Equity and Moderation; he was used to
say of himself that he was a Cardinal without a Title, a Priest-without a
Benefice, and a Chancellor without Seals: to which others did add a Judge
without Jurisdiction, and a Magistrate without Authority. He died in the year
158^* ^ged th^^escore and fourteen years, his Tomb stand^ ^n a Chapel; it is
all of Marble very well (...) Corinthian Pillars and (...) Chan^ns Regul^^
(...) Order of the Congregation of St. Genevieue du Mont inhabit this House.
The Portal of the Church is very pretty, adorned with Architecture like
Pilasters, between which are placed several Statues, and Bas-reliefs above,
which make a very handsome show as you enter, though the Rules of Art are not
observed, nor the ordinary practice, which forbids the placing of Triglifes
upon a Frize that is supported by Corinthian Pillars. Further on you see

The Hotel de Carnavalet, whose Portal is the Workmanship of the famous
Gougeon. It is a kind of Bossage with two Bas-reliefs above it. This Work has
been so much adorned by the skilful that the great Mansard when employed to
finish this Portal, would not touch that which had been begun by such an able
Master, he only proceeded to make the second Story to correspond as we see it,
but it is not finished neither. The Building on the Court side is adorned with
great Figures in demi-relief which are exactly well designed. Near this House is

The Hotel de Angoulesme, whose Architecture is composed of great Corinthian
Pilasters, which take up the whole height of the Building, and which are the
first of this kind that have been raised in Paris, and have served as a Model
to some Architects that have copied from hence their Works of this kind that
have been since made.

At the end of St. Catherines Street of which we are now speaking, you ought
not to forget to see the House of Monsieur de Ville an Architect, who has
omitted nothing to render the Building pleasing and neat. The Staircase is on
one side of the Court. At the further end of the Garden are five Statues,
Laocoon, Hercules, Flora, Juno, and Jupiter, which are very good Copies from
those at Rome. They were brought from St. Maude near Vincennes, where Monsieur
Fouquet had placed them, who was known to be a person very curious in
Collecting good things. There are also eight others equal to these which at
present remain in a low room in the house and are not yet placed in the Garden.
After this digression you ought to return to the Rue St. Antoine and view

The Hotel de Suilly, whose Buildings are extreme regular. The Door is set off
with Dorick Pillars, over which they have left a Platform, partly to make the
Court more airy and partly that the apartments may be the more exposed to view.
Which apartments are very well furnished and contrived extreme regularly.

The Nuns of St. Mary are a little further, and near the Hotel de Maienne,
which makes the Corner of the Rue du petit Mase. Their Church is but small, but
one of the neatest in all Paris: It is a Dome of reasonable height, supported
with Corinthian Pilasters making four Arches, the great Altar is placed under
the furthermost Arch, opposite to the Door. The Tabernacle is of exquisite
Workmanship, and the Pictures representing the Visitation is of an excellent
Master. On Festival days they expose on this Altar a great quantity of rich
Plate, and an Ornament in the middle of which is the Portrait of St. Francis of
Salles their Institutor, set off and adorned with great Pearls. The Quire where
the Nuns sing takes up one side, and the Chapel of that Saint the other; the
design of this Church being contrived by the famous Mansard, cannot choose but
give great satisfaction to the Curious. As you go out from this Church you see

The Bastille, which fronts the Rue St. Antoine. This is an ancient Citadel
composed of eight Towers round and very high, and Tarassed on the top, on which
the Prisoners who are used with least Severity are permitted to walk and take
the Air. It was built in the Reign of Charles VI. in the year 1360. by one
Jaques Aubriot at that time Prevost of Paris. At present it serves for a Prison
to those who are Criminals of State. And Monsieur de Bezemeaux the Governor is
obliged to maintain a Company of Soliders to guard the place.

The Gate of St. Antoine.
This Gate stands on one side of the Bastille and leads to the Faux-bourg St.
Antoine. It was built for Henry II. and dedicated to him as a Triumphal Arch.
Some years since they have beautified this Gate considerably, in pulling down
another old one near this place which caused continual Stops, and in adding to
this two other new ones which make the passage much more easy, and give more
room for Coaches and Carts to enter. One may see by a small Inscription which
is still preserved, that this Building was the Work of Metezeau, the worthy
Father of him whom we have formerly mentioned, he was a man of extraordinary
ability, as we may easily conclude from this Work, which in its kind is one of
the finest things that can be seen. The famous Monsieur Blondel who had the
Care of Ordering all the new Works which have of late been raised at Paris, did
not think that any thing could be added to its beauty, and was contented only
to make a new passage on each side, that that in the middle might be the freer.
The hansomest Front looks toward the Suburbs. It is in the manner of Rustic
Bossage, with a great Entablement or Cornish of the Dorick Order which runs
along all the Work, over which is an Attique. The Statue of the King stands
above all, and two small Pyramids on each hand at the utmost edges. On the
Attique these Inscriptions are ingraved

LUDOVICO MAGNO To LEWIS the Great. But that which the Curious esteem more, are
two pieces of Sculpture on each side the Arch of the first Work, and certain
Figures of the manner of Jean Gou^on representing Rivers and ancient Deities.
On that s^de next the Town they have made the same thing, imitating the
Archwork in the middle of the Gate, which the Architects have found to be so
singular and handsome that this here has given name to all the other Gates that
have been built since. Between the three Arches under which we pass, they have
placed in Bas-relief a Copy of that Medal which the Town caused to be stamped
for the King, representing his Majesty with this Inscription:

LUDOVICUS MAGNUS FRANCORUM ET NAVARRAE REX. P. P. 1671. Lewis the Great King
of France and Navarre. They made it, 1671. On the Reverse of the Medal, which
is placed on the other side, is represented Virtue sitting, and leaning on a
Shield on which are the Arms of the Town with this Motto

FELICITAS PUBLICA. The Public happiness. And at the Bottom LUTETIA. PARIS.

Between the G^te and the Bastion it has been thought necessary to make a Rampe
or Winding ascent forty eight foot large, to make the access to the Rampart
more easy and convenient. At the entry, near the Door of a little neat Garden,
is placed the following Inscription, looking two ways. On that side next the
Faux-bourg,

LUDOVICUS MAGNUS, Lewis the Great, having enlarged the Borders of his Empire
beyond the Rhine, the Alps, and the Pyreneans, has also enlarged this void
space about the Walls of the Town, after the ancient manner; in the year from
the Redemption of the World MDCLXX. On that side next the Town you read these
Words

LUDOVICUS MAGNUS Lewis the Great has Fortified those Towns which he recovered
in the Right of his Lady, And prepared this Rampart for the Delight of the
Citizens, in the year from the Redemption of the World MDCLXXI. The Rampart is
planted with four Rows of Trees, which make a very pleasing Walk, and leads to
St. Martins Gate. It is composed of one great Ally, and of two counter-Allies;
that in the middle is threescore foot, and the other two between eighteen and
twenty foot large. The Gate of St. Lewis which was lately new built, stands
about the middle of this Rampart, on which Gate you may read this Inscription,

LUDOVICUS MAGNUS Lewis the Great to his Ancestor St. Lewis. In the year from
the Redemption of the World MDCLXXIV. All these Works are of Monsieur Blondel's
designing, who also made the Inscriptions.

Without the Port St. Antoine, as you enter into the Faux-Bourg, is made a
great round Esplanade, on which they have placed two great Statues sitting upon
Trophies of Arms.

All the Faux-bourg St. Antoine consists of three great Streets only, namely
the great Rue Saint Antoine, which lies in the middle, the Rue de Charonne, and
the Rue de Charenton. In the middle Street, which is the fairest, is the new
Hospital built for exposed Children. Many pious persons have contributed to
this excellent Charity, among others, the Chancellor de Aligre's Lady, who has
there an Apartment. The Church and the public buildings of the House are not
yet quite finished.

The Abbey of St. Ant^ine is farther on. This Abbey gives name to all this
Quarter. Many very remarkable Stories are told of the Foundation of this House,
but in regard they do not suit with the Gust of this Age, I do not think it
proper to insert them here. This Abbey began to be built about the year 1193.
and was finished in the Reign of St. Lewis who was present and assisting at its
Dedication, together with Queen Blanch of Castile his Mother. The Order of
Cistertian Nuns was here placed by the solicitation of Odo de Suilly Bishop of
Paris. The House is extreme numerous and very well Governed. The Abbess is
Madame Mole of Champla^reux, of one of the most Illustrious Families of the
Long Robe, and Daughter of the late Monsieur the first President Mole, Keeper
of the Seals of France. The Church has in it nothing very considerable unless
it be the Tombs of two Princesses, Daughters of Charles the sixth, lying on
both sides of the great Altar.

As you go into the Street beyond this Abbey, is the Manufactury of
Looking-glasses, which were formerly brought from Venice. But Monsieur Colbert
observing how great a Treasure this Trade had yearly drawn out of the Kingdom,
established this Manufacture, which has had a very happy Success, as indeed all
other matters have had which that great Minister has undertaken. Here is a
great number of Workmen, who are continually employed, some in polishing the
Glasses with Sand, others with Emery, and other in making the Bessil. They use
no others at present at Paris. And these which they make here are as beautiful
as those which formerly came from Venice, with infinite greater Charges. These
Workmen are placed in long Galleries round a great square Court. Which
Buildings have all the Conveniences that are requisite, being raised on
purpose for this Manufacture.

The Triumphal Arch.
Near the place where you see the Triumphal Arch was a magnisick Throne erected
for the Queen when she made her Entry in the year 1660. And in regard this
place is the highest of all this Quarter, this beautiful Structure is placed
here, though it is not yet raised much higher than the Pedestal. One may judge
from the Model which is only of Plaster, that it will be when finished one of
the most Illustrious Monuments of all Europe. It is a great Work, consisting of
two Fronts and three open thorow-Passages, between each of which are placed two
Corinthian Pillars, in all eight on each side, and two at the ends, or
thickness of the Work. Over the Entablements or Cornish, are placed great
Tro^hies of Arms with Slaves in Chains. The top of all the Work is flat, in the
middle of which is placed a great Pedestal, and thereupon the Kings Statue on
Horseback is to be erected. Posterity will learn from the several Ornaments of
this Beautiful Structure the glorious Actions of this Kings Life, which are
represented in Medaillons placed in the spaces between the Pillars. This
Triumphal Arch will without doubt surpass all those which are to be seen at
Rome and other parts of Italy, the Remains of Antiquity; and we shall see in
this more regularity, more design, and more grandeur. The Solidity of the Work
will answer the beauty. They make use of the hardest and greatest Stones that
can be got, which are joined in such manner that you cannot perceive where
unless you look very closely, and this without cement or any thing like it. In
fine, they have forgot nothing whereby to make it one of the Noblest Monuments
of this Age.

The Chateau or Royal House of Vincennes.
Tho we did not intend in this Description to speak of any of the beautiful
houses about Paris, yet we must not neglect to say something of Vincennes in
regard of its near neighborhood. It is at the further end of that great Ally
of Trees, which has been continued from the Triumphal Arch to this place, to
serve for a passage hither, and makes a pleasing prospect. The Building is
exactly square, compassed about with a Moat very deep. It has several Towers of
great height but one higher than the re^t called the Donjon. The first Founder
of this House was Philip Augustus, who also made the Park about it, in which he
put a great number of Deer, sent him by Henry King of England from Normandy
which he then possessed. Philip of Valois and King John his Son continued the
Work, but it was not finished till the Reign of Charles V. called the Wise,
which put it into the condition as it now is. There have been several very
considerable additions made, and the Court has often resided here for a long
time together. The two great Wings of Modern Building on the Park side, are of
Dorick Pilasters and were designed by Monsieur du Vau.

They are Magnificent both without and within, and show very great; but that
which is most remarkable is the great Gate that leads to the Park, of the same
Order, together with the Statues that stand on each side which are very
beautiful. The Chapel was founded by Charles V. and the Body of Monsieur the
Cardinal Mazarin, who died here, is reposited in this Chapel, till that of the
College of the four Nations be finished, in which will be raised a Monument
for him, as he has ordered in his Will. You ought to take particular notice of
the curious Windows in this Chapel, they being highly esteemed, in regard
neither Italy nor any other parts elsewhere can equal them. Many Kings have
made their abode here. St. Lewis who used oftentimes to divest himself of the
State and press of his Attendants at Court, that he might have the greater
freedom to exercise his Piety, would here pass his days of retreat. It is said
that not long ago there was remaining in the Park a great old Oak, under which
this good Prince was used to hear their Complaints who resorted to him for
Justice; and that he himself would use to send abroad his Heralds about the
Country to call in all such who had any need of his Authority against the
oppression of great men. And thus much has been already well observed by a
learned Preacher in an Eloquent Panegyric which he made on the Feast day of
this Saint, in the Church of the Grands Jestures, dedicated to him.

At the entrance into the Park is the Menagerie or place where they keep
several sorts of Wild Beasts, which oftentimes they cause to fight together in
a Court in which are Galleries that serve the Spectators to stand in and see
without danger. Behind the Menagerie over against one of the Park Gates, are
the Nuns of S. Maud, which Nuns were formerly at la Saussaie beyond the
Ville-Juif. This House did once belong to Monsieur Fouquet.

This is all you can see on this side: as you return into the Faux-bourg you
may take a walk in the Garden of the Piq^epuces, which is among the first
Houses you come at. Here are some Grottoes of Shell-work, ^ot ill wrought. In
their Refectory you will see some Pictures of Monsieur le Brun. This Convent is
one of the most pleasing and neatest of Paris, tho it be but of this last Age.
On the same side as you go on toward the Town you pass before Rambouillet,
whose Gardens are extreme pleasant, composed of several Walks of C^momil^, and
a great Parterre, in the midst of which is a Fountain.

Near Reuill^ stands the house of Monsieur de Chantelou, M^istre d'Hotel to the
King, who has the best Pieces of Poussin that are to be seen, among others the
seven Sacraments of which there are so many Copies, and which the Sieun Pesne
has etc^t. All knowing men agree, without contradiction, that these Pieces are
the best Paintings and the best designed things of the whole World, if we
except the Works of some Italian Masters.

On the other side of the Faux-bourg you ought to view the house of the Sieur
Titen the Kings Secretary, in the Rue de Montreuil: It is one of the finest you
can see, whose Master being rich and of a delicate Gust, one cannot but imagine
that nothing can be there wanting; and in truth it is very pleasant. Both on
the Court-side and that next the Garden the Fronts are very Beautiful.

In the Rue de Charonne you will see also an other which belongs to Monsieur de
Folville, who caused it to be built very lately. It is flat Roof'd after the
Italian manner, with Vases and Statues over the Cornishes. It is a kind of
great Pavilion with four Fronts. In the middle of this Building is a Hall that
opens to all the four sides, and parts the whole into four Divisions. The
Beauty of the Buildings is equal on the Garden, and on that of the Court. The
Garden is great enough and very carefully kept. Strangers ought not to neglect
to see these two houses, for it is certain they can hardly see finer, and where
the beauties of Modern Architecture have been observed with more care and
Judgment. And this is all that is more than ordinarily curious to be observed
in the Fauxbourg St. Antoine.

The first thing you see as you re-enter into the Town is the Arsenal, where
you have a very handsome Garden, with a long Ally or walk of Trees which runs
all along the Ditch. Near the Mail there are some apartments handsome enough
which extend along the very spacious Courts, whose Prospect is upon the River.
Among others, the great Hall is adorned with a Plafond, or Ceiling, of Monsieur
Mignard's Work. The Duke of Lude at present enjoys these Lodgings, as great
Master of the Artillery of France. Formerly they cast the Ordnance here in the
Arsenal, but at present, it is done in the Frontier Towns, because of the
proximity of those places where they are to be employed. Over the Gate are
these two Verses.

Aetna haec Henrico Vulcania tela ministrat,
Tela Giganteos debellat^ra furores.
This Aetna does to Henry Thunder yield,
With which the Giants that rebel, are quelled.
The Hotel de l'Edig^ieres is in the Rue de l^ Cerisaie which leads to one of
the Arsenal Gates* You ought not to neglect to see the magnificent Furniture in
that House; it is not long since they had here the best Pictures of the
Kingdom, which the late Duke de l'Ediguieres had collected with much care and
Judgment, but they are now, since his Death, dispersed into other hands.

The Celestins.
Formerly this Convent belonged to the Carmelites of the Place-Maubert, and
these Celestines did then inhabit where they now are. But they desiring to be
nearer the University, left this place in exchange with the Celestins. The
first Founder was a Burgess of Paris named Jaques Marcel, who in the year 1318
bought the place which the Carmelites had left, for the sum of 500 Livers, and
gave it to the Celestins. Charles V. surnamed the Wife, augmented the
Foundation very much, and built their Church as we see it at present, himself
laying the first Stone. Nor did this King stop here, he gave them also
considerable Rents, which have been since that time augmented by other
Donations which have been made to them by several great Lords, more especially
by Lewis Duke of Orleans, Brother of Charles V. who was Assassinated by the
Duke of Burgundy his Coufin German, as he came out of the Palace of Isabet of
Bavaria his Sister-in-law. that Prince had a very particular affection for
these Fathers, and did them more good Offices than any other Person ever did
since their Foundation. After his death his Body was brought to their Church,
and was interred in a Chapel which he had caused to be built for himself and
his Family. Before we enter into this Church we ought to pass through the
little Cloister, which is exactly square, and built very neatly. It is all
Vaulted and adorned with Sculpture. The Pillars that support the Arches have
their Capitals extremely well wrought. This is a Work of the last Age, and had
it been done in this it would have cost much more than it did, for it is said
that the whole expense did not exceed 29000 Francs. In one corner of this
Cloister you ought to observe the Epitaph of Anthony Perez, Secritary to Philip
the Second King of Spain, who being fallen into disgrace with his Master came
for refuge into France, were he led a private life. And dying at Paris in the
year 1611. he was interred in this place. His Epitaph is as follow:

Hic jacet Illust. D. Anthonius Perez olim Philippo Secundo Hisp^miorum Regi a
Seretioribus consiliis. Cujus odium male auspicatum effugiens, ad Henricum
Quartum Galliarum Regem invictissimum se contulit, cujusque beneficentiam
expertus est, demum Parisits diem clausit, An. S. MDCXI.

Here lies the Illustrious Anthony Perez, formerly Secretary to Philip II. King
of Spain. To avoid whose unhappy displeasure, he betook himself to Henry IV.
the most potent King of France, by whom he was received into favor, and at
length ended his days at Paris, in the year of Salvation MDCXI.

The Church belonging to these Fathers is all Gothic and has nothing Curious
in relation to its Structure. The Altar is not much better adorned: yet on the
Festival days they expose here very rich Ornaments of an ancient sort of Stuff
of Gold and Silver Embroidered, by whose Beauty we may perceive that in the
Ages past they had very industrious Artists, and such who had a delicate Gust
in these matters. The Kings Secretaries hold their Confraternity in this
Church. Their Company is one of the famousest that is, as well for the number
of considerable persons that compose it, as the great Privileges which their
Office gives them, one of the fairest of which is the Title of Nobility. They
have a black Pall, the richest that is to be seen; made by an Italian whom
Cardinal Mazarin caused to come into this Kingdom expressly, to design the
Embroidery which he intended to make. This Pall is of black Velvet with a great
Cross of Silver, and Cartouches about the edges, in which there are several
devises delicately wrought.

You ought next to see the Tombs which are in the Chapelle de Orleans. As you
go in, on the left hand you may observe a great twisted Pillar, of white
Marble, adorned with Feuillages and Mouldings let into the Work, as is also the
Capital which is of the Composite Order; Over which is placed an Urn of Brass,
and in that the heart of the Constable Anne de Montmorency, who died gloriously
of his Wounds received at the Battle of St Dennis, which he fought against the
Hugonots on the fourteenth of November in the year 1567. This brave Lord
received six several Wounds, of which the last only was mortal. It is reported
of him that being in the Agony of Death, a Cordelier exhorting him to his last
Duties with something too much Violence and Importunity, he desired him to
permit him to rest a little, saying that he had not lived fourscore years, and
not yet learnt what it was to die one quarter of an hour. His Funeral Pomp was
Magnificent, and equal to that of Kings, his Esfigies being carried as is
customary at the Obsequies of Kings or their Children. This beautiful Pillar is
erected upon a Pedestal of red Marble, and set off with three Statues of Brass
representing three Virtues. The Sword Royal of which the Constable has the
Charge with the other Marquess of that Dignity are also here represented in
Marble. You may here read certain Inscriptions in French Verse, which at that
time were much esteemed but I have omitted to insert them in this Work, they
being not at all of the Gust of this Age. This Monument is one of the most
beautiful and singular that is to be seen, the work of the Pillar is exquisite,
and it is said that the Sculptor was more than fifteen years in making it. The
Body of this great Constable is in the Church of Montmorency, four Leagues from
Paris, where has been raised for him one of the stateliest Mausoleums of all
the Kingdom, of which we may say more hereafter.

In the middle of this Chapel stands the Tomb of the Duke of Orleans, for whom
it was particularly erected, It has nothing magnificent; only the
representation of four persons in cumbent postures, namely of Lewis Duke of
Orleans, who was murdered; and of Valentine his Wife, who died two years after
her Husband of Grief and Sorrow, having done her utmost endeavors to be
revenged upon the Duke of Burgundy for his Treachery, by drawing into her
quarrel the Dauphin Charles, tho against his own Mother, and the Parliament who
cited the Duke to appear personally before them. The Clergy and the University
did commiserate her Sorrows, and did their endeavors, tho unsuccessfully, to
comfort her. France is obliged to this Princess for that incontestable Right
she has to the Duchy of Millain, which she brought by her Marriage with the
Duke of Orleans, from whom Lewis XII. and Francis I descended. She was daughter
of John Galeas Duke of Millain, who left two Sons, but both dying without issue
Male, this Princess became Presumptive Heir to that Duchy. Near her Statue are
engraved those Verses,

Quae mulier Ducis Insubrii pulcherrima proles;
Jus Mediolani, Sceptraque dote dedit.
The Heiress here of Millains Duke you have,
Who for her Dowry the whole Duchy gave.
The two other Figures lying on each side upon this Tomb are, that of Charles
Duke of Orleans eldest Son of him we mentioned before, and Father of Lewis XII.
and that of Philip Earl of Vertus, his Brother, who died unmarried. All these
four Figures are of Marble, and were caused to be made by the pious care of
Lewis XII. who for the mildness of his Reign and the great favor and love
which he had for his Subjects does merit to be called the Father of his People,
a Title the more illustrious, by reason that the Emperor Augustus and the
greatest Kings of the Earth were ambitious to deserve it. At one end of this
Tomb, next the Altar, is placed the heart of Henry II. in an Urn of Brass gilt,
held up by three Virtues upon their heads, which Statues are of Marble, and the
best sort of Germain Piton's Work. Men of Judgment admire this Piece for the
Beauty of the Design. And it is said that a curious Person of the last Age
offered to give for it 10000 Crowns and a Copy of the same to be made as
exactly as could be and placed in the Room. The Pedestal of these three
Figures, which properly speaking are but one, is triangular like a Tripos. They
are as big as the Life, of one Block of Marble, and hold together by the hands.
Their Drapery and the air of their heads, is admirable. One may easily perceive
by this that the past age did equal ours in delicate Workmanship, and Beauty of
Design.

At the other end is the heart of Francis II. on a high Pillar of white Marble.
Flames seem to issue out at the top, about this Pillar are three Cupids with
their Torches reverst and extinguished. This is raised upon a Pedestal of
Porphyry, on the sides of which are certain Inscriptions, among others one that
says that this King married Mary Stuart, who was beheaded in England through
the Jealousy of Elizabeth. He died at Orleans, December. 10. 1560. being but
sixteen years of Age. The heart of Charles IX. his Brother, who died at
Vincennes on Whit-sunday in the year 1572. is also in the same Monument.

Along the Wall on the right hand, is the Tomb of a Princess, who was sister to
Valentine of Milain; that of the Admiral Chabot, the Workmanship of Paul Ponce,
whose Labors are mightily esteemed; and that of one of the Princes of the
House of Rohan. These two last Tombs tho of a different sort, are very
beautiful, and the Effigies of those who are there interred are well designed.
Near the door which leads out of this Chapel into the Nave of the Church,
stands a great Pillar of white Marble full of Ciphers and Sculptures, and
belongs to the illustrious House of Cosse-Brissac, as appears by the Epitaph.
It was raised for Timoleon de Cosse-Brissac. But that which is most remarkable
in this Chapel, and that which strikes the eye with most surprise, is the
Curious Pyramid belonging to the house of Longueville, the Workman-ship of
Monsieur de Augui^rre, in which are the hearts of several persons of that
illustrious Family, it is adorned with Trophies and accompanied with four
Virtues of White Marble. On the Pedestal are two Bas-reliefs gilt over,
representing two of the most remarkable Actions of the Duke of Longueville, for
whom this Monument was erected at a very considerable expense. You ought to
observe the Picture over the Altar, it being done by Francis Salujati, a
Boulonois, who was a famous Painter, and whose Works are much sought after in
Italy. Behind this Chapel is another little one, which Monsieur the Marquess
of Rostaing caused to be built, but in it there is nothing to invite the
Curious. In the Nave of this Church is a Tomb belonging to the Ancestors of the
Duke of Gesvres, where you will see some Statues of Marble, kneeling, in the
habits of that Age, very well wrought, but more especially that of the Duke of
Tremes, his Father. In one of the Chapels is the Monument of Monsieur de la
Tremouille, and over against that the Tomb of Monsieur Zamet, Bishop of
Langres, on one side of which you may see the Monument of Carolus Magnus; he is
represented sitting and leaning his head on his left arm. This is the Work of
Paul Ponce a famous Sculptor, as we have already said. In that Chapel where
you see the Tomb of the Duke de la Tremouille, there is over the Altar a very
curious piece of a Magdelain done by Mignard, Nephew of Peter Mignard whom we
have formerly mentioned.

In the house it self there is nothing of Curiosity. These Fathers have begun a
great Building of late time, which is now almost finished, wherein they will be
extreme conveniently lodged. Their Gardens are handsome enough, in one of which
near the Vineyard, you may see a Grotto of Shell-work, which is committed to
the care of one of the younger Monks. The Cabinet of Father Augereau, in the
little Garden adjoining, deserves to be seen; there are some good Pictures, and
curious Prints. This Father is very skillful in these matters, but he has not
the opportunity of making any great Collection. These Monks are very regular,
and never eat any flesh, unless they be sick, or happen to be above two leagues
from home. They observe much the same Rule with the Cistercians, being a branch
of that Order.

Near this, on the edg of the River is the Hotel de Fieubet belonging to
Monsieur Fieubet, Counselor of State in Ordinary, and Chancellor to the
deceased Queen. He caused it to be built about three or four years ago. One can
hardly desire a neater house than this both within and without. The Staircase
is very light and adorned with Busts between the Windows. The apartments are
contrived in enfilade as the mode is at present; on one side they look into the
Garden, and on the other side upon the River. The Furniture is of the same
neatness, as well in the Rooms above Stairs as below. The great piece of
Perspective on the adjoining wall is very fine; it is painted in Fresco with a
great deal of fancy. It represents a Building composed of two great Arches,
between which are some Pillars and a Statue of an Hero between them. Over all
there is a Sun-dial, about which are placed several Figures, among others a
Woman pulling Feathers out of a Cocks tail to point out the hours upon a
Tablet, and Time over her head seems to approve the Action. All the Work keeps
its Colors very well, which is not usual in Paintings exposed to the injuries
of the Air, which last but a short time, especially in Paris where the Air is
very moist in Winter, and the dryness of the Summer very great, in such sort
that it is difficult for any Plaster to defend it self against these
extremities. This is the Work of Monsieur Rousseau, who did that at Monsieur
Pouange's.

In the same Row you have the Hotel de la Vieville, whose entrance is but dark,
yet is the inside capacious and convenient enough.

The Church of St. Paul which is the Parish Church of this Quarter, is in the
Street that runs along near the last mentioned Hotel. Formerly this Church was
the Parish Church of the Kings house while the Court remained at the Palais des
Tournelles. It was built, as is to be seen, in the Reign of Charles VI.

As you go toward the Isle of Nostre-Dame you come again to the Convent of the
Nuns of the Ave-Maria in the Rue des Barrieres. They are of St. Clares Order.
St. Lewis had formerly placed in this house certain Beguines, which were Nuns
of the Order of St. Begue, a Fleming by extraction. They wore a Coif that hid
almost all their Face, But in the Reign of Lewis XI. Queen Charlotte introduced
the third Order of St. Francis, with the Reform, and her Son King Charles VIII.
built for the Friars, the house adjoining, separated only by the passage that
leads to the Church. There is not in all Paris any Convent of Nuns who live
more austere than these. They never eat any Flesh, nor wear any Linen, and
besides that, they rise at midnight, and go continually barefoot without
Sandals or Stockings, with a strict observance of a perpetual Silence. Nor can
we find in any Convent a greater Stock of Virtue, and more disesteem and
neglect of secular affairs. These good Nuns never think of the World but when
they pray to God to forgive the disorders which are committed in it. And as
they have no other Subsistence than by Alms, so have they no other trust than
to the Divine Providence, which is never wanting; Paris containing so great a
number of Pious People, by whose Charity they are maintained. Seldom or never
are any permitted to speak with them; so that in the midst of Paris they are as
much retired from the World as^if in the darkest solitude. On this account you
very rarely see my Coaches at their Gate. At such times as they are obliged to
speak to their nearest Relations, it must be in the Church, they having not
throughout their whole house any other Parloir or speaking Room. The Tomb of
the illustrious Ancestors of Monsieur the Archbishop of Paris, who have been
concerned with honor in the greatest Employments, stands in a Chapel
belonging to this Church.

A little further is the Hotel de Sens with an old Gothic Gate but handsome
enough. Formerly the Archbishops of that City, who were Metropolitans of
Paris, resided here. But under the Pontificate of Urban VIII. Paris having been
dismembered from that Arch Bishopric this Hotel has been since let out to
several particular persons who pay their Rents to the Archbishop of Sens.

After this you pass over the Bridge called Pont-Marie, to go into the Isle de
Nostre-Dame. Observe as you go that this Bridge is not so full of Houses as it
might be, in regard that in March 1657. the River being extraordinarily
overflown, it carried away two Arches n the night time, to a very great loss
both of Persons and Goods, which perished miserably. This Bridge took its name
from the undertaker of the Work in the year 1614 who was called Marie.

The Isle of Nostre-Dame.
The Isle of Nostre-Dame takes its name from the Church of Paris to which it
belongs as part of their Estate. All the houses which we see there at present
are the work of this Age. It was formerly a Meadow ground where people of all
sorts used to walk to take the Air, in the middle of which place stood a small
Chapel Dedicated to St. Lewis. At present it is all compassed about with a Key
of Freestone very firm, and filled with very handsome houses, among which there
are some most magnifick, and which may be compared with the most beautiful
Palaces; especially those which are situated at the corner on the East side,
where the Seine divides it self into two Arms to make the Isle. The Streets are
strait, and all end upon the edge of the River.

The first house which ought to be observed on the side of Pont-Marie, is that
of Monsieur de Grand-Maison, which appears to be solidly built, and whose
inside is extreme handsome. As you pass further, you come to the house of
Monsieur Lambert de Terigny President of the Chamber of Accounts, whose chief
Entrance is from the Rue St. Louis which crosses the Isle from one end to the
other. This House is magnifick in all its parts, the Gate is great and high,
and the Locksmiths Work is very extraordinary. But this is not that which is
most observable. The four sides of the Court are adorned each with a Front of
admirable Buildings set off with great Ionick Pilasters, which reach from the
Ground to the top of the Fabric, with Vases upon the tops. The Staircase is
placed at the bottom of the Court, with two Ranks of Pillars, directly over
which the light falls full upon the Steps, without the least obstacle. The
first Apartment is composed of several Chambers one beyond another, from all
which you have a delicate prospect upon the River on the Garden side in such
sort that in a clear day one may see six or seven Leagues into the Country,
which is a very considerable pleasure. In these Apartments you may see some
Cieling-pieces of the best sort of Painting, especially in the last Chamber,
which is all of le Sueur's work, who in an age but very little advanced gave
great hopes in time to equal the best Painters of Italy, as one may perceive by
the last Pictures which he made. Those things of his which are to be seen in
this house are the best that ever he did, chiefly the Paintings in the Alcove
representing the Muses in a Consort of Music, the Cieling-piece is almost of
equal Beauty. The Movables of this Apartment are extreme rich. From thence you
ought to go into the Gallery which is on the same Floor. All that is devised
ordinarily to adorn the fairest Galleries may be found in this, gilding upon
Sculpture curiously wrought, with a Ceiling enriched with Pictures of the best
Masters, among which are several of le Sueur, of whom I spoke before, which one
may easily distinguish from the rest, although those which are not of his hand
are not however to be neglected, being very well painted. The door, by which
you enter into this Gallery, is sustained on the inside with two Corinthian
Pillars all over gilt, the sides are almost of the same fashion, with Paisages
and Pilasters of the same Order, between which are placed Busts of Marble upon
Tables of the same; the end of the Room does determine in a little Terrase in
manner of a Balcony, which commands all over the River. The Apartments below
are not so well adorned, tho they also have their Beauties. In the Garden are
to be seen some Statues handsome enough. And you ought not to forget to see the
Orangerie, which in Winter is in a Hall, where one may walk about very
conveniently. Near to which place there is another, separated only by a great
partition that is glased, through which one has the pleasure in the midst of
Winter to see the Virtue of the Orange Trees. The face of the house on the
Garden side is of the same Symmetry and Order of Building with that in the
Court, which thing gives this house an air of grandeur at a great distance, and
which shows extremely fine as one comes to Paris by Water from Charenton. Near
this is

The house of Monsieur de Bretonvilliers, another President in the Chamber of
Accounts. This house is yet better situated than that of which I have been
speaking, in regard it stands upon the very point of the Isle, and the River is
on both sides of it. It is also much more great and spacious. The Masonry tho
it be of no set Order of Architecture because of the many Ornaments that are
there placed, is notwithstanding extreme handsome to the eye. The Staircase is
on the left hand in one of the Corners of the Court: built with much solidity
as is all the rest of the house; there has been no sparing of Vaults in those
places where there appeared any occasion. This house is truly great and
contains in it all things necessary for the entertainment of a great Lord. The
outward Court is parted from the rest in such manner as it cannot cause the
least inconvenience. As to the beauty and delights of the inside they are more
considerable than that of which I treated last, in regard its Prospect is
farther extended, and that it seems from the Windows of this House that all the
Boats that come continually to Paris, are coming to land at its door, and here
it is that they separate on the one side or the other, to go either to the Port
St. Paul or to the Port de la Tournelle, where usually they unload their
Burdens. The movables are magnisick; consisting of Beds most richly
embroidered, Chenets, Tables, Sconces, Looking-glasses, and Ornaments for the
Chimneys of Goldsmiths work, of Tapistry heighthened with Gold and Silver; all
things are there in abundance. The Pictures are also of the best sort, since
they are of Monsieur le Bruns hand, who is at present the chief Painter of the
Kingdom. The Gallery which is on the left hand is all of his Work, the sides of
which, instead of Wainscot are coverd with Paintings in fresquo, such as employ
the Curious a long time in beholding them, who take a mighty pleasure to
discover in these pieces that which they usually seek for in Italy with so much
concern and pains. The Apartments below Stairs are very pleasant. There are
Baths, and a Hall extreme convenient for Summer, by reason of that fresh air
which is there gathered. In fine, nothing is wanting in this house, and one may
find there all the conveniences that can be desired of what sort soever; he who
caused it to be built having not spared the greatest of expenses to render it
such as it is.

Leaving this house we ought to pass along the Key called Quay Dauphin,
otherwise, the Key of Balcones, almost all the Houses that are built here
having Balcones before the Window, among the rest one ought to be observed more
especially, which is that in which at present dwells Monsieur the Abbot of St.
Croix, Master of Requests, it was built with much care, by the deceased
Monsieur Hesselin, who was one of the most curious persons of his time, and it
was designed by the Sieur le Veau. The Front is of a very handsome design,
without crowding in of insignificant Ornaments. And on the inside there are
very beautiful Cielings, with Chimney-pieces of the best sort of Workmanship.
The Court is in truth a little too obscure, but this defect is advantagiously
repaired by the Symmetry of the Building on that side, and by the curious
prospect from thence.

Near this is the house of Monsieur Roulier, the Staircase of which is extreme
handsome, it is supported with Ionick Pillars and adorned with Bas-reliese. The
face on the side of the Court is embellished with Architecture handsome to
perfection. It was built by Monsieur de Alisi. Having seen this House we ought
next to go to

The Church of St. Lewis, tho it be not yet finished. That which is begun is of
a very fine sort of Architecture. The Porta is supported with Dorick Pillars.
And when this Church is completed it will deserve to be compared to the best
of the kind, for the design and regularity with which it is carried on. The
Sieur du Vau gave the first design. M. Champagne an able Painter, being
Churchwarden, has the care of the Ornanaments of the Architecture there, and
Monsieur le Duc has carried on the Work in such manner as we now see it.

Leaving the Isle Nostre-Dame we go over the Bridge de la Tournelle, built of
Freestone, after the same Model with that of Pont-Neuf; it has two ways
raised on each side, for the convenience of those that walk over on foot. As
you pass forward you see on the left hand

St. Bernard's Gate, embellished also some years since, after the designs of
Monsieur Blondel: on each side are placed great Bas-reliess that fill up both
the Fronts. On that side that faces the Town the King is represented pouring
out plenty upon his Subjects; and on the Attique over head, we read this
Inscription

LUDOVICO MAGNO ABUNDANTIA To LEWIS the Great 1670. On the other side which
fronts the Fauxbourg the King is represented Apparelled in manner of the
Ancient Gods, holding the Helm of a great Ship under full Sail, with this
Inscription,

LUDOVICI PROVIDENTIAE MAGNI PRAEF. To the Providence of Lewis the Great, The
Prefect and Aediles caused this to be erected in the year from the Redemption
of the World, 1670. Along the River side among the Wharss and Wood-yards, there
is one Hou^e of a private Person very handsomely built. It is composed of two
Pavilions or Arms, with the main building in the middle in which the Staircase
is placed that communicates to both ends. The house has a very good face on
the Court-side, and looks toward the Fields, which renders the Prospect
extreme pleasing. The Apartments are very commodious and adorned with Wainscot
gilt, and Marbled of diverse colors. This House is the handsomest of all this
Quarter.

By the Street called Rue de Seine which passes close to the Walls of this
House, you may go to

St. Victor's.
This is a famous Abbey of Canons regular of the Order of St. Augustine, of which
Monsieur de Coislin, Bishop of Orleans, chief Almoner to the King, and Brother
of the Duke of Coislin, is Abbot. This Abbey is very ancient, of such Antiquity
that we are not well assured of the time of its first Foundation. We know only
that King Lewis the Gross in the year 1113. caused a great Church to be built
in this place, where was before but a very little Chapel: and we read in the
Church History of Paris, that Thomas de Champeaux Canon of Nostre-Dame, and a
famous Professor of Theology, having a difference with one of his Disciples
named Abaillard, retired with some of his Scholars to a place near the little
Chapel of St. Victor, and that he took the habit of a Chanon Regular, which
possibly might be the Original of this Abbey, which from that time did always
increase more and more. This happened about the year 1105. The Quarrel between
this Thomas de Champeaux and the said Abaillard is much spoken of in the
Histories of that time, and there are many very remarkable passages in it which
notwithstanding are not proper to be reported in this Work.

That which is the most curious thing to be seen in this Abbey is the Library,
which is very numerous and full of the best sort of Books that can be met with.
There are also Manuscripts in the great Cabinet at the further end. It has
been considerably augmented by Monsieur Bo^chet, Counselor in the Parliament,
on condition that it be public for all sorts of Persons oftener than it was
before, which has made it of mighty advantage and wonderfully frequented by the
Studious, who may come three times a Week, Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and
remain there all day long if they please. It is the only Library of all Paris
that is open in this manner, but we hope in time there will be others in that
City that will yield the like profit. In the other parts of this house we find
nothing very curious. There is in the Church here great Devotion to our Lady of
Succor, and to St. Clair, Bishop of Autun, who is invoked for sore Eyes. Among
the Monks of St. Victor there are many Learned Persons, some of which are
Monsieur de Santeuil, almost the only man in France who understands to make
Inscriptions in Verse for public Monuments, he is of an extraordinary ability
in this Science and all things of this nature which we see come from him, are
entirely fine. Hugh of St. Victor a famous Divine was also of this house.

After you have seen the Abbey of St. Victor you ought to go to the Kings
Garden; in the way thither you pass by

The Hospital of Pity, which is a Limb of the great Hospital general; in which
they harbor a great number of young Boys and Girls, whom they employ in diverse
sorts of Work, more especially the Girls who make Point of France, from which
the House does easily draw a Profit sufficient to maintaian them.

The Kings Garden.
This Garden is filled with nothing but Medicinal Plants of most choice sorts,
which are there nourished and looked after at the Kings Charges. Certain Months
in the Year, here are Botanick Lectures, to the hearing of which any one may be
admitted freely. There is a Doctor of Pyhsick who has a Sallary for this
purpose, and who is ordinarily more eminent than the rest for his Learning.
This Lecture is made at six of the Clock in the morning, in those parts of the
Garden where the several Simples grow. One ought to observe that half this
Garden is taken up by a Mount or eminent Ground, round which they have made an
Ally which mounts about it in a Spiral Line, which Ally has on the outward edge
a Palisade of Bushes, on the top of this Mount is an Accacias from whence you
have a Prospect over the River and Fauxbourg St. Antoine. On the left hand as
you come into the Court, is a Laboratory, where they also work publicly in
Chemistry during certain months in the year. The Compositions which they make
there are given freely to such poor that need 'em.

But that which is the greatest Curiosity of all is the Cabinet of Monsieur du
Vernay one of the Royal Academy of Sciences, and one of the prime Men of the
Kingdom for Dissections and Anatomy. Few People ever made a farther progress
than he in this sort of operation, in which he has made a great number of
Discoveries, that have gained him a mighty Reputation. In Winter he reads
publicly in the great Hall, which is contrived in manner of an Amphitheatre,
that may contain abundance of People. Monsieur Daquin the Kings chief Physician
has the oversight and the administration of this Garden; he appoints the
Doctors in Physic and Surgery who read the Lectures of Chemistry and
Dissection, and he has a Pension from the King for this purpose. The
Superintendant of the Buildings is the absolute Master here, and it is under
his Authority that all these things are transacted. Leaving this place you may
go to

The Hospital-general; although for delicate people it is no very pleasing object
to see the poor, yet it is a curious thing, and surprising at the same time, to
see so great a number of all sorts and ages, whose miseries are eased with so
much care and Charity, that nothing is wanting to them but only Liberty. This
great Building which contains in it more than six thousand persons, appears as
you come in like a little Town, by reason of the quantity and diversity of the
houses, although it be all the Work of this age, and all the poor People that
are in it are maintained upon Charity only. The Church was built not above
seven or eight years ago: It is of a very peculiar design; a great Dome of
eight Angles raised upon Arches, against each of which are placed eight Naves
or spaces to contain all the poor people. The Altar is contrived just in the
middle under the Dome, so that it may be seen on eight sides for the
convenience of all. There is nothing magnificent in the Work, except only the
Portico by which people enter from abroad, which is supported by certain Ionick
Pillars, over which is placed a small Attick, but this is of no extraordinary
relish however. On the two sides of this Entrance are placed two Pavilions
where are lodged the Ecclesiastics who serve the Chapel, and administer the
Sacraments to the poor People. It is observable that they employ here all the
young girls of the Hospital, who are very numerous, in making point of France,
some embroider, others make the Loops, others the Ground, which causes much
work to be dispatched by their hands in a little time, of which is made a
considerable income. The first President de Bellievre was one of those who were
most active in the Foundation of this great Hospital, which at that time was
thought incredible; and this was done on the account of that excessive number
of Poor which were continually about the Streets and Churches of Paris, to the
great incommodity of the Public. In the mean time this Illustrious Magistrate
being assisted by the Cardinal Mazarin, the Duchess of Aiguillon, and some
others, persons of Authority, accomplished his design, and caused all those to
be shut up in this Hospital who were found begging, or who were not able to get
their Living.

Almost over against the Gate of this Hospital, in a large place, is kept the
Horse-Market on the Wednesday and Friday in every Week.

Les Gobelins.
This House is almost behind the Faux-bourg of Saint Marcel. Here it is that
the Curious ought to apply themselves with their utmost diligence to observe
all the Rarities that are to be seen in this place, in regard there is no part
of Europe that produces so many. But to give you a juster Idea, I shall make a
Description.

First of all, it is not unuseful to observe that this place has been always
inhabited by excellent Artists: and that heretofore it was employed by the
famous Dyers of Wood, the first of which was one Giles Goblin, who, as report
says, found out the secret of dying the best Scarlet, or at least that he first
brought it to Paris, from whence it comes that ever since it has been called
Scarlet des Gobelines. This House has still kept the old name as well as the
little River that runs behind it, which Water has a peculiar Virtue for the
dying of this Color, and before that time it was called the River of Bieure.
The Dutch have made it their utmost endeavor to discover this secret, but they
could never do it with all their industry and expense, however they come pretty
near, but they cannot arrive to that Degree of perfection, which our Dyers have
in making this Beautiful color, which makes so great a Merchandise through all
Europe, nay in a manner through the whole World, for much goes into the Indies
and America. But not to say more of this house and River called the Gobelins,
let us now speak of the things that are there to be seen. It is to be observed
that all the Artists that work here are employed only for the King, and that
their Works which they perform here are for the Decoration and Ornament of the
Royal Palaces. Some years since the number of the Workmen was much greater than
at present; but the prodigious quantity of Work which they did is the occasion
that they are now much retrenched, in regard the Repositories where the Kings
movables are kept are sufficiently filled, in such sort that one may say at
this time there is no Prince in Europe that has more Goldsmiths work or
Tapistry.

The first thing that is to be viewed are the Pictures, which are, in a manner,
all of the hand of famous Monsieur le Brun, the ablest Painter of France, and
whose Works are so much sought after and admired by all those who are skilled
in Painting. As a reward for whose great pains which he is continually engaged
in, and for the Emulation of those who have any Genius in designing, the King
has been pleased not only to give him large Pensions, to declare him Overseer
of all the Works in Painting and Sculpture which are done for him, and to name
him Director of the Academy-Royal of Painting, but he has also ennobled him by
his Letters Patents. The Principal Pieces of this excellent Master are at
Versailles. The great Staircase is almost all of his hand, and he is working
at present in the great Gallery, which takes up all that side that looks upon
the Garden. In the Louvre there are also diverse Cieling-pieces of his design.
In the Church of Notre-dame are two Pieces, one represents the Martyrdom of St.
Stephen, the other the Crucisying of St. Peter, both which Pieces are in the
Quire on each side of the high Altar, and which one may easily distinguish from
other Pictures, at the Carmelites in the Faux-bourg St. Jacques. The second
great Piece which represents a Magdelain at the feet of our Savior in the
House of Simon the Leper, is of his hand, so also another Piece of the same
Saint, in one of the Chapels of the same Church, which was much admired by the
Queen Mother, who began first from the sight of this Piece to have an esteem
for M. le Brun, whom soon after she made known at Court by the means of the
Chancellor Seguier, by whom he was mightily esteemed. Most of the Works which
are wrought in the Gobelins are of his design, and it is he that orders the
Performance. His Cabinet is one of the most curious that can be seen; in which
he has collected the Paintings of the most excellent Masters that have been,
and several other rare Pieces which have a Relation to Painting. I will say one
thing more to the Glory of M. le Brun that he has under him several other
Painters who do nothing else but Copy his Draughts and work after his Designs.

The second thing which one ought to see in this Place, is the Tapistry Works.
Among that great number of Artists that work here in this Manufacture, there
are some Flemings, who are equal to the most Renowned of the last age at
Anvers. Nothing can be seen finer than what comes from their hands, be it in
History or Landscape, in both which Gold and Silver are employed even to
profusion, and they have some pieces there that are all over heighthned after
that manner. When we have well examind these things we must conclude that there
is no part of the World where they make better Work, or better understand the
perfect way of Shadowing the Wool. It is however Monsieur le Brun, who gives
them the Designs, and for the most part they Copy his Paintings. Of late they
have also copied some of the best things of Poussin, (the greatest man of our
age without contradiction) among others, the little Moses which they had from
the Cabinet of the lately deceased Madam Lescot: The Rock in the Wilderness
with the Fountain of Waters flowing from it, which belonged to the deceased
Monsieur Dreux Counselor of the great Council, and two other Pictures from the
Cabinet of Monsieur the Chevalier de Lorraine, one of which represents the
passage through the Red Sea, and the other the Worship of the Golden Calf. They
have made also many Pieces from Raphael and Michael Angelo. But one of their
most beautiful and curious things is the History of the King represented in
diverse Pieces, of which subject may be made diverse Suits of Hangings, in which
are contained the principal Actions of his Life, as the Battles he has gained,
the Towns he has taken, the Ceremonies of his Marriage, the renovation of the
Alliance with the Deputies of the thirteen Cantons of Swisses, and many other
Passages of such like nature, the Borders of these Pieces have the Groundwork
of Gold, with Grotesques, and several Devices and Ciphers at the Corners and in
the middle which things are of colored Silk, and show delicately upon the Gold
ground. The Sieur Gens and le Fevre have the oversight and direction of those
who work at that sort of Tapistry which is called the high Lists, and the
Sieurs Mozin and de la Croix, those who work at the low Lists.

After you have seen the Tapistries you ought to see the place where they carve
and engrave upon Copper and Brass for Closets and such like matters. It is here
that they made those curious Locks that are to be seen at Versailles, and the
Louvre, which are wrought with such delicate Workmanship.

In the first Court through which you pass to see the things of which we have
been speaking, you ought not to forget to visit the houses of le Sieur Loir and
le Sieur Villiers, two famous Goldsmiths, who are employed continually for the
King: You will find often under their hands Works of mighty value. Here it was
where they made those two Balusters for the Alcove, which are at Versailles
before the Kings Bed, and the Queens. One may know of what Beauty, Workmanship,
and Riches they are, since the price of each amounted to two hundred thousand
Crowns. They are all of solid Silver without any thing to help out, either
within the Pedestals or Rails, other than the thickness of the metal it self,
which has been employed with Profusion.

Near the Goldsmiths, in the same Court on the right hand, you may find certain
Works of an extraordinary nature performed by the Sieur Branquier, and the
Sieur Ferdinand de Meliori, who were both invited out of Italy to make here a
kind of Mosaic Work; which will cost much time and expense. They are a sort of
Pictures, the different colors of which are made of inlaid Stones, which
represent Figures extreme like, and very well designed. These Pieces are most
commonly composed of Agate, Lapis Lazuli, Jacinth, and Cornelian, which makes a
coloring more lively and brillant than ordinary Painting, which Stones are
joined together with a sort of Mastick very hard. They are ordinarily placed
upon Ebony Cabinets, or Tables of great price. At the habitation of one of
these Artists there is a little Garden behind his house, which is very pretty
and in which are diverse Ornaments of artificial Rocks and Shell-work.

After you have examined these things, you return by the same way to visit
other Curiosities that are to be seen in another Court. There are two
Workhouses for Carvers and Statuaries, the one of which is governed by the
Sieur Baptiste, in which is the Statue of Monsieur de Turenne in white Marble,
which is to be placed at St. Denis upon the Tomb which the King has there
caused to be raised for him; here is also a great Muse, bigger than the life,
of excellent Workmanship, which is intended to be placed at Versailles with
diverse other Statues of the same bigness. The other Workhouse is governed by
the Sieur Coesvau, who for the most part works after the life. He has made
several Busts and other Figures of representation. This is he that made the
Kings Bust which stands in the great Staircase at Versailles.

After this you ought to see the Embroiderers, who are in a Hall near which you
pass to go to the great Court. They are employed upon diverse Pieces, in which
the richness of the materials does most commonly vie with the beauty of the
Work.

Near this place here are still two Statuaries more in two Low Rooms, where you
may see some Pieces in Marble and some in Lead for the Fountains at Versailles.
Besides those things already described, there are many other Curiosities in
this great House, which the Curious may observe, and which would be too long to
treat of in particular. We have already said that here are all sorts of
excellent Artists who have been invited hither from different Parts. Among whom
we ought not to forget M. Audrean, one of the ablest Gravers of his time: he
has etcht and graved all the great Pieces of M. le Brun, as the Triumph of
Constantine the Great, the Battle of Maxentius, all the History of Alexander,
in five great Pieces, and diverse other things of that great Painter. All that
comes from his hand, is of a singular beauty, and most exact design, the most
correct that can be: which occasions that all his Work sells much dearer than
others, nay oftentimes it is difficult to get them at any rate in regard all
the best Proofs are reserved for the Kings Cabinet. He has also graved several
Pieces from the famous Poussin, which all Curious Persons treasure up in their
Closets. The Sieur le Clear dwells here also who is very able and well esteemed
in this Art. And these are the most curious things at the House called les
Gobelins.

From hence we return again into the Town by the Fauxbourg St. Marcel, and we
pass before the Church of that name, which was first founded by Roland Earl of
Blare Nephew of Charlemagne, who was a great Benefactor to it, in conferring
great Privileges upon the Canons who served there. This Church did heretofore
bear the title of S. Clement. But the Body of S. Marcel Bishop of Paris, being
found here it took his name, which it has kept ever since. The famous Peter
Lombard, surnamed the Master of the Sentences, is here interred. And this is
his Epitaph,

Hic jacet Magister Petrus Lombardus, Parisiensis Episcopus, qui composuit
Librum Sententiarum, Glossas Psalmorum, and Epistolarum: cujus obitus lies est
13. Call. Augusti Anno 1164. Here lies Master Peter Lombard Bishop of Paris, who
composed the Book of Sentences, Glosses upon the Psalms and Epistles: the day
of his death is the 13 th. of the Calends of August. In the year 1164. There
are also in this Fauxbourg, the Cordelier Nuns. Whose Convent was first built
at Troyes by Thibaut VII. Earl of Champagne and of Brie, but they were removed
to Paris soon after, because of the inconveniency of the place where they were
first founded. Margaret de Provence Wife to St. Lewis caused the Church to be
begun as we now see it, and Blanch her Daughter Widow of the King of Castile
became a Nun there, and gave a considerable Augmentation to the Estate of this
House, She built the Cloister where are yet remaining her Arms in several
places. These Nuns observe the Rule of St. Francis somewhat nearer than the
Cordelier Friars of the great Convent in Paris; there is nothing of singular
note in their Church, no more than in that of

St. Medard, the Parish Church of this Quarter; where there happened in the last
Age a furious Tumult, raised by the Calvinists who came flocking with Arms in
hand to Massacre the Catholics being then at Vespers; the cause pretended was
that the noise of the Bells of this Church did disturb them in hearing their
Sermon which at that time was in a house close by. But they were punished for
their Rashness; for the Citizens taking Arms, killed all those that fell in
their power. This was the first occasion of that hatred which the Parisians
bear to those of the pretended Reformed Religion; and the Historians observe
that from that time the Calvinists threw off their Mask and went armed in the
Streets of Paris, but the Catholics not being able to endure this, it was the
occasion of many Disorders which happened afterward.

Monsieur Patru from whom we have a Volume of Pleadings extremely fine, is
interred in this Church. Monsieur d'Ablencour had so great an esteem for his
Judgment that on his deathbed he recommended his Works to his Correction.

In this Quarter near the little Church of S. Hippolytus, is an ancient house
built in the time of St. Lewis which is not far from the River des Gobelins,
where that good King would sometimes use to pass his hours of Solitude, in
Prayer. It is said that under Charles VI. there happened here a very unhappy
accident, which was partly the cause of the distraction with which that Prince
was afflicted the greatest part of his Reign. The Story is thus reported. The
Parisians, who always made it their glory passionately to love their King,
being desirous to entertain Charles VI. with a Ball in this house, upon his
return from a great Victory which he had gained over the Revolted Flemings; The
King was at this Entertainment with many Lords disguised like Salvages, and
apparelled in Linen pitched over and covered with Flax, like hair, and so close
fitted to the Body that it seemed to be the natural skin; as he was dancing
with the young Lords one of the Company approaching too near, a Flambeau held
by a Prince who was desirous to discover the King from the rest, it happened that
the Flame caught the Flax and burnt furiously; and they being all fastened to
one another, the King could find no security but by casting himself all covered
with Flames as he was, into the Arms of the Duchess of Berry, who very happily
being then present extinguished the Flame by covering him all over with her
great Gown. The other Masquers were all either stifled or roasted alive and
died within two days after, the King and Mantouillet only escaping, which last
cast himself headlong into a Tub of Water, which he happened to light of not far
from the place. After this sad accident Charles began to fall extreme Morose
and Melancholy, and the Idea of so great a peril prepared his brain for that
madness which seized upon him near the Town of Man's, in such manner as is
recorded by Monsieur de Mezeray. And this is all that is to be seen in this
Fauxbourg.

The Gates by which you go into the Town are two, that of St. Victor near the
Abbey of that name, of which Abbey we have already spoken. This Gate was lately
repaired but not with so great expense as the others. There is only represented
in Basse*taille over the Arch, a great Ship of War, which are the Town Arms,
with this Inscription beneath it,

QUAE NON MARIA? What Seas does she not Sail through? The other Gate is that of
St. Marcel, behind St. Genevieue du Mont.

Near this on the Fosse between the two Gates lives Monsieur de Troyes, whose
Pictures you ought not to sail of seeing. He was sent by the King into Bavaria
to take the Picture of Madame the Dauphiness. Few Painters have been more
successful than he after the Life. This has attained him the Practice of most
Persons of Quality, who cause themselves to be drawn by his hand.

We shall say nothing of the Convent of English Nuns, nor of the House of the
Fathers of the Christian Doctrine, which are also upon the same Fosse, there
being nothing curious about them to remark, unless it be one of the best
Prospects that we can see, by reason of the high situation of the Place where
these two houses stand.

The end of the first Part.
A New DESCRIPTION OF THE Most Remarkable Things IN PARIS. PART II.
The University Quarter.
THIS Quarter is one of the antientest and best Peopled of all Paris. It takes
up a very great space of Ground, almost the fourth part of the Town. Philip
Augustus, at such time as he went to Palestine, with Richard King of England,
against the Sarrazins, gave order that during his Journey (which lasted a whole
Year) this Quarter should be enclosed with Walls; some Remains of which one may
perceive at this Day.

The University of Paris is so ancient, that, as some hold, Charlemagne was its
Founder. This opinion is built upon certain old Titles, which are preserved
with great care. Notwithstanding there are many Learned Men, who are of a
contrary opinion; among others Monsieur Joli, Grand Chanter of Nostre-Dame, who
has clearly proved his Sentiments, in his Little Tract of the Episcopal
Schools. But if it be doubtful, whether it were founded by that Great Emperor;
it is however most certain, that it began to appear in a very little time after
his Reign, which was in France a Glorious one, for Learning and Learned Men, to
whom this great Prince showed all the Favor that could be. And in Gratitude,
they have rendered him famous to Posterity, not only as the most knowing
Emperor of that Age; but also the Bravest and most Glorious. In the mean time,
the University have taken him for their Patron, and on the Day of his Feast,
the Exercises cease in all Colleges. We shall say nothing of its ancient
Splendour, nor of the Credit and Authority, which it formerly enjoyed. It is
well known, that most of the great Affairs, have been transacted by the advice
of this University, and that Kings have not disdained to Consult it, in their
most pressing Occasions. Popes themselves have in a manner appealed hither, and
have often sued for the Suffrages of this University, to authorize their
Elections, and support them against Competitors.

Monsieur Duboulay in the History which he has made of this University in
three Volumes, in Folio, makes mention of many Illustrious Persons, who have
issued from hence. It has been so numerous and so full of Scholars, that we
ought not to omit observing here, one surprising thing, which happened under
Charles VI. That Prince being fallen into a Distraction, public Prayers and
Processions were appointed to be made for his Recovery. All the Companies and
Communalties went afoot, in Procession to St. Denis in France; and the
Parliament, as the principal Body of the Kingdom, begun this Act of Piety. The
University had also their appointed day to go thither, and Juvenal des Vrsins
records. That all the Scholars were obliged to assist with their several Heads
and Members, who belonged to them: He adds, That they all made so great a
number of Men, that the beginning of the Procession, was entering into the
Church of St Denis, when the Rector, who went last, was hardly gone out of the
Church of the Mathurins, where they first met together. The number of Scholars
and Colleges is now very much diminished. Formerly one might have reckoned one
Hundred, at present you can hardly find Thirty: Among which there are only nine
that maintan Exercises (Des basses Classes) of the lower Classes, and they are

The College du Plessis.

The College d'Harcourt.

The Coll. de Navarre.

The Coll. de Beauvais.

The Coll. of the Cardinal le Moyne.

The Coll. de la March.

The Coll. de Lizieux.

The Coll. des Grassins.

The Coll. of Clermont, wholly employed by the Jesuits, of which we shall speak
by it self.

It is needless to insert the names of the others, where they do not teach;
they are but little known, and serve only for the Lodgings of certain Scholars,
called Boursiers, who live there upon the Pensions which the College allows
them yearly. The University had also its own Jurisdiction apart, and if any of
its Members had committed any Crime, it was not permitted for the Public Judge
to condemn them. Of this you may read an Example in an Epitaph, in the
Mathurins Cloister. Two Scholars having done certain Crimes worthy of Death,
were Executed by Sentence of the Provost of Paris: The University conceiving
themselves wounded in this Sentence, suspended their Exercises, and by this
means obliged the Provost of Paris, to bring back the Bodies of these two
Scholars to the Mathurins, after he had himself taken them down from the
Gallows at Montfaucon, where they there hung; and after he had kissed their
Cheeks, tho they had been Executed above four Months. There are many Examples
of this sort. But since that time things are very much changed; and though at
present the University is full of Persons of great Learning, yet her Credit and
Authority are mightily diminished; especially since about the middle of the
last Age, she has suffered some Losses, which she will have much ado ever to
repair.

In the mean time this hinders not, but that the Sciences flourish here, more
than in any other part of Europe, and are here taught with much Success and
Profit. The University is divided into four Faculties, and over them all they
have for their Head, a Rector, who is chosen every three Months. Formerly they
chose him every six Weeks, but of late four times a Year has been thought
often enough. The four Faculties are

DIVINITY,

LAW,

PHYSIC,

The ARTS.

Divinity is professed only in the Sorbonne, and in the College of Navarre. For
the Law, as it is divided into the Civil Law, and the Canon Law, so there are
Professors for both in a College, which stands in the Rue Saint Jean de
Beauvais. About two years since, the King has founded a new Chair for the
French Law, possessed by Monsieur de Launay, who makes his Lectures in the
College of Cambray near St. Bennet's Fountain. There is but one College for
Physic, and that is in the Rue de la Bucherie; where there is an Amphitheater
(as the Physic Bills call it) in which they often make Dissections of humane
Bodies.

As for the Faculty of the Arts, which is the last, that is subdivided into
four Nations: The Nation of France, the Nation of Picardy, the Nation of
Normandy, and the Nation of Germany; the last of these was put in the room of
that of England, excluded by reason of those cruel Wars, which have been
between the French and English. These four Nations are again subdivided into
other Provinces, which would be too long to recite.

This is what may be said in general of the University, of which I shall say
more in describing the remarkable Places therein.

I begin this Quarter at the Key called, Quay de la Tournelle, from whence you
pass before a House built by the late Monsieur Martin. In which Madam de
Miramion, so well known by all pious People, has about eight years since
settled a new Company of Nuns, who live under the Rule of St. Austin, of the
Congregation of St. Genevieve. Of this new Company she is the Foundress. The
House is well built and deserves to be seen. Near this is

The Hotel de M. de Nemond, one of those Presidents, who are called Presidents
a Mortier, in which House you will see very good Furniture, but above all a
Library well furnished, which this Illustrious Magistrate often visits. From
hence you pass into

The Rue de Bernardins, which lies on the left hand, in which Street are
several very pretty Houses; among others, one wherein lives Monsieur du
Vaurouy. Here are some Paintings of the last Age well esteemed. A little
further you will enter into

The College of the Bernardins, which serves for all those who are of the
Order of Cistertians. It is an ancient Foundation, but that which is most
observable, is the great design of Pope Bennet XII. who was formerly a
Religious Man of this Order, and who desired to render his name Illustrious, in
building this College of a Surprising Magnificence. The Walls that enclose the
Ground, are of a wonderful thickness and solidity; and one would think, that
the Holy Father would rather enclose a Citadel, than a College of Religious
Men; the Chapter House is perfectly well Vaulted overhead, and at present
serves for their School. But that which is more Beautiful is the Structure of
their Church, which ought to be considered as one of the fairest Gothic
Buildings in all France; its Roof is of an extraordinary height, with Chapels
on each side. True it is, that but part of this great Work is finished, by
reason of the Holy Father's Death, which happened too soon; however by his Last
Will be appointed, That what he had begun should be completed, and to that end
he left a Sum of Money; but that falling into the Hands of Robbers on the way,
as they conveyed it into France, during those Troubles, which happened in the
Reign of Charles VI. the Work remained imperfect as it now is. One the side
next the Sacristy, you ought to ask to see a little turning Staircase, very
curiously contrived, in which two People may at the same time ascend and
descend, without being seen to each other. This is by two winding Ascents, like
a Snails Shell, managed one upon the other in the same round Space or Room.
Th^s piece is admired by such Curious Persons who have seen it, in regard there
are but very few Parallels. When the General of the Cistertians comes to Paris,
he usually makes his abode in this House.

We ought to observe, that several Religious Orders have a right to have
Colleges in this University, whose Members may take Degrees, and pass Doctors;
but some others have neglected this advantage, or the University has not
granted it to them for special Reasons.

As you go out of the Bernardins, on the left Hand, you find the Church of St.
Nicolas du Chardonnet, newly Rebuilt of a very handsome Design. This Church is
so called, in regard it stands on a piece of Ground, formerly overrun with
Thistles (in French called Chardons.) Which Ground the Monks of Victor gave for
the building of a Parish Church, much wanting in this Quarter. The Church is
not yet quite finished. All that is Curious here, is a Chapel where Monsieur le
Brun has begun to Work. You may here see the Tomb of his Mother, designed by
himself, and wrought in Marble by the Sieur Baptiste, on which there are very
delicate Figures.

All this Quarter has nothing very remarkable. From hence you go to the
Carmes, at the Entry of St. Genevieve's Hill, near the Place-Maubert, which is
one of the greatest Markets of all Paris.

The Carmes of the Place-Maubert.
I Have already said, when I treated of the Celestins, that the Carmes (or
Carmelites) were Founded there by Saint Lewis, which Order he brought with him
out of Palestine. But in regard that place was so far distant from the
University, and in respect of the overflowings of the Seine, they thought it
convenient to come and Inhabit in this Place, in the Reign of Philip the Long;
whose Queen Jane did, by her Testament in the Year 1349, leave them great
Riches; among other things, she gave them her Crown of Gold, set about with
diverse Precious Stones of considerable Value; also the Flower-de-Lys of Gold,
which she received at her Coronation, her Girdle set with Pearis, and all her
Silver Vessels; together with the Sum of Fifteen Hundred Florins of Gold,
which in those days amounted very high. They made use of all this to build
their Church, and their Covent, which have nothing very handsome. There is in
this Church a great Devotion to our Lady of Mount-Carmel, to which resort a
very great number of People, who are devoted to the Holy Virgin, in order to
gain certain Indulgences, and this is every second Sunday of the Month. Not
long ago they Rebuilt their Great Altar, after a design very singular; it is
supported with Pillars of Freestone, Painted like Marble, which make a very
handsome show.

On St. Genevieve's Hill, as you go to the Abbey of that name you pass before

The College of Navarre, the Fairest and most Spacious of all Paris; it was
Founded by Queen Jane of Navarre, Wife of Philip the Fair, as appears by the
Inscriptions under the Statue of that King and Queen, on the side of the great
Gate, which are as follows:

PHILIPPUS PULCHER CHRISTIANISSIMUS Hujus DOMUS FUNDATOR. PHILIP the Fair, the
most Christian King, Founder of this House. Under the Queen's Statue,

JOANNA FRANCIAE ET NAVARRAE REGINA Jane Queen of France and Navarre, Countess
Palatine of Champaign and la Brie, Founded this House, 1304. In the middle are
these two Verses,

Dextra potens, lex aequa, fides, tria lilia Regum
Francorum, Christo Principe, ad astra forunt.
Valor, just Laws, Religion, Flowers of France;
Christ being the guide, to Heaven's top advance.
This College was formerly the most renowned of all the University. The Sons
of the greatest Lords of the Kingdom, were here put to Pension, and that their
Commerce with other Scholars, might not waste their Allowance; they then
received none but Pensioners: But this Method is changed at present, and now
they admit to their Exercises, all sorts of Scholars indifferently. Divinity is
taught here, as has been already said, and four Professors have Salleries to
read their Lectures; two in the Morning, and two in the Afternoon.

Monsieur the Archbishop of Auch is Provisor of this College. They have here
a Library, given by Queen Jane of Navarre, which was formerly of great
Reputation, before the use of Printing. It contains several very curious
Manuscripts. This College has produced more Famous Men of Learning than any
other. The Chief of whom is Pierre d'Ailly, Cardinal by the Title of Saint
Crisogon, and Arch Bishop of Cambray, who was a great Benefactor here, as is to
be seen by an Inscription in the Chapel. He is interred at Cambray In the
middle of the same Chapel, is the Tomb of the illustrious Thomas de Clemengis,
a Famous Doctor in Divinity, and on it is this Inscription;

Qui Lampas fuit Ecclesiae, sub Lampade jacet. A Light of the Church under this
Lamp does lie. John Textor is also here interred. The other Famous Men are
Gerson, Joannes Major, Almainus de Castro Forri, Papillon, Gelin, de Villers,
and Pelletier: The last of which was the great Master of this College, and was
present at the Council of Trent. Of late they have had Monsieur de Launcy, a
Famous Critic, who has Composed several Volumes of the Ecclesiastic History,
and who, perhaps, has best understood, of all of this Age, the Annals of the
Church, as appears by his Works, so much sought after by the Learned. He has
also writ the History of this College.

Note that this Hill was formerly called Mons Locutitius, but for what reason
is not known. Higher on the Hill, where this College stands, is the Abbey of
St. Genevieve, and next to it

The Church of St. Estienne du Mont, a Parish Church. This Church is of so old
a Foundation, that it is not certainly known in what time it was first Built.
That Building which we see at present, was undertaken in the Reign of Francis
the First, and after it had remained a long time imperfect, it was not finished
till under Henry IV. Queen Margaret of Valois, his first Wife, gave a Sum of
Money for making the Portal, herself laying the first Stone, on the Twelfth of
August, 1610. This Portal is curiously wrought, and they have bestowed there a
profuse number of Sculptures, which had made a much better show, if they had
been managed and disposed with more care. The inside of this Church is very
neat, and lightsome; the Roof is very high and well extended. There are between
Pillar and Pillar, certain Arches that support Galleries of Communication, and
turn about each Pillar with much Art. The Tribune over the entrance into the
Quire is very hardy, as are also the little Stairs that go up thither, which
wind about the thick Pillars of the Croisee. The Chapel of the Holy Virgin,
behind the great Altar, is also well Built. But that which the Curious ought to
observe more carefully than all, is the Pulpit, which is of excellent
Workmanship, adorned with Sculptures and Bas-reliefs, of a wonderful Design and
Performance. The Statue of Sampson supports the whole Body of the Work, about
whom are placed several little Figures of Christian Virtues: Upon the Canopy
over-head, is a great Angel, holding Two Trumpets. All these things are
perfectly well designed; and this Pulpit, is, without contradiction, the most
Beautiful of all Paris. It ought to be known, that Monsieur Pascal, one of the
greatest Wits that France ever had, Author of that Incomparable Book, called
Pensees sur la Religion, (Thoughts upon Religion) and of several others of the
same Beauty and Learning, is Buried in this Church. La Sueur a famous Painter,
of whom I have already often made mention, is also here interred.

From hence you may pass into the Church of St. Genevi^ve, through a Door of
Communication, behind the Pulpit, but this is not the ordinary way. The usual
Entrance is by the great Gate, which is in the open place before the Church.

St. Genevieve du Mont.
BEfore we write of the Curiosities in this House, something ought to be said
of its Foundation. Clovis, as some believe, was the first Founder, and
Dedicated it to St. Peter and St. Paul, whose names it bore a long time. He
placed here Secular Canons, who inhabited this House till the Reign of Lewis
the Young, in the Eleventh Age, at which time the King constrained them to take
the Rule of St. Austin, and to live in Community, they having till then led
very irregular Lives. To establish this new Reform, some Persons were brought
over from St. Victors, and Monsieur de Mezeray acquaints us with the Reasons,
which occasioned that King to do this. He says, That of old time beyond Memory,
there were certain Secular Canons in this House, who had been by the
Solicitation of King Robert the Religious, freed from the Visitation of the
Bishop, and placed immediately under that of the Holy See: But it happenning
that Pope Engenius the Fourth, flying for refuge into France, and Lodging in
this House, there happened a Dispute between the Canons and the Holy Father's
Officers, on occasion, that the Canons would have taken to themselves an
Imbroidered Carpet, which the King presented to his Holiness, to hang before
his Pry Dieu (or Seat in the Church) they pretending that it ought to belong
to, and remain in their Church. The Controversy was so hot, that they fell
from Words to Blows, and the Canons being the stronger Party, assaulted the
Pope's Officers so home, that they were some of them Killed. The King himself
coming thither to appease the Tumult, thought he should have been Wounded in
the disorder: To punish the Canons for this their insolence, the King agreed
with the Holy Father to Expel them from this House, and to give the care of the
Reform to Sugar, Abbot of St. Denis; who thereupon drew off 12. Canons Regular
from St. Victors, and placed them here in the room of the others. After this
manner, the Chapter was changed into an Abbey, whose first Abbot was called Odo.
Since that time the Rule of St. Austin has always been observed here with much
Purity, and this House is become the Chief of all the Congregation in France:
The Abbot of which, with his four Assistants, is the Head of the Order. This
Abbey had formerly a peculiar Jurisdiction, like that of St. Germain des Prez;
but in regard this was found to be the cause of much Disorder and Confusion,
they were all united to the Body of the Chatelet. Many Kings have been
Benefactors to this House, but the greatest was King Robert, who built the old
Cloister, which was taken down under Francis the First, who enclosed for them
17 Arpens (or Acres) of Land. The House has been often ruined by the Normans
and the Danes, while it was out of the Town; but the Devotion which the
Parisians had for St. Genevieve, their Patroness, was the occasion that the
Ruins made by those Barbarous People, were repaired again in a very little
time after. The Body of St. Genevieve is in the Shrine behind the great Altar,
supported by 4 Ionick Pillars, of an extraordinary sort of Marble. The Chest is
of Silver-gilt, enricht with Precious Stones of very great value. Father du
Breuil, who has Composed a Volume Of the Antiquities of Paris, tells us, That
this Shrine was made by the Liberalities of several pious Persons, and that the
Goldsmiths Work came to, One hundred fourscore and thirteen Marks of Silver,
and Eight Marks and an half of Gold to gild it. The Queen Mother, deceased,
whose Piety will be a long time remembered, in diverse Parts of Paris, enricht
this shrine with Nosegays composed of Precious Stones, of a very considerable
price. There hang round about several Lamps of Silver, and diverse Figures of
the same Metal, which are all so many Vows made by sundry People to this Saint.

All that is of more than ordinary Curiosity in this Church, is the Tomb of
Clovis the first Christian King; it stands in the middle of the Quire; his
Figure which lies along upon the Tomb, is the same which was made for him after
his Death. Some years since they have raised it two Foot and a half, to make
room for this Inscription.

CLODOVAEO MAGNO To Clovis the Great France, Founder of this Church. The
Scepter which he holds in his Hand, and the Crown on his Head, appear to have
been added of later time. Antiquarles need no longer doubt of the Antiquity of
the Flower-de-Lys, if they could but believe the Crown on this King's Head, to
have been made in his time; but the Flower-de-Lys's are too well fashioned for
that, and have not at all the Air of ancient time. The Altar is Isole, that is,
so contrived, that one may go round it. The little Tabernacle is a very
Beautiful thing. It is of White Marble, in form of a Dome of Eight Angles, with
four Porticos, supported with small Corinthian Pillars of Sicilian Marble,
whose Capitals are of Brass gilt, very well carved, and Figures of Angels on
the Pedestals, with other Ornaments, of the same. The Body of this Tabernacle
is inlay'd with diverse rich Stones, as Lapis Lazuli, Agate, and such like. All
the Work stands upon a Foot (en cul de Lamp) like the bottom of a Lamp, of a
blew Marble extreme rare. On each side are two Statues, of St. Peter and St.
Paul, St. Denis and St. Austin; these are of a kind of material Resembling
Marble for its whiteness, but much lighter.

In the Nave of the Church are several Chapels, very well adorned with Marble
Pillars. The Door that leads into the Quire, over which is the Jube, is of
Marble also, with Bas-reliefs upon the Attick. The Organs are extreme handsome,
and the Wainscot exactly well wrought. The most considerable Tombs next to that
of Clovis, already mentioned, are the following, viz. That of Clotilda his
Wife, reputed a Saint, in regard she was the principal cause of her Husband's
Conversion, as Gregory of Tours relates. She is interred near the Steps going
up to the great Altar. In a Chapel on the same side, with the Sacristy in the
Mausoleum of the Cardinal de la Rochefaucault, whose Figure we see kneeling in
White Marble, upon a great Urn of Black Marble: On the forepart of which are
the Arms of the Abbey of St. Genevieve, of which he dyed Abbot. This is one of
the best wrought Pieces that can be seen.

In the Nave, Strangers and generally all those who have any respect or
sentiments of Esteem for great and famous Men, are extremely pleased to read
the Epitaph of the famous Rene Descartes, one of the most Learned and
Illustrious Philophers of these last Ages. The Epitaph is as follows,

RENATUS DESCARTES,
Vir supra titulos omnium retro Philosophoram,

Nobilis genere, Armoricus gente, Turonicus origin;

In Gallia, Flexiae studuit:
In Pannonia, miles meruit,
In Batavia, Philosophus delituit;
In Suecia, vocatus occubuit.
Tanti viri praeciosas reliquias
Galliarum percelebris tune Legatus, PETRUS CHANUT, CHRISTINIAE, sapientisimae
Reginae, sapientum amatrici 1650, mense Feb. 10. aetatis 54. Virorum insignium
cultoris, and remuneratoris, Procurante PETRO DALIBERT,

Et divinitatis, immortalitatisque animae,
Maximum and clarum assertorem,
Aut jam creed felicem, aut precibus read.
RENE DESCARTES.
A Man above all the titles of the ancient Philosophers, of a Noble Family,
Native of Britany, of Tourenne by Extraction. France he Studied at la Fleche;
served as a Soldier in Hungary; lived a retired Philosopher in Holland; and
dyed in Swedeland; being Honorably invited thither. PETER CHANUT, then
Ambassador there from France: CHRISTINA the most Learned Queen, and Lover of
Learned Men. In the year 1650, the tenth of February, and the 54 th year of his
Age. Lewis the ^ourteenth, Peter Dalibert,

In the Vault under this Church, you may still see the Tomb of St. Genevieve,
tho there remains therein nothing of her Body, which is all entire in the
Shrine, with the very Boards of her Coffin. This Tomb is of Marble without any
Ornament. At one end, upon an Altar which stands between two Pillars, is a
Cross adorned with certain Agates, with an Ecce Homo at the Foot of it, of one
entire piece of Coral, very well wrought. These things come from the Cabinet of
the Reverend Father du Molinet, whose Present it was. There are two other Tombs
very ancient, of two Bishops of Paris, who dyed with the reputation of
Sanctity, and who are invoked on the account of some particular Distempers.

From hence you ought to go and see the Sacristy, which you will find very well
furnished with Ornaments of diverse Colors very rich, and with a great quantity
of Plate. There is no place in this Kingdom, and perhaps in all Europe, where
the divine Offices are Celebrated with more Devotion and Majesty, than in this
Church: All the Religious are extremely regular, and one is much Edified to see
them in the Ceremonies of the Church.

In the inward parts of the House there are many curious things, particularly
as to the Architecture; about ten years since they have made considerable
Reparations. The great Gate was very inconvenient; and they have built another
in the place, after the manner of a double Portico, supported by Pillars of the
Dorick Order, very regularly proportioned, with two Square Pavilions at the
Extremities. Over against this Gate is a Fountain at the Feet of a Figure of
St. Genevieve, in a kind of Niche or Arch, set off with two Ionick Pillars.
After this we enter into the Cloister, or rather under a kind of Portico,
supported on both sides with Dorick Pillars, like those at the Entrance, but of
a handsomer Orderance. At the further end of this Portico, about thirty Paces
long, stands the great Staircase, which leads to the Dortoirs, at the further
end of which is a Figure of the Holy Virgin, holding the Infant JESUS in her
Arms; it is of Excellent Workmanship, as one may easily perceive. The Dortoirs
have nothing of Magnificent. Their only care is, that all things throughout the
place should appear neat, as well as in the Lower Rooms, in which you may see
several Pictures of the ancient Abbots of this House. The Garden is very
pleasant, it is the greatest of all those that were within the ancient Walls of
Paris. On that side next the Portico, of which we have been speaking, you may
go into a Chapel dedicated to the Holy Virgin, round which are hung several
Pictures of Devotion well Painted. In the middle of this Chapel is a Tomb
about a Foot high, on which is the Figure in Brass of an ancient Bishop, in his
Pontificial Habits. After you have seen these things, you ought to visit tho
Apothecary-Room, which is extraordinary neat, and where there are several
Curiosities, for those who are knowing in these matters.

From hence you ought to go up to the Library, which at present is esteemed one
of the fairest and best furnished of Paris. It takes up the upper Room of one of
those four great Wings, which compose this building. It is, in truth, a little
too high situated, but in recompense of that it is so much the lighter. You
have there a very great number of Books, placed in Presses of very handsome
Wainscot, with the busts of all the great Men of Antiquity, Coppied from those
at Versailles. The Reverend Father du Molinet, one of the most Learned and able
Men of this Age, in the knowledge of Books, and in the curious search of
Antiquity, has the oversight and care in these matters. They preserve here a
great quantity of Prints, part of which came from one called Monsieur Hacart,
who was a very curious Person, and dying left all that he had Collected to St.
Victors, St. Germains des Prez, and S. Genevieve's, but they have here a great
many others more rare and better kept.

At the end of the Library you enter into the Cabinet of the foresaid Father,
which is extraordinarily well furnished with Curiosities; you may there find
all sorts, but chiefly Meddals of Gold, Silver and of Brass bigger and lesser,
very well chosen, and some of them extreme rare. We ought to consider this set
of Meddals, which this Father himself has Collected, as the fullest and most
Complete, in all France, next to that in the King's Cabinet.

Among other Extraordinary things, in a little Press you may see certain
consecrated Knives, with which the Ancients used to cut the Throats of their
Victims; a great Platter in which they mixed Wheat, Flower, Oil and Wine, with
which they used to rub the Beasts they Sacrificed; certain Sphinxes or Idols,
found among the Momies; Antique Keys; Styles, or steel Pens, which the Romans
used to write with; a Copper Table, to which are fastened several little Balls
of the same Metal, which may be placed as a Man pleased, these the Ancients
used to cast account with; several sorts of Lacrimatories, or Glass-Viols, in
which they used to preserve the Tears of those, who they hired on purpose to
Weep at Funerals, with several little Copper Spoons that they made use of to
gather the Tears up with, from Leather Aprons, which they wore before them at
that time, on purpose for the Tears to fall in. In another little Press on the
Right Hand, are all sorts of Measures for Liquids, and Weights to weigh things
sold, according to the usage of the Ancients. In another, he keeps all the
Graving Tools of Parmezan, with which that Famous Graver used to Counterfeit
the old Medals of the Ancients so exactly, that the most skilful in this Art
have been deceived, and have taken the Counterfeit Medals, made by that able
Workman, for true ones, and stamped in the times of those Men which they
represent. This was perhaps one of the Curiousest Actions that could be done,.
and those who are skilful in these matters esteem them much. Together with
these things, you may see here several Pieces of Optics, invented by Father
Niseron, a Minim, of whom we have formerly made mention; the Poot of a small
Mummy, very well preserved; certain extraordinary Fishes; and another Rarity,
which in the Ages past, was esteemed an entire Treasure of it self, and that is
a great Unicorn's Horn, white as Ivory, five or six Poot in height, and of a
considerable thickness, it is no less Beautiful than that in the Treasury at
St. Denis; for which, as it is said, the Republic of Venice did once offer,
One hundred thousand Crowns, to have Presented it to a King of Persia. In
another small Cabinet, there are all sorts of Rich Stones, Shells and Minerals
exceeding rare, and such like things. Over against the Door, where you enter,
are diverse kinds of Habits, made of the Feathers of Paroquets, and other Birds,
wrought together with great Art, and brought from America; a Cuirass and a
Corselet of Japan, made of Vernish, and of an unusual shape; a Shield made of
Silk, probably coming from the same Country; and that which can hardly be seen
elsewhere, a great number of Shoes belonging to almost all Nations in the
Levant, extremely different in Shape, from what we wear. There is also a Chain
made of Wood, very light and very long, all made out of one piece; several
petrified things very curious; and among the rest one Stone composed of diverse
Pieces, in such manner, that we cannot discern, whether it be the production of
Art or Nature. There are many other Rarities to observe, as the Jaw of a Fish,
of extraordinary greatness, having in it several Rows of sharp Teeth; several
good Pictures, with diverse other rare and well Collected things. This Reverend
Father is not only knowing in these matters, but he has Written several
Learned Pieces, as, A Defense of Thomas a Kempis; A Discourse upon the
Brass-Head, which was found at Monsieur Berrier 's; The History of the Popes by
their Medals; The Works of Stephen de Tourney, augmented very considerably with
diverse Pieces, never. yet Printed; and a learned Commentary, which clears many
obscure places, which would have scarcely been understood without his
Assistance; and in fine, The History of the Roman Learning estab^ished, and
justified by many Excellent Antiquities, which last he has published this
present Year, 1684. There have been many able Men of this Abbey, among others
Father Lalleman, who lived not long ago, and gained to himself great Reputation
by his Books of Devotion, namely, The Death of the Righteous, and the Saints
desire of Death, the Reading of which is extreme moving. The Reverend Father de
Creil, now Living, passes for one of the best Architects that are, and the
Designs which he has invented, have been followed with good success; among
others, those in the New-buildings of this House. In all the rest of this
Quarter there is nothing Curious, being all filled with Colleges, and those
are but old Houses ill built.

The College of Montaigu, or of the Capets, is very near. Of which College
the Chapter of Nostre-Dame, and the Carthusian Fathers are Administrators.
Formerly they entertained here poor Scholars, who were obliged to live under a
very severe Discipline; but at present that Custom is altered. It ought to be
observed, that the famous Erasmus of Roterdam, did for some time dwell in this
College.

Next to this Quarter, we ought to go into the Rue Saint Jacques, which Street
begins at the Little Chatelet, at the end of the Petit Pont.

The Little CHATELET.
THis is a kind of ancient Fortress, composed of a great mass of Buildings,
open in the middle, and served formerly as one of the Town-Gates, as did also
the great Chatelet; this was when Paris had no greater Extent than the Isle of
the Palais. This Building was repaired by King Robert, under whom France
enjoyed a Peace of two and forty years; during which that good Prince had
convenient time to amass a very great Treasure, which he deposited in this
Fortress, notwithstanding the great Bounties, which he bestowed upon Churches,
and his great Charities, with which he relieved the Poor. Some Antiquaries will
not allow this place to be so Ancient, but say that it was Built by Aubriot,
Provost of Paris, the same person who Built the Bastille; and that he did it to
restrain the Insolences of the Scholars of the University, who often used to
make Invasions on the Townsmen, and thereby occasioned very great Disorders.

THE RUE SAINT JACQUES.
THis Street is almost all inhabited by Booksellers, by reason of the
Neighboring University. The first thing of Note that you observe here, is

The Church of Saint Severin, which is very Ancient, and one may think so, in
regard the Patron himself was the Founder: Who lived in the Reign of Clovis,
and was by him invited out of Savoy, where he was at that time a Hermit, to
come into France, and cure him of a grievous Fever, with which that King was
afflicted; and was at last cured through the Prayers of this Holy Man. During
his abode at Paris, he dwelt in this place, at that time very solitary; where
there had been already built a small Chapel in a Wood, Dedicated to St.
Clement: Having remained here some time, he resolved to return to his former
dwelling; but as he past by Chateau-Landon, a small Village in Gatinois, he met
with two Priests, who dwelt there in the reputation of Sanctity; he stopped his
Journey, and after two years abode with them, he dyed there. Childebert caused
a Church to be built in the same place, which is at present an Abbey of St.
Augustine's Order, of the Congregation of St. Genevieve. It is not well known
when this Parish Church was built, but according to Appearance it is not above
200. years old. There is nothing to be seen in it of Curiosity, it being but an
old Gothic Building, not very regular, and very dark in some places. The great
Altar was finished but a while ago; it is composed of eight small Marble
Pillars, disposed in form of a Semicircle, which support a Dome cut in half,
as it were, with some Ornaments of Brass gilt, which show very handsomely; it is
the Workmanship of Monsieur le Brun. In the Churchyard, the side next the
Church, is raised a Tomb, upon which in a demicumbent Posture, is the Figure of
a Young Lord of East-Friseland, who dyed here, being a Scholar of this
University. His Name was d'Embda. The Tomb was built by his Mother's Order; a
Lady extraordinarily afflicted at his Death, he being her only Son, and the
Presumptive Heir of Friseland. The two Epitaphs on his Monument are as follow:

Nobilitate generis Comitum Orientalis Phrisiae and animi corporisque do^ibus
praeclaro, D. Ennoni de Embda, Civitatis Embdensis Praeposito, ac electo
Satrapae, propter certam hujus corporis resurrecturi spem, ac in amoris sinceri
testimonium, avia, materque pia unico suo filio, qui bic ex studiorum ^ursu
patriae ac amicis omnibus magno cum luctu, anno aetatis suae XXIII. morte
praereptus est, hoc monumentum statuerunt.

ANNO DOMINI 1545. 18* JULII.

To Enno d'Embda of the Noble Family of the Earls of East-^riseland, and of a
beautiful Mind and Body, Provost of the City of Embden, and Chief Magistrate
elect, in sure hope of the Resurrection of the Body, and in Testimony of their
sincere Love, his Grandmother and Mother to their only Son, who was here
snatched by Death, from his Studies, to the great Grief of his Country and
Friends, in the XXIII. Year of his Age, erected this Monument.

In the Year of our LORD, 1545. 18. of July.

On the other side of the Tomb are these Verses:

Quid fuerint nostra, haec recubans commonstrat imago:
Quid sim, quam teneo, putrida calva docet.
Peccati hanc poenam nobis ingenuere parents,
Cujus sed Christus solvere vincela venit.
Hunc miht viventi spes, qui fuit and morienti,
Aeternam corpus, quale habet ille, dabit.
Peccati, fidei, Christique hinc perspice vires,
Vt te mortisices, vivisicetque Deus.
What once I was, this Image does disclose,
And what I am, the Carcass under shows.
This said reward of Sin our Parents gave,
But our deliverance from Christ we have*
He Is now my Hope when dead, as when alive,
A Body Glorious like his own he will give.
Of Sin, Faith, Christ, this Tomb the force displays,
Who mortifies himself, him God will raise.
On the other side of the Rue Saint Jacques, as you enter into the Rue Galande,
which Street butts upon the former, there stands a very ancient Church named

Saint Julien le Pauvre, which, doubtless, was formerly an Hospital. Gregory of
Tours, in the ninth Book and the ninth Chapter of his Works mentions it; and
tells us, That coming to Paris on certain private affairs, he Lodged in this
place, at such time as they had taken a Notorious Cheat, who pretended he had
brought from Spain certain precious Relics, among others some of St. Vincent,
and St. Felix, with which, no doubt, he would have abused the Credulity of the
Parisians. But when his pretended Relics came to be examined, they found in
his Bag nothing but the Roots of diverse Plants, the Teeth of Moles, the Bones
of Mice, with the Fat and Claws of Bears. Which things being apprehended to
serve only for some Magical use or other, they were all thrown into the River.
The Cheat himself was committed close Prisoner, and put in Chains, according to
the Custom of those times. This happened in the Reign of Chilperic, who was
unhappily slain just entering into his Palace at Chelles, as he returned from
Hunting, about the Year Five hundred Eighty four.

A little further on in the Rue Saint Jacques, is

The Church of Saint Yves, built in the year 1347. at the Charge and Care of a
^amous Confraternity of Bretons, at that time residing at Paris, and who caused
Divine Service to be there Celebrated daily, by certain Ecclesiastics, whom
they hired. On the side of this Chapel lies

The Rue des Noiers, which has been of late enlarged, and thereby rendered
much more commodious than formerly.

The MATHURINS.
THE Convent of these Fathers stands a little higher in the other side of the
Street. St. Lewis was their ^ounder, and they are of the Holy Trinity of the
Redemption of Captives. Their principal Institution is to go into Barbary, and
there ransom. Christian Slaves out of the Hands of the Infidels, and procure
their Liberty. From time to time they make these Voyages, assisted by the
Contributions of pious People, who supply those great Expenses which they
cannot avoid. It is not long since they brought over a great number, which we
saw here with much Edification. Their Church is very lightsom, though it is
built after the Modern way. It was built in the form we now see it, by the
means of Robert Gaguin, Minister, and General of the whole Order, who was an
Illustrious Person in his time, and has Composed diverse Books; among others
The History of Lewis XII. However some think, that this Church was begun before
his time, and that he only finished it. He lies interred in the middle of the
Quire. Formerly you might have read his Epitaph there; but when the Church was
raised, it was removed from that place. It is this:

Illustris Gallo nituit qui splendour in orb
Hic sua Robertus membra Gaguinus habet.
Si tanto non saeva viro Libitina pepercit,
Quid speret docti caetera turba chori?
ANNO A NATALI CHRISTI MILLESIMO QUINGENTESIMO PRIMO, VIGESIMA SECUNDA MAII.

Here Robert Gaguin now Entombed does lie,
Who shined a glorious Light in the Gallic Sky.
If Death so great a Scholar would not spare,
How* obnoxious then Inferior Learners are!
In the year, from the Birth of Christ, One thousand five hundred and one, the
Twenty second of May.

In the Cloister there are also some Tombs; among others that of Sacro-Bosco, a
very famous Mathematician. This is his Epitaph:

De Sacro-Bosco qui compotista Johannes,
Tempora discrevit, jacet hic a tempore rapius.
Tempore qui sequeris, memor esto quod morieris,
Si miseres, plora, miserans pro me, precor, ora.
Here Sacro-bosco the Accomptant lies,
Who Time divided, him did Time surprise.
Thou, who come after, shortly dead must be,
If thou have Pity, Weep, and Pray for me.
Near this is another Epitaph of a Famous Lawyer, who was the Master of
Papirius Masson.

CUJACI. Balduinus hic jacet, hoc tecum reputa and vale,
Mortuis vobis Jurisprudentiam corriptt gravis sopor.
Franciscus B^lduinus Jurisconsultus obiit, Anno aetatis suae 53. 9. Kalend.
November. Anno a partu Virginis 1573. PAPIRIUS MASSONIUS Jurisconsultus, Balduini
Auditor, tumulum posuit Here Baldwin lies, think on it and farewell;
E're since a drowsiness on Law does dwell.
Francis Baldwin, Lawyer, dyed in the 53 Year of his Age, the Ninth of the
Calends of November, in the Year from the Birth of our Savior 1573. Papirius
Masson of the same Faculty, the Scholar of Baldwin, erected this Tomb. Lastly,
here is the Tomb of the two Scholars, named Ledger Moussel, and Oliver
Bourgeois, who were hanged at Montfaulcon in the Year 1408, on the 17th. of
May, by Sentence of the Provost of Paris, without regard to the Privileges of
the University; who afterward demanded that famous Satisfaction, which we have
already spoken off in the 4th. Folio of this Second Part. Of late they have
made many Considerable Decorations in this Church. The great Altar is adorned
with Pillars of a kind of reddish Marble, very rare. The little Tabernacle upon
that Altar is also very Beautiful: So are the two lesser Altars on each side of
the great one, adorned with Pillars very well wrought. The Quire of this Church
is separated from the Nave by a kind of Balustrade, or rather by six Ionick
Pillars of Marble, supporting a Cornish, on which there are several little
Figures of Angels, very well designed. The rest of the Church is Wainscoted
with Joyners Work, full of Sculpture, with a great number of Grenades, which
are the Arms of the present General of the Order, who has been at the Expense
of all these new Reparations. The University assemble in the Chapter House of
this Convent, when they make their Processions; which usually happens every
three Months, at which the Rector is constantly present. He is also obliged to
give a Sum of Money to all those that assist at the Ceremony. These
Processions ought to be seen and observed by Strangers, and are well worth
their Curiosity; the Show being very numerous, and disposed in excellent Order.
The four Faculties are obliged to appear there, in the proper and peculiar
Habits belonging to them. The Money which the Rector disburses on this
occasion, arises out of the Revenues of the University, which amount to the
Sum of Fifty thousand Franks, arising out of the Messageries (or Carriage of
Goods) between certain Towns of this Kingdom, and also from several Houses
Situated in diverse places of Paris. Formerly they possessed much greater
Revenues, but they have been lost by the negligence of those, who of late Years
have had the Administration of their affairs. From hence you pass before

The Church of Saint Benoit, supposed to be Founded by St. Denis, who Dedicated
it to the Holy Trinity; if so, none can doubt it to be of very great Antiquity.
It is possessed by Canons Secular, who are obliged on the great Feasts to
accompany the Canons of Nostre-Dame, when they make their grand Processions.
The Building or Structure of this Church is nothing Beautiful, as being carried
up at several times and by pieces. The Nave was built in the Reign of Francis
the First, and four years since the Quire was Rebuilt anew very handsomely. The
inside is embellisht with Corinthian Pilasters, which support a Cornish of a
very good Gust. This Church is very lightsome, and has not now the defect which
it sometimes had; which was, that the great Altar was contrived on the West
side; since, when it was new built in the last Age, they quite changed that
Disposition; which occasioned that it has been called, St. Benoist le bien
turn, or St. Bennet's the well contrived. For in those days they were very
exact, in contriving the Churches East and West, even to a kind of Scruple.

On the other side of the Street St. Jacques, over against the hinder part of
the Quire of this Church is a small open-place, or Court, at the Entrance into
which stands a Fountain which bears its name. The place is called La Terre de
Cambray, from the College of that Name there Situated. You have there also

The College Royal, whose original Founder was Francis the First, the Father
and Restorer of Learning in France. 'Twas he that instituted most of the
Lectures in Law and Physic in this University, and invited hither the ablest
Men he could find, to teach here the Mathematics, Philosophy, and the Greek,
Latin, Syriack, and Hebrew Tongues. He intended to have raised here a great
Building, but his design being never executed, because of his great Expenses in
the Wars, which he had on all the Frontiers of his Kingdom, especially in
Italy; he left the Work to be done by his Son Henry the Second, who neglected,
or at least had not a Convenience of doing it. The Professors all the while
read their Lectures in the College of Cambray, and remained in this Condition
till under the Reign of Henry the Great, who in the Year 1609. on the 23. of
November, sent the Cardinal du Perron, the Duke of Suilly, first Minister, the
President de Thou, and a Counselor of Parliament named Monsieur Gillot, to
view the Situation of the place, and if there was sufficient Room, to raise the
Building projected. It should have been composed of a main Front, and on each
Hand two Wings, with a Court, in the midst of which should have been a
Fountain. The lower Rooms were designed for Schools, and the first Story on one
side, for the Royal Library, which was then at Fountainbleau, and is at present
kept in the Rue Vivien. The Professors also should there have had their
Lodgings, which would have been of great advantage; but these excellent
Projects were never executed, by reason of the Tragic Death of that great
King, of whom France was robbed in a time when she least expected it. Queen Mary
of Medieis his Illustrious Wife, to second the Zeal of the King her Husband,
resolved to finish what he had begun; and to that purpose she her self with her
Son Lewis XIII. at that time but nine Years old, went to the place. The Young
King laid the first Stone, and the Work was carried on with fervency; but in
the end it was once again broke off, and remains as we see it, having never
been thought of, to be continued, from that time to this. There is but one side
finished, and that stands in the same place, where formerly stood the College
called de Treguier. The Professors are paid by the King, and are a kind of Body
distinct from the University, to which, however, they are subject. They enjoy
the same Privileges with the Officers of the King's Household; and the Rector
of the University is not permitted to dispose their places, nor to prohibit
their Exercises, which he may do to all other Professors. They have always been
persons of singular Note, and extraordinary Merit.

The most Famous have been; in the Greek Tongue Adrian Turnebe, Native of
Andeli in Normandy, who dyed in the Year 1565, being but Fifty three Years of
Age. Denis Lambin succeeded him, and has left behind him many excellent Works.

In the Hebrew Tongue, Francis Vatable, originally of Picardy; he has writ
several Commentaries upon diverse Authors, much esteemed. Gilbert Genebrard,
Doctor in Divinity, of the Order of St. Bennet, and Prior of St. Denis de la
Chartre, near the Pont Nostre-Dame. He was Elected Archbishop of Aix in
Provence, and dyed in March 1597. There are extant several Works of his, the
Catalogue of which are at the end of the Book Entitled La Liturgy Saint. The
formerly mentioned Calignon was another Professor here for this Tongue; he has
composed a Grammar which is much esteemed. Ralph Baines an Englishman, who
writ three Books of Commentaries on Solomon, according to the Hebrew Phrase,
which he Dedicated to Henry the Second.

In the Mathematics there have been Oronce Fine, Native of the Town of
Briancon in Dauphine; and Paschal du Hamel, who succeeded him.

In the Latin Eloquence Barthelemy Latomus, and John Passerat.

The two most famous among those who have taught Philosophy here, were Francis
Vicomereat, originally of Verona, and Peter de la Ramee of Cuth in Vermandois,
who lived about the Year 1568.

Finally, those who have most excelled in Physic are, Vidus Vidius, Jacques
Silius of Amiens, and John Rioland. These are those whose Names are of greatest
Note, on the account of the Learned Works which they have left behind them. One
can hardly find out any one College, that has produced more Learned Men than
this, although it be of no great Antiquity.

Over against this last mentioned College, is, The Commandery of St. John de
Latran, which depends on the Order of Malta. It is a great piece of Ground full
of Houses ill built, in which lodge all sorts of Workmen, not Masters, who may
here manage their several Trades, without being disturbed by the Jurates of the
City. That which is here worth seeing, is the Tomb of Monsieur de Souvre; this
is he who dyed Grand Prior of France, and who built some years before his
Death, that fine House at the Temple. While he was only Commander of St. John
de Latran, he caused this Tomb to be raised in the Church. It is all of Marble,
his Effigies lying upon a great Urne of the same, accompanied with two Terms
rising out of their Guenes, which are Channell'd and very well wrought. All
this Monument is exactly Beautiful, and of a very singular Design. It is the
Work of Monsieur Anguerre, one of the ablest Sculptors that France ever
produced. The Body of Monsieur de Souvre, is not interred in this place, but
only his Heart. There is nothing else remarkable. The Church in which this
Monument is Erected, is very ancient and ill built.

As you leave this place and go on in the Rue Saint Jacques, you come to

The College du Plessis, which was formerly called, the College of St.
Martin, by reason that its first Founder Geoffrey du Plessis, Secretary to Pope
John XXII. had a very great Devotion to that Saint But the Cardinal de
Richelieu, to Eternize the Founder's Memory, restored it to his Name; and after
he had Rebuilt it magnificently, he caused it to be called The College du
Plessis de Richelieu. This College has the best contrived and handsomest
Lodgings of all the University, and is also the fullest of Pensioners and
Scholars. The Doctors of the Sorbonne have the Direction of this College, and
place the Principal and Regents. A little higher in the Street is

The Jesuits College.
OVer the Gate you read this fair Inscription,

COLLEGIUM LUDOVICI MAGNI.

The College of Lewis the Great.
It was formerly called the College of Clermont, being built for the Scholars
of that Town, in imitation of some other Colleges of the University. In the
last Age, Messire Guillaume Duprat, Bishop of Clermont, being at the Council of
Trent, on behalf of this Kingdom of France, contracted there a particular
Friendship with certain Fathers Jesuits, whom he met with at that Assembly; he
conceived so high an esteem of their Learning, and Piety, that at his return he
brought them with him into France, to instruct our Youth in humane Learning;
but more especially in the Purity of the Romish Religion, which at that time
was disturbed with the Heresy of Luther and Calvin. This Prelate brought in
his Company to Paris, Father Paquier Brouet, with several others of that
Society, whom so long as he lived, he entertained in his own House; but at his
Death left them by his Testament Three thousand Livres of Rent, and a very
considerable Sum of Money; with which they purchased a void piece of Ground,
then called the Court de Langres in the Rue St. Jacques, being the place where
they now are. This they named the College of Clermont their great Benefactor,
having been Bishop of that City. Henry III. was pleased to lay the first Stone,
on which this Inscription was then graved

RELIGIONIS AMPLIFICANDAE STUDIO, HENRICUS III. CHRISTIANISS. REX FRANCIAE
ATQUE POLONIAE, IN AUGUSTISS. JESU NOMEN PIETATIS SUAE MONUMENTUM HUNC PRIMUM
LAPIDEM, IN EJUS TEMPLI FUNDAMENTUM CONJECIT.

ANNO DOMINI 1582. DIE 20. APRILIS

With a desire of enlarging Religion, Henry III the most Christian King of
France and Poland, to the honor of the most Glorious JESUS, as a Monument of
his Piety, laid this first Stone in the Foundation of his Temple.

In the Year^ of our Lord 1582. the 20. Day of April

There is nothing of singular Remark in the Building belonging to this
College; yet there are here many Observable things, which you can hardly meet
with elsewhere. As first, the great quantity of Chambers and Lodgings, filled
to the least Corner, contrived with very great Industry. The great number of
Pensionaries, most of which are of considerable Quality; besides the multitude
of Scholars that come from abroad, which sometimes amount to Two or Three
thousand. These study together in the most regular Order and Discipline of the
World. The Schools are Six in number, besides those set apart for the Study of
Philosophy, Divinity and the Mathematics: Which last are not used, but only by
Young Jesuits, who still pursue their Course of Studies, or at least by some
Pensionaries, who design not to take any Degrees in the University; for those
who propose to themselves to be Masters of Arts, or Doctors, are obliged to
study Philosophy in some of the Colleges of the University. One thing extreme
laudable among these Fathers is, that all their Scholars are obliged to go to
Confession every Month; so that at the same time the Parents are freed from the
Care, both of their Childrens Consciences, as well as Studies. The Chapel of
this College is small and obscure: It stands on the Right Hand as you enter:
There is nothing to be seen there but upon Feast days, and at such time the
Altar is one of the richest and best furnished. They have there an Antipendium
all of Silver, and another of a rich Embroidery of Gold, very high raised upon
a Ground of Silver. The Apartments in the hinder part of the House, are more
convenient than those in the fore part; the Arms of Monsieur Fouquet in their
Front, speak him to be the Builder of that part; as also of the main Body of
the Edifice, which is at the further part of the Garden, near the little
College de Marmoutier, which has been annexed to this to augment it. In this
apartment they have placed their Library, which, beyond all contradiction, is
one of the fairest and most numerous of all Paris, as well for the Quality, as
Quantity of Books, there to be seen. There is also a good number of ancient
Manuscripts, and of Heretical Books, chiefly of the Socinians, which fill
almost a little Room themselves. Besides this a very excellent Collection of
the Spanish History, as well general as particular Histories of the several
Provinces of that Kingdom, and of the Famous persons who have therein
inhabited; these Authors are either in Spanish or Latin. There is also a great
quantity of Mathematicians and Humanists, which take up a little Gallery, which
they have contrived into several Presses: for although this Library does consist
of two long Wings of building; yet it is all too little, and they are forced to
employ this Gallery, for the receipt of the lesser Volumes. At one end of this
Gallery hangs a piece of Bassan, representing the Combat of the Centaures and
the Lapithites, this Monsieur Fouquet gave, having first built the Library
where it hangs, and endowed it with a Thousand Livres of Rent, for its
Maintenance and Augmentation. They preserve here an excellent Set of Ancient
Medals, but being not disposed into order, they seldom are willing to show
them. In this College are many able Persons, among whom may be reckoned a
considerable number of Authors; such as are now living, are Father Bouhours,
Author of The Entretiens d Ariste and d'Eugene, in which you find so much
Sweetness and such Purity of Language, that it seems a Man that would speak as
an accomplished Person, must be sure to imitate his style; his other Works are
The Doubts and Remarks on the French Tongue; The History of Peter d'Aubusson,
Grand Master of Rhodes; The Life of Saint Ignatius, and the Life of St. Francis
Xavier, Apostle of the Indies; and certain Books of Devotion. Father Rapin, he
has writ The Spirit of Christianity* The Importance of Salvation; The Belief
of the last Ages; and Curious Instructions relating to History; with some Latin
Poems. Father de la R^e, he has Commented upon certain Ancient Authors for the
use of Monseigneur the Dauphin; and the Tragedies which use to be represented
on the Theater at this College, are very often Writ by him: one may say that
he is alike able in many things, for the French Verses which have come from his
Pen, have been much esteemed. Father d'Arouy, before he went into Britany,
where he now is, was much admired for the Mathematical Instruments which he
invented; he invented one not long since, which showed us the Motions of the
Stars in such a method, as is worthy the Curiosity of the most Skilful in that
Science. They sometimes make Public Actions in this College, which draw a
prodigious number of People. At the Carnaval they represent some little Latin
Tragedy. After Easter they expose Enigmatical Questions to be explained, for
which they have certain Prizes. They have also certain Theses to be maintained,
to which Persons of Quality resort; but their greatest Bravery of all is, the
Grand Tragedy which they represent yearly in the Month of August, on a Theater
raised on purpose, which takes up all the bottom of the Court. The Actors are
always Pensionaries, and Sons of Persons of Quality. The finest objects of this
Tragedy are the Balets of the Sieur de Beauchamp's Composition, which are
danced between the Acts. When all is done they make a distribution of Prizes to
those that merit best, without any regard to the Quality of the Person; which
occasions great Emulation among the Youth, and makes them use the utmost of
their endeavors to gain a Prize, which the King gives, in the View of such an
Assembly.

As you go from hence, a little higher in the Street, you have

The Church of St. Estienne des Grecs, the first and oldest of Paris. St. Denis
Bishop of this Town, as some think, was the Founder. It is not any way
considerable, but for its Antiquity. Report says, That St. Francis of Sales,
Bishop and Prince of Geneva, made his Vows of Chastity and Poverty in this
Church, before the Chapel of our Lady de bonne delivrance here, in which there
is a very great Devotion. Over against this is

The Convent of Jacobius, formerly called Friars Preachers of the Order of St.
Dominick, whose first Foundation is alleged to be in the life time of that
Saint, who lived in the Year 1217. under the Pontificate of Honorius the Third,
and in the Reign of Philip Augustus. Historians say, that St. Dominick took
great pains, about the Extirpation of the Heresy of the Albigenses, who caused
great disorders in Languedoc: and at the same time he sent two of his Religious
to Paris, who were Lodged in a place called The Citizens Parlour, in the same
place where now this Convent stands. They were called Jacobins, from the Rue
Saint Jacques. Their Church, as it now is, was built by order of St. Lewis, if
we may believe Belleforest, a faithful Historian. Here are many Tombs of great
Lords, who for the most part were Princes of the Blood Royal of France. But in
regard I did not design to search into Antiquities, I shall not here express
their Names, which may be found in Father du Breuil. I will only observe, that
among these famous Monuments is that of Humbert, the last Sovereign Prince of
Dauphine, whose Title was Dauphin of Vionnois; the Tomb stands before the great
Altar. History says, That seeing himself Childless, he sold this Province to
Philip Augustus for a small Sum of Money, and himself embraced a Religious
Life at Lions, and entered into the Order of St. Dominick; where he lived in
very great Esteem with all good Men, and was chosen to be Prior of this
Convent, and afterward Patriarch of Alexandria. This is his Epitaph:

Hic jacet R. Pater and Dominus amplissimus HUMBERTUS, primo Viennae Delphinus,
deinde relicto Principatu, Frater nostri Ordinis, Prior in hoc Convenru
Parisiensi, ac demum Patriarcha Alexandrinus, and perpetuns Ecclesiae Rhemensis
Administrator, and praecipuus bujus Conventus Benefactor. Obiit anno Domini
1345. Maii 22.

Here lies the Reverend Father, and Most Honorable Lord HUMBERT, First Dauphin
of Vienna, after that leaving his Principality, he became Brother of our Order,
and Prior in this Convent at Paris, and at last Patriarch of Alexandria,
perpetual Administrator of the Church of Rhemes, and chief Benefactor to this
Convent. He Dyed in the Year of our Lord 1345. May 22.

This Church has nothing but what is ordinary, yet is the great Altar very
handsomely contrived; it is adorned with black Marble, and the Arms of the
Cardinal of St. Cecily, Brother of Cardinal Mazarin, which you see about it,
speak it to be built at his Costs; and this he did in regard he was of this
Order. Over the Door going into the Sacristy, is a Picture of Valentine's,
representing the Nativity of the Holy Virgin; which Piece Cardinal Mazarin
gave, to be placed over the great Altar; but when he perceived it to be too
little, he left it to the Church, and it has been placed here ever since. It
is one of the most Beautiful pieces in all France, and the Curious esteem it
highly. Felibien, in his Book which he Composed of the Lives and Works of the
most Famous Painters, tells us, it is one of the best Pictures that ever came
out of Italy into France. On one side of the great Altar, stands the Chapel of
our Lady of the Rosary. The Wainscot Work of which is very handsome. Here is a
very great Devotion, by reason of the Indulgences, which are here to be gained
every first Sunday of the Month. In the Cloister are several Paintings, but
they are of no great Note; so also is their Library, which is not very
numerous, yet it has been made use of by very Famous Doctors. They preserve
here one thing of great Curiosity, and that is the Pulpit of Great St. Thomas
of Aquiu, the Angel of the Schools. It is made of Wood, and enclosed in another
of the same material, that it may not be injured by time. A General of this
Order was at the charge of making that in which it is enclosed; and not along
ago these Fathers have caused a small Room to be made, at the end of the
Library, where this Pulpit is conveniently exposed to sight. It Is well known
that St. Thomas of Aquin formerly professed Divinity in this Convent, and in the
great School, which we see at this day, he made his Lectures. It has been
Rebuilt at the beginning of this present Age, through the Alms which these
Fathers collected in a Jubilee. Several Preachers of this House have acquired
great Reputation in the World. Among others Father Chaussemer, who is esteemed
one of the most Profound and Eloquent that we have at present; he Preached this
Lent at Nostre-Dame, after he had performed the like at the Louvre. The
deceased Monsieur Coeffeteau, who has composed a very Curious Roman History,
past here the greatest part of his Life; with many others, whose names would be
too long to insert here.

Before you leave the Rue Saint Jacques, you ought to know, that here inhabit
many Booksellers, who sell almost all of them, the Works of the Messieurs du
Port Royal, all the Works of Monsieur Arnault, generally esteemed by all
Learned Men: Here you will find the several pieces of the French Academicians;
many Foreign Books; the several pieces that concern the Gallicane Church; all
Monsieur Maimbourg's Writings; here also are sold Father Bouhour's Books; those
of Father Rapin; of the Bishop of Meaux; of the Abbot Flechier, Almoner to
Madam the Dauphiness, who Translated the Life of Cardinal Commendon, and
composed for Monseigneur the Dauphin, the History of Theodosius the Great, and
four Funeral Orations. Many other Books proper for the perusal of curious
Persons, are here also to be met with. In this Street also are many Gravers and
Sellers of Prints, who have in their Shops great store of Maps, and Printed
Pictures. Of which I shall say no more in this place. At the end of this Volume
I may (perhaps) set down a Catalogue of such Books as are best Writ in our
Language, for the use of Strangers, who oftentimes for want of better
information, buy very scurvy Books, instead of such as may be of use and
advantage to them in their study of the French Tongue.

Without the Port St. Jacques, in the Fauxbourg of that name, you may observe
many fine things, and in a greater number than in any other Faux-bourg about
the Town.

On the left Hand, as you enter, is the Convent of the Nuns of the Visitation,
which makes no great show. The Church it self is no bigger than an ordinary
Hall. Yet is their Altar one of the richest that can be seen on the Feast Days,
these Nuns sparing no Costs to adorn it with Candlesticks, Lamps, Vessels,
Figures, and a Thousand such like things, which are all of Silver, and most of
them very weighty. But the place being none of the best contrived, these rich
things appear not so well as they might do elsewhere. Going still forward, you
pass before

The Parish Church of St. James, from which all this Quarter takes its name. It
has been repaired in such manner as we now see it by the late Duchess of
Longueville Sister of Monsieur the Prince, who was one of the most pious and
Charitable Princesses of this Age. The Portal is of the Dorick Order, very well
performed; and had that Virtuous Princess lived, she had doubtless given
wherewithal to finish the Work: But she dyed about four years ago in the
Convent of Carmelite Nuns, to the regret of abundance of poor People, who
subsisted by her Alms.

The Seminary of St. Magloire, is near the last mentioned place. This was
formerly an Abbey of St. Bennet's Order, which was first Founded in the same
place, where at present stands St. Bartholomew's Church, near the Palace. But
those good Religious Men, being troubled with the noise and Clutter of that
place, changed their habitation in the Year 1138. and came to dwell here, which
was at that time a good way out of the Town, where there was already a Chapel
built and dedicated to St. George. After that in the Year 1549. The Monks of
St. Bennet did altogether quit this House, and transferred themselves to other
Houses of the same Order, the Revenue of this being given to the Archbishop of
Paris. And in the Room of the Monks they placed here certain Penitent Nuns, but
they continued not long. In fine, the Priests of the Oratory were introduced
here in the beginning of this present Age, whose Institution is to instruct the
Young Ecclesiastics in the Functions of their Ministry.

Further in this Street are the Vrsuline Nuns; whose Church is but small, yet
is their Altar of a very handsome design, and adorned with Pillars of black
Marble. These Nuns teach freely young Girls not only to Read and Write, but
also several sorts of Works proper for them, which is of great advantage to the
public. They were first Founded here in the Year 16^7. by Mademoisel de Saint
Beuve, a Lady of extraordinary Piety, and Queen Anne of Austria laid the first
Stone of their Church, in the Year 1620. June 22.

The Feuillantines are on the same side of the way, they are Nuns of St.
Bernard's Order, reformed by the blessed John de la Barriere, and were first
established in Paris 1622. through the Solicitation of Queen Anne of Austria.
Their Church has been some Years ago rebuilt anew, with considerable Expense.
It is very lightsom, and the Portal is not ill contrived: It was designed by
the Sieur Merot. One of their Benefactresses has contributed largely to the
Charges. Over the great Altar is a very good Copy from Raphael, of the Holy
Family, the original of which is in the King's Cabinet. The Grate of their
Quire is adorned with Copper gilt.

Nor far from thence are the English Benedictines, who have also built a new
Church, which is really something of the least, but in recompense of that, it
is very well adorned. It is set off with Pilasters, and the Altar is
accompanied with Pillars and Figures, which show very handsomely; the Wainscot
Work of the Stalls for the Monks, is very pretty, and the little Chapel of the
Holy Virgin, which stands over against the Door, is very neat. The Religious
who inhabit this House are originally English, and are come for refuge into
France, on the account of Religion. The late Queen Mother gave them great Alms,
as did also many other persons of Piety, and some English. There is a Person of
Quality interred with them, who has been a Benefactor, as may be seen by his
Epitaph. On the other side of the way are

The Carmelite Nuns.
THis was sometimes called Nostre-Dame des Champs. The Church belonging to
these Nuns is one of the oldest in Paris; most Antiquaries believe it to be one
of those which St. Denis Founded. Some modern Authors write that it was
formerly a Temple of the Goddess Ceres, or else of Mars; but for this opinion
they have no very good Foundation: For we find nothing in the ancient
Historians to warrant such a Conjecture. It is much more certain, that it
appertained a long time to the Order of St. Bennet, and that it was a Priory
depending on the great Abbey of Marmoutier, near the City of Tours. Whose
ancient Title to this place is still in being; and the Bishop of Orleans, who
is Abbot there, receives from hence Four or Five thousand Livres per annum. In
the Year 1604. were placed here certain Carmelite Nuns of St. Teresa's reform,
whom the Cardinal de Berulla fetched himself out of Spain, at such time when
this Reform began to be so famous in Christendom, for its great austerity. This
House was the first in all the Kingdom, that took the Rule of St. Teresa, and
from hence it is that all the other Convents of Paris, and in the other parts
of France, took their original. At present this Nunnery is very numerous, and
there are in it many persons of the greatest Quality, who quitting the World,
come to end their days here.

Their Church is one of the fairest, and most magnificent that can be seen, the
main Body of the Building is, in truth, very ancient, but the modern Ornaments
within it make sufficient amends for that. As you go in you may observe, that
it is all painted in imitation of black Marble vein'd with White; and that the
Balustrades or Partitions of the Chapels are of a Wainscot, extraordinary
finely gilt: But the most curious things of all are the great Pictures placed
under every Window, in Frames richly Carved and gilt. There are six of these
Pictures on each side, each representing some principal Passage of the New
Testament. They are the Work of the famousest Painters of this Age. The First,
on the left hand as you enter, representing the Miracle of the Five Loaves, was
done by Stella. The Second represents the Feast at the House of Simon the
Leper, where the Magdalen perfumed our Lord's Feet, and this was done by
Monsieur le Brun. The Third representing the triumphal entry of our Lord into
Jerusalem, is the Work of de la Hire. The Fourth is the Story of the Samaritan
Woman, and is also done by Stella; the Colors and the Drapery of this Picture
is excellent. The Fifth is Monsieur le Brun's; and the Sixth representing the
Transfiguration, is de la Hire's. Those on the other side were all done by
Champaign, and that able Master never made any better Pieces than these, as one
may easily observe. The Altar of this Church stands very high, and is all of
Marble, as well the body of the Work as the Pillars, which are of the
Corinthian Order, their Capitals of Brass gilt. The Tabernacle is all of
Silver, and represents the Ark of the Covenant; on the forepart of which there
is a great Bas-relief very well Carved. On Feast Days this Altar is adorned
with Vases, Candlesticks, and diverse things of that sort, which make a very
handsome show without Confusion. Over against the Grate of the Quire, where the
Nuns sing, is a great Picture representing the Angelick Salutation. It is the
Work of Guido, and ought to be esteemed as one of the best pieces that can be
seen, even in Italy it self. The several Chapels correspond to the magnificence
of the Church, especially that which is dedicated to the Magdalen, in which
there hangs an excellent Picture of that Saint, done by Monsieur le Brun, one
of the best, perhaps, that ever he made. The Saint is represented weeping under
a Rock, tearing her Hair and Ornaments, and trampling them under Foot, her Eyes
are all drowned in Tears, through which her Complexion but faintly appears;
briefly, one cannot imagine a piece of Painting more feelingly expressed and none
can see it without more compassion for such a Penitent. Over against the Altar
in this small Chapel is placed, in a kneeling posture, the Statue of Cardinal
de Berulle, Institutor of the Priests of the Oratory, to whom these Nuns are
much obliged, as has been already said. His Statue is of white Marble, and
made by Sarazin, in the Year 1657. It is raised on a Pedestal of four sides, on
which are several very good Bas-reliefs, wrought by an able Sculptor named
To^^rt, the same who made the curious Pulpit at St. Eslienne, of which I have
already spoken in this Second Part p.. On each side are two Pillars of black
Marble, on the top of which are certain Hames of Brass gilt, so also are the
Capitals, which are of the Ionick Order, and very well wrought. The rest of the
Chapel is adorned with Pictures of Monsieur le Brun's Painting, representing
the Life of the Magdalen. The following Inscription is on a Gravestone of white
Marble, in the middle of this Chapel, under which lies buried the Abbot le
Camus, at whose sole Charges this Church was adorned and beautified.

IN SPEM In hope of the Resurrection. Edward le Camus 1674. of February. The
other Chapels want but little of the same Beauty. The further part of the
Church terminates in a great Tribune (or Gallery) the Windows of which are
grated, into this Gallery the Religious Women come to hear the Sermon, when the
Preachers preach in the Nave of the Church. In the fore part of this Gallery
are placed two Statues, one of St. Peter and the other of St. Paul, and on the
top, the representation of St. Michael overcoming the Devil, which is of a very
curious Invention: It was the Work of Stella, before mentioned. All the Roof is
very well Painted after the manner of Cartouches: Between the Cordons you ought
to take notice of a Crucifix, accompanied with the Holy Virgin and St. John,
which are wrought with so much Art, that the Figures seem to stand upon a real
bottom. This is a pleasing fallacy to those that mind it. Finally, the last
remarkable thing to be observed in this Church, is the Crucifix of Brass over
the Balustrade, that divides the Quire from the Nave. The Curious esteem it
highly; it was made by Sarazin, who had the reputation of one of the ablest Men
of his time.

As you go from hence through the Court, you may observe a small House, built
after the Italian manner, composed of two Pavillions, very handsome, with a
Garden before the House, through which you pass as you go in. This House also
was built at the Charges of the before mentioned Monsieur the Abbot le Camus

From this place you go to see the famous

VAL de GRACE.
HEre it is that all Strangers are forced to grant, that we can raise in France
as fine Buildings and as regular, as those in Italy so much admired by
Travelers. We may also affirm, without vanity, that this magnificent House, if
considered in all its parts, is one of the most beautiful Works of all this Age.

It ought to be observed that the Nuns of Val de Grace were formerly Founded
near the Village of Bierre, about Three Leagues from Paris, in a very
incommodious place by reason of the Marish Grounds, called there le Val
profond, or the deep Vale; being very Sickly in this place, they Petitioned
Lewis XIII. for his permission to come and inhabit in Paris. Queen Anne of
Austria, his Illustrious Wife, being acquainted with their merit, chiefly from
one of their Company, named Margaret d'Arbouse, by whose means she took a
particular affection to them, declared her self their Foundress. She caused
them in the Year 1621. to be lodged in the Faux-bourg St. Jacques, in an old
House then called the Hotel d^ Valois, which was pulled down to make way for
those Buildings, which have been since erected. Some Years after, that
illustrious Queen, by way of thanksgiving for the happy Birth of the now King,
whom God gave to France after Twenty Years expectation, caused the Foundation
to be said of that glorious Edifice which we now see. Monsieur Mansard, so
often already mentioned, who was at that time the most esteemed Architect of
France, was made choice of for this Work, and the designs which he drew were
admired by all Men. He carried up the work as high as the first Floor, but then
for some Reasons he was changed, and other Architects employed in his place, to
wit, le Due, le Muet, and du Val, who performed their parts so well, that
Mansard was not mist, though so great a Master. In disgust to be thus used he
undertook to build the Chapel at Chateau de Fresne, seven Leagues from Paris,
for Monsieur de Guenegaud, Secretary of State; where he performed in little
that magnificent design, which he drew out at first for Val de Grace, and
thereby made that Chapel one of the finest Structures in the Kingdom, as all
who have seen it unanimously agree. But though the building at Val de Grace, is
admirable in its present condition, yet it has been effected with abundance of
pains, and with excessive Charges, chiefly in laying the Foundation, by reason
of the Quarries which they met with in digging. The present condition of this
place is as follows:

First you enter into a great Court, which lies before the principal Door; this
Court is separated from the Street by a Pallisade of Iron, at the extremities
of which are two square Pavillions; on the right Hand and on the left it is
bounded with certain Stone Works, adorned with rustic Pillars, which make a
very handsome Show. At the further part of this Court is the great Portal,
raised upon Six steps. But that which makes it most remarkable, is, that it is
after the manner of a Portico composed of Four great Corinthian Pillars, with
Niches on each side, in which are placed St. Bennet, and St. Scholastica, of
white Marble. On the Frise is this Inscription in Letters of Gold:

JESU NASCENTI, VIRGINIQUE MATRI. To the Child JESUS, and his Virgin Mother.
The Front of the Portal is of two Orders of Pillars, the Corinthian and the
Composite, with all their proper Ornaments. If the outside appears great, the
inside is still infinitely more magnificent. All the Church is paved with Marble
of diverse Colors. And the compartments are correspondent to the Cartouches of
Sculpture, and to the Guillochis (or Flourishings) in the Roof, where there are
several Bas-tailles of admirable Workmanship. This Roof is of Stone as white as
Marble, and it is throughout enriched with Ornaments of the best sort, in which
Monsieur Anguerre has surpast all. On each side of the Nave are Three Chapels,
divided asunder by Two great Pilasters, which support the Cornish that runs
round the Church, and supports the Arches of the Roof. The Quire is directly
under the Dome at the further end of the Nave, from which it is parted only by
a grate of Iron gilt. Four great Arches support the Dome; and the great Altar
is placed under the futhermost Arch. It is of a very singular design, composed
of Six great twisted Pillars of the Composite Order. They are of black Marble
vein'd with white; of which sort there are hardly any others to be found in
Europe; they are raised upon Pedestals of Marble also, and they are all over
enriched with Palms and Feuillages of Brass gilt, which make a wondrous
beautiful Show. One may truly say that the contrivance of these Pillars is, in
some respects, more magnificent, than those of the great Altar at St. Peter's
in Rome, which were designed by the Cavalier Bernin. These excel in number and
in the beauty of the Workmanship. They stand in a great Circle, raised about
two Foot, and make a kind of Pavillion open on all sides, forming Six
Conso^nes, at the feet of which are Angels holding Censingpots. These Pillars
are joined together by great ^estons of Palms, about which little Angels hold
certain Scrowles, in which are writ several Verses of the Gloria in Excelsis
Deo. Glory be to God on high. The whole is of the best sort of gilding without
any Colors Upon the Altar, which is placed in the middle of these Pillars, the
Infant JESUS is represented lying in his Cradle, all of white Marble,
accompanied by the Holy Virgin and St. Joseph* these are all of Monsieur
Anguerre's Work, and reckoned among the best things that ever he did. Behind
the great Altar you see a Grate in a kind of Pavillon, of Marble also. To this
place the Nuns come to make their Prayers, when the Holy Sacrament is exposed.
The inside of this place is very beautiful, but in regard it is difficult to be
seen, I shall not here say any thing of that subject. Between the Arches which
support the Dome, in the Corners stand the ^our Evangelists in Sculpture, well
worth your exact Observation; and a little lower are as many gilt Balconies
placed over the like number of little Chapels, which are contrived out of the
thickness of the Work. But though all these things are admirable, yet these are
not the chief Rarities, the Painting on the inside of the Dome will give much
more pleasure to the lovers of Art; it represents the Glories of the Blessed in
Heaven, who are placed in several Groupes, the Apostles, the Prophets, the
Martyrs, the Virgins, and the Confessors, each of which are distinguished and
known by some particular remarks, the Kings, the Patriarchs, the Heads of
Orders, the Fathers of the Church, St. Bennet and St. Sch^l^stioa; in the lower
parts are placed the Altar, and the Candlestick of Seven Branches, and in a
word, all that the Scripture discovers to us of Paradise. In the upper part the
sight loses it self in an infinite space, which appears full of confused and
faint Objects, by reason of a vast distance, and a great light that strikes out
from the highest of all. All this delicate Painting is in Fresco, and the Work
of M. Mignard, who did the Hall and Gallery at St. Cloud. In the Frise at the
bottom you may read this Inscription:

ANNA AUSTRIA D. G. FRANCORUM REGINA, REGNIO. RECTRIX, CUI SUBJECIT DEUS OMNES
HOSTS, UT CONDERET DOMUM IN NOMINE SUO, Ecc. A. M. D. C. L. ANNE of AUSTRIA,
by the Grace of God Queen of France, and Regent of the Kingdom, to whom God
subdued all her Enemies, that she might build a House in his Name. On the right
Hand and on the left of the great Altar, are the two Grates which take up all
the void space between the side Arches. They are of an extraordinary greatness,
and the like were never made of the bigness, besides they are wrought with such
delicate Art, as if the Iron had been as soft and easy to form as Lead. That
on the right side encloses the Nuns Quire from the Church, which is large and
well Wainscotted* They have in it a small Organ which they use on Festivals, at
such time as they sing their Service Musically, which they perform to the great
pleasure of their hearers, they having among them some very excellent Voices.
On the other side is a great Chapel* all hung with Mourning, in the middle of
which is erected a Hearse of black Velvet upon Four or Five Steps; here are
reposited the Hearts of the Queen Mother their Illustrious Benefactress, the
Queen whom we have so lately lost, with others of several Princesses of the
Blood Royal, among the rest that of Madam the Duchess of Orleans.

Before we leave this place we ought to observe the Cyfer, which is at the
bottom of the steps of the Altar, composed only of two Letters L. and A.
encompassed about with Palms, and other Feuillages of white Marble. There are
here many other things worth observation, which would be painful to set down in
writing, but the Curious when they come hither will easily find 'em out. The
inside of the Convent corresponds exactly well to the magnificence of the
Church. The several Cells and the Offices are regularly disposed, and built
with solidity, particularly the Apartment of the Queen Mother, disposed in such
manner as may befit a C^puchin Nun. The Nuns are very austere, for they observe
the reformed Rule of St. Bennet. They choose their Abbess from among their own
Community, whose Authority is only Triennial. Their chief Revenues arise from
the Abbey of St. Corneille in Compiegne, which is annexed to this House.

As you go from hence you must not forget to observe the outside of the Church,
and the Ornaments about the Dome, which appears of a very great height: it is
covered with Lead, with great Bands gilt; and on the top a Balustrade of Iron,
round about the little Lanthorn open on all sides; over that is the great Ball,
and thereupon the Cross. All these things are set off gloriously with Gildings,
and which way soever you enter into Paris, this Dome is so big and so high,
that it may be easily discovered a great way off.

After you have seen Val de Grace, you ought next to go to

The Convent of the Capuchins, behind which there lies a very great enclosed
piece of Ground, which extends a great way into the Fields, and serves in
Summer for a very delightsom Walk. their Cloister is but small, according to
the manner of building used by those good Friars. Within it on the Walls they
have set up several Inscriptions in French Verse, to excite the Devotion of
such as walk there.

In the Street over against the Capuchins going into the Rue d'Enfer, stands

The Convent of the Bernardin-Nuns, according to the Reform of Port Royal.
Their Church is very neat; it was designed by the Steur le Pautre; though it be
but small, yet it has some Beauties which are not found in greater. The late
Queen Mother brought these Nuns from the famous Abbey of Port Royal des Champs
near Versailles, in the Year 1625, in which place they were very numerous and
of great Reputation, and placed them here; this House being then called the
Hotel de Clagni. They have in this Church a great Devotion, by reason of one of
the Holy thorns of our Lords Crown, in favor of which some great Miracles have
been done. Their Altar-piece representing the last Supper, was painted by
Monsieur Champagne. They have also here an antique Amphora or Waterpot, which
as some pretend, was one of those which were made use of at the Marriage of
Cana.

There remains nothing more that is remarkable in this Faux-bourg, but

The Observatory ROYAL.
THE King who takes no less care to make the Arts flourish, than to extend the
Limits of his Kingdom, caused this Structure to be erected in the Year 1667.
for the Habitation of Mathematicians. It consists of a great Body of Stone-work
two Stories high; the Windows of which are round at the top, and about fourteen
Toises high (a Toise is Six Foot.) The forepart of the Building is made with
Towers Eight Angular of the same height, with a great Esplanade in manner of a
Tarrass, with fronts about the whole Building. The Tower on the East side is
open at the top, and without any Roof, that so one may see the better from the
bottom. Between these two Towers are several great Rooms, which are not yet
furnished with such things as are to be there. But that which is most remarkable
in this Building, is, that there is not used about it either Iron or Wood, and
yet the Roof of it is extremely solid. The Staircase is the finest that can be
imagined; it is all of Stone laid after a way extraordinary, hardy and bold
from the bottom to the top; and the Iron Rail that winds the whole length of
these Stairs is very well wrought. It is 156 Steps high and leads to the
Tarrass. In regard this Building consists of several stories, it has several
vaulted Roofs one over the other, the uppermost of which consists of an Arch of
a large extent, flat on the outside, and paved with Hint-stones, cut exactly
and bound together with Cement, that the Rain may not penetrate and damnifie
the Vaults beneath. The Curious may if they please go down into the Caves or
Grotto's which are extreme deep, since the Staircase that leads down contains
One hundred threescore and eleven Steps; in the middle of which they have
contrived a void hollow space in manner of a Well, which pierces through all
the Rooms, and extends up to the top of the Tarrass, so that through this hole
you may see the light to the very bottom of the Cave. It is said that this was
made on purpose to see the Stars at Noonday. But it seems it fails of effect,
for no body has yet seen them, though it has been often endeavored. This place
which they call le Puits (the Well) contains 28 Toises (56 yards) from the
bottom of it to the vent at the top.

In the several Apartments, especially in those belonging to M. Cassini, are
several curious Mathematical Instruments, as Globes, Pendulums, and chiefly
Glasses of very great Dimensions, with which these Learned Men observe the
course of the Stars. There are only Four Mathematicians who lodge in the
Observatory, part of those who compose the Academy of Sciences, established at
the King's Cabinet, as we have formerly noted; and they are M. Cassini,
originally an Italian, and formerly one of the great Dukes Academy at Florence,
where he had attained great Reputation. He takes here a great deal of pains in
Astronomy, and has made many discoveries in that Art, for which the King gives
him a considerable Pension. M. de la Hire, M. Couplet who teach the
Mathematics to the Pages belong-to the great Stable; the Deceased M. the Abbot
Picard was one of those, but his place is not yet supplied, and M. Hugens, a
Hollander, has here also an Apartment, though he does not commonly abide in it.
These Gentlemen meet together upon certain days, and communicate the
Observations which they have severally made, and sometimes they Print them also
for public satisfaction. Every Year M. Cassini publishes about Newyearstide a
small Volume, called La Connoissance des temps, by which one may know the
Course of the Planets, and other Curiosities of that nature, much more exact
and regular than any thing hitherto seen on the subject. They have here a small
square Chamber over the forepart of the Tarrass, in which those who speak at
the opposite Corners may easily understand one another, and yet those in the
middle not perceive it. This is occasioned by reason the Roof is Vaulted
hollow, and the Angles are continued along the Roof from one side to the other,
without any obstruction. After you have seen the Observatory, as you go out you
ought to take notice of

The Water-House, which stands near the Gate as you go out next the Rue
d'Enfer. This House was built to receive the Water that comes from the Village
of Rongis in that Curious Aqueduct, which Queen Mary of Medicis caused to be
built at Arcueil, which the Curious ought to visit as one of the finest in all
France. You ought to know that most of the Fountains in Paris come from this
Receiver or Conduit, which makes its first discharge at Luxembourg-House, from
whence afterward the Waters divide themselves to all parts of the City.

As you return back to the Town again, through the Rue d'Enfer, you first come
to The House of the Fathers of the Oratory, which they call The Institution,
and serves them as a Novitiate. The Church is well built, but there is nothing
here of singular Note. From hence you go to

The Convent of the Carthusians.
THis Monastery was built by the King St. Lewis, who gave to the Religious of
St. Bruno's Order, the old House or Chateau of Vauvert, where at that time, as
Historians say, Devils did inhabit, and caused there so many disorders, that by
Arrest of Parliament the Town Gate which led into that Street was walled up.
The Street which lies before the House does still retain the old name, and it
is for this reason that it was first; called the Rue d'Enfer (or Hell Street.)
But since these good Fathers became possessed of the place, they quickly expelled
the evil Spirits; and St. Lewis having a great esteem of the Austere and Holy
Life that they led, made them a Visit with his whole Court, and conferred upon
them sufficient Lands and Demesnes for their Subsistence. Many persons did
contribute to the building of their House, which takes up more Ground than any
other Religious House does at present in all the Town and Suburbs of Paris.
Besides that the Cells are large, and that they have each a separate Garden;
they have also a great Close containing many Arpens of Land, which encompasses
the whole House. The Church has nothing in it extraordinary, except the Seats
of the Religious, which were made about two Years ago, and are the finest
wrought that were ever yet seen. The Wainscot is perfectly handsome, and
adorned with Sculpture that makes a delicate appearance: These are composed of
small Corinthian Pilasters which support the Cornish; one of the Fathers of the
House designed them and managed the Work. They now begin to place some Pictures
between the Croisees. The first which has been placed here is done by M.
Audran, the second by Monsieur Coipel, and in time the whole Quire may be
furnished in this manner, which will considerably beautify the Church.

The little Cloister which lies on one side of this Church, is the only thing
that is rare and singular belonging to these fathers. It is adorned with a
Dorick Architecture of Pilaster fashion. Between the Arches are several
Pictures representing the Life of St. Bruno their Founder, and in certain
Cartouches adjoining to each Picture, the Life of that Saint in Latin Verses.
The Pictures which hang at the Corners of the Cloister, represent the views of
several remarkable places, among others of the City of Rome, of the Grand
Chartreuse near Grenoble, of Paris on the Louvre side as it showed before the
old Tower was taken down, and the Port-neuve, which stood not far from the
Pont-rouge; the rest are only fancies of the Painter. All the Painting of this
Cloister was done by Le Sueur, who never did any thing finer than these Pieces
here. Of late days they have contrived Wooden Shuts in which they shut them up,
that they may not be injured, as certain persons who envy the Merit and
Reputation of that incomparable Man, have attempted to do. They do not open
these Pictures but upon certain Days, or when Curious People desire to see
them. It is apparent that better Paintings than these cannot be; yet had he
lived we should have had from him things infinitely more perfect; but his fate
was like that of Raphael, who dyed in an Age when his admirable Genius began to
make him known. That which remains to be seen in this House is the Refectory,
which is very lightsom. Here the Religious never Eat but upon Festivals,
Sundays and Thursdays; upon other days they take their repasts in their several
Cells, which are disposed in a square place round about their Churchyard or
Cemetery. These Cells are composed of Four or Five small Rooms all on a Floor,
Boarded throughout, and very simply furnished. Some of these Fathers have by
them very curious Libraries, the Father Vicar has one which is much esteemed.
Some of them employ themselves industriously in diverse Works, thereby to pass
more easily their time of Solitude, which is very rigorous in regard they are
never permitted to go out of the House, nor to receive any Visits but at
certain hours. And it is well and judiciously observed by one of our
Historians, that the principal reason why these Fathers have preserved the
purity of their first Institute better than the other Orders, is because they
have always shunned with extreme care the great Commerce of the World, and the
Visits of Women: Two Dangerous Rocks for the Monastic Life.

Near the Carthusians stands the little Convent of the Feuillans, in which is
nothing extraordinary. But not far from this Convent dwells M. -- who has a
very neat Garden of the design of M. le Nostre.

From hence you descend to the Port St. Michael, which was taken down two
Years since, to enlarge the Passage, which before that was very strait and
inconvenient. In the same place where the Gate stood, is built a Fountain under
a great Arch in manner of a Niche, with a small Portico of the Dorick Order
beneath; but the Ornaments are not yet quite finished. Here you come into the
Rue de la Harp, and so you may go on to the College of

The SORBONNE.
THis beautiful House requires to be treated of with a particular application,
in regard it is one of the principal Ornaments of Paris, as well for the great
reputation of those Learned Men which come from hence, as for the beauty of the
Architecture in its buildings. Cardinal de Richelieu beautified it as we see it
at present. Before that it was but an old College consisting of very mean
building, yet was it however a place of mighty great Reputation. It was first
Founded by Robert de Sorbonne, Almoner to St. Lewis, who furnished him with
means wherewith to perform the Work, as apears by the following Inscription in
the Church, graved on a Brass plate.

LUDOVICUS REX FRANCO RUM, SUB QUO FUNDATA FUIT DOMUS SORBONAE. CIRCA ANNUM
DOMINI. Lewis King of France, by whose Favor this House of the Sorbonne was
Founded about the Year of our Lord M CCLII. The Cardinal de Richelieu, who took
all occasions to Immortalize his Name, caused this College to be Rebuilt, and
spared no Costs to make it truly magnificent. For this purpose he employed the
Sieur Mercier an able Architect, who after some Years time brought the work
almost to the point of perfection as we see it; however it was not quite
finished by him, for he dyed before he could give it his last Hand. That which
we are first to observe is the square place before the Church Door, and has a
Passage into the Rue de la Harp. This place is, in truth, not large, by reason
of some Houses built before it, belonging to the College des Tresoriers,
however this hinders not but that it is very handsome. On both hands it is
fronted with very fair Houses. On one hand is a great Body of Lodgings stone
built of Two Stories high, in Bossage Rustic; and here is the Divinity School
for those Scholars who come from abroad to hear the Lectures which are made
here by Six Doctors, Three in the Morning and Three in the Afternoon, who
change from hour to hour. This School is great and high, and it is sometimes
made use of when a Thesis is maintained by some Person of Quality. On the Right
Hand in this Court is the Chapel belonging to the College of Clugni. It takes
up almost one side of this Court, and makes no unhandsom Show, although it be
of Gothic building; but gives the Beholder occasion to observe with pleasure,
the difference between that gross and Rustic sort of building in the Ages
past, and the regular and studied manner now used in this. As you enter into
this open place or Court, and cast your Eyes upon the Portal of the Church, you
cannot desire a finer object. The proportions are so true, and the points of
the view so well contrived, that the distant parts of this Edifice seem to
stand over the Portal, and to be placed in the standing where they are, to
serve for a greater Ornament to the Front. The Dome is none of the highest. It
is accompanied like that of Val de Grace, with Four little ones, with Statues,
with bands of Lead gilt, and with a Balustrade of Iron about the little
Lanthorn which is on the top of all the work. All these different things do
agree so well one with another, that one cannot wish to see a more beautiful
piece of Architecture. The Portal of the Church consists of Two orders of
Pillars, Corinthian, and Composite. The second Story are only Pilasters. Both
above and below, between the Pillars, are Niches, in which are placed Statues
of very good Workmanship; as also are those on the outside, and those within,
between the Corinthian Pilasters that support the Roof. The inside of the
Church is but small, and is not altogether so light as it might have been;
however, all things there are well disposed: The Pavement is of Marble: The
Dome is very well painted, and so are the Four Fathers of the Church which are
between the Arcades that sustain it; these are in Fresquo, and of colors very
shining. The great Altar is not yet begun; but doubtless it will be
magnificent, if they follow the designs which are shown: It is to be all of
Marble, composed of Six great Pillars of Jasper, with their Capitals and other
Ornaments gilt. The lesser Altars, which are already finished, do promise, that
if the great Altar be of the same gust, one cannot see any thing more delicate.
The Altar of the Virgin was finished not long ago; it is of white Marble, with
Ornaments of Brass gilt, which show admirably. From hence we ought to go into
the inward parts of the House, in the midst of which is a square Court
encompast about with Buildings, part of which are higher than the rest, which
gives an air of Grandeur and Majesty to the Portico of the Church. As you see
it on this side, hardly can any thing appear better: At the bottom of this
Court it appears raised upon Fifteen steps, and consists of ten great
Corinthian Pillars, distant from the building more than Six Foot: These Pillars
support a Fronton in which are the Arms of Cardinal de Richelieu, with two
Statues on each side. On the Freese you read this Inscription:

ARMANDUS JOANNES CARD. DUX DE RICHELIEU, SORBONAE PROVISOR, AEDIFICAVIT DOMUM
ET EXALTAVIT TEMPLUM SANCTUM DOMINO. Armand John, Cardinal and Duke of
Richelieu, Curator of the Sorbonne, built this House, and erected a Holy Temple
to the Lord. Under this beautiful Portico you see the Door into the Church,
which is of the same disposition with that of the Rotundae in Rome: The
Architect has imitated it as near as he could. All the Apartments about this
Court are inhabited by the Doctors of this House, who have a particular right
to dwell here. Some of these Doctors have very pretty Libraries of their own,
but these are not so easy to be seen as the great Library which is common to
all the House, where all the Doctors study. It is very long and very high, and
runs over the head of two great ground Rooms, in which the Sorbonnists maintain
their Theses and Disputations. M. le Masle, Prior des Roches, and Secretary to
Cardinal de Richelieu, gave the greatest part of the Books you see here, which
are very good ones. Monsieur the Cardinal gave his also, among which are some
very rare Manuscripts, distinguished from others by his Arms on the Covers;
among the rest, there is one of Titus Livius in two great Folio Volumes,
written in Parchment, it is of an old Translation into French about the Reign
of Charles the Fifth, adorned with Mineatures at the beginning of every
Chapter, and with Flourishes in the Margin, which are curiously Painted with
that delicate Gold color, the secret of which has been lost for these two last
Ages, it having been formerly used as an ordinary Color, and is of such an
admirable brightness that it never sullies. Besides this there are many other
very rare Manuscripts in one of the Presses at the end, on that side next the
Chimney, most of them bound in red Turkey Leather. In this Library are a
greater number of Divinity Books than of any other sort. Besides you may may
see here a great quantity of Bibles of different sorts, which have been
Collected together with great care. At each end there is a Chimney, over which
are placed the Pictures of Monsieur the Cardinal in his Ceremonious habit, and
of Monsieur le Masle, both in their full length; over that next the door is a
Bust of the Cardinal, in Brass, wrought by the Sieur Varin, which came from
among the Goods of the Duchess of Aiguillon, who after her death bequeathed
this, with other Goods, to this House, she having had the use of them during
her Life, by the Will of the Cardinal de Richelieu her Uncle. There is also
another lesser Library in a private place of the House, but it contains only
those Books of which there has happened to be two of a sort in the great
Library, or such as the other Library cannot hold, in regard the number does
increase daily, because most Authors present their Works here. The King himself
has presented to this place all the curious Prints which he has caused to be
graved, of which there are four or five great Volumes in Folio, neatly bound,
which are the Carousel, the Tapistries, the curious Dissections which have been
made at the Academy of Sciences, and some others; in such sort as this Library
ought to be esteemed as one of the best and most numerous that can be seen,
though it be not yet quite perfected. But it is with this as with others which
are in greater esteem, it being almost impossible to render any one Library
complete, because of the difficulty of recovering some scarce Books, which
oftentimes make the chief beauty of a* Library, and which cannot be met with
without mighty pains. Besides since Printing, the number of Books is so
increast, and there are so many published in all parts of the World, that all
cannot be had.

Over the Church Door, on that side next the Place is the following Inscription:

DEO OPT. MAX. To Almighty God, Armand Cardinal of Richelieu. After you have
seen the most Remarkable things in the Sorbonne, you pass forward in the Rue de
la Harp; turning back again through the open place before the Church, you come
next to

The College d'Harcour, one of the best of the University, in which they keep
Exercise for the lower Schools, which are full of Pensioners, and such as come
from abroad. The Gate is fair and of a very regular design, it is Vault
fashion, adorned with Bossages, with a great Cornish, and an Attique over that.
If they had contrived a Court before it, it would have appeared with more
advantage.

As you descend lower you pass by the Colleges of Justice, of Baieux, of
Narbonne, and that of Seez, in which the Schools have been laid down for some
years past.

Lower is the Church of St. Cosmus, in which there is nothing remarkable unless
it be the Epitaph of Monsieur Dupuy, so well known to all Men of Learning. The
House of St. Cosmue stands near this Church, in which House the Chirurgions do
ordinarily meet to make their Dissections in relation to the Anatomy of humane
Bodies, upon which sometimes they make Learned Lectures.

Over against the Rue de Sorbonne, in the Rue de Mathurins, stands the Hotel de
Cluni, belonging to the Abbot of that name. This Hotel was formerly called the
Palais des Terms, because of some old Ruins here remaining of the Thermae or
Baths, as some thought, of the Emperor Julian the Apostate. And you ought not
to neglect going for this purpose to a Neighboring House in the Rue de la
Harp, at the sign of the Iron-Cross, where the Messenger of Chartres lodges;
you will see there several old Arches, which argue great Antiquity, and within
them a kind of Hall whose Roof is very high, and contrived without Cordons;
this is very likely to have been used for some profane Temple. The three Niches
in the South Wall sorve to support this Conjecture, in regard they might have
been so contrived for Statues, but we cannot determine any thing, and the
silence of Historians in this matter leaves People at Liberty to make what
Conjectures they please. The other parts are very well built, and assure us it
was heretofore some great House. The Roof is so strong that they have laid upon
it so much Earth as to make a little Garden, in which are Flowers and small
Trees growing; and those who dwell in the Hotel de Cluni, come and walk here as
on a Tarrass made on purpose.

This is all that is to be seen in this Street. Further on, and at the end of
the Rue de la vielle Bouclerie, which determines at the little open place
before the Pont St. Michael, near to a House which almost makes the very Corner
of the Street, you may observe a great stone, which serves for a Boundary, upon
which is cut after an ugly fashion the Figure of a Man; but as ill as it is one
may easily distinguish the Head. Historians tell us, That this is the
representation of one called John le Clerc, a Locksmith by trade, and Porter of
the Gate de Bussi; who in the time of those Troubles which happened in the
Reign of Charles the Sixth, after the Parisians had expelled the Burgundians out
of this City, where they had committed a thousand Disorders, had the Treachery
to open to them that Gate in the night time, which put the Burgesses into an
Alarm. After all these troubles were over, the Parisians intending a revenge
upon the Author of them, and not able to apprehend his person, he being fled,
they caused his Esfigies to be made in stone, and by Sentence of the Provost of
Paris, all the Inhabitants were ordered to cast something in his Face, in
detestation of his Treason, and this was accordingly executed. Since that time
this Statue has been removed to this place to keep off the Wheels of Coaches
and Carts, from injuring the House where it stands. Turning on the left Hand
you enter into

The Street of St. Andrew des Arcs. The Parish Church which gives name to this
Street is considerable for several things, which the Curious will meet with in
it. It was formerly but a small Chapel, and stood in the middle of a Field,
planted with Vines or Fruit Trees, belonging to the Monks of St. Germain des
Prez. But all these things have been altered a long time. Some think that this
Church is called St. Andrew des Arcs, by reason of some old Arches that were
hereabouts. The building it self has nothing singular, but you ought not to
neglect to go into this Church to see the Tombs of several Famous persons; such
were Messieurs de Thou, whose Monuments are in the Chapel of St. Christopher,
which they built from the Ground. The name of these great Men has attained so
great veneration among the Learned, that most of them make no difficulty to
say, That France never produced more Illustrious Persons. And the History which
was writ by one of them, is looked upon as the very Model and best thing of the
kind in these last Ages. It is writ in Latin, which has occasioned Strangers
not only to read it, but to have so great an esteem for it, that they apply
themselves to this Historian more than any. In this Chapel you may see a Bust
of Monsieur de Thou in Marble, with his Epitaph, which recites at large the
great Employments which he enjoyed.

D. O. M. UXOR LIBERIQUE MOER. P. Sacred to Almighty God. Christopher de Thou,
Knight, the Brother of James, who having passed through all the Offices of the
Long-Robe, with the commendation of his Learning, Honesty and Prudence, and
having arrived to very great Honors under Francis the First, and Henry the
Second Kings of France: Being President of the Parliament at Paris; after that
chief Counselor of the Holy Consistory, and then Chancellor to Henry Duke of
Orleans, and at last to Francis Duke of Anjou. At length when he designed to
correct the Courts of Justice, to deliver the Revenue of the Kingdom from
Cheats and Defalcations, and to restore the Discipline of the Universities,
having perceived in himself none of the inconveniences of old Age, he died
suddenly of a Fever. 74. Years and 5. Days. Salvation 1582. on the Calends of
November. You may also read in the same Chapel the Epitaph of his Eldest Son,
and of several other persons of this Family who are here interred.

In St. Anthony's Chapel, near this, are the Tombs of several Ancestors of the
Chancellor Seguier, to whom France owes a great part of her Renown in Learning.
These Illustrious Fathers of a Son no way degenerating, were of the same name
with him, Peter Seguier, and did execute in their times the principal Charges
in Parliament, as may be seen by the Inscriptions in this Chapel.

On the same Church you may read the Epitaph of the Princess of Conti, who
deceased in the Year 1668. and whose Piety is still Reverend in the Eyes of the
whole World. This is in the Quire on one side of the high Altar. Upon the
Monument is placed a handsome Figure of White Marble representing Hope
Afflicted: it was wrought by M. Girardon. Fellow the Figure is this Inscription:

A LA GLOIRE DE DIEU, XIX, ans, vendit ses pierreries pour nourrir pendant la
famine de 1662. les pauvres de Berry, de Campaign, and de Picardie, pratiqua
toutes les austeritez que sa sante put soussrir, demeura veuve a l'age de XXIX.
ans, consacra le rest de sa vie a elever en Princes Chretiens les Princes ses
Enfans, and a maintenir les Loix temporelles and ecclesiastiques dans ses
Terres, se reduisit a une depence tres-modeste, restitua tous les biens don't
l'acquisition lui fut suspecte jusqu' a la sum de D. CCC, mill livres,
distribua toute son epargne aux Pauvres, dans ses Terres and dans toutes les
parties da Monde, and passa soudainement a l'eternite apres XVL. ans de
perseverance, le IV. Fevrier M. DC. LXXII. agee de XXXVI. ans. To the Glory of
God, CONTY; 1662. for the relief of the Poor in Berry, Champagne and Picardy,
practiced all the Austerities which a Religious and Holy Life can endure;
became a Widow at the Age of 29. Years, and consecrated the rest of her Life,
to the Education of her Sons like true Christian Princes: and to the
maintaining the Laws Temporal and Ecclesiastic in her Lands, reduced her self
to a mean expense, restored all the Goods she had, which were any ways
suspected by her to be unjustly gotten, to the Sum of Eight hundred thousand
Livres, distributed all the Overplus of her Revenue to the Poor in her Lands,
and indeed in all parts of the World, and after Sixteen Years of perseverance,
past suddenly to Eternity on the Fourth of February, M. D C. LXXII. Aged
Thirty six Years. Prince of Conti, and Francois-Louis de Bourbon, Prince de la
Roche-Sur-Yon, her Sons raised this Monument. In all this Quarter there is
nothing considerable but only the Hotel de Thou, where formerly lived the
Famous persons of that Name, who also built it. The Famous Library, of which we
formerly made mention, and which Monsieur de Menars purchased some Years ago,
did for a long time remain in this House.

The Hotel de Megrigni is not far off; this is also in the Rue des Poitevins.
This last is built with much regularity; and though the Apartments are not very
spacious, yet are they convenient.

In the Rue Haute-Feuille, at the further end next the Cordeliers, stands the
College of the Premonstrantes. In this College the Religious of that Order
study in the way, to attain their degrees in the University. The Church has
been considerably repaired of late Years by the care of Monsieur Colbert,
Abbot, and General of this Order, who has caused it to be adorned within,
throughout, with a handsome Wainscot.

The Convent of Cordeliers.
THis Monastery was built about the Year 1217. in the Pontificate of Pope
Honorius the III. while St. Francis was yet living at Assisium in Italy. Some
of the Religious Men of the new Order, which that great Saint did institute,
came into France; the first who arrived at Paris were Lodged in the Houses of
certain Burgesses; but afterward at the Solicitation of the forementioned
Pope, who writ to William then Bishop of this City in their behalf, they were
taken notice of; and in the Year 1230. Eudo, Abbot of St Germain des Prez, gave
them the place where they now inhabit at this day. The Kings of France did
after this become great Benefactors to them, St. Lewis gave more than all; he
caused their Church to be built, not as we see it at present, but as it was
before the Fire which happened here in the Year 1580. and reduced all into
Ashes, and part also of the Convent, ruining many Marble Tombs of several
Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royal, which then stood in the Quire, but
can hardly now be remembered. However according to the report of Giles Corozet,
these were the Principal; namely, that of Mary Queen of France, Wife of Philip
the hardy, Son of St. Lewis; of Jane Queen of France and Navarre, Wife of
Philip the Fair, and Foundress of the College of Navarre, as we have already
said; the Heart of Philip the Long, and others whom it would be to no purpose
to mention. The Body of the Cordeliers is one of the most numerous of all
Paris. There are always here resident a great number of Students, who come
hither from diverse parts of the Kingdom in order to take their Degrees of
Doctor in Divinity, which makes them considerable among themselves. We have
seen very great Men come from this House; among others Nicholas de Lira,
esteemed the most knowing of his Age in the Tongues, but more especially in
Divinity; and John Scot, surnamed Doctor Subtilis, who through his profound
Science has raised a Singular Tenent taught and read in their Schools, which
notwithstanding is founded on the Principles of Aristotle. The only Curiosity
to be observed in the Convent of these Fathers, is their new Cloister which
contains near a hundred Chambers all very neat and very lightsome, it is
Square, and in the middle is a small Garden adorned with a Parterre and a
Fountain. The Four Coridors or Walks, which compose this Cloister, are vaulted
and adorned with the Arms of those pious Persons, who did contribute to the
Charges of the Building, which were not small. The Refectory, the Chapter House
and the Library are worth seeing; as for the Church it has nothing Curious.
There are in it two famous Brotherhoods, one of the Pilgrims of Jerusalem, and
the other of the third Order of St. Francis, who have here their several
Chapels. As you go forth you ought to observe the Statue of St. Lewis, over the
Door, which Antiquaries think to be one of the likest to that great King that
we have.

This Quarter has been of late time much improved and beautified: they have
made two new Streets that go into the Fossez of the Hotel de Conde. In that
next the Convent of the Cordeli^rs is contrived a little place (or open Court)
before the Church door, which is not inconvenient: this Street is called Rue de
l'Observance, and the other Rue de Tourain, because of the adjoining Hotel de
Tours.

Near this place did formerly stand the Port Saint Germain, which some years
ago was pulled down. In the place of which is erected a Fountain, with this
Inscription:

URNAM NYMPHA GERENS DOMINAM TENDEBAT IN URBEM,
HIC STETIT, ET LARGAS LAETA PROFUDIT AQUAS.
1675. The Nymph was hastening with her Vrn to Town:
Here she stood still, and joyful poured it down.
1675. THE FAUX-BOURG SAINT GERMAIN.
SInce the taking down of the four Gates which divided this Faux-bourg from the
rest of Paris, it has been called The Quarter of St. Germain 's;

And doubtless this is the fairest and largest of all the other Quarters, on
the account of its extent, the number of its fair Houses, and the quantity of
its Inhabitants: on those accounts this one Faux-bourg may be compared with
some great Towns in Europe, which are much talked of, according to the Opinion
of Strangers themselves; to whom the dwellings here appear so pleasing, that
they prefer this part of the Town to all the rest of Paris: and they have
reason for so doing, since all things abound here, and the Air is very pure,
the Houses being divided from one another by several Gardens. Besides other
advantages, all sorts of Exercises are taught here; and perhaps there is not in
the whole World any one Town in which one may reckon no less than Six
Academies, as you may in this Quarter; filled, for the most part, with all the
illustrious Youth of France and Germany; who come hither to learn all things
that can make a Gentleman accomplished and capable of gaining Reputation in the
World. Sometimes in one Winter there has been reckoned here Twelve Foreign
Princes, and more than Three hundred Earls and Barons, not counting a much
greater number of ordinary Gentlemen, whom the reputation of France draws
hither with a mighty desire to learn our Language, and those Exercises which
are no where taught in their parts with equal perfection. The Six Academics
bearing the names of the Six principal Riding-Masters who Teach at them, are,
Monsieur Coulon, near Saint Sulpice. M. Bernardi, near the Hotel de Cond^. M.
de Long-prect, at the end of the Ru^ St. Margurriie. M. de Rocfort, in the Rue
de l'Vniversity. M. de Vandeuil, in the Rue de Seine. M. -- On the Fossez de
Monsieur le Prince.


This Quarter takes its Name from the Abbey Royal of St. Germain des Prez in the
midst of it, which is one of the Ancientest and Richest of the Kingdom. Of
which we must speak in a particular manner.

The Abbey of St. Germain des Prez.
KIng Childebert, Son of the Great Clouis was the Founder. Monsieur de Mezeray
reports the particulars of the Foundation, and tells us, That that King being
in Spain in the year 543. in a War against the Visigoths, he laid Siege to the
Town of Sarragossa in which they were refuged: the Inhabitants finding
themselves severely pressed by the French, and thinking in imitation of the
ancient Romans, to move their Enemies by some surprising Action, they concluded
to make a Procession about their Walls, in which they carried the Coat and
other Relics of St. Vincent. At this sight Childebert was so effectively
concerned, that he yielded so far, that he was contented to depart with certain
Presents which the Bishop made him, among other things that Coat, and those
Relics of St. Vincent, which he brought with him to Paris, and to the honor
of them built the Church, of which we are now about to speak.

This Abbey has had several Names; it was sometime called St. Croix, because of
a piece of that Holy Wood placed here among the other Relics which he brought
with him: at present it bears the name of St. Germain, who was Abbot here, and
Bishop of Paris, and is here interred. On his Festival day, which is the 28th
of May, they expose to public view his Shrine, which is of Silver gilt,
adorned with a great quantity of Precious Stones: It is of a Gothic kind of
Work, but as curious and handsome as one can see. All that remains of
Childebert's Building is the principal Gate at the end of the Church, and the
great Steeple over it, which appear very ancient. The Statues of the Kings and
Queens which are on the sides of this Gate, are of such a design as discovers
that in that Age the Gust of good Sculpture was not known; for we can hardly
distinguish whether the Statues represent Men or Women. The Tomb of the
aforementioned King is in the middle of the Quire, raised about two foot and an
half, with some Inscriptions added to it when they removed it hither from St.
Germain's Chapel, where it formerly was behind the Quire. This translation
happened about thirty or forty years ago, when the Church was Repaired and
Beautified as it now is. At the same time they made over it a Vault of Stone
instead of one of Wainscot as was before, and adorned the Pillars that
supported it with Corinthian Capitals. This Church is not looked upon at
present, as any Curiosity, yet is the Disposition of its parts well enough. The
Great Altar is in the middle of the Croisee; and so contrived, that one may go
round it: In the forepart of this Altar is a Table of Silver gilt, which is a
great Ornament, and is showed only on Festival Days. It is adorned with the
Figures of the Apostles, and a Crucifix in the middle, of an ancient sort of
Work, not unhandsom. This was the Gift of William, Abbot of this House* whose
Body was found entire not long ago, though he had been buried several Ages. The
Quire where the Religious sing is behind, in which their Stalls or Seats are of
a very handsome Workmanship. At the Feet of Childebert's Tomb you may read the
following Epitaph of Monsieur the Duke of Verneuil, natural Son of Henry the
Fourth, who before he married with the Duchess of Sally, was Bishop of Metz
and Abbot of St Germains. The Epitaph was made by the Learned Dom. Jean
Mabillon.

SERENISSIMO PRINCIPI To the Illustrious Prince Henry of Bourbon, Duke of
Verneuil, Benedict, Some time since, here has also been interred near this
Monument, Monsieur the Comte de Vexin, naturalized Son of France, over whose
Body is this other Inscription.

D. O. M. Sacred to Almighty God. Lewis Caesar of Bourbon, Vexin, Son of Lewis
the Great. January, in the Year Lewis the Great On each side of the great Altar
are three Tombs, which belong to certain Kings of the first Race, namely that
of Chilperic, with this Inscription on the edges in ancient Letters:

REX CHILPERICUS HOC TEGITUR LAPIDE. Under this Stone King Chilperic lies
interred. That of Queen Fredegonde, which is composed of a kind of Mosaic, of
pieces laid in with Veins of Brass couched in the Stone. This Queen is
represented holding in her hand a Scepter with a double Flower de Lis at the
end of it, which makes one believe that in those ancient times the Flowers de
Lis were in use; the Crown on her Head may further authorize this Opinion. She
deceased at Paris in the year 601. Clotaire second Son of Childeric the Second,
and of his Wife Fredegonde, with his Wife Bertrude are also here interred: so
likewise are Childeric the Second, and his Wife. This King was Son of Clouis
the Second, who was murdered in hunting in the Woods of Bondis, by a Gentleman
of Liege called Bodile, whom he had caused dishonourably to be whipped, not
respecting his quality.

Before the Normans and Danes ruined this Church, here were many other
Monuments of famous persons whose memory now is loft. The Kings of the First
Race did affect to be buried here, in like manner as those of the second and
third Races made choice* of St. Denis for the same purpose. They have lately
built here two very handsome Chapels of the same Symmetry, in the two Wings of
the Church: they are adorned with Composite Pillars of Marble vein'd, with
Pedestals of the same, so also the Frise. That on the right hand is dedicated
to St. Margaret, whose Girdle these Fathers keep here; and Women with Child,
who have a very great devotion to this Chapel, are usually girded with it. The
Tomb belonging to some of the family of Castelan is over against this Chapel,
and is of the design of M. Girardon.

The other Chapel is dedicated to St. Casimir, King of Poland, Patron of King
Casimir, who dyed here in France, Abbot of this Abbey, and whose heart is under
the Monument, which stands on one side of this Chapel. This King is represented
kneeling, in white Marble, apparelled in his Royal Robes, and offering his
Crown and Scepter to God, on a Tomb of black Marble, supported with a great
Pedestal; in the fore part of which is placed a Bas-relief in Brass,
representing a victory by him gained over the Turks. This Monument is one of
the finest that can be seen, and one can hardly meet with the like. A Lay
Brother of this House named Brother Jean Thibaut, who passes for one of the
most able men that are in these Works, did erect it. On each side are
represented Captive Turks in Chains, sitting on heaps of Arms, in manner of
Trophies. The Epitaph was written by Father Delfau, one of the Monks of this
Abbey, and is as follows:

AETERNAE MEMORIAE ALTO E JAGELLONIDUM SANGUINE, LIBEROS EX LEGITIMO CONNUBIO
SUSCEPIT, QUEIS POSTEA ORBATUS EST, NE SI SE MAJOREM RELIQUISSET, NON ESSET
IPSE MAXIMUS, SIN MINOREM, STIRPS DEGENERARET, PAR EI AD FORTITUDINEM RELIGIO
FUIT, IMPERIUM SPONTE ABDICAVIT ANNO M. DC. LXVIII. To the Eternal Memory of
the Orthodox King. Rests in a noble part of himself. Poland and Sweedland;
Iagellonides, Vasatensian Family The Muscovites, Sweedes, Brandeburgers,
Cossacks, and other Rebels Warsaw. The Temples of the Calvinists Lithuania; The
Socinians driven out of the Kingdom, Casimir Christ Catholic Faith, Alexander
the Seventh. Caminiec, January, As a Pledge of his Love; In one of the Chapels
behind the Ouire, you may further observe two Tombs of Marble belonging to two
of the House of Duglas, one of the principal Families in Scotland.

Having seen these things, there remains nothing more of singular note in the
Church. On Festival Days the divine Office is here Celebrated with great Pomp
and Majesty, and there is scarce any Company of Regulars who perform better.
The Order of St. Benet has been in the Possession of this House, ever since it
was first Founded by King Childebert. And the Church, according to the opinion
of some Historians, stands in the same place where was formerly a Temple
dedicated to the Goddess Isis, whose Statue remained here till the last Age; at
which time an old Wom^n being seen saying her Prayers before it, it was by
order of the Superiors removed out of the Church, and broken to pieces.

In the inward parts of this Convent the Refectory is worth seeing, which is
great, and one of the fairest of the Kingdom. It has lights on both sides: The
Glass of which is very handsome, though old. At the end of this Room is a
Staircase that leads up to the great Dortor: which Staircase is a hardy piece
of Building. And you must not neglect to visit the Chapel of our Lady; behind
which is something of the same design with the Holy Chapel at the Palais.
Report says, That both were built by the same Architect, who lies buried here.

But without tarrying long in viewing these things, you ought to go to the
Library, which takes up all the upper Room of that Arm of the Cloister next the
Church. It is, in truth, none of the fullest, but in recompense of that, all
the Books are the choicest and of the best Editions that can be met with. In
the last Age, when there was not such plenty of Libraries as at present, this
here, was esteemed the principal Library of Paris. And at this day, if it does
not continue all out of the same reputation for Printed Books, yet for
Manuscripts none will dispute the precedence, of which we can no where meet
with so great a Quantity nor such Choice ones, unless it be in the King's
Library. These Manuscripts are kept at the further end, in a little Chamber by
themselves; which Room is full of them from the top to the bottom. Here are
some of all Subjects, but chiefly of Religion; by means of which great Lights,
several faults of Printers and ill Copiers have been discovered and amended. In
a little Press in the great Library, they preserve several Volumes more choice
and rare than the rest; amongst which is one called The Psalter of St. Germain;
it being supposed to have been used by that Saint, who lived about the Year
560. in the Reign of Childebert, King of France, and Justinian, Emperor in the
East. Formerly this Book was kept in the Sacristy, among the Relics; but in
regard it was so often desired to be seen by curious persons, it was removed
hither: It is written in Letters of Gold and Silver, upon a Purple colored
Velom; and contains all the Psalms of David. There is also in the same place a
very ancient Missal, which according to all appearance, is more than 900. Years
old: Certain Tablets of the Ancients, made of small Boards of Cedar, with a
kind of Wax or Varnish finely spread over them, upon which they writ with their
Style (or Steel Bodkin); and several other singularities of such sort, which
deserve to be considered; above all, one great Volume, full of Attestations of
the Belief of several Greek Bishops, touching Transubstantiation: Which
Attestations the Learned M. Arnauld, with much pains, procured from
Constantinople, by the means of Monsieur de Nointel, Ambassador from France to
the Port, for Authorities against those of the pretended Reformed Religion, who
maintained that the Greek Church was of their Opinion.

Having said thus much of the Library, the Reader will not be displeased if I
give some account of those Excellent Works, which the Learned Monks of this
House have lately published; of which the most useful and most considerable is
St. Augustin's Works, which they have interpreted and corrected according to
the most ancient and authentic Manuscripts in all the Libraries in Europe, of
which they have had an account. We have already received five great Volumes, to
which the public have given an universal applause, and they are continually
employed about publishing the rest with the same Purity. One may justly say,
That there has not been any thing undertaken in this Age, of greater importance
and advantage to Religion; in regard all the Disputes that of late Years have
happened among Divines on the subject of Grace, have risen from the different
interpretation of that Father. The Church is obl ged to these Learned Monks,
who deserve no less Glory for their Pains, than they have had Trouble in the
undertaking, before they could bring the Work to this Condition. Father Dom Luc
d'Achery, a Monk of this House, has published the Spicilegium, and has
continued it to the Thirteenth Volume in Quarto, in which he has collected
together several ancient Pieces, hitherto hid in the Libraries of his Order,
and which had been lost in oblivion, without his care in thus showing them to
the light; to these Volumes he has added learned Prefaces, which are a great
help to the Curious.

But after the incomparable Book, which Father Dom Jean Mabillon has published
two Years ago, nothing further can be wished for; it is Entitled, De Re
Diplomatica, in Folio, with a great number of Figures of ancient Charters,
which this Learned Author has deci^er'd after the happiest way that can be; and
thereupon he has made most learned Remarques, to teach us how to know if they
be Counterfeits, which will appear an easy thing to him who has read this
Book. Those who have perused it can never sufficiently admire the Pains and
Patience of the Author, in making such Learned Discoveries as are in it; and
there is hardly any Work in which there appears more solid Judgment than in
this; which is the cause that of the small number of Authors which we can
reckon among the Learned, he is one of those who is most esteemed and has the
greatest Reputation. We have also from his hand several Volumes of Analects (or
Fragments) in Octavo, which he continues daily, with much care.

There are also in this Society, many other Learned Men who are continually
employed upon diverse subjects, from whose hands we shall have in a little time
the Works of St. Ambrose. One may say further, to their Commendation, that
there is not any Religious House where Idleness is more strictly avoided than
in this.

We must know, that this Abbey has been in former times often Ruined, at the
Incursions of Foreigners, it then standing out of the Town. The Normans and the
Danes have Pillaged and Burnt it three or four times, and it has stood out
some Sieges like a Fortified Town. It was at that time enclosed about with deep
Ditches and strong Walls, which from one space to another were defended with
round Towers, most of which, of later time, have been pulled down to build the
Houses round about it; and there remain but two which are at the Gate, on that
side next the Rile St. Benoist.

In regard it is difficult to observe the course of the Streets in St. Germains
Quarter, as we have done in other parts of the Town; because things are not
here in a Row as elsewhere: We shall therefore speak of the observable places
severally, endeavoring, however, as near as we can, to describe them to the
Curious in the (...) course, and thereby to spare their pains as (...) as may
be.

The Palace of ORLEANS,
OTherwise called The Palace of Luxembourg, because it stands in the same place
where formerly stood a Hotel of that name.

Of all the Houses in Paris, and even in the whole Kingdom; there is none more
regular, better designed for Architecture, or more magnificent than this
Palace. Mary de Medicis, Widow of Henry IV. caused it to be built, and for that
purpose made use of the ablest Artist of her time, named Jacques de Brosse, the
same person who designed the Portal of St. Gervais, of which I have already
spoken. That great Queen spared no Costs to leave Posterity a Monument of her
magnificence. All Foreign Travelers do agree, that in all Italy, there is
nothing to be seen, where Art has been observed with more exactness, and where
more Grandeur and Majesty appears, than in this building. It is composed of a
great Square Court, at the further end of which is the main Body of the
Building, accompanied at the ends with four Pavillions, and in the middle the
Avant-corps, which makes a fifth, set off with Pillars. On each side of the
foresaid Court are two long Galleries a little lower than the rest of the
Building, each supported with 9 Arches, under which one may walk dry round
about the Court. The Front of all this Palace is after the manner of an open
Gallery, with a kind of Dome in the middle supported with Pillars, under which
is the great Door butting upon the Rue de Tournon; at the upper part of which
Street this Palace is situated, which adds much to the beauty of its Avenu^. At
each end of the Galleries, and also of the two Tarrasses, which run along the
forepart of the Court, are two other great Pavillions, which stand in the same
Line with the Face of the Building. The Architecture of this Palace consists of
Pilasters, except about the great Portal, and on the Garden side before a
little Dome, which serves for a Chapel, where are some Pillars which stand off
from the Work. The Orders observed in this Work are the Tuscan, and the Dorick,
with an Attique above; and on the Garden side over the Tuscan and Dorick, is an
Ionick, which makes a third Order complete, with Balustrades round about the
top; as also Frontons and Faces, on which are great Statues in cumbent
postures, supporting Crowns. This excellent Architecture is still more
beautiful, by reason of the Bossage that runs all over the Work, no other
Ornaments being necessary. All that you see here is according to the plain and
true Rules of Art, which is the cause that all those who are any thing knowing
in Architecture, take more delight in considering this Palace, and observe more
beauties in it, than those who regard only the things without knowing the true
value. This Palace is at present inhabited by two illustrious Princesses,
Daughters of the late Duke of Orleans, only Brother of Lewis the XIII. On the
left hand as you come in are the Apartments of Mademoisell d'Orleans, and on
the right those of Madam the Duchess of Guise, her Sister. In the first
mentioned are several excellent Plasons, and very rich Furniture; in the last
among other things, you ought to see the Gallery painted by the Famous Rubens
of Antwerp, who was invited from Flanders on purpose to paint it. These
Paintings are great Pictures on the Pannels between the Divisions, in which are
represented the principal actions of Henry the IV his Life, more especially
those in which Mary of Medicis had any concern. No Man can desire to see any
thing more exactly designed or better performed: but that which is most to be
admired is the excellent Coloring which this famous Master used in his Works,
in which thing he surpast all others. Often do the Young Painters come and
study in this Gallery, and in regard it is all throughout of his manner, they
may easily here learn the Ideas of Excellent Peinture. The Garden was formerly
very beautiful, and full of little Groves and covered Walks; but several hard
Winters having killed many of the Trees, it has been thought necessary to cut
up the rest to make room for others, which they have already begun to plant; at
the end of the great Walk, before the Parterre, they designed to make a
Fountain; so much of it as is already made, is of a very good kind of
Architecture. It is a kind of Niche, adorned in the forepart with four great
Tuscan Pillars, charged with Congelations, on which are Sea-Gods holding Vases,
with a great Cartouche, in which are the Arms of France, and those of Medicis
impaled.

There is nothing more, very remarkable, unless it be the Balustrade of white
Marble in the forepart of the Tarrasses, which enclose the Parterre; but it is
not yet finished. From hence you ought to go and visit

The Hotel de CONDE'.
HEre lives Monsieur the Prince, first Prince of the Blood, with all his
Illustrious Family. The building of this House is not extraordinary. It was
formerly the Hotel de Reiz, and being built at diverse times by snatches, as
convenience would allow, the Symmetry was not over carefully observed; but as
to the Furniture it is difficult to see any elsewhere more magnificent or more
numerous. There are Pictures done by all the excellent Masters, extraordinary
Tapistries, which did formerly belong to the illustrious House of Montmorency,
and Jewels fairer than in any House of Europe. Here is also a Library very
numerous, in which you may meet with some very curious Books and Writings
extreme rare. But that which you ought most to endeavor to see is the Garden,
which in a space of Ground small enough, shows all the beauties and
singularities which Art and Nature joined together can produce. There are here
certain Rooms or Arbours, made by Hollanders, with abundance of Industry: At
the end of each walk stands a small Triumphal Arch of the same work. In Summer
this Garden is full of Oranges and Jasmins, which makes the Walk here in the
Evening most delicious.

In the Rue Vaugirad, which ^uns along before Luxembourg House, stands the
Little Hotel de Bourbon, otherwise called the Little Luxembourg, which Cardinal
de Richelieu caused to be beautified for his Niece the Duchess of Aiguillon,
with great Expense, as one may easily perceive by the Excellent Plafons, and
more especially that in the great Hall, which cost a great price: Here was in
those days very magnificent Furniture, and all sorts of Curiosities extremely
rare; but they have been since dispersed into several hands upon the Death of
that Duchess.

Hard by, and on the same side of the way, are the Nuns du Calvaire, of Saint
Benet's Order* here Founded in the Year 1020. by Queen Mary of Medicis. Their
Church and Convent has nothing of extraordinary, no more than

The Convent of the Nuns du Precieux Sang, which stands in the same Street. A
little higher is

The Convent of the Carmes Dechaussez, or discalced Carmelite Friars.
THis Monastery was Founded about the beginning of the last Age, by the
Liberalities of certain Burgesses of Paris; who bestowed a small House,
Situated in this place, on the Carmelite Friars, who came from Spain, and
brought into France the Reform which St. Teresa had made in the Order of Mount
Carmel. In the Year 1613 they began the Foundation; and Mary de Medicis laid
the first Stone of their Church, as we may perceive by this Inscription, which
was set over the place:

MARIA MEDICAE A MATTER FUNDAMENTUM HUJUS ECCLESIAE POSUIT. 1613. Mary de
Medicis the Mother, laid the Foundation of this Church, 1613. Chancellor
Seguier declared himself their Protector, and became a great Benefactor; among
other things he gave them wherewithal to build their great Altar; which is of a
very handsome design, adorned with Corinthian Pillars of black Marble, and
several Figures representing the principal Saints of this Order. All the Church
is of the Tuscan order of building; yet, in truth, it is none of the most
regular. In the middle there is a Dome, painted in the top by a Chanon of the
Church of Liege, named Bertolet, who was no bad Painter, as one may well judge
by this Work; which represents the Assumption of Elias, in a Chariot of Fire,
and his Mantle falling on his Disciple Elisha, who receives it with open Arms.

There are in this Church two Chapels that deserve a particular consideration.
The first of which is on the left hand, under the Dome, and Dedicated to the
Holy Virgin; in which there is a Statue of white Marble, the finest that can be
seen: It was made at Rome, by a Disciple of the Famous Cavalier Bernin, and
cost a great expense to bring it from thence. It is not easy ever to meet with
a better figure than this. It represents the Holy Virgin sitting and holding
her Infant on her Knee, who smiles and extends his little Arms to embrace her.
All that one can wish to see in a complete and finished Statue, is to be found
in this; and all Men ought to consider it as the best Piece in the Kingdom. The
Niche in which it stands over the Altar is of the Design of Cavalier Bernin, it
is adorned with four Corinthian Pillars of a vein'd Marble. The other Chapel is
over against this, and dedicated to St. Teresa, as appears by the Picture in
the middle. This Chapel is adorned with Marble Pillars, of a composite Order,
but very singular, with Festons on the Freese; but this is the Architects own
fancy, and there are but few examples of such Work. However the whole is very
handsome and pleasing to the view. The Balustrades of these two Altars, and that
also of the great Altar which stands between 'em, are of a choice sort of
Marble. The rest of the Church has nothing at all extraordinary, unless it be
the white painting, with which it is all over painted, which has a Gloss, and
shines like Marble. It is said that these Fathers have a Secret to make it
thus, and that they are not willing to discover the mystery to any.

In the inner part of the House there is nothing remarkable but the Library,
which though it be but little, and the number of Books very small, yet it ought
to be seen if it were only for the delicate prospect which it has over the
Neighboring Fields. These Fathers have the handsomest Gardens and the best
kept in all Paris, which is not to their small advantage, for in regard they
eat no Flesh, they have from their own Gardens sufficient of Roots and Pulse,
and the like, whereon to subsist without buying.

In a Street at the end of this, which is called the Rue du Regard, is a small
House lately built, whose prospects are all upon the Neighboring Gardens, and
is extreme neat and handsome.

The Fortress where the Academists of M. Bernardy exercise is not ^ar off. It
stands near the Walls of the Palais d'Orleans, enclosed in a little piece of
Ground, and serves for this use only. Here they make their attaques as regular,
as if at the taking of a place of the greatest importance.

In the Rue Cassette near the Carmes of which I have been speaking, is, The
Monastery of the Nuns of the Holy Sacrament, who owe their Foundation to the
late Duchess of Orleans, Second Wife of Monsieur Gaston of France, Duke of
Orleans, ^on of Henry the IV. and Brother of Lewis the XIII. This Illustrious
Princess who was of a most exemplary Piety; was their great Benefactress, and
gave them wherewithal to build their Church* and their great Altar* which last
is of a very handsome Wainscot work, Marble painted and the Ornaments gilt, all
which shows very handsomely, but this is all that is here to be seen* ^very
Thursday they sing here a Salutation of the Holy ^acrament, at which a great
number of Devout Persons assist, and offer up their P^ayers.

In the Street called Rue du Pot de fer, which also butts against the Rue
Vaugirard, is

The Noviciat of the Jesuits.
THE Church of these Fathers is but small, but in recompense of that, it is one
of the handsomest and best designed for Architecture in Paris. It is said that
one of the Fathers of this Society named Father Marlange, drew the design, and
having well observed the faults of that in the Rue St. Ant^onie, of Father de
Rant's designing, he altered many things. This Father being consulted with
about the work of this Church, would not meddle till the General had given him
permission to do what he thought proper, without being obliged to observe the
orders of any one whatsoever of the Society. After this he undertook the
building, which is not so big as the other, but it infinitely surpasses it in
Regularity. The Portal is of Pilasters of the Dorick Order, and over them the
Ionick Order. The inside is also of Dorick Pilasters supporting a Cornish,
between the Triglifes, of which are several Ornaments representing the
Instruments of our Lord's Passion. The great Altar is but very plain of Jovners
Work, adorned with two Corinthian Pillars. But that which sets off this Altar
infinitely beyond the fairest of the Kingdom, is the great Picture which you
see there of the famous Poussin, one of the best which that able Master ever
did. All the Curious esteem this piece extremely, and look upon it as the best
in France for exactness of design: Notwithstanding the objection of some
Critics, who say the Ear of St. Francis Xavier, who is here represented on his
Knees, working a Miracle, is bigger than it ought to be.

After you have seen the Church, you ought to ask to see the Chapel of the
Congregation, which lies on the left Hand of the Door, as you come in. It is
adorned with a gilt Wainscot, and Pictures from space to space; and in the
Ceeling a Plafon well Painted. On the Festivals the Altar is adorned with a
rich Furniture of Silver, which the Members of this Society have given.

The whole House is very Commodious, though it be of no great extent, by reason
it is all enclosed by four Streets on every side. The following Inscription is
cut on the first Stone of the Church, which was laid by the late Duke of
Verneuil.

D. O. M. PRINCEPS, ABBAS S. GERMANI, DECIMO APRILIS. To Almighty God. Francis
Xavier Apostle of the Indies, In the Year of our Lord M. DC. XXX. Urban the
Eighth. Lewis the Thirteenth. Mutius Vitelesco. Henry of Bourbon, Bishop of
Mets, Prince of the Empire, and Abbot of St. Germains, laid the first Stone of
this Church, on the Tenth of April.

Posterity ought to know that Monsieur Desnoiers, Secretary of State built this
Church at his own Expense.

The next thing of Note is The Church of S. Sulpice, the only Parish Church in
all the Quarter of ^t. Germains, and upon this account it is the greatest of
Paris. This was formerly but a small piece of building as is easily to be
observed* by the remaining part of the Nave, which as yet is not quite pulled
down, which was so small that it could not contain the tenth part of the
Parishioners. On this account about 25. or 30. Years ago, they begun the new
Edifice which we see at present, an undertaking so large, and the expense so
great, that the Quire is hardly yet finished, with all the Liberalities the
Parishioners can raise. So much as is done is the whole Quire, which is of a
noble design. The inside is supported with high Arches, and between Arch and
Arch Corinthian Pilasters, over which a Cornish that supports the Vault, which
is perfectly well made and very solid, though very high. Round about between the
Quire and the Chapels is a long Corridor, which is capable of holding a great
number of People, who may from thence behold all that is done at the great
Altar, where divine Offices are performed with great edification, especially on
the Festival days.

At one of the Pilasters standing between two Chapels, you may read the Epitaph
of the famous Monsieur de Marolles, Abbot of Villeloin, the greatest Translater
into our Language we ever had, and who enriched it with abundance of Authors
which were never before in French. Mons^eur the Abbot de la Chamber, his
intimate Friend and Executor of his Will, caused it to be set up in this place
to his Memory. It is a Medaille of white Marble, and in it his Picture, on
which a weeping Cupid leans, holding in his Hand a Torch reversed. This is the
Inscription.

MICHAELI DE MAROLLES, VARIA ERUDITIONE CLARISSIMO, To Michael De Marolles,
Abbot of Villeloin, Famous for his noble Birth, the sweetness of his
Disposition, the sincerity of ^is Religion, and the Variety of his Learning,
who dyed being above Fourscore Years old, the day before the Nones of March,
1681.

Peter de la Chamber the Son of Marinus, his Executor, erected this Monument to
his best Friend.

He was, perhaps, the ablest person of his Age in the knowledge of Prints. He
had Collected a very great number which are now to be seen in the King's
Cabinet. Amian Marcellin was the last Author which he Translated, at the end of
which Book you may see a Catalogue of all the pieces that have been published
in his name.

In the rest of this Church there is nothing extraordinary, unless it be a
little Staircase of one direct Line, winding like a Snail shell from the
bottom to the top. It is all of Free stone and very high, it reaching to the
Roof of the Church.

The Seminary House of St. Sulpitius is near the Church; the building i^ ^reat
and spacious, and was raised at the expenses of Mousieur de Bretonvilliers, who
also has furnished it at his own Costs. Observe here, especially the Chapel,
the Plafon of which was Painted by M. le Brun, in which he has represented the
Assumption: This is one of the finest things that he ever did.

St. Germain's Fair is kept near St. Sulpice at the end of the Rue de Tournon;
it begins at the Feast of the Purification. 2 Feb. and lasts to the first Day
of Lent, nay it continues often to Easter. The place is not extraordinary; it
is composed of several covered Walks, disposed in a square form, and crossing
one another. Here the Shopkeepers and Merchants keep their Stations, and sell
here generally all kind of Merchandise whatsoever. Tradesmen are privileged to
come to this Fair from all parts. There are some Shops here full of very rich
Commodities and very curious things. And in that of M. Herot, you may meet with
some Pictures of very great price.

Monsleur the Abbot Bourdelot dwells in the Rue de Tournon, whose profound
Learning has gained him mighty reputation. Every Wednesday he holds Conferences
in his House, and the principal Discourses are in the Physics.

In the Ru^ Gerance behind St. Sulpice, is the Hotel da Leon, belonging to the
Marquess of Sourdiac, who built it after the Designs of the Sieur Robellini:
but it being unfinished, we see but a small part of those Beauties, which would
have appeared in case the Work had been continued.

From hence we go to the Premontrez, whose House stands in a (...) place as you
enter into the Rue de Seve, at the meeting of Six Streets. Their Church is
small, the Portal is of the Sieur Dorbay's Work. The Queen Mother gave
wherewithal to raise it. And these Fathers owe the^r Establishment to that
pious Princess.

Further on is the Abbaie aux Bois, of the Cistercian Order. They were removed
hither from Picardy about Sixty years since. Near this is

The Hospital for Distracted people, called Les Petites-Maisons, here you may
see a Crucifix of great esteem, and done by an excellent Master.

In the same Street also is the Hospital called Les Incurables, the lower Rooms
of which Hospital are curiously vaulted, and the Diseased people looked after
very carefully. The Church has nothing in it extraordinary. It is contrived in
the middle of the Apartments, equally distant from the Men and Women. They
receive none into this House, but such as are afflicted with incurable Diseases.

From the Rue de Seve you pass into the Rue de Grenelle, which begins at the
Carrefour or open place of the Red Cross, near the Premontrez. The first thing
you take notice of in this Street is the Hotel d'Auvergne, in which dwells
Monsieur the Count d'Auvergne* Colonel General of the Light Horse of France,
Brother of the Duke of Bouillon, and Nephew of the famous Monsieur de Turenne.
This Hotel is not extraordinary well built, but the Garden is large and very
pleasant. Further on at the Corner of the Rue du Bacq. stands a large House,
and very convenient habitation, in which the Spanish Ambassador used to live.

Near this place dwells a Sculptor, at whose House you may see several
Bas-reliefs, not ill designed, they are of the manner of one named Vanobstal,
originally of Bruxelles, who was the first that brought the gust of Bas-reliefs
into France, out of Italy. There are some things of his at Versailles, which
are very much esteemed, more especially those over the Doors of the Grotto.

Beyond this is the Hotel de Navailles, a well built House; it consists of one
great square Pavillion, high raised, and overlooking all the adjacent Gardens,
which renders the abode very pleasant. Here formerly dwelt Monsieur de Cogneux,
who built it. From hence you come to

The House of the Sieur Roland, one of the most knowing and Curious Men of all
Paris in Buildings. This House, as also the Gardens, which have all the
delights one can desire, are worth seeing. Here are Fountains, Arbours,
Perspectives, and Parterres of the best sort. The Apartments are neatly
furnished, and all things handsome, especially the Staircase, which is of a
singular design, and well approved by the Curious. At the end of this Street,
in the adjoining Fields, you discover

The Hotel Royal, called Les Invalides.
OF all the King's Buildings, there is not any in which there appears more of
magnificence and piety together than in this, since all that prodigious expense
which has been bestowed on this Work is solely intended for the maintenance of
crippled Soldiers; who being disabled to serve any longer in the Army, would
be forced to lead a Languishing and Miserable life, were it not for the support
which they find in this House, where they are supplied with all things, and may
end the course of their Lives in the Exercise of Christian Piety. But that
which is not a little surprising is, that all this vast Edifice was completed,
as it now is, in less than Eight Years, and in the height of the War.

About the Year 16**. they began to lay the first Foundations of this curious
Structure, which at present makes one of the Chief Ornaments of Paris. It is
exactly square, and contains in its Circumference five Courts of the same
Figure, one great one in the middle, and two lesser on each side, all which are
compa^t about with Apartments, in which the Soldiers have their several
Lodgings. That in the middle is much greater than the rest, and the buildings
about it are of a handsome Symmetry. They are composed of two rows of Arches,
one above the other, which makes so many Corridors or Galleries, by means of
which you may walk dry round the Court. The top of the Buildings are adorned
with Ornaments, representing Trophies of Arms, and such like things, which
make a very handsome Show. At the end of the Court, just opposite to the
principal Entry, is the Portal of the Church, composed of two ranks of Pillars,
the first or lowermost of the Composite order, and the second of the
Corinthian. Here you may enter into that part of the Church which is appointed
for those of the House: as for those who come from abroad they are building
another part already somewhat advanced, and this will be incomparably more
magnificent. The Model in little may be seen in a Pavillion raised on purpose;
if it be performed according to this Model, nothing can be seen more glorious
or of a greater design. It will be a Dome very high raised, under which the
great Altar is to be placed, which will be enricht with all the most beautiful
Ornaments, which the most studied Architecture can produce. The Covering is to
be gilt like that at Val de Grace, but they intend this to be more regular, and
better performed, both for the disposition and the Ornaments. You ought to see
the Infirmaries, which are divided from the rest of the House, but not far off.
The Beds are neat, and the Sick receive there all the help and assistance that
is necessary, they are served by the Sisters of the Charity of St. Lazar's, who
make it their particular profession to wait upon the Sick in all parts of the
Town, as well as in this House. But that which Strangers ought to observe more
especially, are the four great Refectories which are on each side of the middle
Court, where you will see painted in Fresquo, the principal Sieges and Battles
which France has gained against her Enemies. Few Pictures are more exactly
designed, or can show more variety and life than these; the sight of which
things cannot choose but give a very great pleasure, to those who were
concerned in the Actions represented. There is in this House a certain Soldier
works in Tapistry, whom you ought not to forget to visit. As you go out you may
observe the Front of the building, with the great Court before it, compast
about with a dry Ditch, and a Wall of Freestone, from which you have a delicate
Prospect. They keep Guard at the Gates here in the same manner as in a Citadel,
thereby to preserve the Soldiers in Health, and free from Idleness. The
Discipline which they observe in this House is admirably exact; and the Fathers
of the Mission, who have the Care and Conduct of the place, acquit themselves
very worthily.

All that remains of Note in this Quarter, after you have seen the Invalids is

The Hotel, in which dwells Monsieur the Commandeur de Haute-Feuille,
Ambassador from Malta, in a Street behind the Peutes-Maisons. Here you may see
very Curious Pictures, with many other great Rarities, which can hardly be met
with elsewhere.

Near this, in the Rue du Bac, is the Seminary of the Foreign-Missions, where
of late they have built a Church, the Roof whereof is very surprising, it is
indeed but low, because they design to raise a second Church upon this. It is
the Invention of the Sieur du Buisson, an able Architect. From this House are
sent Missionaries into the Indies to Preach the Gospel there to Infidels, in
which office they acquit themselves with a very great Zeal, and their
endeavors are blessed with mavelous Success, as we perceive by the Relations
of Monsieur the Bishop of Heliopolis, and all the other Travelers that come
from those parts, who relate most surprising things.

In the Rue St. Dominique is the Noviciat of the Reformed Jacobins, whose
Church is now building, and will be none of the least handsome of Paris. The
Sieur Bulet, who is the City Architect, has undertaken the building of this
Church, as also of the Houses round about; which bring these Fathers a
considerable Revenue, and are well built. On the other side of the way is

The Hotel de Luines, heretofore called the Hotel de Chevreuse, whose name has
been changed since the death of the Duchess of Chevreuse, on whose account it
was first built. The Apartments are very handsome and convenient, and the Sieur
le Muet made the design.

In the same Rue Saint Dominique, you may perceive a new House built by order
of the Hotel-Dieu, whose Porch is very pretty, it stands at the further part of
the Court, and is supported by Dorick Pillars, which show curiously as you
enter. The whole House is of the design of the Sieur le Duc.

In the Petite Rue Guillaume, stands a large House in which dwells Monsieur
Talon, Advocat General; the Structure is extreme handsome, the Apartments very
pleasant, having all their prospects upon the adjoining Gardens, the Court is
great, and, in fine, it appears that there were no costs spared in the
building; but that which gives it the best Ornament is the excellent Library in
it, composed of the rarest and scarcest things, both for Manuscripts and
Printed Books.

The Hospital called La Charity
THis Hospital is situated in the outermost part of the Town, in which the
Curious must not expect to find any pleasing Sights; but Poor Sick People, who
are served very neatly by the Brothers of the Order of St. John of God, who
mind no other business but to assist and comfort these poor People, and to
procure for them freely all such things as they need. Here are three or four
great Rooms full of Beds on each side. In their Church you may see the Tomb of
P. Bernard, who dyed in the Reputation of Sanctity, his Statue here represents
him to the Life, kneeling.

Near the Door of this Church, on that side next the Rue Tarane, is a new built
Fountain of a very handsome design, on which these Verses of Monsieur Santeuil
are graven:

QUEM PIET AS APERIT MISERORUM IN COMMODA FONTEM, This Fountain for the needy
built, does show,
Your Charity should still like Water flow,
M. DC. LXXV. In the Rue des Saints Peers, adjoining is the Hotel de Brissac,
whose building is very regular: Here is a Gallery with several Apartments very
delightsom.

The Hotel de S. Simon is in the same Street. This is very well placed, having
the great Street called the Rue Tarane over against it, which gives it an
advantageous View. It was built by M. Salvois, who made use of the Sieur
Gittar's designs.

The House where now dwells the Princess of Wirtemberg, is not far from hence.
The Garden behind which has a delicate air.

Almost over against the last mentioned House, stands another, which though it
makes outwardly no great show; yet at the further part of the Court there you
may see a piece of Perspective very well Painted, wherein at a distance you
discover a Triumphal Arch ^ l'antique, which shows well afar off.

THE RUE DE L'UNIVERSITE.
YOU must observe that this Street changes its name in three places, all along
by the Garden Walls of St. German's Abbey, it is called the Rue du Columbier;
further about the middle it is called the Rue Jacob, and at the end, the Rue de
l'Vniversite. It is full of handsome Houses, and most new built. But the most
remarkable and the greatest Curiosity to see, is

The Cabinet of Monsieur Blondel.Before we speak any thing of the Rarities in
this rich Cabinet, it is convenient to say somewhat of those excellent Works
which Monsieur Blondel has written. This learned person is so well known among
all Scholars, that it would be difficult to say any thing in his commendation
which is not known already. It is sufficient to give the Reader an Idea of his
merit and profound Knowledge, to say only that the King made choice of him to
teach the Mathematics to Monseigneur the Dauphin, and appointed him Director
of the Royal Academy of Architecture, established in the Palais Brion, and
composed as all men know of the ablest Men of the Kingdom in this Science. The
names of the present Members are,

M. Blondel, Director, Marechal de Camp to the King's Armies, and
Mathematick-master to Monseigneur the Dauphin. M. Perault. M. le Vau, the
Elder. M. le Pautre. M. Gittard. M. Bruan. M. D'Orbay. M. Mansard. M* Filibien,
who is the Secretary, and has published several excellent Works, as we have
already mentioned in the first part of this Book P. 38. where we treated of the
Kings Antique Statues at the Palais Brion.
Monsieur Perault of this Academy, has published a Learned Translation of
Vitruvius, enriched with a great number of Figures; and but a while ago another
Book of Architecture Entitled, L'Ordonnance des cinq especes de Colonnes des
Anciens, highly esteemed by the Curious.

But to return to Monsieur Blondel, we are obliged to him for the new Plan of
Paris, it being performed by his directions, according to the express Order
which the King gave to the Burgesses, not to suffer any one to undertake this
Work but him, since it is well known, none could perform it so well as himself.
It is to be seen at his House only, and contains 12 Sheets. The new
Embellishments, as also the Town Gates lately raised, and all designed by him,
are ingraved in the Edges. The same Author has also published A Treatise of
Architecture in three Volumes, which were read as Lectures in the Academy, the
Preface before which is very eloquent and full of Instruction: A Treatise of
Geometry Speculative and Practical, in two Volumes in Quarto; and another Of
Arithmetic, in the same manner as he taught them to Monseigneur the Dauphin:
Also The manner of Fortifying Places, wherein are ingraved very curious Plans
of the best Fortifications that are in the World: The Comparison of Pindar and
Horace, Dedicated to M. le Premier, President de Lamoignon: The Solution of the
four principal Problemes of Architecture, in Folio: Of the Royal Impression in
the Louvre, adorned with Figures: The Art of casting Bombes, in Quarto; and
lastly, another which came forth but the beginning of the last year, Entitled,
The History of the Roman Calendar, in which you may see not only all the
several Manners which the ancients made use of to count their Time, but also
all that has past in reducing the Computation of time to the form that is now
used, and the difficulties which have been met with before it was brought to
the present regulation. This Book is so full of curious Learning, that there is
hardly any sort of People to whom it is not profitable: He has also given us
hopes of several other Books, which may be published in time, they being ready
for the Press; and they are these:

Galileus promotus de resistentia solidorum.

Geometrick Elements of Medieties.

A Treatise of Algebra.

A Treatise of the Motion of Celestial Bodies.

A Treatise of Dialling*

A Treatise of Mechanic Arts.

A Treatise of the Proprieties of Pullies.

A Treatise of Attacking and Defending of Places.

Miscellanies of diverse pieces of the Mathematics and Physics.

A Translation of Sermotsi's 3d. and 6th. Book of Architecture.

A Second Edition of Francis Savot's French Architecture, augmented with a
great number of Notes.

But Books are not the only things that have made M. Blondel famous, the great
Exploits which he has performed in the Wars as well by Sea as Land: The
Negotiations in which he has been employed with Foreign Princes; and in fine,
the long Voyages which he has performed in the four parts of the World, wherein
he has seen all that is observable, and thereby attained so perfect a Knowledge
in all things, that the reputation of his Experience and Abilities has justly
acquired him the quality of a Counselor of State.

He has here one of the most curious Cabinets that is at present in Paris, in
which are several Rarities of all the best and choicest kinds, and no less
choicely preserved. Among other things, he has here several original Pictures
of Palma, of Paul Veronese, of Guido, and of the famous Poussin, several
Land-skips of Paul Bril, of Corneille, of Breugle, of Fouquiere, of Lucas, and
of diverse others. Pieces of Fruit of Labrador, of Sommes; and of Flowers of
Picard, of Mariv Delsiori, and of others: Also a great number of Limnings and
Miniatures after the best Painters; as Raphael, Carache, and Poussin. Here are
also 200. Leaves of the same Work representing Birds, besides those of Animals,
which they made at Limoges in the last Age upon Gold and Silver; the secret of
which work is at present lost, and which things are now sold at excessive
Rates. Here are some Pictures of inlaid Wood, whose Colors are as beautiful as
if they had been wrought with a Pencil.

But that which is infinitely more curious than all the rest, is the great
number of Agates, among which there are 40 greater than the rest, most of them
are antique, and represent Deities, Emperors Heads, and Sacrifices, and are
admirably well cut: Those which are modern are graved by Coldore, a famous
Lapidary, and by several others as great Artists; with these a small Chain of
six great grains of Agate also.

Still these are not the most precious things of this Cabinet, there are some
things of greater esteem, as 12 Bracelets composed of Agates, Cornelians, Onyx,
Jasper, and of prime Emeralds adorned with Gold, which altogether make 150.
antique Gravings, representing Roman Deities, and all the Emperors from Julius
Caesar to Labienus Posthumus, with 36. Empresses; among the Emperors the Heads
of Pescenius Niger, and the 2 Africans are very curiously cut in Onyx. This
Suit is looked upon as one of the most singular Rarities that is at present, and
it is without dispute the only thing of this kind in the whole World. For we
never yet knew of any Man who collected a Suit of antique graved Stones as has
been usually done of Medals; and this here has been the Work of four of the
most famous Vertuosi that ever were in France, who have above 50 Years used
their endeavors to render this Collection complete as it now is. Besides these
there are four other Agates graved hollow representing the History of the
Triumvirate, the Heads of Caesar, Mark Anthony, and Lepidus, are upon the three
principal, and that of Cleopatra on the other. On a green Oriental Jasper of an
Oval Figure which is placed in the middle, is represented a Pillar, at the ^oot
of which a Soldier holds up the point of his Dagger: This Pillar was called by
the Ancients Columna execrata, in regard the Senate and M. Anthony caused it to
be raised to the memory of Julius Caesar, and that all the Soldiers might come
before this Pillar, and here swear to Revenge the death of that great Emperor.
This Pillar was taken down by Dolabella. The Inscription graven about this
curious Agate explains the History, and is this, MART VL. AUX. D. JUL. LACRI.
Which signifies, Marti, ultori, auxiliatori, Divo Julio Lacrimae.

To Mars, the Revenger, the Helper, to Divus Julius Tears.

Upon this Pillar stands an Urn, and the Sidus Julium on one side, which, as
Historians say, appeared after the Death of Caesar.

The other things are several Rings of Gold, adorned with precious Stones, as
Rubies, Emeralds, and Oriential Topazes, a great Diamond in manner of a Button,
very perfect; another Yellowish but very lively; an Aigue of the Sea, oriental;
a great Violet-colour Ruby of 28. grains; an Opal of the East in the form of a
little Lion; three great Boxes full of Stones graved of the antique, some
hollowed, and some in relief; several rare Shells of strange fashions; a Suit
of one hundred Imperial Medals of Silver, and one hundred others of Greek and
Roman, the best chosen of Padouan.

As there want no Rarities in this rich Cabinet, you may see here also several
Persian and Turkish Arms, as Cimeters, Daggers, and Knives of Damask't Steel,
whose hilts and handles are of Stone inlaid with Gold, and enricht with Jewels.
There are also Japan Works, and the best sort of Porcelains; curious Books;
some pieces of Ivory wrought in Sculpture, with a good quantity of Rosary-Beads
of Agate; and a thousand other things of such sort, which would require a long
description, if we should mention all in particular.

All that you see in this Cabinet is of unusual Beauty, the Collection having
been made by one who was perfectly knowing in these matters, and who spared no
Costs to attain the thing which pleased him. On this account you will find in
this House sufficient to satisfy any Man's Curiosity. And the Civility with
which they are shown gives no less satisfaction to the Beholders, than the
Rarities themselves occasion Admiration.

Beyond this on the same side of the way in the Rue de l'Vniversite, stands the
Hotel Tambonneau, perfectly well built, and designed by the Sieur le Veau.

The rest of this Street, deserves not much pains to examine it, though there be
several good Capacious Houses in it, among others that of Monsieur the Grand
Provost.

Also the Sieur Logeois otherwise called the Marquess of Imbercour, one of the
Farmers General of the five great Farms, has built here a great and convenient
House, which will cost him above 24000. Crowns before it be quite finished.

You must not neglect to visit M. Pelitot, over against the Hotel Tambonneau;
he is one of the ablest Enamellers in Europe, and makes those curious Pictures
in Enamel, which are set about with Diamonds, and presented to Ambassadors; and
sometimes they are set in Bracelets, being commonly no bigger than a Shilling,
and often much less: One may confidently affirm that no Man did ever better
understand this Art, nor has made his Pictures more like.

At the end of this Street in a House near the Hotel de les Mousquetairs, you
may see a Burning Glass which does wondrous things when exposed to the Sun, so
far as to dissolve the hardest and the most incombustible Bodies that are. It
is greater than any we have yet seen; and the Foot on which it stands is no
less singular, it being also of Steel, and wrought with much Art and Patience.

The Little AUGUSTINS.
THE Convent of these Fathers is in the Street which bears their Name, leads
from the Rue Columbier to the Edge of the Seine. Their House has nothing
extraordinary no more than their Church. The great Altar is of Joyners Work,
well enough wrought, Marble Painted, and adorned with Statues of great esteem,
especially that of the Dying Figure. They are made, Clay baked, by one called
Biardeau of Anjou, and so are all the rest, which are of a very good manner. M.
Varin esteemed the Head of this dying Figure worth its weight in Gold. Margaret
of Valois, Wife of Henry IV. and Sister of Henry III. was one of their
principal Benefactors, and by her Testament left them part of her Plate, which
they use in adorning their Altar with that rich Furniture, which they expose on
Festival Days. This Queen built entirely of her own Cost the Chapel on the
right hand of the great Altar, which is in manner of a Dome, and the first
which has been raised at Paris of this sort. The following Inscription is there
ingraved on black Marble.

LE 21. MARS MIL SIX CENS HUIT, LA REINE MARGUERITE DUCHESS DE VALOIS, PETITE
FILLE DU GRAND ROI FRANCOIS, SOEUR DE TROIS ROIS, ET SEULE RESTE'E DE LA RACE
DES VALOIS; A IANT ETE' VISITE'E ET SECOURUE DE DIEU, COMME JOBET JACOB; ET
LORS LUI AIANT VOUE' LE VOEU DE JACOB, ET DIEU L'AIANT EXAUCE'E, ELLEA BATI ET
FONDE' CE MONASTERE, POUR TENIR LIEU DE L'AUTEL DE JACOB; ou ELLE VEUT QUE
PERPETUELLEMENT SOIENT RENDUES ACTIONS DE GRACES, EN RECONNOISSANCE DE CELLES
QU'ELLE A RECEUES DE SA DIVINE BONTE. ELLE A NOMME' CE MONASTERE DE LA SAINT
TRINITE', ET CETTE CHAPELLE DES LOUANGES, ou ELLE A LOGE' LES PEERS AUGUSTINS
DECHAUSEZ. On the 21. of March, One thousand six hundred and eight, Queen
Margaret Duchess of Valois, Grand Daughter of the great King Francis, Sister
of three Kings, and the only remainder of the Race of Valois, having been
visited and relieved by God, like Job and Jacob; and having at that time vowed
the Vow of Jacob, and God having heard her, she built and established this
Monastery, instead of Jacob's Altar, in which she desires that perpetual thanks
be given to God, in return of those Favors which she has received from his
divine bounty. She has named this Monastery from the Holy Trinity, and this
Chapel the Chapel of Praises, and she has here placed the barefooted Fathers
of Saint Augustine's Order. One may perceive by this Inscription that these
Fathers were formerly more austere than they are at present, in regard they
were then Dechaussez or barefooted. That Queen built this Monastery in favor
of her Confessor who was of this Order; his name was Francis Amet, originary of
the Town of Montargis. You ought to see their Library, which is very neat.
Among these Fathers is Father Lubin, who is esteemed one of the most skilful
Geographers that we have. This is he who Translated the Relation of Lapland,
which is sold at the Widow Varenne's at the Palais.

In the Rue de Seine, behind the College of the four Nations, is the Hotel de
la Roche-foucault, which was formerly known by the name of Hotel de Liancourt,
whose building is very regular, and of a beautiful Ordinance. Here were
formerly very excellent Pictures, but they have been dispersed since the Death
of the Duke of Liancourt who made the Collection.

Parallel to this Street lies the Rue Mazarin, so called, since the building of
the College of the four Nations which takes up part of the Street, of which
College Cardinal Mazarin was the Founder. In the middle of this Street is the
Theater of French Comedies over against the end of the Rue Guenegaud; this is
the only place where at present they act French Plays. Formerly there were
three places in Paris, where you had such Spectacles, at the Palais Royal, at
the Marais du Temple, and at the Hotel de Bourgogne; but since the Invention of
Opera's, these things have been changed, and these here are the only Company of
French Comedians that remain at present. They often Act here new Pieces that
are very pleasant, but are not of equal Beauty with those of M. Corneille, nor
of M. Racine for serious Matters, no more than they are equal to those of the
famous Moliere for Comic. All Strangers agree however that the French Scene is
the handsomest and most magnificent of Europe, as well for the decoration of
the Theater, as for the Beauty of the Pieces there represented; the Comedians
moreover spare no Costs to satisfy the Spectators in the richness of their
habits. There are some among them who compose Plays themselves, which makes
them more expert, and enables them more thoroughly to understand the Character
which they represent.

From the Rue Mazarin you may turn into the Rue de Guenegaud, in which dwells
Monsieur the Abbot de la Roque, Author of the Journal des Scavans, which he
publishes every Fifteen days: The Curious receive this piece with extreme
satisfaction, since he shows so great care to enrich it with all the fine
things he can collect. M. de Salo, Counselor in the Parliament, was the first
who began this Journal in the Year 1665. and gave the Idea to Strangers, who
found the invention so profitable and so pleasant, that they have imitated the
same thing in diverse parts of Europe. M. the Abbot Gallois continued the
Journal for some years after, from 1666. to 1674. at which time M. the Abbot de
la Roque undertook the Work, in which he has always labored since then, with
such success as has acquired him a very great Reputation in the World. He holds
at his House every Thursday Conferences, at which many Learned Persons meet,
and propose to him the Discoveries they have made in the Arts and Sciences.

From this Street you go upon the Key of the Augustines, which begins at the
Pont Saint Michael, and runs all along the River as far as the Pont-Neuf.

The Convent of the Grand Augustines.
THE House of these Fathers is of no greater Antiquity than that of the other
Mendicants, of which I have already spoken. Historians say, that they came to
Paris about the Year 1270. and that they were then called the Hermites of St.
Augustine. Their first Habitation was near the Gate of Mont-martre, in the
Street called Rue des Vieux Augustines, which still keeps that name, and while
they dwelt in that Quarter they made use of the Church of St. Mary Egyptian,
which is still remaining. They changed their abode some years after, and came
into the Rue des Bernardins, where there is at present St Nicholas du
Chardonnet: but finding that place no more Commodious than the former, they
shifted once again* and came at last to this place, intending to associate with
the Penitents called Sachets, who were apparel'd in a kind of Sackcloth, and
were placed by St. Lewis on the Bank of the Seine, in the same place where the
Convent stands at this day. This habitation the Sachets left entirely to them,
and became themselves dispersed into diverse places. The Church belonging to
these Father; was not built till the time of Charles the Fifth, called the
Wise, as one may observe from the Inscription placed at the Foot of his Statue,
placed at the entrance of the great Door on the Right Hand.

Primus Francorum Rex Delphinus fuit isle,
Exemplar morum, Carolus dictus, bone Chrisle,
Merces justorum dilexit fortiter isle,
Hic patet exemplum, tibinam complevi^ honor,
Hoc praesens Templum Deo dite^ur honor.
This King of France, first Dauphin was in Fame,
Example of good manners, Charles by name.
He loved full strongly the reward of the just,
The reason's p^ain, and grant it me you must,
For he this Church to Almighty God did frame.
The Church was dedicated by William Chartier, Bishop of Paris, in the year
1453. assisted by a great number of Prelates, who performed this Ceremony with
much Solemnity. The Great Altar is a modern Work; it is but two years since it
was finished. M. le Brun made the Design, which is not much different from that
of St. Severin: you may observe that the Joyners Work of the Quire, is of the
best sort in Paris, as is also the Tribune between the Quire and the Nave
adorned with black Marble Pillars of the Corinthian Order. On each side of the
Door under this Tribune, are two Chapels, one dedicated to the Holy Virgin, and
the other to St. Nicholas of Tolentin. The Pulpit is also adorned with certain
Carvings gilt, and the Bas-reliefs which are round about, are carefully
preserved, they being wrought by Germain Pilon, yet these Fathers have been not
long since persuaded to gild them.

In this Church are several Tombs of illustrious Persons, among which Philip de
Comines is the most famous; he lived under Lewis the Eleventh, and was his
principal Secretary. The Memoires which he has left us are so excellent and so
profitable, that they have been translated into Latin, with Commentaries and
Notes upon them: And M. Godefroy, Historiographer of France, has printed a
French Edition of them at the Louvre, according to the Original, in the
Language of the time, which he has illustrated with many curious Remarks. That
learned Man is buried with his Wife in a little low Chapel behind the Altar
belonging to the Knights of the Holy Ghost, and one cannot see his Tomb unless
the Sacristan open the Door of the place in which it is, it not appearing
outward. You must not forget to observe the great Picture in this Chapel,
representing the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Holy Virgin, and the
Apostles; it is the Work of -- a Famous Painter. There is another Picture on
the side of the same bigness, representing Lewis the Thirteenth in his
Ceremonial Robes giving the Collar of the Holy Ghost to a Lord, assisted with
the principal Officers of the Order, in their proper Habits also. In this
Chapel are performed the Ceremonies of the great promotions, and Henry the
Third made choice of this place when he first Instituted the Order of the Holy
Ghost on the last day of December, 1579. as did appear by an Inscription which
was not long since taken away, but this is a Copy:

Fortissimis and prudentissimis utriusque militiae Equitib. Priscae nobilitatis
bello and pace optime de Rep. meritis HENRICUS III. Galliae and Poloniae Rex
augustus, divini Spiritus apud Christianos Symbolum pro equestri Stemmate esse
voluit, jussit, decrevit, plaudente, venerante populo and vota pro salute
Principis nuncupante ob singularem ipsius pietatem.

LUTETIAE PARISIORUM.

KAL. JANUAR. M. D. LXXIX.

To the most Valiant and most Wise Knights, both of the Sword and the Gown, of
Noble Birth, who have deserved well of the Commonwealth both in War and Peace,
Henry the Third, the august King of France and Poland, has Willed, Commanded
and Decreed, That the Symbol of the Holy Ghost among Christians, should be the
mark of his new Order of Knighthood, the people applauding, reverencing, and
praying for the Health of their most pious Prince.

Paris, the First of January, M. D. LXXIX.

You ought not to neglect to read the Epitaph of the Learned M. de
Sainte-Beuve, a Parisian (...) of the Sorbonne, and a person most famous for
his profound Knowledge, and extraordinary Probity, both which did acquire him
the esteem and confidence of the most illustrious Prelates of his time: The
Epitaph was made by his Brother, and is placed on one side of the great Altar,
on a Table of black Marble, of which this is a Copy:

HIC situs est JACOBVS DE SA^NTEBEVVE, Presbyter Doctor ac Socius Sorbonicus,
and Regius S. Theologiae Professor. Antistites, qui ex omnibus Regni Fran^^ci
Provinciis anno Domini M. DC. LXX. apud Ponte^ Isarae Conventum habebant, Here
lies James de Sainte-Beuve, Priest, Doctor and Fellow of the Sorbonne, and
Regius Professor of Divinity.

Who being scar^e XXVIII. years old, was chose by the Clergy of ^rance, which
was assembled at Mante, in the year M. DC. XLI. that he with some other learned
Men should compose a body of Moral Divinity; and two years after he taught
Divinity in the School of the Sorbonne, with great reputation, and concourse of
learned Men. The Breviaries and Rituals, of some Churches of France, diligently
Corrected, many Heretic happily brought back to the Catholic Religion; many
Controversies of private Men, who had chosen him for Vmpire wisely composed;
very many of all Orders and Estates persuaded to mend their Manners by his
prudent admonitions and counsels, do show his extraordinary Learning, Piety and
Wisdom. He being daily consulted not only by his own Citizens and Countrymen,
but also by Foreigners, concerning matters pertaining to Ecclesiastical
Discipline and good Manners, and satisfying, all with an unwearied diligence:
The Bishops who were assembled out of all the Provinces of France, in the year
M. DC. LXX. at Pontoise, considering him as a person who had done very good
service to the Church, gave him an honorable Pension.

He lived LXIV years, and dyed the xviii. of the Calends of January, in the
year M. DC LXXVII.

Hierom de Sainte-Beuve, Prior of Montaureoli, has set up this, mourning, to
the memory of his best and dearest Brother.

In their Cloister is a Statue of St. Francis kneeling, it represents him in
the posture he might be in when he received the Stigmata. This Statue is much
esteemed, it being made by Germain Pilon, and by him presented to these Fathers
in the year 1588.

The Assemblies of the Clergy are usually held in this Convent* of which we
have seen some these last years.

Not far from this Monastery is the Rue Dauphine, so called, because built at
such time when Lewis 13 th. came into the World. Before that here were only
certain old Gardens full of Ruins, across over which they cut this Street, at
the end of the Pont-Neuf. It had at the end of it a Gate of the same name,
which about 10 or 12 years ago was taken down, for the better uniting the
Suburbs and the Town together. After you have past this Street, as you follow
the course of the River you come to

The Hotel de Conti. This was formerly called the Hotel de Nevers; but that
name being determined after the Marriage of the two Princesses who were the
last of the Family, one of which was Married to Casimit King of Poland, and the
other to Prince Edward of the Palatine ^amily, the H^tel de Nevers passed into
other hands; Monsieur de Guenegaud, Secretary of State, bought it, and made
here very considerable augmentations. Who, being one of the Richest and most
Magnificent persons of his time, spared no Costs to adorn it without and
within, and raised also several Houses in the Street behind the Walls of the
Garden, which Street is called after his name to this day. The Entrance into
this Hotel appears great, and the inside is very suitable. You ought to
endeavor to see the Chapel which is really very handsome, adorned with
Corinthian Pillars, and other Ornaments of a very good gust. It is the Work of
Mansard, as is also the great Staircase which is highly esteemed. The Garden
is very pleasant, planted with an Ally of Trees, and has a great Parterre. The
Apartments have their several Prospects, which renders them very pleasant in
Summer. The late Princess of Conti, one of the Wisest and most Virtuous Ladies
of this Age, changed away to M. de Guenegaud for this House, her fair House of
Bouchet, together with the old Hotel de Conti, where lives at present Monsieur
the Duke of Crequi. In one Corner of this Hotel stands a great House, which
makes no distinct appearance outwardly, but depends upon this Hotel. One can
hardly desire a better contrived building or neater than this. Monsieur the
Prince de la Roche-sur-Yon dwells in it at present, that so he may be near his
Brother the Prince of Conti.

Between this Hotel and the College de Quatre Nations, Monsieur the Abbot de
la Chamber, one of the French Academy, has his Lodgings, where you may see
many fine Curiosities. He has a very great number of all sorts of excellent
Books, among which are many Prints and pieces of Architecture. But the greatest
Rarity of all is a Marble Bust of the famous Cavalier Bernin, made at Rome a
little before his Death; and another Bust of Christ, made by the same Master;
with another of M. de la Chamber, his Father, whose name is so famous among all
Men of Learning, for those many excellent Works which he has published, and
for that particular Character which he has, of treating of the most profound
Matters, with a style so neat and polite. Beside this you may see at M. the
Abbot de la Chambre's several Copies of Poussin's best pieces, and some Models
in Wax of some of Bernin's Statues. Near this is

The College des Quatre-Nations.
HEre stood formerly the old Gate called Port de Nesle, with a very high
Tower, which did much incommode this Quarter. The Heirs of Cardinal Mazarin,
who by his Testament appointed the Foundation of this College, bought this
place for that purpose, and caused those Buildings to be pulled down, which
obstructed the form of that Plan which the Cardinal himself had drawn out. The
Key, which was broken off in this place, was continued as far as the
Pont-Rouge, and at last they raised the Buildings in such manner as we now see
them, of a most curious Ordinance without. They consist of two great
Pavillions, square and very high, adorned with Corinthian Pilasters, which
standing in a Demi-Circle, enclose a small Place or open Court; at the further
part of which is the Portal of the Chapel raised upon some steps, and adorned
with six Corinthian Pillars, which make a kind of Portico. Over all the Work,
which stands something higher than the Wings, are placed twelve Statues,
representing the four Evangelists, the Fathers of the Greek Church, and the
Fathers of the Latin Church; these serve for an Ornament to the Dome which
rises above them, and is enriched without with all the Ornaments one can
desire, as gildings upon the Lead in manner of Festoons, and Fe^illages over
the Slates, which are cut and placed like the Scales of Fishes. The inside of
the Church is not in the splendour at present which it is like to have in time.
And the Tomb of Cardinal Mazarin, which is to be placed here, is not yet begun.
On the Frise over the Portal you may read this Inscription:

JUL. MAZARIN. S. R. E. CARD. BASILICAMET GYMNAS. F. C. A. Julius Mazarin,
Cardinal of the holy Roman Church, caused this Church and School to be built,
in the Year M. DC. LXI. The inner part of this College is very spacious; it is
composed of two Courts, the first of which and also the least, is adorned with
two Portico's, one of which leads to the Church, in the other is the Staircase
that goes up to the Apartments of the foremost buildings. The other Court is
very great and all the buildings run along one side only, in which are
convenient Lodgings for a very great number of People. The Schools are below in
the Ground Rooms, level with the Court. But these things ought not to detain
you long, you ought to see the Library which is composed of Thirty five
thousand Volumes, collected together by Cardinal Mazarin, with great Care and
Charges. They are placed in excellent order, and the Presses are wrought of
Wainscot adorned with Pillars and Sculpture. This Library is of great length,
and it takes up one of the Pavillions that runs out upon the Key. Monsieur de
la Potrie one of the most intelligent men of the Kingdom in Books, has the
care of this Library, and shows it to the Curious very obligingly. It is said
that it will be made public, and that people will have allowance to study
there on certain days every Week, as is done in that of St. Victor's, but no
body knows when this will be. The Revenue which is appropriated for the
maintenance of this College is considerable: For beside the Abbey of St.
Michael en Herme, which is of a great Rent; there are several Houses in the Rue
Mazarin, from which arises a very great Sum of Money. The Design of Cardinal
Mazarin was to entertain here the Gentlemen of those four several Nations,
whose Country has been so long time the Theater of War, and that they might be
here Instructed in all those Exercises that are proper for Persons of Quality.
Here are to be Sixty in all; Fifteen from the parts about Pignerol, for Italy;
as many out of Alsatia for Germany; Twenty out of the Catholic Low Countries;
and Ten from Roussillon; that so these people being acquainted with the French
manners, may have an affection for that Nation from whom they have received
such Benefits. The Doctors of the Sorbonne are to have the Government of the
College, and to teach here Humanity. Here is also to be taught the Riding the
great Horse, and there is already a place set out for a Manege (or Rideing
School.) They are also to be taught to Dance, to handle their Arms, to Vault;
the Mathematics, and all belles Lettres, (or Polite Learning.) And these
Gentlemen have all this and all sort of Entertainment gratis, without costing
them one ^arthing, which makes this Foundation esteemed as one of the best, and
most useful that could be invented.

On the Key that runs along the River side, is placed this Inscription, in
black Marble, fronting toward the Louvre, composed by M. Blondel.

LUDOVICO MAGNO. To LEWIS the Great. M. DC. LXIX and M. DC. LXX. On the same
side is the Hotel de Crequi. In which Monsieur the Duke of Crequi, Governor of
Paris and one of the four principal Gentlemen of the Chamber, makes his abode.
You may see here very Curious Pictures, and very rich Furniture.

The Hotel de Bouillon is next, whose Apartments are magnificent, adorned with
Plafons. Here is no sparing in furnishing the House with the best sort of
Ornaments.

The House which makes the Corner of the Rue des Saint Peers, at present
possessed by Monsieur the Marechal d'Humieres, Governor of Flanders. It is a very
regular building, and wants nothing but a little more Room, to make it lighter.

Further on is the House of the late President Perault, Intendant of Monsieur
the Prince, which has been built with much Cost. You ought above all to see the
Gallery which fronts the River, open on both sides correspondently, and adorned
with several Pictures representing the principal Persons of the Royal Family of
France, with a long Genealogick Chart in Vellom of the House of Bourbon, in
which are the Portraits of all those Princes from St. Lewis, down to the
present Reign, in miniature. In the Garden are some very good Statues, two
Gladiators, colored like Brass, the Venus Medicis, and a young Bacchus of the
same kind, with some others, very well cast off from the Antiques at Rome. The
great Iron Arbor is remarkable for its height, and for its being the first
that ever was made of this sort. We ought not to forget the Chapel, in which is
a Picture done by Albert Duret, and highly esteemed, with some Copies of the
Sacraments from the Famous Poussin. This is a general account of what is here
remarkable, not mentioning the Furniture, which was very neat during the
Master's Life, who past for one of the Curiousest and best Judging men of the
Kingdom.

We come next to the Theatins. Cardinal Mazarin was their principal Founder,
having left them at his death a great Sum of Money for the building of their
Church, which was begun with much Cost, but is since left off imperfect, the
enterpr^ze being much greater than the Legacy, which was left 'em. These
Fathers are the only Men of this Order in France, and Cardinal Mazarin was the
first that brought them out of Italy.

The last house that you see in this Row, on the side of the River, is the
Hotel de Mailly, now building. It will stand very convenient and pleasant, in
regard its prospects are extended over the Tuilleries, and over the Course de la
Reine, the two most beautiful Walks of Paris.

The Course de la Reine, is on the other side of the River, at the end of the
Tuilleries; it was planted with four rows of Trees, as we see it, by the care
of Mary of Medicis, who gave the public this agreeable Walk: The Marechal de
Bassompierre has been at the charge to enclose it on that side next the River,
all along with a Wall of Freestone. It is in length a Roman Stadium, and at
each end has a Door of Iron, supported with certain Stone Works of a Rustic
Order, which make a very handsome effect. This Walk is the pleasanter in regard
it is upon the Banks of the River, from whence it has such a fresh Air, as in
Summer draws hither all the Gentry, and persons of Fashion in Paris. You may
count here often times no less than seven or eight hundred Coaches, which drive
about in the exactest order that can be, and without the least embarrass
imaginable.

These are the principal things that are to be seen in the Quarter of the
Faux-bourg St. Germain. There may be here other Rarities no less singular than
these, but in regard they are in particular hands, whose owners do not care to
have them known, I think it best to make no mention of them, as well to oblige
the owners, as to save the Labor of the Curious that they may not ask to see
what they are in great hazard to be denied.

L'ISLE DU PALAIS, (Or Island of the Palace.)
THIS is the last Quarter that remain^ to write of, though according to History
and Antiquity, it should have been first mentioned; but we did not think that
proper for some reasons, mentioned in the beginning of this Book. Formerly the
whole Town of Paris contained no more than that space of Ground which lies
between the two Arms of the Seine, which place still retains its ancient name
of the City. This is the fullest of People of any Quarter of Paris; but withal
the most incommodious, by reason of that great confusion of Houses, very high
for the most part, which make the Streets narrow and obscure.

The most remarkable things in this Quarter, are some Churches and the Palais,
or place where the Parliament sit.

The Church of Notre-Dame.
THis Church is the Cathedral of Paris, and the Seat of an Archbishopric,
which was erected in the Pontificate of Pope Urban the VIII. in the Year 1622.
It was before that only a Bishopric, but that very ancient; since St. Denis
who lived but a little time after the Apostles, was the Founder. This Church,
in the first Catholic Ages, was called by the Christians of those times, by
the name of that Saint its Founder; but it being rebuilt in the Reign of
Childebert, eldest Son of Clovis, about the year 522. it was then dedicated to
the Holy Virgin, whose name it has ever since retained. King Robert one of the
most pious and wisest Princes that France ever had, perceiving the ancient
Building not to have all that Beauty and Magnificence, which it might have;
begun another, but the design being a vast undertaking, it was not brought to
perfection till many Years after. Henry the First his Son, Philip the First,
Lewis the Gross, Lewis the Young, and Philip Augustus his Successors, did all
assist in the Work, and it was finished under the glorious Reign of the last, as
we may presume, because he is the last of those 24. whose Statues are set up on
the great Frontispiece.

The Structure of this Church is of the Gothic manner, but the handsomest and
best performed in France. It is very remarkable for its Grandeur and Solidity.
The Vaults are very high raised, and contain 17. Toises (a Toise is six Foot)
in height, the breadth is 24. and the length 65. The 2. great squate Towers in
the Front, are 34 Toises high, flat on the top, so that from this place one may
easily and conveniently discover all Paris. The Bells that hang in the Towers
are very fair ones, the biggest of them was cast but a while ago, for which
purpose the Chapter has been at a very considerable expense, and yet it has
no very pleasing Sound. All the Body of the Church is covered with Lead, and it
is easy to judge what a prodigious quantity there goes to cover so great a
Roof.

As for the inside of the Church, the Curious who are Lovers of Painting, will
here find sufficient satisfaction in viewing those great Pictures which all the
Pillars are adorned with. Those in the Quire are much better than the rest.
Here are two of M. Le Brun's hand, one representing the Crucifying of St.
Peter, the other the Martyrdom of St. Steven. Here is also one piece of le
Sueur's, representing St. Paul in the midst of a Public Assembly, casting into
a Fire the Books of Magic, before the Gate of the Temple, whose Portico is
supported with Pillars: This Picture ought to be esteemed as one of the
choicest that can be seen, it being of the best manner of that excellent
Master, who in the Judgment of some able Men, is esteemed the Second French
Painter of this Age, and next to the famous Poussin. In former Years on every
first day of May, the Company of Goldsmiths did use to present a Picture to
this Church, for the making of which they employed some renowned Painter, who
had made himself known and gained a Reputation; but this Year the Custom has
been intermitted, though we hope it will be continued again hereafter. There are
few Cathedral Churches in Europe, wherein the Divine Service is performed with
more exactness and Reverence. The Chapter is composed of 50. Canons, among whom
there are some very famous and of great Merit.

Among the rest, Monsieur Joli, the Chanter, and one of the Canons, is known to
be a person of extraordinary Probity and Diligence in his Office, and who to
his singular Merit has added a profound Learning. He has made public several
Works, some of which are already very scarce to be met with. The principal are

An Historical Treatise of the Episcopal Schools, 1678.

Christian propositions for relief of the Poor, 1652.

A Voyage to Munster in the Year 1646.

A Translation of two Books of the State of Marriage, composed by Francis
Barbaro, a Noble Venetian.

A Christian Instruction for the Financiers, 1667.

Christian and Moral Advice for the Education of Children.

The Christian Widow, Dedicated to the late Queen Mother.

Diverse small Tracts collected from the Memoires of M. Antoine Loisel. Advocate
in Parliament, his maternal Grandfather.

De Verbis Vsuardi quae in Martyrologio Ecclesiae Parisiensis referuntur in
festo Assumptionis B. Mariae Virginis, in 12. 1662.

Traditio antiqua Ecclesiarum Franciae seu totius Imperii Occidentalis, quae in
ipsius Martyrologio ad festum Assumptionis B Mariae Virginis referuntur,
Vindicata, 1672.

There are also some other Books ascribed to him, Entitled

Recueil de Maxims veritables and importantes pour l'institution du Roi.

Codicille d'Or, ou petit Recueil tire de l'Instution du Prince Chr^tien,
compose par Erasme, mis en Francois sous le Roi Francois I. and a present pour
la deuxieme fois, aves d'autres petites pieces, 1665. in 12.

Traite de la restitution des Grands, precede d'un^ Lettre touchant quelques
points de la Morale Chretienne, 1665. in 12.

De Reformandis horis Canonicis and rit^ constituendis Clericorum muneribus,
Consultatio, 1643. in 12.

This last mentioned Book is a most curious piece. He has also compiled
together the Works of Monsieur Guy Coquille, containing many Curious Tracts
relating to the Liberties of the Gallican Church, in two Volumes in ^olio. He
had a numerous Library, but gave it away to the Chapter about two years since,
on Condition that it be public, and that all sorts of People may have liberty
to come and study in it freely. It is at present in a house in the Cloifter,
behind the Draw-wells, on that side next the Church; and we may e're long see
it considerably augmented, some other of the Canons having promised to add
their ^ooks to it.

It ought to be observed that the Canons of this Church rise at midnight to go
to Matines, which they still say at that hour, according to the ancient usage
of the Church. There are some ancient Men among these hanons, who for 30. or
40. Years together, have not omitted one single time: and this is almost the
only Church in the Kingdom, that has Religiously continued this pious Custom,
though so painful and troublesome, especially in Winter. The Canons places are of
no great Revenue, yet they are much esteemed, because they are very honorable.

On Festival days you may see here very rich Ornaments. Their Silver Vessels,
or Altar Plate, is of the best Workmanship. It consists of six great
Candlesticks, and a Cross made by Monsieur Baslin. Over the Copper Pillars,
behind the great Altar, is the Shrine of St. Marcel, one of the first Bishops
of Paris. It is of Silver gilt, adorned with precious Stones, and Enamel of a
delicate Color. On Whit-sunday they expose here a Suit of Ornaments of Crimson
Satin, Embroidered with Pearls, some of which are very large. This was the
gift of Queen Isabel of Bavaria, Wife of Charles VI. Which Present she made in
order to obtain of God her Husbands Cure, being afflicted with a troublesome
Distemper. The fair Suit of Tapistry, which they display here on the great
Festivals, representing the Life of the Holy Virgin; is the gift of M. le Masle
Prior of Roches, Chanter of this Church, and Secretary to the Cardinal de
Richelieu, the same who gave his Library to the Sorboune. The Statue which we
see on a Pillar on the left hand of the great Altar, represents Philip
Augustus, whose Wife is interred here in the Quire; as is also a Son of Lewis
the Gross, who refused to be Bishop of this Church, because he would not by his
own promotion, hinder that of the famous Peter Lombard, who was chosen in his
stead. The Tomb of Copper raised about one Foot from the Ground, near the Quire
Door, belongs to a Bishop of Paris, named Odo de Sulli, in whose Pontificate
this Church was finished; he lived in the Reign of Philip Augustus, and died in
the year 1208.

In the Chapels behind the Quire there are more Tombs, the most considerable of
which are those of the House of Gondi, originally of Italy, who came into
France with Catharine de Medicis, the Cardinal de Retz, who died about 3. years
since Abbot of St. Denis, and had been Archbishop of Paris, was the second
Cardinal of this Family. The Chapel of the Virgin, which is on one side of the
Door that leads into the Quire, is adorned with many Silver Lamps, and
abundance of other curious Offerings that have been made here. Some years ago
they placed before the great Altar, that huge Lamp of Silver, given by the late
Queen Mother, which weighs 120. Marks, (a Mark is 8 Ounces) and is six Foot in
Diameter. This Chapel of the Virgin, has been sometimes called the Sluggards
Chapel, because of the very late Masses which were said here for such as lay
long a bed: It was the only place in Paris that enjoyed this privilege,
contrary to the Custom of the past Ages, when it was forbid to say Mass after
10. a Clock. Over against this is the Statue of Philip de Valois, on Horseback
Armed, and Caparison'd as the fashion was in his time. He is represented in
such manner, as when he came into this Church, to return his Thanks for a
Battle gained over the Flemings near Cassel; a Battle so Bloody that he saw
22000. of his Enemies dead upon the place. Near this is a great Picture,
representing Lewi^ XIII. in his Royal Robes, kneeling at the Feet of Christ
taken down from the Cross; it is the Vow of that King made in a dangerous fit
of Sickness. I shall say nothing of the several Chapels round the Nave, all
well Wainscotted and Painted; nor of the Galleries over the sides capable of
holding a vast number of People; for this would be to engage too far into
particulars. I shall only say that Paulus Aemilius, that famous Historian, is
interred in this Church on the North side, but the precise place is not known.
However you might have read this Epitaph not long since.

PAULUS AEMILIUS VERONENSIS, hujus Ecclesiae Canonicus, qui praeter eximiam
Vitae sanctitatem, quanta quoque Doctrina praestiterit, judex atque testis erit
Historia de rebus ^estis Francorum, posteris ab eodem edita.

OBIIT A. P. 152^. DIE 5. MENSIS MAII.

Paulus Aemilius of Verona, Canon of this Church, of whose great Learning,
besides his extraordinary Sanctity* his History of France will be a sufficient
testimony to Posterity.

He died in the Year 1526. the 5. of May.

In the Sacri^ty, you may see an excellent Bust of Cardinal de Richelieu, made
by Cavalier Bernin, which the Duchess of Aiguillon gave to this Church by her
Testament.

On the South side of this Church, stands the Archiepiscopal Palace, on the
bank of the River Seine. The House makes no very handsome show on the outside,
but is within very commodious and neat. Here is very handsome Furniture, and a
Cabinet of choice Books. The Garden is but little, and consists only of one or
two Alleys along the River.

Behind the Church of Nostre-Dame, stands another little one very ancient,
called St. Denis du Pas, because the first Torment that they inflicted upon
that Saint was in this place, where they put him into a hot Oven, from which he
was delivered by a Miracle.

The Cloister where the Canons live is enclosed with ancient Walls, within
which they have their several Apartments. Formerly when they lived in Community
like the Religious, Women were not suffered to dwell here; but since they have
been Secularized, they have had distinct Lodgings, and it has been permitted
to those who have room to spare, to let out their Apartments, which has been
the occasion to introduce here all sorts of People.

M. Menage, so well known among the Learned for all his excellent Works* dwells
in this Cloister. Every Wednesday he has in his House a Meeting for the
improvement of the Sciences, to which all Men who make any profession of
Learning are freely admitted.

These are the most remarkable matters in this Cloister, which is joined to the
Isle of Nostre-Dame, by a Bridge of Wood, over which lies a Communication.

From hence, you pass before the Hotel-Dieu. This Hospital is the principal and
greatest of all Paris; they receive here indifferently all poor Sick People,
and you may sometimes reckon here to the number of 4000. who are all
entertained and nourished with exceeding great Care. They are served by Nuns of
St Augustine's Order, whose Rule is the more severe, in regard they are to
spend their whole Life in this Exercise, which they could never undergo without
admirable Virtue and Patience, by reason of all those incommodities which they
pass through, near so many poor Sick People, whose Miseries and Diseases render
them equally froward and insupportable. This Hospital has very great Revenues,
and they increase daily more and more, by reason of the gifts that are
continually given to it. The building is not handsome, nay it is very
incommodious, because it is straightened for Room; the Ground on which it stands
being shut up on all sides. They have been therefore constrained to extend
their buildings upon the very River, and to erect a great Room upon a long
Vault, under which the Stream runs. Though there be here a very great number of
Beds, they are not sufficient for that greater quantity of Sick which are
brought hither every day; and sometimes they are constrained to put 3. or 4. in
the same Bed. They have several and distinct Rooms, where they lodge those who
are afflicted with like Distempers, that so the Disease may not spread. The
Hall on that side next the Petit-Pont, whose outside is adorned with Figures,
was built by Cardinal Anthony du Prat, Chancellor of France, and Legate of the
Holy See, about the Year 1535. It is thought that the first Foundation of this
great Hospital was laid by St. Landri, the 28 th. Bishop of Paris, who lived
under Clovis the 2 d. in the Year 660. In the first Ages of Christianity,
Bishops were, by a laudible Custom, obliged to Nourish and Lodge the Poor, as
being the Dispensators and Trustees of the Poors ^state. For this reason they
built Hospitals near their Cathedral Churches, to the end that so they might be
the principal Administrators themselves; as at this Day the Archbishop has
the chief direction here, with the Primier President, and the Procurer General;
the Canons of Nostre-Dame have the Direction of the Spirituals.

St. Lewis, as William de Nangis, who has composed a History of France much
esteemed, tells us* was a great Benefactor to this Hospital, and did
considerably augment its revenue. Henry the 4 th. did the like, giving
wherewithal to build one of the fairest Halls, which is that of St. Thomas,
raised upon a Stone Bridge, very solid, and finished 1602. It is a very Edifying
Curiosity to see in what manner the Poor are served in this Hospital.
Princesses have sometimes performed here the vilest Offices of Servants; and
even in our days we have known The Duchess of Nevers, Mother of Madam R^iale,
and of the Queen of Portugal deceased.
one dye of a Disease which she caught here in giving some Broth to a Poor
Creature. sick of the Small Pox.

Over against the principal Gate that goes into the Parvis de Nostre-Dame, you
may see a great Stone Statue, very high, which represents a Man holding a Box
in his hand, and a Serpent by his side. It is supposed to be the Statue of
Esculapius, God of the Physicians, who is presumed to have had some Temple in
this place. On the Fountain behind this Statue, these Verses are ingraved.

QUI SITIS, HUC TENDAS DESUNT SI FORTE LIQUORES,
PROGREDERE, AETERNAS DIVA PARAVIT AQUAS.
Come hither you that Thirst, and Water want,
Go, and take living Water from the Saint.
All this Quarter is full of Churches, which in truth are but small but very
ancient. Their names are

St. John le Rond, standing on one side of the Church of Nostre-Dame, and is
the Parish Church of the Cloister.

St. Christophers, over against the same Church.

St. Genevieve des Ardens, which has been so named, by reason of a famous
Miracle, which happened through the Intercession of that Saint, when her Shrine
was carried in procession to Nostre-Dame, in order to the obtaining a Cure for
an Epidemical Disease, called Les Ardens, because those who were afflicted with
this Distemper were inflamed with such a Thirst, that no Remedy could abate.
This Miracle happened in the Reign of Lewis VI. in the year 1130. under the
Pontificate of Pope Innocent the 2 d. And for a perpetual Memorial, this Church
was built, it being before that but a small Chapel; but in process of Time it
is become a Parish Church, though the Parish be but of sinall extent.

St. Peter aux Boeufs, where they touch Cattle with a hot Key, to keep 'em from
running Mad.

St. Marine, the Parish Church of the Archbishop's House, to the Curate of
which Church are sent all Marriages, that are gained by Sentence n the
Officialty.

St. Landri.

St. Symphorian.

St. Denis de la Chartre, where according to some Men's Opinions, that great
Apostle of France, was put into Chains, and for some time cast into an obscure
Prison, when he came to bring the Faith and Light of the Gospel into France.
The late Queen Mother, whose piety extended into many places, repaired the
Altar, and placed there all the Figures which you see, representing a Miracle
which happened to the Saint, when he was shut up in this place; they are the
Work of M. Anguerre. This Church is a Priory of the Order of St. Benet, enjoyed
by M. l'Abbe Testu, one of the French Academy. Near to this is the Church of

Saint Magdelain. Some hold that this is one of the oldest in Paris, and that
for this reason it is exempted from making Processions as others do. Here is a
Fraternity that was formerly of so great Reputation, that the greatest Lords
entered themselves of it, after the Examples of the King, and the Princes of
the Blood. The other Churches are

Saint Croix.

St. Peter des Arcis.

St. Martial.

St. Germain le Vieux. Whose great Altar is of a very handsome Wainscot Work,
adorned with Corinthian Pillars of black Marble, with a Picture representing
the Baptism of our Lord, Painted by Stella, an excellent Master. This Church
was formerly dedicated to St. John Baptist, before they brought hither the
Relics of St. Germain, in the Reign of King Pepin, for fear they should be
plundered by the Barbarians, if they remained in the Abbey of his name, which at
that time stood without the Town. That King himself assisting in carrying the
Shrine upon his own Shoulders from the Abbey to this place. In memory of the
Miracle which then happened as they past by the little Chatelet, he gave to St.
Germains the Estate at Palaiseau, six Leagues from Paris.

Lower in the Street near the Palais, are the Barnabites. These Religious have
been in the Possession of this Priory, but since the beginning of this Age
before that time it belonged to the Order of St. Benet, under the name of St.
Eloy. And the Revenues are reunited to the Archbishopric of Paris. Their
Church is unfinisht. The House which they have erected here, about four or five
years since* has cost them more than 50000. Crowns; but it was a very
necessary building, for before that they had hardly any Lodgings to lie in.

St. Bartholomew is also over against the Palais, to which and to all this
Quarter it belongs as the proper Parish Church. This was formerly also a Priory
of the Order of St. Benet, dedicated to St. Magloire, but the Monks left it, to
avoid the Tumult and Noise of the place, and removed to the Faux-bourg Saint
Jacques, near the little Chapel of St. George, belonging to them at that time.
This Translation was made, as has been already said, in the Reign of Lewis the
Young, in the Year 1138. This Benefice was since reunited to the
Archbishopric, and the Church made Parochial, the Extent of which Parish
reaches to the Rue St. Denis, St. Zue St. Giles was once annexed to this; and we
have known a Curate who was possessed of both these Benefices, but they have been
since divided because of the great distance.

The Church is obscure and ill built. The great Altar is of Wainscot Work, and
of a handsome design. There is a Chapel on the right hand, in which you may see
two Pictures of M. Herault's Work, one represents St. William, and the other
St. Charles B^romeus. That over the Altar is of M. Loir's hand, and represents
St. Catharine kneeling, and receiving on her Finger a Ring, which is put on by
the Infant Jesus. The rest is not much remarkable.

Missire Lewis Servin, Advocate General in the Parliament of Paris, is interred
in St. Bartholomew's. He was a person who had gained by his extraordinary
Merit, the Respect and Love of all those who knew him; and his Reputation was
so great throughout all Europe, that the most Famous Men of Learning of his
time, made it their glory to hold a Commerce by Letters with him, as we see in
their Printed Works, where are some Letters of his, of wonderful Wit and
Genius. His inviolable Fidelity for the Right side, gained him the Confidence
of Henry III. who made him his Advocate-General, after the dismission of
Messire Jaques Faye Despesses, which Office he performed with a most exemplary
Integrity, until the Year 1626. in which he died, as he was making an Oration
to Lewis XIII. then sitting on his Throne of Justice in the Parliament. The
University, to whom he had done great Service, made him a solemn Funeral at the
Mathurins, where his Elogium was pronounced in Latin. These two Verses may
serve for his Epitaph: Est satis in titulo Servinus, prob? jacet ingens,
In mundo scivit scibile quidquid erat.


Servin's enough for Epitaph, here lies,
Who knew whatever Science did comprize.
THE PALAIS.
IF I had obliged my self in this Collection, to speak of the Antiquities of
those things which I treat of in Paris, I should have had occasion here to
mention many particulars; but after all it had been only a repetition of what
many Authors have already said. Those who have the curiosity to be informed in
these Affairs, let them consult du Tillet, Giles Corrozet, Father du Breail, in
his Theater of Antiquities at Paris, M. du Chesne in his Antiquities of Towns,
and several others who have writ on the French History, I will only say to the
honor of those who compose this great Body, that Pepin Father of Charlemagne
did first Institute it; and that it was ambulatory till the Reign of Philip the
Fair, who, as Belforest reports, was the first who made it Sedentary, in
quitting his own proper Palace to the Officers of Justice. To make it the more
spacious, he caused to be built the greatest part of the Chambers, and the
whole work was finished in the year 1313. Notwithstanding it is certain that
there were in this place several great Buildings before that time, in regard
several Kings made this place their usual abode. Clovis himself kept his Court
here; but St. Lewis dwelt here longer than any, for finding the Situation
commodious in the middle of Paris, he made here several great Works, especially
the Holy Chapel, of which more by and by.

The chief remarks in this great building is, first, the great Hall, admired by
the Cavalier Bernin, as one of the handsomest things in France. It is built
upon the same Plan, with another very old which was burnt down in the beginning
of this Age, in which the Statues of all our Kings were placed round about the
Walls, as big as the Life. In this Hall the Kings did use to receive
Ambassadors, and made public Feasts on certain days in the year, and also here
they celebrated the Nuptials of the Sons and Daughters of France. At the
Marriage of Isabel of France with Richard the Second, King of England, there
was in this place so great a Crowd of People, that many persons were stifled.
Charles the Sixth who Reigned at that time, was himself in danger of his Life.

This Hall is all Vaulted with Freestone, with a row of Arches in the middle,
supported with great Pillars, round which are several Shops employed by diverse
Tradesmen; the Dorick Order of Pilasters run round the Hall. At one end is a
Chapel where Mass is said every day; the Procureurs (or Attorneys) to whom this
Chapel belongs, have about a year since laid out 40000. Francs to beautify it
as we now see.

Above this is the Clock, according to which the Hearings or Audiences in the
several Courts are regulated. At the bottom of the Dial, you may read this neat
Verse made by M. de Montmort, one of the French Academicians.

SACRA THEMIS MORES UT PENDULA DIRIGIT HORAS.

Justice does guide us, as the Balance this.

The inside round about this Chapel is adorned with Gilding, and painted like
Marble of various Colors, which makes the place very handsome.

You must not neglect to see the several Chambers where they plead. The great
Chamber is on one side of the great Hall; it was built in the time of St.
Lewis, who used here to give his Public Audiences, in which, with the kindness
of a Father, and the Majesty of a great King, he endeavored to pacify the
disorders that rise among his Subjects, or received the Ambassadors sent from
the Neighboring Princes. Lewis the XII. repaired it as it is at present. The
Plafon composed of Culs de Lamp (Work in the Ceiling swelling down with knobs)
was heret fore esteemed as an excellent piece of Work; but time has decayed a
great part of that which made it esteemed. This is the Room where all the
Parliament assemble when the King comes hither to sit on his Tribunal of
Justice, or at such times when there is any great Affair for them to deliberate
upon. In this place also the Dukes and Peers of France come and demand to have
their Patents Registered, which they obtained of the King, for the Erection of
their Dignities. The other Chambers are much handsomer than this, and in some
of them the Plafons (or Ceilings) are gilt and painted very richly. The 2 d.
and 3 d. Chambers of Inquests, and the Chambers of Requests are the best
adorned.

The Court of Aids.
THis is a separate Jurisdiction from the Parliament, which fits in three
distinct Chambers, that are beautified with costly Plafons. The face of the
building, on that side next the Perron du May, is of Stone enricht with
Sculpture of a good design.

The Chancery, whose coming in is in the Gallery of Prisoners, has been
repaired of late years.

The next day after St. Martin, being the day on which the Parliament opens,
there is here a Ceremony which strangers must not neglect to see. All the
Members of that great Court are present, apparelled in Scarlet Robes on that
day, and assist at a solemn Mass in the great Hall. The principal Presidents,
called Presidens a mortier, are distinguished from the rest, by their ^acings
of Minever, or a kind of spotted Fur. When these last go up to Offer, they make
a kind of Reverence which was used in old time, and is never practiced now
adays but upon this occasion. After the Mass is ended, they go to hear the
Speeches, which are usually made by the first President, by the Procureur
General, and by the Advocates General, who are no less remarkable by their
Eloquence, than by their Dignities.

The Saint Chapel.
OF all the Monuments of Piety which St. Lewis raised, there is none more
beautiful or more magnificent than this. Who making his usual abode in this
Palace, caused this Chapel to be erected for the convenience of his own
Devotion. In the same place where it now stands there was formerly a small
Church Founded by King Hugh Capet, under the title of The Adoration of three
Kings, in which Church Robert his Son did institute an Order of Knights, called
Knights of the Star. This Order was of great Reputation in the beginning of its
Institution, and the greatest Lords accepted of the Collar. But in process of
time it became so vilified, that it came to be conferred on the Town Watch, who
go about in the Night time to prevent disorders, that might happen in the
Streets from Thieves and Robbers. From whence it comes, that at this day, the
Captain who commands that Watch is called the Chevalier du Guet (the Knight of
the Watch). This little Chapel remained in such Estate till the time of St.
Lewis, who built the Structure which we now see, a building of surprising
Delicacy. The Vaults are very high, and the Windows of it pass for the
handsomest that can be seen, by reason of their bigness and almost infinite
Variety of Colors, representing some particular History of the Old and New
Testaments, the Glass of which is of such thickness, that it has resisted the
injuries of time down to this day. This beautiful Work was but five years in
doingand was finished in the year 1247. In a little time after which, they
brought hither the Relics which are kept here. These were redeemed by that
holy King out of the hands of the Venetians, to whom Baldwin Emperor of
Constantinople, had engaged them for a very considerable Sum of Money, which
they lent him to carry on his War against the Bulgarians. This Redemption of
these precious Pawns by St. Lewis, was not done without the Emperors knowledge
and consent to take them, upon paying to the Venetians the Moneys for which
they were engaged. They were as follows, A great piece of Wood, part of the
true Cross; our Lord's Crown of Thorns, and certain drops of his precious
Blood; some of the Cloths which belonged to his Infancy; another piece of the
true Cross, some Blood which bled Miraculously from an Image of our Lord struck
by an Infidel; one link of Iron, part of the Chain wherewith he was bound; the
Napkin or Towel with which he washed his Apostles Feet; a piece of the Stone of
his Sepulcher; some of the Holy Virgins Milk; the Iron head of the Lance that
pierced our Lord's side; the Purple Robe with which they Clothed him; the
Sponge which they used in giving him Vinegar and Gall to Drink; a piece of the
Shroud in which he was wrapped: Together with these things there is kept in the
same Treasury, a Cross which our Ancestors used to carry with the Oriflame,
which is at St. Denis, when they marched out to any Wars of Consequence, which
Cross was called on that account The Cross of Triumph; and many other things
beside, as Moses's Rod; the upper part of St. John Baptist's Head: all which
things are enclosed in the great Shrine of Copper gilt, which you see raised
upon four Pillars, supporting a little Vault behind the great Altar: But with
the sight of these things one must not expect to satisfy his curiosity, for
these precious Relics hardly ever are exposed, but when some Queen desires to
see them, which happens very rarely. Upon the great Altar, in a kind of
Tabernacle or Box of Wood, gilt and powdered with Flowers-de-Lis, is the model
of the Holy Chapel in little of Silver gilt, and of most excellent Workmanship,
enricht with Stones of considerable value. It is showed only on Festival Days.
There are also in the Sacristy other things to be seen that are very rare,
especially a great number of Reliquaries of Gold and Silver; a great Cross all
of Gold, in which is enclosed a piece of the Wood of the true Cross, which is
exposed every Friday in Lent. You may here also see the Chanters Staff, on the
top of which is placed a great Agate, representing St. Lewis to the Wast,
holding in one hand a little Cross, and in the other our Lord's Crown of
Thorns. Here are also several Books whose Covers are enricht with great Pearls
and precious Stones.

But that which is extraordinary rare is a great antique Oriental Agate, very
fine, of Figure almost Oval, a little bigger than an ordinary* Trencher-Plate;
it is cut in Bas-relief, and represents the Apotheosis of Augustus, the
Workmanship is really most admirable, by reason that the design is so
contrived, that the Natural Colors of the Stone serve for Shadows in their
proper places, where they should be according to Art, and make the same effect
as if the Work of the Pencil. Monsieur de St. Avaunt, a Famous Antiquary, has
explained all the Figures in this Piece, and discovered to us very curious
things, which may be read in his great Treatise of Medals. This fair Agate was
a Present made by an Emperor of Constantinople to Charles VI. in order to
obtain some Succors from him against the Turks; but this he could not have, by
reason of those Troubles which the English and the Duke of Burgundy then caused
in this Kingdom.

The Ornaments of the Altar in this Church are magnificent, especially those
which are exposed on the Feast of St. Lewis, whose Head you see of Silver gilt
supported by two Angels of the same materials formerly kept in the Treasury of
St. Denis. As you go out you ought to observe a handsome Figure of our Lady of
Pity, placed under the Organs on the left hand as you enter; it is the Work of
the famous Germain Pilon, who lies buried in the lower Holy Chapel: this is
esteemed as one of his best pieces. The Chapter of this Church is not numerous,
yet are the Canons places of a good Revenue and enjoy fair Privileges. They
have for their Superior a Treasurer, whose place is double the Revenue of the
other Canons. The Abbey of St. Nicaise at Reins, worth 3000. Crowns per annum,
is appropriated to this Chapter, with many Houses besides round about the
Palais. In the same Court over against the Holy Chapel, is

The Chamber of Accouuts.
Within the enclosure of the Palais, is also this Sovereign Jurisdiction
separate form the Parliament. Here all the Receivers of the Finances make up
their Accounts. And all those who have had the management of any of the King's
Money, ought here to justify their proceedings. Here also they keep the
Archives, and ancient Charters of the Crown; among which there are a great many
which our Historians have made use of. The famous Monsieur du Cange, among
others, has collected from hence a great number of Memoires, to serve him in
Commenting upon those ancient Historians. which he has published. The reading
of which Pieces will give us a sufficient Idea of his profound Knowledge. The
principal are

The History of Constantinople under the French Emperors, Writ by Geoffry de
Ville-Hardouin, and by Philip de Mou^^es, in the Language of their time, in
Folio; The History of St. Lewis, by the Sire de Joinville.Beside these, this
Learned Author has Published.

Historia Bysantina duplici commentario illustrata; Prior continens familias ac
stemmata Imp. Constant. etc. alter descriptionem urbis Constant. qualis extitit
sub Imperatorib. Christianis, in Folio.

Glossarium mediae atque infimae Latinitatis; 3. Vol. Fol.

This last Book has gained him a greater reputation than all, and that as well
in Foreign Parts as in France. And it stands with reason, since this is
esteemed one of the greatest Works that has been undertaken in this Age, for
which the Author had need of all the time he had, even for many years, to treat
of all those various Subjects therein contained, with so much Learning as he
has done.

I might here name many other Learned Men, who have drawn great Light for
History out of the Chamber of Accounts; among others the Messieurs Godefroy,
who have made public a great many of our old Historians, now lately Printed at
the Royal Press in the Louvre, with excellent Commentaries at the end. Monsieur
d'Herouval, Auditor of the Accounts, has assisted them, in procuring for their
sight all the helps that lay in his power, as we may perceive in their Works;
they acknowledging in express terms, how obliging he has been in searching out
for them those things, that might be useful for their occasions; and one may
justly say, that without him the greatest part of the best Monuments of our
History had been unknown and remained buried in dust.

The buildings of the Chamber of Accounts, has been in its time esteemed as a
handsome piece of Work. It was at first raised by Lewis XII. whose Device is to
be seen in several places of it, which is a Porcupine with these words,

COMINUS ET EMINUS. Near and far off. In one of the Chambers are several very
curious ancient Pictures, representing, according to the Life, several Princes
and Princesses of the Blood Royal, in the Court of Charles the V. and of some
other Kings, whose Pictures we cannot elsewhere meet with. Father Menetrier
thought them so curious and so singular, that he caused them to be graved, and
we may meet with the Prints in some places, with Historical explications of the
Persons and Blazons represented, which are writ by the said Father.

La Cour des Monnoys, or Court belonging to the Mint and Coynage, is over the
Chamber of Accounts. in which there is nothing singular to be observed.
Monsieur Croussin is one of the Presidents, to the praise of whom it may be
said, that no Man has labored with more Success for the improvement of the
French Tongue. He has Translated out of Greek all the Authors that have writ of
the Constantinopolitan History; in the beginning of which he has adjoin'd very
Learned Prefaces, for the better understanding of those Historians, who for the
most part are so obscure and intricate, that, without his helps, we should
hardly be able to understand any thing in them. Never did any body before
undertake this Work, because so very difficult; those Historians being looked
upon as half Barbarous. But now by the assistanc eof this Learned Man, they may
be read in French, Translated with all the Elegancy and Fidelity that can be
expected, in a piece writ on purpose for the Language only. They begin with the
ancient Justin, and continue to Constantine Paleologus; under whom the Eastern
Empire ended. They all make Nine Volumes in Quarto. He has also Translated the
Roman History of Xiphilinus, of Zonaras, and of Zosimus. The Ecclesiastical
History of Eusebius, of Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, and Evagrias, in Quarto.
Certain practical Books of Devotion of Cardinal Bona; and lastly the History of
the Empire of the East, written by Eginard, and other Authors, which was
published about the beginning of this year, 1684.

The Hotel of Monsieur the Premier President, behind the Chamber of Accounts,
has nothing remarkable.

The Place Dauphine.
THis Place is at the very end of the Isle of the Palais next the Pont-Neuf. It
is in figure triangular; the Houses that compose it are built of Brick, with
Cordons of Freestone, and all of the same fashion, They were erected in the
Year 1606. four or five years after the birth of Lewis XIII. on which account
they are thus named.

Of late years they have opened a way on this side to the Palais, and have
raised several great Houses in the Garden belonging to the H^tel of the Premier
President, with a long Gallery, in which many Tradesmen keep Shops, as in the
other Halls belonging to the Palais. This way saves a great deal of going
about, which those who came from the Pont-Neuf were formerly forced to make.

The little Street that lies behind is named. The Rue de Lamoignon, because it
was built in the time of the famous Premier President of that name; who did
himself contribute all his endeavors to procure the convenience of this Passage
for the good of the public.

THE BRIDGES of PARIS.
IN regard the Bridges of Paris make a considerable part of the beauties of
this great City, we have thought it proper to make a particular Chapter of that
subject; and thereby to have the more liberty in explaining the singularities
thereof.

The Bridge of Notre-Dame.
THis is the oldest and the first that was built with Stone. It was finished as
we now see it, in the Year 1507. A Cordelier, originally of Verona, undertook
the work, at the Charges of the Hotel de Ville. Historians say his name was
Joannes Jucundus, and that he was in great reputation for his wonderful
knowledge in all sorts of Learning: They add also, That the famous Julius
Scaliger was his Scholar. On one of the Arches you may read these Verses graved
in the Stone: JUCUNDUS GEMINOS POSUIT TIBI SEQUANA PONTES,
HUNC TU JURE POTES DICERE PONTIFICEM.


Jucundus he re a double Bridge did frame,
Him Pontifex Posterity may name.
This Bridge is laden with Houses on both sides, but they are not so high
built as those on the other Bridges. These Houses are beautified in the front,
with great Terms A Term is a kind of Pilaster in the lower half, and toward
the top fashioned like a Man or Woman without Arms.
of Men and Women, supporting on their Heads Baskets of Fruit; between every two
are certain Medals* in which are represented all the Kings of France, with
every one a Verse suitable to him. Time had much decayed these things, but they
were well repaired against the late Queen made her Entry, she passing over here
as she went to the Louvre. And of a long time it has been the Custom for the
Queens to pass over this Bridge, when they make their first Entrys into Paris,
at which time these Buildings are adorned Magnificently. It is reported that
when Isabel of Bavaria made hers, it was covered from one end to the other,
with a kind of Pavillion of blue Taffaty, powdered with Flowers-de-Lis of Gold,
they say also that by means of a wonderful and suprising Machin, an Angel flew
down from one of the Towers of Nostre-Dame Church, and placed a Crown of Gold
upon her Head. But though this Deed is recorded by an Historian of that time,
it seems to me that one may reasonably doubt the truth of it.

In the middle of this Bridge are erected two Machins, which draw up the River
Water for the use of those Quarters of the Town which are far distant. The Gate
belonging to this place is of the Ionick Order, set off with certain Ornaments
which make no bad effect. The following Verses of Monsieur Santeuil's, whom we
have so often mentioned, are ingraved upon black Marble in Letters of Gold:

SEQUANA CUM PRIMUM REGINAE ALLABITUR URBI,
TARDAT PRAECIPITES AMBITIOSUS AQUAS.
CAPTUS AMORE LOCI, CURSUM OBLIVISCITUR ANCEPS,
QUO FLUAT, ET DULCES NECTIT IN URBE MORAS.
HINC VARIOS IMPLENS FLUCTU SUBEUNTE CANALES.
FONS FIERI GAUDET QUI MODO FLUMEN ERAT.
ANNO M. DC. LXXVI.

As Sein does to the Queen of Cities glide,
The Ambitious River stops his hasty Tide.
Enchanted with the place, forgets his way,
And with the Beauteous Town, contrives his stay.
Into her various Pipes he freely Flows,
And from a River now a Fountain grows.
M. DC. LXXVII.

One of these Machins raises 24. Pouces of Water, and this is the Invention of
Monsieur Mance; the other which raises but half so much, was invented by M.
Joli. On the same Arm of the River is

The Pont au Change.
THis is the next Bridge to the Pont-Neuf. It has this name because formerly
there were a great many Money Changers, or Banckers, who inhabited the Houses
on this Bridge, and made a kind of Exchange or Bource in this place. It has
been also formerly called the Pont aux Oiseaux, or Bridge of Birds, because no
doubt of Birdsellers here dwelling. But being in the Year 1629, burnt down by
an extraordinary Fire, it being then of Wood, it was afterward rebuilt of
Freestone, as we now see it, with so much solidity, that they have erected upon
it two Rows of double Houses four Stories high, all of them arched with
Freestone. These Houses are inhabited by Traders, who have their Warehouses on
the side next the Water, and their Shops in the forepart. This Bridge has the
most Passengers of all in Paris, because of the Palais which stands at the end
of it.

At one end, over a house which fronts the Bridge, you may see the King's
Statue about the Age of 10. years old, Crowned with Laurel by the Figure of a
Victory. This Statue is raised on a little Pedestal; and on each side of it are
the Statues of Lewis the 13 th. and Anne of Austria as big as the Life, in
Brass. These Statues are very well designed, and very like.

The Key or Wharf, called Qua de Gesvers, leads from this Bridge, to the Bridge
of Nostre-Dame, under cover all the way. It is supported by Vaults, whose
Foundation is in the River, of a sort of Work extraordinary hardy, those who
affect such things ought to go down and observe it.

At the other end of the Pont au Change, at the Corner of the Quay de
Morfondus, is the Clock belonging to the Palais; the Dyal of which is adorned
with certain figures of one of the most famous Sculptors of the last age. In
regard it was done in the Reign of Henry III. the Arms of France and Poland
stand over it, with this Verse, still legible, which that King used as his
Device or Motto.

QUI DEDIT ANTE DUAS, TRIPLICEM DABIT ILLE CORONAM. Who once gave two, now
gives a triple Crown. This Clock guides the sittings in the Parliament; and as
often as there are any public rejoycings, they ring the great Bell for some
hours together.

The Pont St. Michel is also near the Palais' and opposite to the Pont au
Change. It takes its name from the little Church of St. Michel, which stands
within the Enclosure of the Palais; or perhaps because it leads to the Gate of
that name, which once stood at the upper end of the Rue de la Harp, and was
not long since demolished, as we have already said in the page of this Second
Part. This Bridge is also built upon; the Houses are of Brick and Freestone.
Formerly it was of Timber only, like those of which we have already spoken; but
it being broke down by a high flood, in the beginning of the Reign of Lewis
XIII. it was in a little time after rebuilt as we now see it.

The Petit Pont, one of the oldest Bridges of Paris, is on the same arm of the
River that runs under the Pont St. Michel; the Houses on each side of it and
the Little Chatelet at the end of it, hinders you from perceiving that you go
over Water when you pass this way.

Within the limits of the Hotel Dieu, are two other Bridges built: One of which
is wholly belonging to that Hospital, the other is partly used for a
convenience of passage on foot to the Church of Notre-Dame, every one that goes
over that way paying a Double for passage. Both these Bridges are of Stone, and
very well built.

I shall say nothing here of the Pont Marie; nor of the Pont de la Tournelle; I
having described them in my discourse of the Isle of Nostre-Dame, as also of
the little wooden Bridge that leads from the Isle du Palais to that Quarter.

The Pont-Neuf, or New Bridge.
IN fine, we are now arrived at the last Article of this Description, which
cannot be better concluded than with the Pont-Neuf, from which one may discover
part of the most magnificent objects of all Paris. The Pont-Neuf was begun
under Henry III. who laid the first Foundation in the Year 1578. and gave the
conduct of the Work to a famous Architect, named du Cerceau. That King being
accompanied with Catharine de Medicis, his Mother, (who as some say did first
think of this great Work) the Queen his Wife, and with all the illustrious
Persons of his Court, at that time laid the first Stone, with a great Show and
Ceremony, upon which Stone this Inscription is graved:

HEN. III. F. ET POL. R. They began the Work with much eagerness at that end
next the Great Augustins; but the Troubles of that King's Reign prevented this
great Enterprise from being finished in his time. It remained imperfect from
its first undertaking in the Year 1578, as I have said, till the Year 1604,
when Henry the Great, of happy memory, completed the Work, by the means of
William Marchand.

It is observable that this Bridge is one of the most beautiful that can be
seen for its length, which extends over the two arms of the Seine, which unite
here into one Channel; for its breadth, which is divided into three ways, one
in the midst for Coaches and great Carriages, and two on each side raised
higher for those who go on foot; and lastly for its structure, which is of such
solidity and of such an ordinance, that has but few equals.

Among these advantages one may also add the delicate Prospect which the
Passenger has from it: A view which passes for one of the most pleasing and
finest of the World; and if we may believe those who have seen foreign parts,
and the report of one of the greatest Travelers in this age, he tells us, That
he never observed any Prospect more magnificent, naming this for the third of
those which he has observed, to wit, That of the Port at Constantinople: that
of the Port at Goa in the Indies; and this of the Pont-Neuf in Paris, which
extends on one side over the Louvre which runs along the Seine, with a long row
of magnificent buildings; and on the other side the Hotel de Conti, the
College of the Quatre-Nations, which is very remarkable for its Dome, and for
the two great square Pavillions which stand before it; and in fine, for many
other great Houses which extend a great way, with the Course de la Reine, which
determines this Prospect, and Mount Valerien which appears over all; which
Views altogether make a most beautiful Prospective as they extend into a
Landscape. I say nothing of the continual press of People passing over this
Bridge, by which one may guess at the infinite number of Inhabitants in Paris.

The Statue of HENRY IV.
THis Monument stands at the middle of the Pont-Neuf, at the corner of the Isle
du Palais: It was set up in the Year 1635, by Lewis XIII. to the memory of
Henry IV. who is represented on Horseback, as big as the life, all of Brass,
and raised upon a Pedestal of White Marble; where the principal Actions of that
great King are represented in Bas-Reliefs of the same Metal also, these are
placed two and two of every side. At the four corners of the Pedestal are
placed four Slaves of Brass also, treading upon certain Antique Arms, All these
pieces, except the Horse, were designed and cast by one named Francheville,
originally of Cambray; who was esteemed as one of the best Sculptors of his
time, of whose hand you may see several other Works, much esteemed: among
others, the Marble Statue representing Truth, in the Tuilleries.

But the Curious will not be offended perhaps if I set down here the particular
History of the Horse, which was made in Italy by the famous John de Bologne, or
as the Painters commonly call him, Bologness. Cosmus the Second, great Duke of
Tuscany, gave it as a Present to Mary de Medicis, during her Regency, Lewis the
13 th. being then under Age.

The Chevalier Pescholini, was appointed to come into France to Present this
Horse, in the name of the great Duke Cosmus the Second. The care of Imbarking
at Legorn was committed to him; but it met with several accidents at Sea: A
horrible Tempest forced the Vessel, in which it was, with so much impetuosity
against a Bank of Sand, that it was Wrackt, and all its Freight lost; however
this Statue was recovered from the Sea, with much pains and cost, and once
again it was Shipped in another Vessel; this last unhappily met with Pirates on
the Coast of Spain; but in fine, after all these Troubles and Labor, it
arrived at Havre de Grace in the beginning of May, 1615. And on the 2 d. of
June following, King Lewis the 13 th. laid the first Stone of the Pedestal,
accompanied with Monsienr de Liancourt Governor of Paris, and several other
Persons of Quality. Notwithstanding all the Ornaments and all the outward parts
of the Work were not quite finished, till the Year 1635.

And lastly, that Posterity may be fully instructed of all that past, the
Inscriptions on the four sides of the Pedestal were not thought sufficient
alone; they writ another upon Vellom, which they enclosed in a Pipe of Lead,
and put that into the Belly of the Horse, which they filled full of Cole dust,
the better to preserve it from Humidity, the Inscription is as follows:

A LA GLORIEUSE ET IMMORTELLE MEMOIRE. FERDINAND, meu d'^un bon zele pour la
Posterite, fit fair and jetter en bronze par l* excellent Sculpteur JEAN DE
BOULOGN^, cette Statue representant a cheval sa Majeste tres-Chr^tienne, que le
Serenissime grand Duc COSME SECOND du nom, a fait elabourer par le Sieur
PIETROTOCA, son Sculpteur, and l* envoya en tres-digne present sous la conduite
du CHEVALIER PESCHOLINI, Agent de son Altesse Serenissime, a la tres-Chretienne
and tres auguste MARIE DE MEDICIS, Reine Regente en France, apres le deceds de
ce grand Roi, sous le Regne du tresauguste LOUIS XIII. du nom, Roi de France
and de Navarre, per le commandment tres-expres du quel and de la dite Dame
Reine sa Mere, etant Messieurs DE VERDUN, Premier President en la Cour de
Parliament de Paris, NICOLAI Premier Pesident en la Chamber des Comptes, DE
BELIEVRE, Procureur General de sa Majeste, DE MESME, Lieutenant Civil, LE FEVRE
President, DU MOULIN, DE GAUMONT, GAUDE^ROY, VALLEE, HOTMAN, ALMERAS DE DONON
and LE GRAS, Tresoriers Generaux de France audit Paris, MIRON, President aux
Requetes, Prevot des Marchands, DES NEAUX, CLAPISSON HUOT, PASQUIER, Eschevins.
PEROT, Procureur du Roi de la Ville; tous Commissaires ayant l* Intendance de
la construction du Pont-Neu^ de Paris, ont au milieu d'icelui, present le Sieur
de PIERRE DE FRANCHEVILLE, premier Sculpteur de leurs Majestez, fait dresser
and poser avec solemnite ladite Statue sur le pied' estail a cette sin ^rige.
Assistans a ce MESSIEURS DE LIANCOURT, Gouverneur de Paris, DE SAINT BRISSON
SEGUIER, Prevot de Paris, lesdits, DE MESME, Lieutenant Civil, le Prevot des
Marchands and les Eschevins de ladite Ville. To the Glorious and Immortal
Memory of the most August and most Invincible HENRY the Great, Fourth of the
Name, King of France and Navarre.

The most ^^rene great Duke of Tuscany Ferdinand, moved with a good Zeal for
Posterity, caused the excellent Sculptor John de Bologne, to make and cast in
Brass this Statue, representing his most Christian Majesty on Horseback, which
the most Serene great Duke Cosmus the Second of that name, caused to be wrought
by the Sieur Pietro Toca, his Sculptor, and sent it as a most worthy Present,
under the Conduct of the Chivalier Pescholini, Agent of his most Serene
Highness, to the most Christian and most August Mary de Medicis, Queen Regent
in France, after the decease of that great King, in the Reign of the most
August Lewis XIII. of that Name, King of France and Navarre; by the most
Express Command of whom, and of the said Lady the Queen his Mother, Messieurs
de Verdon, then first President in the Court of the Parliament of Paris,
Nicolai, first President in the Chamber of Accounts, de Believre, Procureur
General to his Majesty, de Mesine, Lieutenant Civil, le Fevre, President, du
Moulin, de Gaumont, Gaudefroy, Vallee, Hotman, Almeras, de Donon, and Le Gras,
Treasurers General of France, at Paris, Miron, President of Requests, Provost
of Marchands, Neaux, Clapisson, Huot, Pasquier, Eschevins, Perot, Procureur to
the King for the Town; all being Commissioners, and having the Overseeing of
the Building of the Pont-Neuf at Paris, have in the presence of the Sieur Peter
de Francheville, principal Sculptor to their Majesty's, placed and fixed the
said Statue, in a solemn manner, upon a Pedestal, erected for that purpose, in
the middle of the said Bridge. Messieurs de Liancourt, Governor of Paris. de
Saint Brisson Seguier, Provost of Paris, the foresaid de Mesme, Lieutenant
Civil, Provost of Marchands, and the Eschevins of the said Town, assisting.

The Year One thousand six hundred and fourteen, the Three and Twentieth day of
August.

This Inscription may suffice to make known all that past about the Brass
Horse, without saying more.

The following Inscriptions are to be read about the Pedestal, they are of
Letters of gold raised up upon Brass Plates, and were composed by M. Millotet,
Advocate General in the Parliament of Bourgogne.

On the forefront thus,

ERRICO IIII. To Henry IV. France, Navarr. Lewis XIII. his Son, finished this
Work (which was begun but left imperfect) answerable to the greatness of his
duty to his Father, and largeness of his Empire. The most Eminent Cardinal
Richelieu satisfied the general desire of the People in promoting this Work. De
Bullion, and Boutillier, Treasurers, took care of it M. DC. XXXV. Above that
this other Inscription,

QUIS QUIS HAEC LEGES, ITA LEGITO Whosoever thou art that read this, so read
it, that thou may beg of God, for the excellent Prince, a Valiant Army, a
Loyal People a Secure Empire, and long Life out of ours; Bullion and Boutillier
made it. The two following Inscriptions are under the Bas-reliefs, on that side
next the College of the Quatre-Nations, one of which represents the Battle of
Arques, and the other the Battle of Yvry, both gained by Henry the Fourth.

For the Battle of Arques.

GENIO GALLIARUM S. ET INVICTISSIMO R. Sacred to the Genius of France, and the
invincible King, who in the Battle of Arques, routed great Forces of the
Conspirators with a handful of Men. For the Victory at Yvry.

VICTORI TRIUMPHATORI FERETRIO To the Conqueror, and Triumpher, that has
mastered the General of the Enemies, the Rebels routed at Yvry; His ill
Neighbors being angry and favoring him, the merciful General left the Spoils
to the Spanish Leader. His Triumphal Entry into Paris, is represented on the
side next the River, and under the Sculpture is placed this Inscription.

N. M. REGIS. To the n^ble memory of the King, the best of Mortals' who entering
the City without Blood, having punished the Rebellion, and laid the Factions,
composed France with a desired Peace. For the taking of Amiens from the
Spaniards.

AMBIANUM HISPANORUM FRAUD Amiens taken by Spanish craft, and recovered by the
Valor of Henry the Great. Lewis XIII. set up this to the memory of his Father,
being often attacked by the same Enemies with Fraud and Villainy, he always
overcame 'em with Justice and Valor. For the taking of Montmelian in Savoy.

MONS A Mountain, that was in vain attached by all former Kings and Generals,
is at last reduced to Obediende by the Fortune of Henry the Great, to the
eternal security and Glory of France. These two last are under the Bas-reliefs,
on the side next the Samaritaine.

On the Iron Gate, that incloses all this Work, is this following Inscription,
to show that this Monument was raised by the care of Lewis XIII. and that
Cardinal de Richelieu caused it to be finished.

LUDOVICUS XIII. P. F. F. RETROPRIN^IPUM OPUS ABSOLVENDUM CENSUIT LEWIS XIII.
Cardinal Richelieu De Bullion and Boutillier, Treasurers, Men that answer the
honor of their places, and the grandeur of the Kingdom, employed their Money,
Wit, and Care in the erecting this in troublesome Times. The SAMARITAINE.
AT the second Arch of the Pont-Neuf, on that side next the Louvre, was erected
in the Reign of Henry III. a little House for a Pump to raise the River Water
for the use of the Louvre. They have had here formerly certain handsome Machins
for that purpose, but time has destroyed them. This Water runs into a receiver
near the Cloister of Saint Germain l'Auxerrois, where one may still see the
remains of certain Arches on the side next the River, which are of no ill
design; but all these things are now no longer in the Condition which they were
once in, no more than the Clock, whose Chimes do not now go as formerly. The
Statues of our Lord and the Samaritan Woman, which stand on the side of the
Cistern, are but Copies of those which stood here formerly, and were the work
of Germain Pillon.

The Pont-Rouge, is over against the Louvre, which though at present, of Timber
only, it is presumed that in regard to the Beauty and Majesty of the place
where it stands; it will not remain long in this Condition, but that another
will be built of freestone, to avoid the troubles and inconveniences to which
this is exposed every Winter by the Ice, which often breaks it down, as it has
happened this present year, 1684. It is called Pont-Rouge because it was
painted formerly of a Red Color.

The end of the Second Part.
THE TABLE.
A.
THE French Academy, or Academy of Eloquence. Part I. page 10 -- of Painting
and Sculpture. Part I. page 33 -- of Architecture. Part I. page 39, and Part
II. page 129 -- of Sciences. Part I. page 48 Academies for Riding, etc. Part
II. page 88 St. Andrew des Arcs, Church. Part ibid. page 79 Rue St. Anne. Part
I. page 55 Salle des Antiques. Part ibid. page 19 St. Antoine, Street. Part
ibid. page 103 -- Gate. Part ibid. page 122 -- Fauxburg. Part ibid. page 126 --
Abbey. Part ibid. page 127 Little St. Antoine. Part ibid. page 110 The Arch
Triumphal. Part ibid. page 128 Arsenal. Part ibid. page 132 Assumption, Nuns.
Part ibid. page 30 Ave-Maria, Nuns. Part ibid page 142 The Great Augustines.
Part II. page 140 Little Augustines. Part II. page 136 R^e St. Avoye. Part I.
page 79
B.
St. Bartlemew, Church. Part II. page 168 The Barnabites. Part ibid. page 168
The Bastille. Part I. page 122 St. Bernard's Gate. Part ibid. page 149 The
Bernardine's College. Part II. page 6 The Bernardine Nuns. Part ibid. page 64
Hotel de Beauvois. Part I. page 109 St. Benoit, Church. Part II. page 39 The
Billetes. Part I. page 83 H. de Bisueil. Part ibid. page 87 H. de Bourgogne.
Part ibid. page 63 M. de Bretonvillier's House. Part ibid. page 146 The Bridges
of Paris. Vide Pont. Part II. page 180, 183, 186, ^99 Palais Brion. Part I.
page 33
C
Cabinet and Library of the King. Part I. page 43 His Cabinet of Pictures. Part
ibid. page 9 Cabinet of Father du Molmet. Part II. page 22 -- of Mons Blondel.
Part ibid. page 128 -- of Mons le Nostre. Part I. page 18 -- of the Chevallier
de Loraine. Part ibid. page 28 -- of Mons. du Vernay. Part ibid. page 153 The
Capuchins. Part II. page 63 Capuchin Nuns. Part I. page 32 Nuns of Calvary.
Part II. page 110 The Carmes of the Place-Maubert. Part ibid. page 8 Carmelite
Friars. Part ibid. page 110 Carmelite Nuns. Part ibid. page 52 St. Catherine's
Church. Part I. page 119 The Carthusians. Part II. page 68 The Celestines. Part
I. page 133 Great Chatelet Part ibid. page 65 Little Chatelet. Part II. page 26
La Charity, Hospital. Part ibid. page 126 Churches in the Isle du Palais. Part
ibid. page 166 The Cestercians. Part ibid. page 120 H. de Cluni. Part ibid.
page 78 H. de Colbert. Part I. page 51 College Royal. Part II. page 36 The
Commandery of St. John. Part ibid. page 38 H. de Conde. Part ibid. page 109 H
de Conti. Part ibid. page 147 Course de la Reine. Part ibid. page 154 The
Cordeliers. Part ibid. page 85 Cordelier Nuns. Part I. page 163 St. Cosmus
Church. Part II. page 77 H. de Crequi. Part I. page 23 The Cross du Tirouer.
Part ibid. page 24
D
Rue Dauphine. Part II. page 146 Place Dauphine. Part ibid. page 179 St. Denis,
Street. Part I. page 65 -- Gate. Part ibid. page 69 St. Denis du pas, Church.
Part II. page 163 The Dominicans. Part ibid page 45
E
Nuns of St. Elizabeth. Part I. page 83 English Benedictines. Part II. page 51
English Nuns. Part I. page 166 Epitaphs of -- Jo. Fernelius. Part ibid. page 73
-- Jo. Launoy. Part ibid. page 101 -- Alain Veau. Part ibid. page 107 -- King
Lewis XIII. Part ibid. page 115 -- Henry Prince of Conde. Part ibid. page 116
-- Anthony Perez. Part ibid. page 135 -- Peter Lombard. Part ibid. page 163 --
Clovis the Great. Part II. page 16 -- Renatus Descartes. Part ibid. page 18 --
Enno d'Embda. Part ibid. page 29 -- Robert Gaguin. Part ibid. page 32 -- John
de Sacro-Bosco. Part ibid. page 33 -- Francis Baldwin. Part ibid. page ibid --
Humbert Dauphin of Viennois Part ibid. page 46 -- Edward le Camus. Part ibid.
page 55 -- Christopher de Thou. Part ibid. page 81 -- Princess of Conty. Part
ibid. page 82 -- Duke of Verneuil. Part ibid. page 91 -- Count de Vexin. Part
ibid. page 92 -- Casimir King of Poland. Part ibid. page 95 -- Michael de
Marolles. Part ibid. page 117 -- Jacobus de Sainte-Beuve. Part ibid page 144 --
Paulus Aemilius. Part ibid. page 162 St. Estienne du Mont. Part ibid. page 12
St. Estienne des Grecs. Part ibid. page 45 St. ^ustache, Church. Part I. page
60 Exposed Children, Hospital for such. Part ibid. page 127
F.
The Feuillans Part I. page 29 Feuillantine Nuns. Part II. page 50 H: Fieubet.
Part I. page 141 Fountain of the H. Innocents. Part ibid. page 66 M. Folville's
House. Part ibid. page 132
G.
The Kings Garden. Part I. page 153 The Gard-Meuble. Part ibid. page 13 St.
Genevieve du Mont. Part II. page 13 -- Des Ardens. Part ibid. page 166 St.
Germain l'Auxerrois. Part I. page 21 St. Germains Faux-bourg. Part II. page 87
-- Abbey. Part ibid. page 89 -- Fair. Part ibid. page 119 St. Gervais. Part I.
page 107 The Gobelins. Part ibid. page 156 Rue de Grand Chantier. Part ibid.
page 83 Mons. de Grand-Maison's House. Part ibid. page 144 The ^reue. Part
ibid. page 104 H. de Guise. Part ibid. page 84
H.
The Halle. Part I page 62 Harcour College. Part II. page 77 Henry IV. his
Statue and Inscriptions. Part II. page 188 St. Hippolitus, Church. Part I. page
164 Horse Market. Part ibid. page 155 Hospital Ceneral. Part ibid. page 154
Hotel Dieu. Part II. page 164 Hotel de Ville Part I. page 104
I.
The Jacobins. Part II. page 45. and Part I. page 29 Rue St. Jaques. Part II.
page 27 St. Jaques, Church. Part ibid. page 49 St. Jaques de la Bouchery. Part
I. page 72 H. de Jarz. Part ibid. page 40 St. Jean, Church. Part I. page 106
Jean le Clerc. Part II. page 79 The great Jesuits. Part I. page 111 The
Jesuits College. Part II. page 40 -- Their Noviciat. Part ibid. page 114 The
Incurables Hospital. Part ibid. page 120 St. Innocents. Part I. page 24 The
Invalides. Part II. page 122 Journal des Scavans. Part ibid. page 1^^ The Isle
de Notre-Dame Part I. page 144 The Isle du Palais. Part II. page 155 St. Julian
des Menestriers, Church. Part I. page 74 St. Julian le Pauvre. Part II. page 30
L.
St. Laurence. Part I. page 77 -- The Fair there. Part ibid. page 78 St.
Lazare. Part I. page 71 St. Leu and St. Giles, Church. Part ibid. page 66 Rue
St. Lewis. Part ibid. page 91 St. Lewis, Church. Part ibid. page 148 --
Hospital. Part ibid. page 78 Lewis XIII. his Statue and Inscriptions. Part
ibid. page 94 Looking Glass Manufacture. Part ibid. page 127 The Louvre. Part
ibid. page 6 H. de Longueville. Part ibid. page 23 H. de Louvois. Part ibid.
page 40 Luxemburg Palace. Part II. page 106 Libraries.
The King's Library. Part I. page 43 The Library at St. Victors. Part ibid.
page 151 -- at the Sorbonne. Part II. page 75 -- at St. Genevieve's. Part ibid.
page 22 -- at the Quatre-Nat. Part ibid. page 150 -- at the Jesuits College.
Part ibid. page 43 -- of Mons. Colbert. Part I. page 51 -- of Mons. de Thou.
Part ibid page 52 -- of Chan^. Seguir. Part ibid. page 58

M.
St. Magloire. Part II. page 49 Rue St. Martin. Part I. page 72 St. Martin's
Gate. Part ibid. page 76 St. Martin des Champs. Part ibid. page 75 Nuns of St.
Mary. Part ibid. page 121 S. Marcel, Church. Part ibid. page 162 The
Mathurines. Part II. page 31 Palais Mazarin* Part I. page 52 St. Medard,
Church. Part I. page 164 St. Mederic, Church. Part ibid. page 74 The Fathers de
la Mercy. Part ibid. page 85 The Minims. Part ibid. page 100 H. de Montausier.
Part ibid. page 23 H. de Montmerancy. Part ibid. page 80 Mount-Faucon. Part
ibid. page 78
N.
Navarre College. Part II. page 9 St. Nicholas des Champs. Part I. page 75 --
du Chardonnet. Part II. page 8 Nostre-Dame, Cathedral. Part ibid. page 156 The
Novelles Converties. Part I. page 55
O.
The Observatory Royal. Part II. page 64 The Opera Theater. Part I. page 28 The
Oratorians. Part ibid. page 28. and Part II. page 67
P.
Paris, its Original and Increase. Part I. page 1 The Palais, and Courts of
Justice there. Part II. page 168, etc. Palais Royal. Part I. page 27 St. Paul's
Church. Part ibid. page 142 Rue Petits Champs. Part ibid. page 49
Petits-Maisons, Hospital. Part II. page 120 President Perault's House. Part II.
page 153 Hospital of Pity. Part I. page 15^ The Piquepuces. Part ibid. page 131
Place Royal. Part ibid. page 93 Place Dauphin. Part II. page 179 Plessis
College. Part ibid. page 39 Pont-Neuf. Part ibid. page 186 Pont-Mary. Part I.
page 143 The Premonstrantes. Part II. page 84* 120
Q.
Quatre-Nations, College. Part II. page 148 Quay Pelletier. Part I. page 105
The Quinze-Vingts, Hospital. Part ibid. page 28
R.
H. de Rambouillet. Part I. page 23 The Recolle^s. Part ibid. page 78 Reformed
Jacobins. Part II. page 125 Rue de Richelieu. Part I. page 39 H. de Richelieu.
Part ibid. page 99 St. Roch, Church. Part ibid. page 28
S.
Nuns of the Holy Sacrament. Part II. page 113 The Sainte-Chap* l. Part ibid.
page 172 Salle des Antiques. Part I. page 19 H. Seguir. Part I. page 57 The
Semaritain. Part II. page 198 The Seminary of Foreign Missions. Part ibid. page
124 H. Seneterre. Part I. page 50 St. Severin, Church. Part II. page 27 H.
Soiso^s. Part I. page 56 The Sorbonne. Part II. page 71 The King's New Statue.
Part I. page 67 H. de St. Po^. Part ibid. page 110 St. Sulpice. Church. Part
II. page 116
T.
The Temple. Part I. page 81 The Theatins. Part II. page 153 The Theater at the
Tuilleries. Part I. page 17 -- for the Opera. Part ibid. page 28 -- for French
Plays Part II. page 138 -- for the Italian Comedians. Part I. page 63 The
Tuilleries. Part ibid. page 16 -- the Garden there. Part ibid. page 18
U.
Val de Grace. Part II. page 57 H. de Vendome. Part I. page 32 St Victor's
Abbey. Part ibid. page 151 -- Gate. Part ibid. page 165 Vincennes. Part ibid.
page 129 Nuns of the Visitation. Part II. page 49 Rue Vivien. Part I. page 43
The University Quarter. Part II. page 1 Rue de l'University. Part II. page 128
H. de la Urilliere* Part I. page 50 The Ursuline Nuns. Part II. page 50
W.
The Waterhouse. Part II. page 67
Y.
St. Yves, Church. Part II. page 31.
FINIS.

