THE VICEROY OF Catalonia, OR, The Double CUCKOLD.

Made English by James Morgan, Gent.

Fronti nulla Fides -- Juven. LONDON, Printed by J. B. for James Magnes and
Richard Bentley, in Russel Street in Covent Garden, near the Piazzas, 1678.

Licensed,

Muy 9. 1678. Rog. L'Estrange.

TO All Secure In their own Thoughts AND Undiscovered CUCKOLDS.
Gentlemen,
AS I doubt not, on one side, but this Title comprehends, in reality, a most
numerous and powerful Party, and am proud and full of confidence having put my
self under your Protection, -- Cornuasumo; so on the other side I lose much of
my assurance, when I consider that it is to destroy the very being of your
happy condition, to imagine that any of you will think your selves concerned in
this Dedication, since that very thought would make you really cease to be so,
and rank you in another herd amongst the Jealous and suspicious, to whom I do
not apply my self. It is to you (Gentlemen.) I speak, who are sure you are not
spoken to; It is to you only our resolute Don Gabriel submits himself, though
at the same time like a blunt Soldier* as he is, he tells you, that even to
you he yields in nothing but his fortune, which it seems, was as obstinately
bent to force upon him the knowledge of that fatal secret, as he was to avoid
it; and though he confesses he was guilty of much weakness in permitting
himself to be carried away by the importunity of Don Fernand, even so far as to
watch the actions of his Wife (a horrid sin in it self) yet he desires you to
believe that even in that action he never consented to any thought that
suggested to him the least doubt of her Virtue, but armed his soul with a
strong contempt of Don Fernands Jealous humor; In fine, he had still been as
happy as any of you, had not his unkind destiny peevishly forced upon him that
secret which your kinder fates so carefully keep from you, doubly kind indeed,
since they both take from you the knowledge of a reality which would destroy
your happiness, and with the Idea of an imaginary thing (your Wives virtue) no
where existent but in your own brains, make you really happy: Here he submits
and acknowledges the advantages your favorable stars have given you over him;
he adores that heaven of happiness from which he is fallen, and instead of
giving thanks to his officious friend Don Fernand, or others, who had
contributed to awake him out of his golden dream of security, he cries out with
the Grecian in Horace,

-- pol me occidistis amici Non servastis --

Don Fernand on the other side, though he stands in need of friends, deserves
no favor from you: A Jealous mad man; he swears you are all Cuckolds, but
believe him not; believe him, said I? you know he lies: Poor envious Cuckold,
he would disturb the quiet security of your thoughts, and use you as he has
done Don Gabriel; but hearken not to him, and if ever you fall into Don
Gabriel's misfortune of knowing what you would not know, let it never be justly
objected to you that you did in the least contribute to your own unhappiness;
but confirm your hearts in your just contempt of those miserable wretches, of
whom it is so fitly said, that I need not name my Author,

Rather then not be knowing, they will know,
What being known creates their certain woe.


This is the advice of the brave Soldier Don Gabriel, who has been tried in
both fortunes; And this is highly recommended to you by him, who as much as any
one, desires the continuance of your happy ignorance.

James Morgan.

The Double Cuckold.
IN the Reign of Philip the Second, a Gentleman named Don Fernand governed in
Catalonia in quality of Viceroy, a man (to give him his true Character) of a
most agreeable humor, and endued with extraordinary quality; but much addicted
to pleasures, and above all, to those of Love, which he pursued even with the
hazard of his reputation.

He married one of the greatest beauties of Spain, a virtuous young Lady, and
of so pleasant a wit and humor, that any other but he would have found reason
to have been highly satisfied in her; but there are some husbands who think no
women so bad as their own, of which Number Don Fernand was. The quiet
possession palled him, and being disgusted with the continual serving up of the
same diet, he was resolved to divert himself with change when he could, at the
Expense of others.

He had for these some months used to hunt upon the grounds belonging to the
Grand Master of the Artillery; whose wife, though not altogether so absolute a
beauty as his own, yet shone with so many charms, as that few of her sex could
stand in competition with her; and withal, was extremely pleasant and
divertive in her humor, and of the most pleasant and gallant wit in the world.
-- In a word, a Woman exactly framed to his own mould, and temper.

The Grand Master was a man perfectly cut out for War, and so consequently, you
may guess, very unfit for the Court. He bent all his mind to the duty of his
charge, and left the Affairs of his house to the manage of his Wife, of whom he
had a good opinion, being of a temper, contrary to the Genius of those of his
Country, not at all inclined to the yellows.

Some relation between him and the Vice Roy; together with the friendship that
was contracted between the two Ladies who had been long acquainted, served for
an inducement to bring the Grand Master to Court, where Don Fernand would needs
honor him with a particular apartment.

Hitherto all went well; neither did any one perceive the Viceroy's design
upon Donna Angelica (so was the Grand-Masters Lady called:) he spoke not to her
but with his eyes, and by his handkerchief, which in that Country, serves for a
Love-Interpreter as well as the eyes; But now since of an outward he had made a
domesticque Amor, the convenience of daily seeing and entertaining the object
of his Ardent affections, increased his passion to such a height, that it could
be no longer kept a reserve from the quick sight of so penetrating a Lady as
his was.

A little Jealousy is sufficient to disunite two women; A bare suspicion will
dissolve the strongest tie of friendship that can be between them. The Vice
Roy's Lady began to look very indifferently upon Donna Angelica without
assigning to her any reason for it: For most commonly one Woman does not love
to betray the jealousy she possibly may have of another; that seems to her to
be such a point of honor, as she will never, but in the last extremity, and
when she is no longer capable of concealing it, discover the reproachful
signs of this weak passion in her.

Donna Angelica soon perceived the change, and as soon guest the occasion of
it; yet she behaved her self in her usual manner toward the Viceroys Lady. A
Woman takes an extreme pleasure to see her self beloved, especially by a person
of quality and deserving merit as Don Fernand was; But Donna Angelica showed so
much discretion in her conversation with him, that his Lady had nothing to
ground a quarrel on. But that discretion was wanting in him, whose passion was
raised to such a height, that it was not in his power to restrain it.

The Viceroy's Lady, who would no longer serve them toward the convenience of
their interviews, seeing that Donna Angelica abated nothing of her free and
indifferent carriage, he refused her the ordinary civility of entering into her
Chamber, where she used frequently to wait on her; and which had served the
Viceroy as a pretense in his Visits to her. Donna Angelica could not dissemble
this affront, the injustice of it being too great considering the freedom of
her conversation wherewith she had hitherto treated Don Fernand; and she was
now resolved to be revenged, and spare nothing whereby she could be able to
make her jealous in good earnest.

It is something dangerous to provoke an Enemy, when it lies in his power to do
us more mischief then yet he has done: Donna Angelica had no sooner seen the
Viceroy, but assuming to her self a more serious countenance then ordinary;
Sir (says she) I know not what pleasure you can take in making dissension
betwixt your Lady and me. I, Madam? answered Don Fernand, absolutely astonished
at the Reproach she made him: yes, you, your self, replys she: you make her by
some of your actions imagine that you love me, and she by hers would confirm me
in my belief of the same. I did not think, answered the Viceroy, smiling, that
I could ever have been so much obliged to my Wives ill humor, as that she
should make a declaration of love for me; but since it is so, Madam, I wish she
may always continue it, for I swear to you, nothing is so true as what she
would persuade you to; And Madam, I love you to such a degree as no man yet
ever loved before me. I perceive (replys she) that she is already extremely
jealous, but she shall be sufficiently punished for it. Yes, Madam, replied the
Viceroy, if you would but love me a little; Not so, replied she, although
indeed any other would do it perhaps through revenge, if not through
inclination; but, added she, laughing, I desire not to push on my revenge so
far.

This Discourse was interrupted by some Ladies who came to visit Donna
Angelica, and the Viceroy being obliged for that time to retire, writ a Letter
to the Lady the same day to this purpose.

Revenge your self, Madam, revenge your self of the Vice-Queen, who has had the
Curiosity to pry into the secrets of my heart; she is persuaded that none can
have so tender and ardent a passion as that I bear you; that I think of none
but you, that I seek nothing but you, and that I have no pleasure but when I
see you, and am so happy as to be in your company. It seems she has penetrated
into the most secret folding of my soul, and you ought to be angry with her in
earnest; for since this offends you, and it is to your resentment I must owe
your kindness, I would wish to see you so incensed against her as may make me
truly happy; at least you cannot choose a fitter revenge; all the mischief will
fall upon her, and we alone shall enjoy the pleasure. Once more, Madam, let me
beg of you to take your revenge; for though there were no subject for it, you
will however but do an act of justice, in bestowing a little love upon a man,
who is not altogether unwortby of some place in your heart, being

Don Fernand.


This Letter was delivered to Donna Angelica, which she read not without a
smile, but returned him no answer; nevertheless the Viceroy from this time,
saw that his affairs were not attended with any extraordinary ill Circumstances.

The Vice-Queen perceived she had committed an error, and that by refusing
Donna Angelica the privilege of her Chamber, she had given her treacherous
husband a fair occasion to see her in private. Her Jealousy daily increased,
she imagined a thousand times more then was indeed, and she suffered more
trouble in one poor moment, by what she saw not, then she had in many days by
what she had seen: she was forced to change her conduct, and to feign a desire
of renewing her friendship with a Woman whom she hated more then Death. To how
sad a point is a poor Lady reduced, when she is so innocent as to trouble her
self about the little follyes of her husband, and dares not render him quid pro
quo! She would fain have had this satisfaction (though a very affictive one) of
seeing what passed betwixt these two perfidious creatures, and putting a check
to their pleasure by her presence, for she was from morning till night either
with the one or the other.

The Viceroy was extremely weary of her everlasting company, He could have
wished with all his heart, that she had continued her ill humor and quarrel to
Donna Angelica. Whatever he did, she would make one: if he walked out, she did
so too; if he went to pay a visit to Donna Angelica, she followed him, and
would be the last there; I leave it for your married, young, Brisk Gallants to
judge, whether this was not damnable troublesome: He knew not what to do* Donna
Angelica, who loved him not to the expense of her Reputation, would contribute
nothing, on her part to make him more happy, for fear of giving the Vice-Queen
an advantage over her, who possibly waited but for an opportunity to ruin her.
So that being in despair with anger and vexation, after having sought a
thousand ways to rid himself of this trouble, without meeting success in any,
he at last be thought himself of an expedient queint enough, and such as few
Spaniards would have thought on. But the Ascendant of Love often carries them
above that of their Nation. He believed that Women were not jealous of their
Husbands, but for want of something else to amuse them, and that, as one
passion drives away another, he should quickly put an end to the Vice-Queens
jealousy, if he could find her out a man capable of making a tender impression
of Love upon her. He studied a good while whom he should make choice of, to do
him so important a service, without prejudice to his honor: the affair was
pretty nice and delicate; but when a man loves to that degree that he loved,
and is fired with the thoughts of enjoying those pleasures he was in search of,
he must pass by a great many such scrupulosities.

In fine, having run over in his mind all the Gallants of his Court, that were
capable of inspiring Love into the breast of a young Lady, he cast his eyes at
last upon a young Neapolitan Lord, something allied to him, and for whom he had
procured a Regiment of foot; and who was newly arrived at Barcellona: he was
young, full of sprightly air, for whom the Vice-Queen had already a particular
esteem, and he could not elect a Gentleman more fit for his design.

He found him one evening walking alone in the Park, and having taken him with
him, he fell into the discourse of the Ladys of Barcellona, and, smiling, asked
him how he found himself, whether he had hitherto preserved his liberty, and if
he were not engaged in some Amor. My liberty is entire, answered the young
Neapolitan. How? replys the Viceroy, among so many fair Ladys in this City,
has no beauty had the power yet to reach your heart? either you have a very
Obdurate one, pursues he, or I must believe you have left a Mistress in Naples
to whom you will not be unfaithful. Neither the one nor the other, Sir replys
the Colonel; I was never amorous, not that I am insensible of the passion, but
the business and art of War pleases me better then that of Love. You are
young, says the Viceroy, smiling, And you ought not to have such Ideas, for
the one does not hinder the other, you may make Love and yet very well
discharge the duty of a Soldier. Nay, I will tell you more then that, continues
he; there was never any great and perfect Warrior but who was made so by Love;
and so engaging him further in that discourse he began to Number up I know not
how many Great Captains, who owed the most glorious Actions they ever
performed, to the inspirations of Love; and he concluded at last that he must
imitate their Example if he would not pass for a Barbarian.

Count Henry (for so the young Neopolitan was called) yielded himself to the
Viceroy's arguments, but more out of complaisance, then through any
inclination, judging very well that it would not become a young Courtier as he
was, to dispute against a passion, on which all the World knew the Viceroy was
so violently bent: I will court a Mistress then, says he, since you advise me
to it. Don Fernand demanded of him, whether he would not be content to receive
her from his hands; at which proposition the Count began to laugh, but made no
answer. Do you fear then, pursued the Viceroy, that I shall not serve you to
your satisfaction; I know how to acquit my self in such an affair, but too
well, Seignior, says he, and for that very reason it will be dangerous to owe
that obligation to you: no, no, you need fear nothing, says Don Fernand,
smiling; it is true, I have loved the Lady whom I would willingly bestow on you
for a Mistress; but she is at present a trouble to me; and I hate her almost
as much as ever I loved her. What a fine present, Sir, says the Count,
interrupting him, do you make me then? will not the kindness you have for me,
inspire you with something more obliging then to charge me with a Woman you
know not what to do with? no Sir, says Don Fernand, and I may tell you withal,
the offer I make you deserves not to be refused, and there are few men would
have been so generous as I am in it: If you please Sir, (replys the Count)
honor some other person with your liberality; for I must return to what I have
already to'd you, that notwithstanding the examples of so many Heroes that have
loved, yet War pleases me better. Lord Henry says the Viceroy, the person I
speak of is one of the greatest beautys in this Kingdom, and in wit and
ingenuity not inferior to any: I believe it, Sir, replys the Count, but she is
withal a Woman, peevish, conceited, cross, spiteful, Jealous, imperious, and
possibly worse then all this. You do not know, says Don Fernand, smiling, upon
him and folding his arms, that it is my Wife you speak of: Yours? answers the
Count blushing, and thinking he had misunderstood him: My Vice Queen, replys
Don Fernand, whom I intend to bestow on you for a Mistress: consider whether
she be so unworthy of you. It is true, Sir, says the Count, blushing more and
more, I have made some visits to your Lady the Vice-Queen, but it has been with
your permission, and I thought I had not been so unhappy, as to have caused any
unjust suspicions in you by my conduct: you mistake me, answers the Viceroy, I
tell you, that if you like my Wife, it would please me extremely to see her
made sensible of your deserts; and you will oblige me by endeavoring to make
her so; do I now speak plain? If this raillery, Seignior, answers the Count, is
but to make a trial of my respect, I declare unto you, I am so Religious an
observer of my duty, that, setting aside the high obligations. I have to you,
so great a Sacrilege would never enter into my thoughts. The Viceroy,
thereupon walked a while without making any answer, and then turning suddenly
toward the Count; all this, says he, would be proper for another in another
conjuncture, but since I desire not this respect or duty from you, can you do
me any displeasure, think you, by serving me my own way? I tell you again,
pursues he, raising his voice a little higher, you will oblige me extremely, if
you will make love to my Wife, or at least endeavor to make her sensible of
your love. Count Henry more astonished then ever, at the strangeness of the
proposition, knew not what to think, nor what answer to make. At which the
Viceroy laughing, I see, says he, this discourse surprises you, and you have
reason, but I have mine too. I love most passionately, even more then ever, and
the greatest obstacle that opposes my love, is my Wife, and what would not a
passionate lover do to remove such an obstacle: She is jealous, and troubles me
continually with her importunities. What remedy is there for me? I have tried a
thousand ways in vain, she has counter turned all my inventions, I am
continually wearied with her endless complaints and reproaches. She follows me
where ever I go; and poisons with her presence all the pleasures of my life. I
have fancied that something which may amuse her, would do me knightservice, and
much relieve me, and that you are a man very proper to inspire love into her
soul. You are young, handsome, pleasant in your humor, have abundance of wit,
and she has an esteem for you. It is true, she is proud and haughty, but still
she is a Woman as others are. For my part, knowing the sex so well, I doubt so
little of your success; that I must desire you to keep such moderation in it
as I may hope from a relation and friend. You are discreet, and I confide in
you, you know well enough how far the service I desire of you ought to extend.

The Count after some opposition, of accepting such an Employment, either out
of complaisance to the Viceroy, or else because the Vice-Queen pleased him, at
length suffered himself to be overcome by the Viceroys persuasions, which
reached so far as to let him understand, that he would not complain, though to
the prejudice of his honor, this amusement should happen to be carried on
somewhat further then he desired.

Thus they parted, the Vice Roy highly satisfied that he had engaged the Count,
in a service, which another would have feared to have entered into. And the
Count, on the other side wondering at the charge of such a Commission as this,
which was laid upon him. He had never been very much in love himself, and he
could not well conceive, how any one should be so far transported with that
passion. The Vice Roy was to entertain the Ladies the next night at a supper,
which was to present the New Gallant with an occasion of entertaining his
Mistress.

The Vice-Queen, (as I have already told you) was a very beautiful person, and
such a one, as Count Henry might very well make his applications to, without
doing himself any considerable violence: Yet nevertheless because it was a
thing put upon him so, he found not in him that inclination which no doubt he
would have had, had it voluntarily came from his own motion. Though her beauty
was excessively charming, yet the too prodigal bounty of such a husband, was a
great allay to a young heart, which is sooner engaged by the difficulty then
the too great facility of the enterprise.

He was at this feast, where he appeared something abasht, and his spirit was
seized with such a melancholy, which was not usual in him, for he was
generally mighty brisk, and a person of one of the best humors in the world.
The part he was to play had something embroiled him, and taken off from his
accustomed jollity that evening. Not that the declaration of love, which he was
to make, seemed so difficult to him: there is less trouble in saying we love
when we do not, then when we do; but that love is so ingenious as to furnish a
man with a thousand inventions which are impossible to come into the fancies of
those that are not possessed with that passion.

The Viceroys Lady appeared that Evening more beautiful then ever; she gave
him fair play, because she fell upon him raillingly twice or thrice about his
melancholy: But the Count, more frozen and contracted then Ice it self, scarce
made a word of answer to all the raillery that the fair Lady was pleased to
bestow upon him. The Viceroy looked on him with an eye of pity; And being
ashamed of his want of confidence, came up to him, and reprocht him with the
title of the poorest, and most pitiful Gallant he ever saw in his life,
telling him, if there were no better, the Ladies would be very much put to it.
Sir, answered the Count, I will be what you will please to ordain me, but I
protest I must obey you in it with a world of distraction, for I fear you may
lose more by it then you will get. And what does it concern you, briskly
answered the Viceroy, what I gain or lose? do but what I desire you and
trouble your self no farther.

The Count who could no longer excuse himself, advances toward the Vice-Queen,
who having also a desire to speak with him, met him almost half way, and told
him in whisper, she had something to say to him, and desired him not to go away
before she had spoke with him. The Count overjoyed that she had given him so
fair an occasion of obeying the Viceroy, deferred his Court-ship to that time.

When it was grown pretty late and most of the company was retired, The
Viceroy waited on Donna Angelica to her apartment. Which his Lady had no
sooner seen, but she made a sign to the Count to follow her, and she led him
into her closet, where having made him sit down by her. My Lord says she, what
is the cause why you are so extreme melancholy? may we not ask you, pursued she
with a most charming Air, whether it be not the effect of some Inclination?
This question, and the freedom she had used toward him all that evening having
made him suspect that all this was a trick that the Viceroy and she had before
agreed to play him, and that they had a mind to divert themselves at his
expense, he was upon the point of spoiling all, but to show he understood
raillery; Madam, answered he, smiling, I have not been for a month together in
such a Court as this is, where there are so many fair Ladies capable of
inspiring the most tender affection, without feeling the Power of Love: You
love then, says she, Yes, Madam, I do, replys the Count, since it must be so,
how! since it must be so, says the Ladys, are you forced to it against your
inclination. No, Madam, replys he, but there are, you know, certain stars that
incline our hearts which way they please: saying this, he laughed, and looked on
the Vice Queen with such grimarces, and gestures, which extremely puzzled her,
to comprehend the meaning of what he said to her, and, to make him explain
himself; may we not know, says she, who this beauty is, to whom these amorous
Influences have inclined your affections? Madam, answers he, with a good
assurance; if you please to take the pains to consult your glass, it will soon
show you that beauty. I understand you not, says she, putting on a serious
countenance, and I believe being what I am, I do you a favor in not being
willing to understand you. If I may pretend to any favor from you, Madam,
replys the Count, it is, that you would understand me, and be assured, that you
need not go out of this Closet to find the object that has charmed me in this
Country. You forget your respect, Sir, says she, and now I see how far, the
little too much esteem I had for you, has carried you. But if you return not
within the limits of your duty, and forbear hereafter such discourses to me, I
shall be angry in earnest. You are young, pursues she, seeing him struck mute,
and these are faults which may be excused in such as you, if you have a design
to love: added she, learn where to address your self better, and in a place
where something may be hoped. Alas, Madam, replied he, my success is so bad
the first time, that I should do well never to love more. No, no, says she,
smiling, you must not despair of good success: You will find others more
sensible of your love then I am, and if you will let me advise you, I will tell
you where you may direct your Languishing Court-ship, and I dare engage you
will be satisfied with the person I shall choose for you.

This adventure was pleasant enough: for you see on the one side the Husband,
on the other the Wife, endeavored to bestow a Mistress on him. But he to
crossbite 'em, pretends to act the part of the Scrupulous Lover, and to make a
conscience of being constant to his first Affection, and therefore immediately
tells her, he cannot promise that his heart will be able so soon to resolve
upon a change, that the choice he had already made was so good, that nothing
could console him after so bad a success. Nevertheless after a great many
motives she laid before him, and even entreatyes which she used, he feigned at
length to be overcome; and told her, since it was her absolute pleasure, he
would endeavor to obey her, though he could not do it without forcing his
inclinations; and in conclusion, asked her, who it was she had judged proper for
the Empire of his heart? She answered him presently, that it was Donna
Angelica, who had spoken to her of him that day in such a manner, as gave her
to understand she was not insensible of his merits, and that if the resentments
she had of him were not tender and amorous, yet they contained an esteem which
amounted to little less.

The Count would have been overjoyed if what the Vice-Queen had told him had
been true; for of all the Court Ladies, he had seen none that pleased him so
well as Donna Angelica. The truth was, she had spoken very advantagiously of
him to the Viceroy's Lady, but it was not without design. The Viceroy, who
concealed nothing from her, had acquainted her of the snare he had laid for
his wives heart in the person of Count Henry: so that, Donna Angelica, who no
less then he, interessed her self in the success of this plot, was resolved to
help on toward the advancing of it, by prepossessing the Ladies heart with the
good qualities of this young Gallant.

The young Neopolitan, ravished with joy, that the Viceroys Lady had so happily
met his wishes, in the choice of Donna Angelica* dissembled, for the time, his
satisfaction: He only tells her, that after her self, all other beauties were
indifferent to him: That he cared not whom he received, provided it were from
her hands; but as for Donna Angelica, he had neither access to her, nor the
privilege of going to her apartment. The Vice Queen bids him be at no trouble
for that; she would remove all difficulties, and that, if he pleased, he might
see her, and speak to her in her chamber, where she came every* day.

It is easy to guess what the design of the Vice-Queen was, in making a love
intrigue between Donna Angelica and the Count. The employ was something beneath
her quality. But where the interest of the heart is concernd, we pass by the
nice scruples of honor. She had a mind to give her husband a Rival, and such
a One as might be formidable to him, and one whose qualities were too charming,
not to be as much beloved as he: For, judging of her constancy by the faith she
kept to the Grand Master, she did believe she would not prove more faithful to
her Lover, then she had been to her husband. And indeed she judged well. The
ties of love are as easily broke as those of Marriage; and where there is a
mutual passing of oaths, those of the wife ought to be as binding as those of
the Mistress: if the former are violated, the others may very well be so too. A
perfidious Mistress and unfaithful wife, are alike.

The Count knew not that it was to Donna Angelica the Viceroy made his
pretensions. This Amor had not as yet made any great noise about the Court*
the was a great Gallant and whatever he did in this kind passed for a piece of
Gallantry which was ordinary to him. He had not as yet acquainted the Count
with his love, and the Vice Queen concealed it from him, for fear the knowledge
of it might divert him, and make him scrupulous how to be jointly concerned in
a Love-Affair with the Viceroy. So that, finding Donna Angelica a Woman
exactly to his humor, he resolved by the assistance of so powerful a
confident, to attempt so fair an enterprise. The bare Idea of it made him
amorous; and he was already impatient to see his charming Mistress. The
Viceroys Lady told him he need but come the succeding morning and he might
find Donna Angelica with her in her chamber. He retired, full of this hope,
but was hardly got from her apartment, when he meets with Don Fernand, who
reprocht him with his negligence: Why, Sir, says the Count, interrupting him,
do you find that I have not performed my duty well? I am but now come from the
Vice Queen, I have been two long hours with her in her closet, where I have
sighed, talked of Love, and feigned an excess of passion. What would you desire
more? I know not what you have done since I saw you, answers the Viceroy, but
a while since, you made me conceive so ill an opinion of you, that I began to
lay down all hopes of finding any good relief from you. You were sad, dejected,
and said not a word, is that the way to insinuate into the hearts of the young
Ladies? That melancholy air that I affected, Sir, answered the Count* is none
of the worst means to take some hearts, at least it was the means that
persuaded your Lady the Vice Queen to lead me into her closet to ask me what
the matter was. And there, in private, I told her what I had to say, and I
hope, added he smiling, you will find your desired repose. I wish I may,
answered the Viceroy, not being overfond of entering into the particulars of
that Conversation, and, after having encouraged him, to pursue the design,
they each went away to their respective Apartments.

The morrow following, this new lover, who used always to go extreme rich in
clothes, took a particular care to please his Mistress, in his habit. He found
her, as he had been told, with the Vice Roys Lady, and as soon as they saw him
come into the chamber, they both fell a laughing at the different thoughts they
had of this visit each looking upon the other as the pretended Mistress of
this Gallant: It was pleasant to observe the care they both took to render
themselves pleasing to him. Do you not see, Madam, says Donna Angelica softly,
how delicately he is shaped, what a sweet air he has, how particularly
graceful his person is. I observe it all, says the Viceroy's Lady, being
overjoyed to hear her speak in this manner, and I confess, if I were one of
those Women that would entertain a Gallant, I would make choice of Count Henry;
for Donna Angelica did judge by the gentile behavior of the Count, and the
disposition of the Lady, that if no Amor was yet a foot between them, it would
soon be begun: And the Vice-Queen was persuaded, that Donna Angelica, being
persuaded, as she was, of the merits of the Count, either did already, or would
quickly be brought to love him. The Count acquitted himself as to his part well
enough for a young Scholar. He sighed sometimes to one, sometimes to the
other, to the satisfaction of both. When the Viceroy's Lady made him a sign,
he went to Donna Angelica, and then returned to her upon the silent commands of
Donna Angelica. Never was man better diverted, all was well received from him,
he had the privilege to do what he pleased, and they permitted him, each for
the others sake, all the little liberty that he had a mind to take with them.

Some days past in this manner, during which time the Viceroy's Lady and Donna
Angelica, gave themselves this diversion, and where the Viceroy himself had no
mind to be seen for fear of spoiling their mirth. The happy Count enjoyed,
alone, these fair Ladies company, and grew every day more familiar with them:
he was very handsome as to his figure, and of so free and aerie a humor, that
it sparkled through all his actions, and his company was very pleasant and
delightful to them. But Don Fernand, who besides the little advantage he had
hitherto got by it, began to fear, that mischief might happen to his Mistress,
which he intended only for his Wife, grew weary of their divertisements, and
gave Donna Angelica notice, that she would do him an extreme kindness to
forbear being seen there any more, since she was unable further to contribute
to that design. But she, who by no means would permit the Viceroy to concern
himself about the measures of her conduct, and knowing from what motive his
advice proceeded, did but laugh at him, and went immediately from dinner to the
Vice-Queen's chamber, where she was sure the Count would not fail to be: What
is it to me; says she, what the Viceroy desires, I will not deny my self the
satisfaction of seeing the Count. I never passed my time more pleasantly then
since I was acquainted with him. The Vice-Queen was of the same opinion: they
sought not so much now to please one another, because possibly they both loved
him, and it may be already repented they had been so liberal, and not
endeavored to retain him each for her self. But, as both of them had a good
opinion of their own power to charm him, they flattered themselves with a
conceit that they could retrieve him at their pleasure.

The Count being with the Viceroy's Lady, and the time of going to take the
air drawing on, they proposed to walk in the Garden, when there came in some
Ladies, to wait upon the Vice-Queen, and their visit growing somewhat tedious,
Donna Angelica whispers the Viceroy's Lady that she would stay for her in the
Garden, with the Count, in the Arbor, near the Labyrinth, and so they took
their leave of her, and went both together.

This Lady did most extremely long to know which of them had the greatest
Empire over the Counts affections, though she did not much doubt but it was
herself, his eyes, and all his ways of expressions, as well as his mouth, had
sufficiently confirmed her in this belief, but to avoid the ordinary mistake of
women, who are willing to flatter themselves in this particular, she was
resolved to have from him a clear declaration of the truth; and they were no
sooner in the Arbor, but, beginning to laugh after a very charming manner; for
a Young Lover, says she, Count Henry, you have made a great progress in a
little time: You are but newly arrived in this Court, and you have got already
such an esteem among all the Ladies, that I should not very much flatter you,
in saying it is arrived even to the point of Love. You are obliging, Madam,
answered the Count, but I should be too happy, were the progress I have made,
capable of reaching your heart. My heart, says she, with a kind of secret joy
that appeared in her eyes, you have no thoughts of it, you questionless take me
for the Vice-Queen. No, Madam, replys the Count; I know to whom I speak, and if
either of us mistake, it is you, if you imagine my wishes and sighs are
addressed to the Vice-Queen: it is you, Madam, that are their fair object, and
they only aspire at your heart. And, seeing she answered nothing, (for possibly
she was then at a stand what to say to him,) he made use of her obliging
silence, and having put one knee to the ground; Madam, says he, most
passionately taking one of her fair hands, and giving it a thousand kisses, I
have a long while waited for an opportunity to swear to you by all that is most
powerful, and tender in Love, that not only I never had any other design then
to love you, but also that I never will Love any besides your self so long as I
live. As he was speaking in this manner, the Viceroy who was by Accident then
walking in an Alley that led to this Arbor, saw him in this posture; but at
the distance he was from them, he could not well discern whether it were his
own Lady, or Donna Angelica, that he saw. His reason would fain persuade him it
must be the former, but there were some motions of Jealousy that began to
torment him, having made him apprehend it might be the other; he was resolved
to be sure, and therefore hastes toward them to know the truth. Donna Angelica
was the first that perceived him, who hastily making the Count rise up from the
ground; what have you done, Sir, says she, the Viceroy has seen you, and I
know not what he will think of it. Madam, answered the Count, I know not
whether you may have any cause to fear on his side; but I am in despair for
your sake, although not in the least for my own. It is upon your account I
speak, replies she, and you know not possibly the interest he will take in it.

The Viceroy no sooner knew Douna Angelica, but changing color twice or
thrice, according to the different motions wherewith he was agitated, his voice
failing, as if he had been stabbed to the heart. Certainly Madam, says, he, the
Count has either received, or does demand of you some extraordinary favor, to
be in that supplyant posture I saw him in at your feet: One or the other, says
she, being netled at his words, may possibly be true; but you may better be
informed of it from him then me, to which purpose I leave ye together. The
Viceroy would have stopped her, but she desired him to let her go, with such an
air, as Don Fernand durst no longer oppose her in it.

Never was Lover so dissatisfied as the Viceroy. What he had already seen
almost gave him his deaths-wound, and for his comfort afterward, she fled from
his sight. He walked about there without saying a word, his mind being tortured
with a thousand thoughts each more distracting then other; and at last making a
stop before the young Neopolitan, who was also in as dumb a figure as himself;
by what I perceive, says he to him, without looking on him, you are one of
those who with great difficulty begin to love, but when once they are set in,
none comes amiss to them. A few days since, you knew not what love meant, now
one Mistress is too little for you. The Count which though young and
unexperienced in these affairs, yet had a peircing wit of his own, readily
apprehended, by the trouble he saw in the Viceroys countenance, as well as by
what he had heard him say to Donna Angelica, that it was she he was so deeply
in love withal, and that it was his jealousy only which had made him speak in
that manner, so that to repair the ill effect of this last adventure, he told
him, that he was utterly ignorant of the ground of this reproach which he made
him, and that if he were in love, it was with the Vice-Queen, and that too in
pure obedience to him, and that he had not thrown himself at the feet of Donna
Angelica, but to render her his acknowledgments for the many good offices she
had done him as to his Lady.

This reason, though plausible enough of it self, did not work a perfect cure
upon the mind of the jealous Don Fernand, but however he was somewhat appeased
by it. You Italians, says he, as a small matter obliges you, so you carry your
acknowledgements to such an excess, that one would imagine you had received
very high favors, and that no less then a perfect surrender of all was made to
you, when indeed, very little, or nothing is done for you. It was I, continued
he, that desired Donna Angelica to serve you in your love to my Wife, and it is
to me only you are to owe the Obligation. And to leave you nothing more to
guess of this business, but to repose an absolute confidence in you, It is
Donna Angelica whom I love, and therefore that you might not be any longer
deceived, and that in leaving the Vice-Queen to your dividend, let me desire
you that you would forget to cast your eyes on the other, and to avoid even
being seen in her company, at least in private. If I were in your place I know
which of the two would please me best: and I must confess, there is no woman I
could love better then my wife, were she another; but she is mine, and that
title is sufficient to give all husbands a disgust who are of my humor and
constitution. Do not think this to be any caprice; most married men are of this
temper, and I know also good store of wives endeavor to imitate them, and so
to repay them in the same Coin.

As he was discoursing after this manner, the Vice-Queen, who as soon as she
could, had got rid of her visitants, came hastily, into the Garden with a
resolution, caused partly by curiosity, partly by Jealousy, to overhear Donna
Angelica's discourse with the Count, and passing through the Labyrinth, that
she might not be seen, she came to the place time enough to over-hear some part
of the moral discourse her honest husband held with the Count; she listened
with a great deal of patience, even with that which exceeded other women, and
she heard the Connt, make her husband this answer. Sir, the Vice Queen is
certainly one of the most beautiful persons under heaven, and a man must be
then, as you say, her husband, not to love her; but likewise, you ought not to
fear, that a man who is not her husband, and to whom you have given the liberty
of loving her, should not make his advantage of that blessing, and should ever
dream of engaging himself elsewhere: as for my part, I will stand firm, as a
Rock to this inclination, as long as you shall think good to permit me.

This Resolution of the Count's did a little comfort the Vice-Queen, for her
husbands contempt, who heartily endeavored to persuade the young Gallant, that
he could not make a better choice then that of his Wife, nor find a more
Agreeable husband then himself, provided he came not to one particular point,
which he kept for a reserve, leaving him all the rest. They parted thus from
the Arbor and being come to the Palace together, the Viceroy took his leave
to go to Donna Angelica, with whom he was to make his peace before he went to
bed, if he meant to sleep quietly that night.

As for the Vice Queen, she was walking still in the Garden, making diverse
reflections upon what she had heard. What a vexation was it for a person of so
many killing charms as she abounded with, to think of the rare Dialogue,
wherein her husband, with his usual eloquence, had set forth the esteem and
love he had for her. Women of what condition or quality soever, can never
pardon such kind of slights especially those that are handsome. She called him
by the most injurious names she could invent. Is it possible says she, that I
can be so little valued, and that a man, for whom I have given my self a
thousand torments, and whom I have loved hitherto even to the contempt of a
thousand that deserved it better, should himself labor for his own dishonor?
Oh Heavens! pursues she, this indifference of his, or rather this insupportable
injury he does me, cannot sufficiently be punished. I ought to content a
husband that is of this humor: I have yet the same charms and winning looks as
I had, wherewith I might allure a thousand lovers to me, without giving him the
trouble of seeking them for me; he shall not have cause to complain on that
score. I will see how far his patience will extend; and I am a fool my self if
I make not Him the greatest of all mankind. Let me begin with this young
Neapolitan, I perceive I am not indifferent to him, and since he is a Gallant I
receive from my husbands hands, let me entertain him so kindly as that he may
have no cause to be dissatisfyed. He will lose more by it then my self.

With these thoughts she bore her self company to her Chamber, and entertained
her self with them the greatest part of the night, during which, she confirmed
her self in the resolution she had taken, of seconding her disloyal husband's
good intentions.

When a virtuous woman has taken the pains to convince her self, and is fully
persuaded through the motives of Revenge and honor, that the sin is excusable,
neither virtue nor honor is of strength sufficient to oppose her.

The Count was extremely out of humor, that he had met with so unlucky an
encounter, with the Viceroy's Mistress. He foresaw the consequences of it,
and he was not a little troubled at the Resolution he had taken. To think no
longer to love Donna Angelica was nonsense, because already he was so far
engaged; and to continue it, was absolutely to ruin himself. What in the world
to do he knew not, as the case then stood, if he had been able to believe his
interest in this fair one so powerful, as to persuade her to agree with him in
deceiving the Viceroy, they might then keep their love secret; but he durst
not flatter himself so far as to that point: he had a desire, notwithstanding,
to satisfy himself in this particular, if he could find ever an opportunity
for it without plunging the Viceroy into new suspicions.

Whilst he was laboring under this inquietude, he saw him come into his
Chamber. The Count altogether surpised at this visit presently judged that
some great important business had brought him thither; The Viceroy, observing
in his Countenance the trouble that lay upon him, to put him out of his pain
after he had familiarly seated himself on the bed side where the Count was
laid: you see, says he smiling, what it is to be in love by my being up so
early; when you are as fast taken in the Amorous lime-twigs as my self, you
will then sleep as little as I do: and passing from this little preamble to the
occasion of his visit, he told him, that Donna Angelica was mightily incensed
against him, even almost to the last extremity, for what he had said the
evening before, in the Garden: You know pursues he, whether I testified any
kind of regret or jealousy, when I found you alone with her, though possibly I
might have had very good ground for both. But however, she has past a thousand
severe censures upon that action. You must go wait upon her this morning, and,
if she puts you upon that Chapter, endeavor what you can to disabuse her; but
above all, be sure to take no Notice that I have spoke to you, or that I have
in the least made you my confident of my passion for her. If she speaks to you
of the Vice Queen, let her understand that all your inclinations are bent that
way for her. It is the ordinary frailty of Womenkind to flatter themselves that
they are extremely admired by the men, and you having seen them both together,
she perhaps may think you have made a dividend of your heart betwixt them; but
let her understand your inclinations, let her see your heart is incapable of
adoring any more then one Divinity; and that, having made choice of the
Vice-Queen, you have given up your self absolutely to be subject to her Empire.

After these, and a great many other good Remonstrances, the Vice Roy went his
way, and the Count, having dressed himself, to the most advantage he could,
directed his way to the Palace, and found Donna Angelica bright as the day,
setting before her toilet; she blushed when she saw him, possibly at the
remembrance of the last words he had spoke to her, and having made him sit
down, they both remained silent, perplexed, I am apt to believe with the
multitude of their thoughts, rather then want of matter for a discourse. But
Donna Angelica, unwilling any longer to insult upon the young Lovers disorder
took pity on him thereby to retrive his courage; I thought, says she, you came
here to ask my pardon for the boldness you took yesterday in the Evening, but
by what I perceive, you have forgot it already. It is true Madam, answers he
sighing, I am criminal enough to beg your pardon, since I have been so unhappy
as to displease you, but I must confess to you, though I were to expiate my
fault with the laying down of my life at your feet, I know not whether I could
ever repent of what I said to you; and if it be a crime to love you, I am in
danger of being, all my life, the greatest criminal in the world. You do not
fear then, replys she, to offend me. Alas Madam, says he sighing, I dread your
least displeasure, but love is a God more to be feared then you. It is high
time to explain my self, and I am so wretched as not to please you, let me then
at least understand my misfortune. Well Sir, says she, will you be satisfied if
I tell you, that such a man as you, never sighed in vain; she could not bring
forth these words without blushing, but they so strangely possessed our young
lover with a joyous transport, that flinging himself at her knees, he embraced
them a thousand times: She made him rise, and told him, smiling, he should have
a care the Viceroy did not find him again in that posture, whom he was to
look upon as his most dangerous enemy. I know it, Madam, says he, in a tone
wherein there was less assurance, and that he is already too well established
in your heart, ever for me to hope to displace him: it is not on that point
replys she, you ought to fear him, but it is because he will have a watch over
your actions, and if we are not wonderfully circumspect, his jealousy will
bring a great deal of trouble to us both. Then the Count acquainted her with
the visit he had received from him that morning, and the discourse they had
held, and that it was by his Order he had made her this visit, and in fine each
of them passing from these confidences, they entrusted one another with their
deepest reserves. The Count acquainted her with what had passed between him and
the Viceroys. Lady, and Donna Angelica to requite him, concealed nothing that
had passed between the Viceroy and her self: Thus having diverted themselves,
they took their measures how to deceive both the Vice Roy and his Lady: After
which, having made a very fair progress in so early an Amor, they parted
infinitely satisfied with each other.

The Vice Queen, who used every morning to receive a visit from her dear
Gallant, waited for him with more impatience then ever, and began to be quite
and clean out with him for tarrying so long from her, as if he could have
divined the favorable dispositions of her heart toward him that day, She
could stay no longer, but immediately after dinner, she went to visit Donna
Angelica, to hear what was become of him: she was told, he had passed part of
the morning in her chamber, which news together, with some other melancholy
thoughts, put her clearly out of all good humor for the rest of that day.

The Count came not to her till about the Evening, and found her in her chamber
very much indisposed, and full of thoughtfulness. No doubt she was thinking at
that time of him. And she received him with such an indifference as gave him
plainly to understand, she had a quarrel with him; and he was not long ere he
knew what it was; for, after he had used some importunities to beseech her to
disclose, she reproached him with a thousand things, many of which he was not
guilty of, and which ended all in the visit he had made that day to Donna
Angelica, upon which she made a long and smart descant. The Count answered her,
that if he should be in love with that Lady, he paid but the duty of an
obedience to her in it: You are a Traitor replys she, you have obeyed me
without repugnance, and it appears but too plain, that I counseled you
nothing, but what was agreeable before to your inclinations, and that in
refusing your heart, I only hindered you from becoming perfidious to me. You
have yet so much power, Madam, answered the Count, over this heart, that if you
please but to recall the gift you have made of it, it will easily return an
absolute Captive to you.

To speak to her in this manner was indeed to deserve the name of a Traitor;
but he had reason to apprehend some danger from her, as well as from the
Viceroy. He plainly saw, she had engaged him in an amor with Donna Angelica,
whom she mortally hated, but with an intention to ruin her. Moreover, as he
knew not what was in the breast of this fair one, although he had of late
discovered some increase of her inclination toward him, he did not imagine
that what she said to her would be of so great a consequence. But the Vice
Queen, who really imagined, that the Count's inclination was greater toward
her rival, had not any difficulty to be persuaded to what she was willing to
believe, and so engaged him to make his most tender addresses to her. The young
Count, who after he had so happily passed the morning, was now full of
gallantry, added treachery to treachery, and said to her, all he could have
said to Donna Angelica, insomuch that the abused Vice Queen, furiously
swallowed all his Courtship, and was most passionately charmed with it.

These sort of treacheryes, are much in use as well among men as women; which
is the reason that we take a stricter care, and rely no more upon the faith of
words then upon that of looks. The heart it self often proves a great Liar;
what it longs for one day it has an aversion to the next.

The young Count was something tainted with the corruption of the age: and the
Vice-Queen, though otherwise a very ingenious woman, suffered herself to be
deceived, because she extremely wished all things just to the standard of the
young Courtiers Rhetoric to her.

He saw Donna Angelica, but it was privately, and from her, he came full of
love to make his court to the Vice Queen; He used the same disguise toward the
Vice Roy, whom Donna Angelica treated more favorably, to amuse him, and not to
make him suspect that she had any secret intregue with Count Henry. But it is
impossible for a jealous man, and a jealous woman long to be abused, by those
whom love takes pleasure sometimes to blind: It it very difficult when we are
possessed with a great passion to be always on the defensive part against
another passion: and if we are the least forgetful before those who watch us
narrowly we are soon caught.

The Vice-Queen, and Donna Angelica very seldom saw one another; the Jealousy
which had already embroyled them on their husbands account, had now also
disunited them on the account of a Gallant. As for the Viceroy, he was well
satisfied with the proceedings of the Count as to his wife, but not as to his
Mistress, and while he was at rest from the importunity of the former, he was
much disquieted for the love of the other. The submissive posture, in which he
had seen the Neapolitan Count, in the Garden, came continually into his mind,
and he had observed so great a change in Donna Angelica's carriage and
behavior since that time, who did sometimes absent herself for half a day
together, so that no body knew what was become of her, that it gave him
sufficient matter for his thoughts to work on.

The Vice-Queen was much happier then; for she imagined she had an equal return
of Love from the Count, to that she gave him; she saw him every day, and took
all the liberty with him, that any woman would take who cares not if all the
world knows she entertains a Gallant: She had a right to it not to be
questioned, nay further, none could indeed tell how to say any thing against
it. Her husband would have it so: he was a Gallant she had received from his
own hand, who had trained him up on purpose to make him pleasing to her. It is
true he had prescribed him some limits, but however the Vice-Queen was mightily
pleased, in that he left her the means of revenging her self on him, and it was
in the transgression of those limits, that the pleasure of her revenge
consisted.

When inclination is joined with revenge, we very seldom miss our blow: and
Women especially who have always their revenges ready at hand. The Vice-Queen
found herself one morning extremely inclined not to pardon her husband: she had
had that night a thousand pleasant dreams of the Count, and possibly waited
only for his coming, to make those dreams out, my traitor of a husband says she
to her self is absent, I am alone, and if the Count should come at this
instant, I* know not what I should be able to deny him; And I am very sure few
women in the world would have had my patience. What? abused on all sides by a
man, who instead of adoring me as he should do; does court another before my
face, even to the last point of gallantry! nay more, just heavens! he seeks me
out a Gallant to comfort me for his disloyalty, or rather to amuse me, he
teaches him ways to please me, nay, and complains of him that he does not
please me enough. Oh! had the most virtuous woman living such husbands as mine,
we should see if their honor were able to hold out against such cruel
injuries. From these thoughts she passed to others more agreeable: She
represented the Count to her mind in a thousand charming ways; the Ideas
whereof filled her with an impatiency of seeing him not to be expressed. But all
the desires, and languishing motions of her soul brought him not: Noon day
came; and now she prepared herself to make him a thousand reproaches, being no
less enraged against him then against the Viceroy, though in a very different
manner.

The unfortunate Count, was at that time embroiled in a very troublesome
business, and so could not much think of her: she had sent twenty times to his
lodging, and as often to Donna Angelica's, but could hear no tidings of him.
What misfortune had happened to him, what was become of him, you shall now hear.

The jealous Viceroy who had been advertised by the secret spys he kept over
Donna Angelica, that the Count visited her almost every night, had often
attempted to surprise them together; but whether it was the good address of the
Gallant, or whether love was so kind to favor them I cannot tell; but so so it
was, that they had always the happiness to come off safe: so that being almost
in despair, and being infinitely desirous at what price soever, to bring about
his design, he had planted one of his spys when it just began to be dusky,
behind the tapistry at her Chamber door* to see when the Count came in, or she
went out to find him.

It is very well if we are but once happy in such an amor: Too much good
fortune often times makes us negligent; and we find our selves very near a
precipice, when we think our selves just at the Zany of our happiness: But we
ought not to rely too much upon our past good fortune, and in matters of
danger, we ought to be as vigilant as our Observers. Heavens defend all lovers
from such a jealous Man as this Viceroy of Catalonia, who had abandoned his
Wife to another addresses, that he might have the pleasure to make his
applications to a Mistress without being troubled in his business.

He had intelligence brought him about midnight, that his Rival was come, and
had slipped into a closet that was near Donna Angelica's chamber. This news
transported him both with joy and anger: He disguises himself in the habit of
one of his men, comes immediately to the closet and knocks softly at the door.
Count-Henry used every night to come to that happy place, where when the Grand
Master was in bed, he past an hour or two, as affairs would give him leave, in
most pleasant conversation with Donna Angelica; And now hearing one knock so
gently at the door, he doubted not but that it was his fair Mistress. He opened
the door softly, and perceived one with a hat on, who endeavored to force an
entrance; but being young and stronger then the assailant, he pusht him back,
and clapped the door so suddenly to, that the Viceroy ran a very great danger of
leaving part of his Nose behind him. Just at this time the Grand Master came
from the town, and hearing a noise, as he passed toward his Ladys chamber, he
ask't what it was. The Viceroy had taken care to put out two lights which
usually stood there; and hearing the Grand Master's voice, being seized with a
sudden fear, (for he would not for the world be seen in that disguise)
endeavored to make his escape, which he did not however acquit himself so well
of, but that the Grand Master in the pursuit regaled him with his cane; with
which he gave him two or three severe drubs, crying out thieves, thieves: but
he escaped for all this happily enough, if this may be called a happiness.
Donna Angelica heard this alarm in her chamber, but felt it more in her heart.
They told her there was a thief that would have broke into her closet, but she
doubted it was her Dear Count: so that trembling all over with fear, she came
out of her chamber, to see whether he were taken. The Grand Master told her he
was not, but that he had so mauled him with his cane, that he did not believe
he would come thither any more this good while. This news gave the affrighted
Lady some comfort, not but that she was much concerned that her dear Gallant
had been so ill treated. But after the danger she thought he had escaped, she
thanked her stars that he had come off so cheap. These are the fruits of love,
which many young lovers have sometimes gathered before the flowers: she made
some complaints within herself, which being past, she could not but laugh at
the reflection she made upon the Adventures of Lovers, and how different their
days are, one from the other. She knew not that it was the Viceroy, that had
been paid so handsomely for his curiosity, and undergon the punishment due to
his extravagantly jealous humor.

That unfortunate lover came home very much mortifyed as may be imagined,
cursing after a strange rate the folly of Love, but yet more Donna Angelica; I
believe it was a pleasant soliloque he entertained himself all that night, and
if he had been with her, he had vented his passion in dreadful reproaches. He
would not go to bed before he had writ to her a letter which he charged one of
his servants to deliver her the next morning as soon as she was known to be
awake; He flowrished it over after this manner.

You are the most ungrateful of all women, and least worthy to be beloved by a
man of honor. It is in my power to ruin you; but I have compassion on you. A
Lusty young Gallant has the happiness to please you, and in the night time a
closet is a very good place, to hide him from your Husbands eyes, and to favor
your Love. He Is a poor Husband that relies upon the honesty of his virtuous
Wife! you may abuse those that will be blind, for my part thanks be to heaven,
I have opened my eyes; and shall look upon yours with the same indifference, as
I would look upon the ill conduct of a common woman: for you deserve to be no
otherwise regarded. Don Fernand tells you so.


When he had writ this letter, and read it several times over, he went to bed a
little comforted, and resolved not so much as ever to think on Donna Angelica
more. But alas! how little does a lover know himself, and when we have
delivered up our reason into the power of passion, how little reasonable are
we! No soul ever felt any torment comparable to that of the Viceroy that
night. In the morning, when he began to slumber, for he was not to expect any
sound sleep, news was brought him, that the Grand Master was at the door, and
desired to speak with him. He knew not what should be the cause of his coming
thither so early, unless it were to insult over him for the drubs he had given
him with his cane, which he yet felt: he sent him word that he was not very
well, but however he might come in if he had any business of moment with him.
The Grand Master, who thought it his duty to acquaint him with what had
happened in his apartment, the night before, was not willing to defer telling
him that thieves had broken into the Palace; and that he had come home in the
critical minute, to hinder them from stealing the pretty curiosities his wife
had in her closet. He would have told him what swinging drubbs he had given one
of them with his cane; but the Viceroy to whom that relation was uneasy
interrupted him, and told him he had heard all that passage, and further that
it was thought, these thieves were some servants that had a private
correspondence at his house: that he ought to watch them as well by day as by
night, and that if he would give himself the trouble of searching that closet,
he might possibly meet with one of them there still. Sir, says the Grand
Master, my wife has the key, and there is no way for them to get into it,
Except she consents and opens the door. There may be something in that too for
ought you know, replys the Viceroy, or they may have false keys, and I tell
you, you ought not to be too confident* for there are familiar Robbers, who
many times seek something that is above your money, or your choicest rarities
either: what can they seek above those, says the Grand Master, interrupting
him, it must be either my honor, or my Life. As for the former, the virtue of
my Wife secures that: and as for the other, I have no ground to fear; for I
think there is none can say I am his enemy: However, replys the Viceroy to him,
go and search that closet, and if you find any one of the thieves there, you
may judge by his mien of what character the rest are. The Grand Master took his
leave without making any answer, and went directly home, Wondering at the
reasons which moved the Viceroy to speak such things as he did. He came into
his wives chamber, who was yet a bed, and had but just received and made an end
of Don Fernands obliging letter: but it madded her to the soul. He gave her an
account of the discourse he had had with the Viceroy, and of his imagination
that the thieves that had been there the last night, were persons more
dangerous then they were aware of, and that he thought some or other lay still
perdue in the closet. Having both of them laughed at the Viceroy's fancy, he
would needs go himself, and visit the closet: But Donna Angelica, who, after
the letter she had received from the Viceroy, had reason to apprehend some
treachery, endeavored to divert her husband from that curiosity. Do you not
see plainly, says she, that he plays the fool with us. Prithee, how should a
thief, pursues she, come into that closet, or, if he had a false key as he
speaks of, could not he easily have made his escape before this. It Is true,
says the Grand Master, but the Viceroy would fain persuade me, that these
thieves have greater designs then we think for, and he has left me in a kind
of dispute whether they aim at my honor, or my life. And how should he know
their design, says Donna Angelica, certainly he must have some intelligence
with them if it be so. I confess, answers he, I am a little surprised at it,
but for his satisfaction, and that he may not say I have slighted his advice,
let us go and search the closet. Donna Angelica followed him, and though she
thought her self secure as to matter of the Count, yet her heart did strangely
beat within her at the apprehension of something, though she knew not what. But
in short they did search the closet, though they found no body: The Grand
Master was not satisfied with that, but he was resolved to search likewise all
the chambers and go the round, that so he might be able to give the better
account to the Viceroy, and there was not a corner, wardrobe, no nor even a
chest of any considerable bigness but he pryed into it. After all this labor
to no purpose, he went to give an exact account to Don Fernand, and was very
importunate with him to know the reason of those suspicions he had taken up
concerning the thieves; but the good Viceroy had no disposition to extend his
resentments so far, and pretend to make a discovery of things which he was not
able to go through with so effectually as he could have wished; which caused
the Grand Master to think no more of the business; and only to fancy that he
might perhaps be subject to visions.

Donna Angelica, was in no small perplexity: she understood by Don Fernand's
letter that he was acquainted with what had past the night before, and that he
knew she was wont to entertain the Count in that closet: This did extremely
plunge her, and she could not apprehend how the Viceroy should come to the
knowledge of all this; for she did not in the least imagine that it was he on
whom the unlucky Catastrophe of that scene had fallen. In short she knew not
what to believe of it, and she resolved to write to the Count, to see whether
he could not any better clear up this mystery to her. She sent a messenger to
him, in whom she reposed a great deal of trust, who after having sought him two
or three hours in vain, returned to her with the letter, telling her he could
neither find him nor hear any news of him. But all this daunted not Donna
Angelica, who imagined he might possibly have received some small hurt from her
husband which might oblige him to conceal himself, from the sight of his
acquaintance, who might have made some conjectures upon it, perhaps to
disadvantage; she was nevertheless very much disquieted, and thought it
strange, that he should not have the civility, or kindness to write to her
after* such an adventure, as that, which he could not but imagine would create
her a great deal of uneasiness. She stood at the closet window, which looked
toward the sea, and reflecting upon all that had happened to her, she sighed
and complained of the negligence of her lover; when, casting her eyes by
accident on the platform that was under the window, she saw in a little lodge
built for a sentinel, a man that made her a sign with his hand, not daring to
show himself, for fear of being seen, from some other windows of the Palace
which looked that way. She looked earnestly upon him, not knowing at first who
it might be; but at length, not without a great surprise, she discovered him to
be her dear Count, which gave her no small trouble. There were upon this
platform two Culverins; but the place being almost inaccessible; they were
little looked after, and that gate which went to them was never opened but when
they had an occasion to discharge them: so that there was no danger of his
being sought for there; but the main difficulty was how to get him from thence.
The window was so high, that she could not imagine how he could get down
without hurting himself. But they could do nothing before night came on; that
was the only time to remedy all. She writ to him in the mean while several
little notes to comfort him, which she threw down together with some
sweetmeats, and indeed whilst he was under that severe fatality, without
having any thing to eat, I am apt to think he really wanted some such
refreshment as that, or else the comfort of her letters was not of it self
sufficient to keep up his drooping spirits.

Night came at last, having been long wished for by both the lovers; and Donna
Angelica having thrown him down a strong rope which she had prepared for that
purpose, the young Gallant mounted up to the window with an incomparable
address, and you may guess that what he had eaten that day had not very much
overcharged him. What a joy was it to the fair Angelica to see him in her
closet? it was such as could not be moderated but by the fear of some new
misfortune which might happen to them.

The Count acquainted her with all the accidents of the precedent night, and
with what had obliged him to leap down upon the platform: she, on her part,
told him the consequence of that adventure, what alarms it gave her on his
account, and the Grand Masters discourse thereupon with the Viceroy.

They concluded that it must be some of the Viceroy' spys, or possibly he
himself that had been so shrewdly beaten. Then laughed at the thoughs of it, and
they would have carried the discourse out further, but reflecting upon the
present Juncture of affairs, they concluded they had raillied at it
sufficiently, and it was time the Count should withdraw, not doubting but that
they should be now more narrowly watched then ever; so that the pleasure of
seeing one another, and of being together, giving way to the danger that
threatened them both, they began to study which way the Count might get out of
her apartment, and not be discovered. There were in this closet some women's
cloths, and the Count being of no extraordinary stature, Donna Angelica even
ventured to dress him up in one of those, and found they fitted him
extraordinary well: she had no sooner got them on, but the Grand Master knocks
at the door; Donna Angelica, though trembling with fear was forced to open it;
and her husband seeing the young Lady, asked her whether that were one of the
thieves the Viceroy would have him fear, and so went out again, not staying
for an answer, which happened very well to his Lady, for I believe at that time
she was in no extraordinary good condition to make him one, sufficient to pass
muster.

After such a deliverance, we cannot think our two lovers would defer any
longer taking their leaves of one another: The Count, having saluted his fair
Mistress two or three times got out very happily, and came safe home to his
lodging. The next morning, he was no sooner out of his bed, but he received
this letter from the Vice-Queen.

For a young lover, Count, your passion is very cold: what! Is thi^ the love
you have promised me? to let slip a whole day without seeing me: Nay, so much
as without sending to inquire after my health! I find Sir I must even teach
you your duty: But that is a little too much; however I have compassion on you:
You are young, and it seems you know not yet what it is to be deeply in love.
But come to me, for I have resolved to make you happier to day then you could
reasonably expect. Adieu, I shall expect you at ten of the clock this morning,
fail not to come.


The Count went to see her; and, after some few Love quarrels for his so long
absence, for which he excused himself as well as he could, they entered into a
more particular conversation, in which the Vice-Queen used all her charms to
set him on fire. Count Henry, whose spirit was under no constraint as to this
fair one, spoke the most endearing and most gallant things to her in the world,
and such as possibly he could not have said had he been extraordinarily in
love; for Love, though it suggests some times very good thoughts to us, yet it
does not inspire us with the boldness of speaking them. The abused Vice-Queen
in the mean time answered his obliging discourses in such a manner as
discovered how well she was satisfied; one thing only in this Gallant
displeased her; that having so much love for her as he pretended; he had no
more confidence, but suffered all his passion to consist only in words.

Non voglion le done inviti;
Violenze desian per iscusare
Con l'altrui forza i loro appetitu.
She looked upon the Count with eyes which drew him to her, and as soon as he
approacht, she pusht him back, now making one complaint, and then another; and
in fine, like a woman who sought an occasion to quarrel, and at the same time
was desirous to make peace; though I leave it to the Reader to judge what war
and what peace it was she desired: she was in an undresse capable to inspire
any soul with the most passionate tenderness; for, besides that the Spaniards
have naturally something in them extremely charming, both art and love had
mutually agreed, to make her so, and they had dressed her in such a negligent
manner, that was able to poison the most obdurate hearts. I know not what
happened between them; and I should be loath to speak it, though I should know;
but this I know, that, besides the revenge to which the Vice-Queen was carried
out, she was not a woman that would be at all the charge of such a scene to no
purpose. A man of honor stands much upon his fidelity to his friend, but no
principles of honor could resist such powerful charms. Some days past in this
manner, during which, the Count, who for some reasons of polity did not visit
Donna Angelica but made his court to the Vice-Queen to amuse the Viceroy. But
women are less discreet in Love then men, especially when they love as this
Lady did. Donna Angelica had a dying impatience to see the Count, and was angry
at him, that he did not rather expose himself to some danger, then suffer her
to languish as she did, and though she had herself forbid him for some time to
come to her, yet she would have had him testified to her that his love was more
powerful then her prohibition; and that he loved her to such an excess, as
made him incapable of obeying her. Besides these complaints which she thought
she had reason to make of him, she had her jealousy also, which not a little
tormented her: she understood that he went every day to the Vice-Queen, and
though she had advised him to do so, the better to conceal their love, yet she
was so vexed at it, that she could not pardon him: insomuch that she writ him
this letter upon that subject.

When you do not see me, the least you can do, is to see no body; but you have
need of consolation, and it is in the arms of the Vice-Queen you find it.
Ungrateful man! what can you say to this? will you yet say, it is to amuse
her? What can you fear from her: You are a traitor, and you endeavor only to
deceive all the world; me you shall not, I assure you, Adieu.


What a cruelty was this to the poor Count, into what a gulf of despair did
the perusal of this letter plunge him! He thought to go* and wait on her that
very moment, either to justify himself, or die at her feet: but lest his
rashness might ruin them both, he thought he could not use too much
circumspection. At length he bethought himself, that as he had by the disguise
of woman's cloths, got undiscovered out of her apartment, so the same disguise
might be favorable to him, and get him into it. He was young, handsome, and
well shaped, his complexion was such as might become a young Lady: and there
was no danger, that the Grand Master with whom he had no acquaintance, and who
had seen him but once or twice en passant, should know him. He goes then to a
young Lady, one of his intimate friends, and desires her to furnish him with a
suit of women's apparel that might fit him. She brought him one, helped him on
with it, and it became him so extremely well, that nothing could appear more
charming. This done, he takes the same Ladys Coach, and being attended by one
of her women, that knew nothing of the Intrigue, came to the Palace. He goes
into Donna Angelica's apartment, desires to see her, and is admitted into her
chamber, under the name of Donna Brigitta, a Country Lady, who came to wait on
her from another Lady of her acquaintance. He was no sooner in the chamber, but
to his great confusion he saw the Viceroy there: But by good fortune Donna
Angelica who came before him to receive the stranger, hindered the Vice Roy from
observing his disorder. The jest was, that she did not know him, and that she
would have brought him further into the chamber, but the Count soon put her out
of her ignorance, by squezing her hand, and she was so extremely surprised to
see him, that she stood a good while in a maze, but at last she recovered
herself, and led him into another chamber, and presently returned to Don
Fernand. But with what trouble and disquiet I leave to the judgment of any
woman, that has loved and found herself in the like circumstances: She had with
her the most dangerous of all her enemies, at least, she looked upon him as
such; though he had an extraordinary passion for her; And on the other side was
the dear object of her desires, whom for some days she had not seen, and for
the sight of whom she most passionately languished.

To complete all in comes the Grand-Master, who finding this Lady alone, and
understanding she stayed for his Wife, who was with the Viceroy, being a very
civil person, though naturally no great Courtier, he thought himself obliged to
keep her company. The Count, as I told you, had a very winning air with him.
The Grand-Master easily mistook him for a Country-Lady; for he had not seen any
so handsome in Barcelona, and though he was by his rough disposition not much
inclined to admire the sex, yet he found this Lady so exceedingly adjusted to
his humor, that he even surpassed himself; he passed a thousand complements on
her after this manner: He offered, she telling him that she was but newly come
to Town, to show her the Artillery, to lead her to the Arcenall, and to walk
with her upon the ramparts, to salute herwith the great guns; and a thousand
other things belonging to his trade of War, and which he thought a handsome
woman ought to love as well as he: this was the sum of his Courtship and
gallantry to her; The Count, who was very complaisant, seriously thanks him, as
if those were the greatest obligations he was capable of laying upon him; and
being desirous to gain his favor, he looked upon him in so obliging a manner,
as was enough to gain the absolute conquest of his heart. And no doubt the
Grand-Master would at last have made love, had he known how; but as that was
not his trade, he contended himself with making her several other, as he
thought, signal offers of his service, either for herself or her friends: And
I believe he would have also made her a tender of his purse, had not Donna
Angelica come in, to whom, according to the Spanish fashion, he was to yield
his place, though it was extremely against the grain with him so to do.

This amorous Lady had a great deal of trouble, to get rid of the Viceroy, but
it was well repar'd by the charming sight of her dear Count; she looked on him
with admiration, and blushed, not with anger, for it was not possible for her to
conserve any against so dear, and so obliging a Gallant; But rather with love,
and jealousy, to see him so handsome and so attractive in that figure.
Perfidious man, says she to him, with a charming air, you seek every day new
ways to surprise me; but I had sufficiently been revenged on you, had the
Viceroy or the Grand-Master discovered you; for they, you know, are two
enemies, you ought to fear. No, it is your self, Madam, replys the Count, whom
I fear more then all the enemies in the world besides, therefore let me beg of
you to give me some assurance that you are not angry with me, and I shall be
contented. And who, says she, sighing, can be long angry with you? The very
sight of you pleads your excuse. Go, says she blushing, you know too well the
way to get your pardon.

I shall not go about to acquaint you with the sequel of this discourse; but we
may imagine they would have sealed the articles of a firm peace, had not love,
which still delighted to be interfering, sent them the Grand-Master, who
already being fired with a passion for Donna Brigitta, could tarry no longer
without seeing her. He took the pretense of telling them, it was dinner time,
and desired his Wife to persuade the young stranger to dine with them. These
two young lovers, who had not had time to make the full advantage of their
interview, yielded without difficulty to the Grand-Masters request. Only the
Count made some scruple for fashions sake, but it was to be the more earnestly
entreated, which the Lady did with so good a grace, that she could not be
denied. All dinner time the Grand-Master had his eyes fixed upon the fair Donna
Brigitta, he carved for her, and forgot not to drink her health. The Count and
Donna Angelica who observed all his earnestness and care, could not forbear
laughing at him. The new lover, never had been seen in so good a humor in his
life, and he took a great delight to see them meet with so pleasant a
diversion. The Count did as much as the decency of the sex he had taken upon
him would permit, to make him really amorous, who never till then had been in
Love with any thing but his sword. The Count drank the Grand-Masters health, he
showed him all the respect imaginable, he took all occasions to oblige him, so
that the Grand-Master believed he had already got some place in Donna
Brigitta's affection. He spoke very highly of her beauty, and said, he was
forced to confess, having made his excuses to his Wife, that he had never seen
a more beautiful Creature in his life. Donna Angelica managed this scene
extremely well, and played the part of a good natured Wife, telling him, she
would serve him as his confident, but gave him warning that he was to expect a
Rival. A rival, replies he in a fury, being heated both with love and wine, and
who is it that will dispute here with me? the Viceroy, answers she, if he sees
her; but that shall not be here, pursued she, for, as a faithful confident, I
will keep her entirely for you, the Grand-Master was so well pleased with his
wife for this complaisanee, that he could have given her the Empire of the
world, if it had been in his power, to express to her the sense he had of such
an extraordinary kindness.

Dinner being ended, he kept his wife and Danna Brigitta company a little time;
but having some important business that in dispensably called him away, he was
obliged, though with a great deal of regret, to take his leave of them.
Whereupon the Count pretended he must be gone too: but the Grand-Master*
opposed it, and employed, besides his own importunities, those of his wife, to
oblige him to tarry till his return, which sheuld be within as short a time as
possible, telling them otherwise he would not go, how pressing soever his
business was. Donna Angellica frighted with this last menace, as well as with
that of the false Brigitta, told him she would take the charge of that affair
upon her, and that she would lead the stranger into her closet, from whence
she would not suffer her to stir, till he returned. The Grand-Master earnestly
entreated his wife to be as good as her word, and having waited on them to the
closet, for the better security, as well as to show a piece of Gallantry, he
locked them in, and took the key with him.

The Viceroy, who notwithstanding the just ground he might have to complain of
this Ladies imprudent conduct, was now a little reconciled to Donna Angelica,
being yet uneasy and disquieted, spent whole days in her Apartment, so that not
being satisfied with his mornings visit, which had lasted three or four hours,
he came again after dinner. Having met with nobody, and being there well
acquainted, he came as far as her chamber, and hearing some laughing in the
closet, He put his ear close to the keyhole, and knew it to be the Counts
voice, which made him hearken more attentively, for he was unwilling a word of
their discourse should escape him. I leave you to judge whether it could be
pleasing to him or no. He resolved at first not to interrupt them, but hear
them patiently out to the end; but it was hard so long to restrain the
impetuous motions of his troubled soul. The more he heard, the more his grief
enlarged upon him. But what should he do in this circumstance; he was almost at
his wits end, and knew not what was his best course to take; to knock at the
door was a trouble to no purpose; he might very well imagine they would not
open it, without making him speak, and much less if he should speak; and what
measure soever he should use, it would but the more advise them to manage
their precaution. If he had followed the motion of his first thoughts, he had
presently endeavored to break open the door; but besides that the door was
strong enough for the efforts he was able to make against it, he had so much
reason remaining in him, as to see it did by no means become a person of his
character to use that violence in another apartment; and if he made any noise
he apprehended that the worst consequences of it, might light upon himself. He
concluded then, it was his best way to wait there without making any bustle,
till they came out: or the Grand-Master would come in. For he was resolved this
time to undo them, and the occasion was too fair to be slipped. Those in the
closet continued still their merriment. But the deep sighs the Viceroy
fetched, who (sitting on a chair he had placed near the door, the better to
overhear them, bit his nails to the blood) having given them some suspicion of
the truth, made them speak lower, and then it was that the Viceroy being upon
sentinel, and enraged at the heart, not knowing what their secret way of
diversion might be, would fain have found some devise or other to peep in upon
them, though he could not well have hoped to see any thing there that might be
very pleasing to him.

The Grand-Master who was under a most Violent impatience to see Donna
Brigitta, could no longer defer his return. Those who have never loved, are
more violent then others, when they begin to be fired. He left his business
half undone, and sighed all the time of his absence from her: he could have
wished for a winged chariot, to bring him home so much the sooner: but however,
at last he gets thither, and running directly to the closet, he finds, not
without great surprise, the Viceroy in a very sad posture, and with a
countenance which sufficiently witnes't the confufion that possessed him; at
first he made a pleasant judgment of it, and reasoned after this natural
manner, what curr of a hound, says he to himself, is this; no sooner have I any
game here, but he is presently nosing after it, however he seemed as if he knew
nothing, and told him, as he came up to him, that he was amazed to see him
there alone, and asked him, if he knew where his Wife was. You may hear news of
her, answers the Viceroy, in a tone that sufficiently expressed his
astonishment, if you will but open the closet door. The Grand-Master who had
the key in his pocket, would seem cunning, and having no desire that the
Viceroy should see the fair Brigitta whom he imagined to be the person he
sought, knocked at the door, and desired his Wife to open it, telling her the
Viceroy was there. She answered that she could not, and desired to be excused.
The Grand-Master being glad of this answer, told Don Fernand that he must
excuse her this time, that perchance she was doing something she would be loath
to have any men witnesses of; I know, replys the Viceroy, that she is doing
something belonging to her sex, but it is such as cannot be done without the
assistance of a man, and if you will persuade her to open the door, you will
see, she could not have chosen one more gallant, or more young. I understand
you, Sir, answered the Grand-Master smiling; but as he is, we will let him
alone with her; and I hope you will not be more concerned at it then I. No, I
assure you, answered the Viceroy; But Don Gabriel, (so the Grand-Master was
called,) deceive not your self, do you know who it is? I know him so well,
answered the other, that I my self locked them in together, and that you may not
doubt, pursues he with an air full of raillery, see here the key; Don Fernand,
strangely surprised to hear him speak in this manner, was some time without
giving him any answer; and after having walked two or three turns in the
chamber, looking him in the face, as if he would read in his countenance,
whether he spoke in good earnest: your temper, says he, for a man of honor as
you are, in such a circumstance passes my understanding. What you please,
answers Don Gabriel smiling still; but all this shall not oblige me to show you
my Wiv's Gallant. I know him well enough replys the Viceroy; since it is so,
answered Don Gabriel, let us leave them in quiet together, for it is not the
part of a good natured husband to interrupt his wives pleasures, when she is
taking them with her Gallant. The Viceroy, being more astonished, knew not what
to say. He expected the Grand-Masters fury would have made him sacrifice them
both to his resentment, and he was thinking with himself, if he could not
divert him from it, at least to endeavor to save his Wife: how contrary was
the event to his expectation! he makes a jest of it; he is agreed with them,
and has made himself their Jailer. What can the amazed Don Fernand imagine but
that the Grand-Master has lost his wits, or that they have given him a spell?
he went his way, for he knew not how to deal with a man of this character, and
looking upon him with scorn, he marched out of the chamber: Don Gabriel waited
on him; The Viceroy told him he ought to have more care of his reputation; the
other laughed at the advice, and answered him only in raillery. In fine the
Viceroy left him with the worst opinion one man could frame of another.

Those that were in the closet had not heard all this dialogue without a great
deal of concern; They had both been undone had the Viceroy persuaded Don
Gabriel to open the door; and they trembled when he came back to them: The
siege being raised, at last, says he to them, this Viceroy would be a terrible
man, if he did not find some others as cunning as himself; He told them all the
discourse they had had, but with such mimicall gestures, as forced them almost
to burst with laughing, notwithstanding the little inclination they had to it.
This Comedy had lasted much longer had not the Count, observing the trouble
Donna Angelica was in, occasioned by the Viceroy, resolved to retire.

But what gave them most trouble was, that Don Gabriel would by all means wait
on them, and there was need of all their Rhetoric and address to divert him
from it. The fair Donna Brigitta made use of all the power she had over him;
promising him that whenever she came to Town, she would come and pass some
time with them: So that at length he yielded to let her go, and she without any
further impediment got to the Ladys lodging, where she changed her clothes and
reassumed her former figure.

The next day Donna Angelica, impatient to hear news of the feignd Brigitta
sent a note which by misfortune fell into the hands of Don Fernand, by means of
one of his spys, which he had placed at Count Henry's door, to observe what
passed, to whom the messenger entrusted the note; taking him for one of the
Counts servants. The Viceroy was reading it when he saw the Grand-Master
coming to speak with him about some important business, and beginning to laugh,
he asked him what news of his wives Gallant? they said very pleasant things to
each other, both of them believing they had reason to be pleasant on that
subject. You are a man of good sense, Seignior Don Gabriel, said Don Fernand to
him, we are not responsible for the follies our wives commit; and it is a
madness to be disquieted at them, or to make our reputation depend on them:
how many men are there of your humor, and where are the husbands that are not
subject to the like.

The Grand-Master who saw the Viceroy's raillery went a little to far, I shall
come to you, Sir, says he, to comfort me in this case, when I have need of it;
for you are prepared, I see, upon this subject: but let me tell you, it is no
more true, that there was a Gallant yesterday in the closet with my wife, then
that there were theives there the other day. I agree with you in that; answers
the Viceroy that the one is as true as the other. But, Sir says Don Gabriel,
the closet is not so large; I have eyes, and I think, I know you have eyes,
interrupted Don Fernand, but I know too you will not make use of them. I told
you it was a domestic thief who sought neither your money, nor your other
little Closet-knacks; but it seems you care not; since you are so good as to
lock him in your self with your wife. What! is that the thief, answered the
Grand-Master, with a violent laughter, which hinde^^d him to pursue his
discourse. I wish, added he a little after, such thieves would come every day
to my house, and I promise you I will give them liberty to steal what they
please. But Sir, to leave you no longer in your error, I will tell you, the
thief you speak of is one of the handsom'st women in the Kingdom. A woman,
replys the Viceroy, laughing as well as he, and since when is Count Henry
become a woman? Count Henry, says Don Gabriel! I think I have seen him; but he
has not such lineaments, (though this were possible) nor such a complexion, nor
such a fine neck, nor I know, added he, I am not a man to be so deceived, as to
take a man for a woman: yet, says Don Fernand, it was the Count who was
yesterday in the closet with Donna Angelica and the thief I mentioned the other
day. What, the thief that I cudgeld, replys Don Gabriel, I speak not of the
drubbs you gave a man the other night, answers the Viceroy, but what I have
told you is very true. Sir, replys Don Gabriel, if my wife had a design of
making any gallantry she would not sure elect such a raw young Gallant as he
is. The youngest men are not the worst Gallants, replied the Viceroy and youth
is seldom displeasing in a way of gallantry, nay, more, I assure you, I know
his voice too well to be deceived. We are more easily deceived, replys the
Grand-Master by our ears, then our eyes. I see very well: And I too, said Don
Fernand, and to convince you fully, read this Note, which one of your wives
Pages delivered this morning to a servant of mine, whom he took without doubt
for another: Don Gabriel takes it, and finds in it these words.

Are you not ashamed of your negligence? you should have writ to me two hours
since: what say I, two hours? you ought not to have gone to bed without writing
to me, but I pardon you for Don Gabriels sake, who loves you already almost as
much as I. Love works every day great miracles, but this is so extraordinary,
that I believe never any resembled it. At least I can say, that none but Donna
Brigitta. has found out the secret of reconciling two such contrary things in
the world as is love and jealousy; and make herself be equally loved by the
husband and wife. Adieu, if you come not this day at least write to me.


This Note had no superscription, and Don Gabriel, having read it, asked the
Viceroy what he found in it, that reflected upon his honor, and how he knew
it was addressed to a Gallant, rather then to a Lady. I think it is enough to
clear that doubt, answers Don Fernand, that it was sent to Count Henry; but for
your sake, added he, laughing, I will believe if you will have me, that it was
to Donna Brigitta, whom the note mentions. Well, replys Don Gabriel, rising to
be gone, if I have no other enemies to fear, but the young Neapolitan, I hold
my self very secure on that side, as to my Wife.

The Grand-Master having thus left the Viceroy, came to his wives apartment,
and asked her, whether she had writ any note that morning, she who readily
fuspected the Viceroy of some treachery, answered him without any trouble,
that she had, and that it was to Donna Brigitta: Don Gabriel who would have
sworn for his wife's virtue, believed what she said, showed her the letter the
Viceroy had given him, and told her from the beginning to the end all the
discourse they had had together. Whereupon the incensed Donna Angelica spoke
all that her anger suggested against Don Fernand. She told Don Gabriel that
which most troubled her, in the baseness of the Viceroys actions, was, that
not being contented to use all means to create an ill understanding betwixt
them, he had to her greater dishonor, charged her with a man whom all the
Court knew to be the Vice-Queens Gallant: And that you may not doubt it, added
she, besides the report that runs abroad of it, I will show you a letter which
I found the other day by chance, in which you may see what the Lady writes to
the Count. She went to the closet, and brought one her lover had sacrificed to
her, which he had received but two days before from the Vice Queen. The
Grand-Master read it with an inexpressable joy, that he had somewhat to insult
over the Viceroy withal: He went instantly to find him out, and, accosting
him with a smiling countenance, Sir says he, I know not what day this is, but
all love messengers are destined to mistakes on it, Count Henry has more then
one mistress; a while since one of your men surprised a note which my wife
writ to him, and see here another which is fallen into the hands of one of my
servants, and which one of the Vice Queens Pages carried to the same Gallant.
Some mistake on both sides; but as you had the goodness to deliver me that of
my wives, I thought my self obliged to bring you this from yours. Take it Sir,
added he, you know the character, I think it is your Ladys. It is so, answered
the Viceroy coldly, and began to read.

You have scarce left me, my dear Count, but I languish to see you again, and
the same pains other lovers suffer for a months absence, I suffer them all for
that of one night, or a day. Cruel are the minutes I pass without seeing you.
Return to morrow more amorous then ever, if you will repair these disquiets.
The pleasure of being loved by you is so charming to my heart, that I cannot
purchase it at too dear a rate. I find glory in it; honor, and revenge, and
all that another would lose by it. Adieu for some hours; for I hope as soon as
I awake to receive the good morrow from you, from whom alone I expect my
happiness. Nor do I desire to have any more of them, if they do not come from
you, Adieu.


The Viceroy having put the note in his pocket; with the same coldness, he had
read it, and looking upon Don Gabriel who expected to hear him vent his passion
in the most bitter terms imaginable; what would you have, says he, I am one
like your self; like me, Sir, replys the Grand-Master then, methinks my wives
Letter should speak so as that does of the Vice-Queens, but there is a great
deal of difference betwixt them. That difference is just nothing, answers Don
Fernand, and I tell you, though our wives do not write the same, they use us
both in the same manner. Sir, replys the Grand-Master, if you are willing to
believe so for your own comfort, I will subscribe to it: but raillery apart, I
know what I ought to think, and till you have showed me as convincing proofs as
I bring you, you will give me leave, upon the subject of our wives, to put a
difference between your fortune, and mine. The Viceroy told him, it would not
be difficult to convince him, provided he will believe his eyes; and Don
Gabriel having promised he would contribute on his part to the discovery as much
as he could, they parted, the Viceroy being resolved not to leave one stone
unturned, to be revenged of the incredulity of the husband, and treachery of the
wife; The Grand-Master designing to let him use his endeavors, without giving
any notice of it to his wife of whose loyalty he thought he had no reason to
entertain the least suspicion.

Count Henry whom Donna Angelica had not failed to acquaint with all that had
passed between the Viceroy, and Don Gabriel, went no more to her apartment:
but they could not be long without seeing each other. They made several
assignations, of which very few succeeded according to their wish, having
always found some that followed them, or gave them some interruption. They were
observed not only by the Viceroy and the Grand-Master, but by the Vice Queen
also; who, some days since, became more jealous of the Count then ever, because
she saw him but seldom; and caused him to be dogged from morning to night, and
followed him sometimes herself. The Palace-Garden had been more favorable to
them then any other place, whether for the convenience Donna Angelica had of
going thither without noise, or without being followed; or that it was not
mistrusted, being always kept carefully locked. But it is dangerous to go often
to one and the same place, and in case of an amor, the surest way is often to
change stations.

This Garden was one of the pleasantest of Catalonia, the chief country of
delicate Gardens. There was in the middle of it a kind of an enchanted Palace,
made of trees artificially ranged, and composed into Galleries, Halls,
Chambers, and Closets, with all their appurtenances, one of the most curious
pieces of art in the world. There was but one way into this Palace of trees,
which was by a drawbridge, it being surrounded with a deep mote full of water.
The thought of passing an hour or two of the night in so pleasant a place, no
sooner presented it self to our lovers, but they found means to get false keys
to the Garden-door. The Viceroy had at length some notice of it, and advised
the Grand-Master, the better to surprise them, to tell his wife, that he was to
make a journey into the Country for two or three days. Don Gabriel who could
not yet believe what he heard, consented to what he desired of him. The spys
were sent into the garden early, who immediately got up into the trees to keep
sentinel. It was scarce night when they saw a man, of a very good presence,
walk toward the green Palace, and within a little while after a brisk jolly
Lady, who took the same way. They stole down from the trees, having no more to
do, and having drawn up the bridge according to their orders, they ran
presently to the Viceroy to acquaint him that they had taken the Quarry. What
a joy was this to Don Fernand: Don Gabriel was neither merry nor sad. He
desired to know the truth, and then he knew what resolution to take, if things
were so as they reported. Now the truth will appear, says the Viceroy, but I
must beg a favor of you, which is, that you will not be transported against
your wife, and that you will content your self with putting the gallant into
the hands of justice. I believe answers the Grand-Master that in such affairs
we do not take counsel of any persons, but tell me what you would do your self,
should it happen to be your wife. I would shut her up in a convent, replied the
Viceroy, or send her back to her friends, and I beg that favor at your hands,
for Donna Angelica; For I protest to you, I shall not endure to see a Woman
ill-us'd for a misfortune which she should always have reason to accuse me of;
show her me, Sir, says Don Gabriel, and then it will be time enough to
interceed for her; but, to tell you the truth, my heart which uses to give me
the first alarm, when any ill accident threatens me, does not yet give me the
least commotion. Don Fernand begins to laugh, and without any further reply,
marches toward the garden, and Don Gabriel followed him, being each of them
attended by five or six servants well armed to apprehend the Gallant.

They entered the Garden: the night was so dark they could hardly see each
other; they advanced toward the place, caused the bridge to be gently let
down, where having commanded their servants to tarry, that they might make the
less noise, and withal not to have them for witnesses of this adventure: Only
they two went in, and softly stole toward the green-Palace. But it being of a
large extent and having a thousand places wherein to skulk, it was hard in that
obscurity to find those they sought. The Viceroy marched before, and he would
have been pleased that Don Gabriel should hear part of the discourse between
the two lovers, not any longer to doubt of the title with which his wife
honored him. I believe it would have been a pleasant thing to have seen two
persons of their character, animated each by different motions, marching on
tiptoe in the dark, sometimes listening, and taking even the noise themselves
made for the voice of some body; particularly the Viceroy who interessed
himself so much in this affair, that the moving of the least leaf gave him an
alarm: They held each other by the hand, as the song is; and Don Fernand having
the Vanguard, was the first who met with one; but instead of catching, he was
caught himself. He had scarce entr'd one of the Rooms, where he had heard some
noise, but he was seized by the arm. Most treacherous of all men, says the
person that held him, and whom he knew, by her voice, to be his own wife, will
you now own your treachery, or will you yet tell me you come hither to seek me?
I leave it to the Reader to judge whether the Viee-Roy were not sufficiently
astonished, he knew not whether she spoke to him in earnest, or whether she took
him for another; But for Don Gabriel it is hard to express his joy: Ah wretch!
continued she, could you after all my kindness, betray me in this manner? What
pleasure could you take in abusing me with a belief that you loved me, was it
only to comply with the Viceroy who chose you to be my Gallant? why do you not
speak to me? I should have been content to have given you a Mistress as I did,
without giving you a heart which you refuse. These words were too clear to
leave the astonished Don Fernand in any doubt. He would have retired, full of
confusion with what he had heard; not so much upon her account as Don Gabriels
who kept close to him behind, and would needs see the end of this scene which
could not but be exceeding pleasant; but before we pass any farther, it will
not be amiss for the better understanding of this adventure, to tell you, how
the Vice-Queen happened to be there that night.

I have already spoke of her jealousy, which for some days before tormented
her, and caused her to observe all the motions of the Count, and sometimes
followed him in person. She had notice as well as the Viceroy that he went
every night into the Garden, and not doubting but it was to see Donna Angelica
there in private; she went thither by night disguised in man's apparel, to the
end she might not be known. The Palace of trees, being the fittest place for an
interview, she judged they had made choice of it for theirs: so that she went
thither to wait for them, and a while after saw Donna Angelica come toward the
place; but it being the Count whom she principally sought, she let her pass
without interruption. It is true, that in the impetuosity of her first motions
when she was near her, she had like to have been transported to some action,
more comformable to her jealousy, then her sex.

The spys, as I have already told you, went immediately to give the Viceroy
notice: And the Count being come thither presently after, was much astonished to
see the bridge drawn. He imagined there was some mystery in it; He went round
the moat to try whether he could hear any noise, which might give him some
further knowledge of that accident. He was resolved at least not to go out of
the garden till he had found to what end this precaution, of drawing up the
bridge, had been used, and he had a thousand different imaginations about it.
But he had scarce made his round, when he heard the Viceroy and the
Grand-Master coming, and understood part of what they said from behind a
hedge, under which he skulked till they were gone past him. He saw them enter
into the Green-Palace, and presently draw up the Bridge, which stabbed him to
the heart, in that thereby he was deprived of all hope of bringing any succor
to Donna Angelica: no torment could be equal to his, who doubted not, but the
consequences of this cruel adventure would fall heavy upon his dear Mistrisse.
The truth is, she was for her part strangely perplexed. At first she was much
surprised to hear the Vice-Queen speak in a place where she not only thought
nobody was, but where she so little expected her. She rose up at the noise the
Viceroy and the Grand-Master made, thinking it was the Count, and was going
toward them, when on a sudden she heard the voice of her Rival, reproaching
her lover: she was seized with fear, and knew not what to undertake in so
extraordinary an adventure.

The Vice-Queen who knew that Donna Angelica was in that place, spoke in this
manner to the false Count on purpose, to oblige him to an answer, such as she
desired Donna Angelica should hear. Speak, ungrateful man, pursued she, seeing
he made no answer; What do you find in Donna Angelica more then in me! Is it
that she is false as you are: as for her wit or her beauty, you know us both
too well to prefer her to me. Will you tell me, it is to revenge me on the
Viceroy; No, it is nothing but the pleasure you take in treachery, that could
engage you: for you will not deny but you have loved me with passion, and have
told me a thousand times that if I pleased, you would no more see that Lady,
and that you had not the least inclination to her; And in the mean time, while
I give my heart entirely to you, and you assure me of yours, you cast your self
upon a woman whom you profess not to love.

In all this there was something pleasing, and something disagreeable to both
the husbands. When any thing was said that displeased Don Fernand he made a
step back, and the other pusht him forwards; when it was any thing that
reflected on Don Gabriel, the Viceroy pulld him back by the cloak. I have not
yet done, pursues the Vice-Queen, seeing he still kept silence, you shall not
part from me till you have declared which of us two, Donna Angelica or I,
reigns Empress in your heart. I know it must be I added she; if you follow the
Viceroys counsel* for you know there is no woman he could love above me, if I
were not his own wife already. But follow the dictates of your own heart, and
tell me whether you deceive us both, or if I be the only deceived person. You
only, Madam, answered the Viceroy, in whom the Spanish phlegm began to take
fire; you are doubly deceived, pursues he, both in taking me for the Count, and
in persuading your self that he loves you. You did not, pursued he, think me so
near you, when you made me acquainted with your affairs. No certainly, answers
she, in a great astonishment, which nevertheless she soon overcame, but I am
not angry that you heard what I have said, for you know whether you have not
deserved all this, and whether any one has contributed to your dishonor more
then your self. All this replys he, might be better told me if I were alone;
but here is the Grand Master with me who possibly will laugh at us. The
Grand-Master, replies the Vice-Queen to him, has too great a share in this
Evenings adventure to laugh alone; and if he will give himself the trouble of
searching all these rooms, he will find a Lady of his acquaintance here who
came not hither to meet with him: Donna Angelica who was not far off, heard
this discourse, and I leave you to judge what her apprehensions were. The
Grand-Master who knew it was his wife the Vice Queen spoke of, did but laugh,
not seeing any probability of her being there: and answered her, that he did
not conceive the Rendevous was intended for two Ladies, since there was but one
Gallant. It is true; answered the Lady, but the assignation was made for Donna
Angelica. Then, Madam, replied Don Gabriel, what brought you hither? the same;
answers she, that brought you, though my success has been as bad as yours.
But, Madam, says Don Gabriel to her, you see I have no reason to give credit to
what you say, since by your own confession, you are jealous of my Wife:
nevertheless if you can show her to me here, I shall then believe you. The
Vice-Queen having told him, he need but search the place: The Viceroy sent
some of his Servants to the Palace for lights, though she endeavored to oppose
it, being unwilling to be seen in the equipage she was in: But notwithstanding,
the Order was given, and they strait ran to the Palace, to fetch some
flambeau's.

Don Fernand had no reason to be very well satisfied with the Vice-Queen;
though besides his not loving her, he saw, that to give true justice to all
persons, the fault lay not wholly at her door; and that it was but just he
should suffer for his own folly: yet, notwithstanding all these reasons that
made against him, and of which he endeavored to convince himself, he could not
but be exceeding vexed to think Don Gabriel was witness of his shame. It was
necessary, to make the scales even, that he should show him Donna Angelica and
he dyed with impatience to have the lights brought: This unfortunate Lady was
in the greatest perplexity imaginable; she had hid herself under the bushes,
but when she heard them talk of lights, she thought there was no place of
security for her; she would have made her escape, but she found the bridge
guarded. What course to take she knew not; She walked round the Moat with tears
in her eyes, demanding of the night to redouble her darkness, to save her from
the unhappiness that threatened her; and she was resolved rather to throw
herself into the water she saw before her, then to be exposed to the laughter
and scorn of her most cruel enemies: When on a sudden she discovers through
that obscurity the end of a plank, which rested on the bank of the Moat where
she stood: She was fearful at first, but taking courage by little and little,
examined what it was, and could not imagine from whence that succor came: she
stuck not to venture herself upon it, and try to pass to the other side; but
she was scarce halfway, when she met a man coming toward her upon the same
plank: her fear redoubled, and she was just upon the point to return back, had
she not been stopped by the voice of that person, who asked, is it you, Madam? Ah
my dear Count, answered she, with an incredable joy, how opportunely has heaven
sent you, to free me from the greatest misfortunes that could befall me. The
Count, (for it was he) gave her his hand, and told her he had been above an
hour seeking some means to relieve her, and that by a great goodness of
fortune, he had found that plank at the lower end of all the Garden.

Their discourse was not long, the time would not permit it, the lights the
Viceroy had sent for, appeared already in the green Palace. They drew away
their plank, and having tumbled it into the Moat, they got by a by-way,
presently to the Gate, at which they were used to come in, to think how to
manage their affairs, and secure themselves from their jealous observers. As
they past, they could perceive the other three very busy in search of the fair
fugitive. There was not a hole or corner in the Palace, which they left
unvisited: Not a bush unshaken, and hardly any of the higher grass unsearcht;
in fine, no place though never so abstruse which was not carefully examined, as
well by the Masters, as the spys themselves: who all affirmed they had seen two
persons enter the green Palace, and the Vice-Queen more positively then they,
added for the further credit of the story that it was Donna Angelica whom she
had seen, touched, and followed for some time.

The Grand-Master, as he had reason, laughed at all this: and even took pleasure
in making them run from one side to the other, to no purpose, the Vice-Queen
was absolutely in the last despair, and protested she would not quit the Garden
till she had found Angelica. You will find, says Don Gabriel, continuing his
raillery, that this dangerous Count has carried her away; for you must needs
confess with me, that a woman being alone, and without help, cannot otherwise
then by enchantment, get out of this place, the bridge being drawn. They had
great contests on both sides, which at last ended in the common confusion both
of the Viceroy and his Lady, who being weary at length with their unprofitable
search, took their way to the Palace. Don Fernand, nevertheless, commanded
that the bridge should remain drawn all the night, and that guard should be
kept, intending the next morning to renew the search. To what end, says the
Grand-Master is all this precaution, but to cherish so many idle imaginations
of your own brain: Sometimes a thief is in my Wives closet, another time a
Gallant transformed into the Country-Lady, and now to conclude all these
adventures, I am to find my Wife, by night in the Garden with Count Henry,
where instead of her I meet with yours, who takes you for that young Gallant.
What ought I to infer from all this, added he, but that you were pleased to
give me the diversion of a Comedy which we will conclude, if you please, in my
Wife's chamber, whom doubtless we shall find asleep, whilst you have given
your self so much trouble in seaching for her here. The Viceroy whose head was
full of what his spys had told him, and of which he doubted not, since his Wife
had confirmed it, took him at his word, and went with him toward his apartment.

As for the Vice-Queen she had left them in a great dispute which of the two
was graced with the Largest Antlers.

They came into the Palace, and meet in the Guard-room the Major of the place,
who waited for the Viceroy to deliver him the keys of the Towngates, and told
him, that Count Henry was just gone forth at one of the gates of the Haven, and
had embarked himself with a very handsome Lady whom he led with him. A Lady,
replys the Viceroy looking on Don Gabriel to observe his countenace: You will
find, says the Grand-Master to him laughing; it is she whom we seek. The
Viceroy, without giving any answer to the Grand-Masters raillery, asked the
Major of what stature she was, But he could give no exact account, because they
walked fast, and gave him but little time to observe them. The Viceroys heart
notwithstanding, misgave him that it was no other then Donna Angelica: and
running to her apartment to know the truth, he found in effect that she was
absent, and came presently with the news to her incredulous husband, hoping he
would lose no time in pursuit of her. Don Gabriel was for the present a little
astonished at it; but like a man of sense, by the Viceroys example, he would
not afflict himself overmuch, and told him, that since his Wife was not as she
ought to be, the Count had done him a favor, ridding him of her: so that the
poor Viceroy being afflicted on both sides, and made a cuckold too in the
bargain, fell to consider what he should do with his own Wife; but he found his
condition common to so many husbands, that comforting himself with others in
the like circumstance, he resolved not to part with her, and I think he did
well.

A Cuckold! none more a la mode then he
The number does increase so much;
Who names a husband means a property,
And their Wives use them all as such.
FINIS.
THE POSTSCRIPT to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
MY Occasions not permitting me to be present at the Printing of the first four
sheets (the greatest part of this Book) I found, when I had time to peruse
them, that several alterations had been made in my Copy by another hand, in
some of which I found a Dialect to which indeed I was much a stranger, though
it seems, it is very familiar to my Correctour; as inclined to the yellows, in
the 3. page. line. 6. began to be quite and clean out with him. p. 62. l. 12.
13. knight service. p. 20. l. 12. a piercing wit of his own. p. 47. l. 7. And
(which most surprised me) that abominable florid phrase, fast taken in the
amorous limetwigs. I meet with some constructions made false in the mending, as
that of the 49. p. beginning in the 4th. line, and some others. They could not
be corrected because the sheets were finished, so that I am forced to trouble
you with this Postscript, requesting that such faults be not imputed to me.

Farewell.
Books Printed for J. Magnes, and R. Bentley in Russel Street, in Covent Garden.
Plays written by Mr. Lee. SOphonisba, Or, Hannibals Overthrow. The Tragedy of
Nero. Gloriana, Or, the Court of Augustus Caesar. The Rival-Qneens, Or, the
Death of Alexander the Great. Mithridates, King of Pontus. Plays written by M.
Crown. Andromache, a Tragedy. Calisto, a Masque. The Country-Wit. The
Destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus Vespasian, In Two Parts. The Plain-Dealer,
written by M. Wicherly. Plays written by M. Durfey. Madam Fickle, Or, The Witty
False One. A Fond Husband. Plays written by Madam Behn. The Forced Marriage,
Or, The Jealous Bridegroom. The Town-Fopp, Or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. Plays
written by M. James Howard. All Mistaken, Or, the Mad Couple. The English
Monsieur. Tartuff, Or, The French Puritan, by M. Medburn. Generous Enemies, by
M. Covey. By John Drayden, Esquire. Notes on the Empress of Morocco. The Mistaken
Husband, in part by him.
Novels.
Zelinda, a Romance. Happy Slave, Complete in 3. Parts. Count Brion, Or, The
Cheating Gallant. The Disorders of Love. The Triumph of Love. Heroin
Musqueteer, in 2 parts. Almanzor and Almanzaida. The Double Cuckold.

