A LOVING SALUTATION To all FRIENDS every where, in this great Day of Trial, to
stand Faithful unto God, over all Sufferings whatsoever.
YOu dear and tender Children of my Fathers family, Sheep and Lambs of his
Fold, my Brethren, Sisters and Friends which are near and dear unto me in the
living Virtue of the Life of the Lambs Power, which I behold in the clear Light
of that clear Day, that has dawned and shined from on high, which has visited
us, and whence the streams of the Father's Love, which runs from his pure
and clean Fountain into every part of that Body, of which Christ is the head,
which is so sweet and exceeding delightful, and refreshing of Soul, Body, and
Spirit, in which you are exceeding precious unto me, and the most amiablest and
comeliest Family amongst all the Families in the whole Earth; for you are the
most blessed of the Lord, you I mean, that are Chosen, Called, and Faithful,
and are begotten by the Immortal Word of the Power of the Infinite God, and are
brought forth from the Everlasting Womb of Eternity, and from the Bosom from
whence all glorious Virtue does flow and issue: Who can demonstrate the
Nobleness of that Offspring from whence your Beauty does arise? It has been
upon my heart when in the sweet Repose of the Streams of my Father's Love and
Life, by which my heart, soul and spirit has been overcome, to visit you with
a loving Salutation from the place of my outward Bonds and Imprisonment, for
the Gospel sake, which is the Power of God.

O right Dear and Precious Ones, which are united to that which is but one in
all, in which alone the right Dearness and Preciousness does consist, the
glorious Virtue and Power of the Eternal Son of God, CHRIST JESUS our Lord,
which we witness alone, our Savior and Anoint^d of the Father, who has taken
his Throne in our souls, hearts, spirits and bodies, to rule in us over all
that is contrary to him. O come, my dear Lambs and dear Babes, it is a time for
us to flock together into our Father's Fold, and to get into his Tent of
Safety, and to lie down in the Arms of his dear Love, and to be covered with
the Wing of his Power; now the wild Boar of the Forest is abroad to make his
prey, and the Wolvish Devourers are seeking to scatter the Sheep of the Lord's
Pasture: O let us feel and know the safe Harbor, in which alone is Safety,
whilst the boisterous Storms and Tempests are all about us, and the foaming
rage of the troubled Seas are casting up their waves one after another, and
their mire and dirt upon us, as if they would devour us; and also the many
Rocks, Shelves and dangerous Sands are seen, which will split all that fall
thereupon, who are not wise and skilful to avoid them, and know not a Refuge
near to fly unto, till the Indignation, Storm and Gust is overpast, and has
accomplished its end for which it was sent and appointed.

Oh! what if we be the Mark for all wild Hunters to shoot at? Esau the rough
spirit, which is cunning in hunting for that which perishes and must die of
himself, and slights that noble Birthright, to be an Heir of the Promife, which
Jacob the plain and smooth man prizes more than the mess of Pottage. Oh dear
Lambs and Babes of God, our Rock is sure and steadfast, our Refuge and Harbor
safe and unmovable, and our Pilot wise and exceeding skillful; there is not a
danger near, that can attend us in our Voyage to our everlasting Land of Rest,
but he does foresee, and knows right well how to avoid them all. Therefore it
is now our Work and Business in this the Great Day of Trial, that we put our
whole trust and confidence in him, and to give up all we have and are unto him;
and he never failed any that trusted in him, and in the Arm of his Salvation:
and he will make all his to feel, know and witness, that we cannot add one
cubit unto our stature, by all that we can do and not in his Spirit and Life. O
blessed is his Name for evermore, that has made his Arm bare for us, which
has brought in, and is bringing in Everlasting Righteousness into our souls,
and is breaking down all Man's Unrighteousness, and Righteousness, and is
setting up the Horn of his Anointed, and has caused it to bud, even the Horn
of his Salvation, the Eternal Power, which shall break to pieces all the
Potsherds of the Earth, even the Corrupt Powers of the whole World, and shall
reign over all for ever and ever.

Oh! my heart, soul and spirit rejoices in the consideration of the same, and
of the great Work which God has wrought, and is a working, and therefore I am
not at all amazed nor startled at what the Enemies are a working in this their
time and hour of the power of Darkness; But this my soul desires, that I and
all that know him, may not by the subtilty of the wisdom and cunning of the
Serpent, be in the least shy of the Truth, nor in the least stand aloof off
from owning of it in the open face of all, where ever they are cast by the hand
of the Lord's Providence, because of the furious rage of the Enemy, which is
and may be exceeding great, but that we may all wait upon the God of our
Salvation, to receive the Virtue, Life and Power of him, by which we may endure
unto the end of our race, and undergo all the fiery Darts of the Devil, which
he shoots at us by the most fiercest of his Instruments, which may be let
loose upon us, to drive us from our Ground and Rock, upon which we are built,
but that we may all stand fast, and quit our selves like men, and be strong in
the Power of his might, which will cast out all those fears which cause
torment, and he will aid and assist all such as are in a godly fear and
jealousy, which may be upon the hearts of many in this the day of Trial,
knowing that the fleshly part is weak and cannot stand in the Trial. But this I
know and am persuaded of, in the holy fear of God, that the strength of the
Lord God will be made manifest in weakness, that his Power may be magnified
over all: For this I know asuredly, God does not regard the strength, wisdom
and parts nor abilities of none of the Sons of men, but the weakest and
feeblest of his own he has an eye unto, to hold forth his hand of power to
help the helpless, and this I am persuaded, and in his fear and counsel, that
the simplicity and lowliness of his own Seed, he has a special regard unto;
which lowliness and simplicity brings into uprightness with the Lord, and to
wait upon him in all faithfulness with the eye single unto him; and that man
and woman shall not want strength in the time of need, to witness for God, if
it be required of them even to lay down their dear lives for a Testimony to the
Truth, which they witness God has made them partakers of, let their measure be
never so small, for that is it which the Lord looks at, the gift of his own
Seed. Though it be but as a grain of mustard seed; I say, that is it which the
Lord God looks at, be it less or more in each particular, the gift of himself:
but where much is given, much is required; and so little being given, no more
is required but faithfulness to that: And therefore dear Lambs and Babes of
God, in your own stand fast, which is given of God, and which you have rceived
from him, that no man nor thing take your Crown from you; and the desire of my
heart is, that you, the little one, may be as David, and David as the Angel of
God. So dear Lambs feel with me a little where your strength lies; is it not
with you when your minds are stayed and fixed in the measure of the gift of
God, in which you feel the Power which quieteth all, which brings into
calmness, stilness, and coldness? then do not you find a secret hand of Power
to arise up in your hearts, which girds up the loins of your minds, and girts
you about with living strength? And then, are not your hearts opened, and your
understandings cleared, and your minds bent and stayed upon the Lord? Then, do
not you behold the Beloved of your souls, and is he not then unto you the
chiefest of ten thousands? And then, cannot you trust in him, and in the Arm of
his Power revealed in you? yea I know you can. Then, do you feel his Banner of
Love to be over you? then, do you feel his Right hand embracing of you, and
filling your souls with his swetness of Love and Life, which is better than
Wine, and all Spices? Then, does he reveal unto, and give you of his sweet
Counsel, and open the Mystery of his Kingdom, and gives you to understand the
working of his Power? And then, can you say one unto another, Did not our
hearts burn while he talked with us? O the precious frame of spirit that is
felt when the mind in the pure Power of the Lord God is gathered up unto him,
in waiting to receive of his Liberal Bounty the freeness of his Grace and Love,
the Life to spring up over all the death and darkness, and the will of man
overcome and subjected, delighting to stand in the Will and Counsel of God,
that it may take place in all things, over all to Reign, the Righteous Power to
be above all. This makes glad the hearts of the upright. Oh my heart is full,
and my cup does overflow to you, much more then words can utter at this time,
in writing unto you the Beloved of God, and of my soul, because of it! O let us
all sit down in the Mansion House of God, and at the banqueting Table of him!
for truly it is often with me, that I behold in the Light of the Lamb, that all
you the Children of the most high God, siting as Children at one Table, in the
comely Order and Beauty, every one according to the Father's appointment, where
he comes to take a view of you all, and to distribute, and that you may receive
a portion of his pure Bread and Water of Life, and of the Milk and Wine which
he has mingled, and that each particular Babe may have his lot and portion
suitable unto his nature and growth in the Mystery of his Kingdom, and according
to the working of his divine Power in them, that there may be no complaining in
his house, where there is bread enough; and this is known unto such whose minds
are not without, but inwardly staid, feeling their own gift from God, and so
are satisfied with their portion, which he does give and renew in due season;
So that the murmuring and the discontented part may be shut out, and the quiet
and contented mind may be known; for Godliness with Content is great gain.

Oh dear Lambs! we have a great Portion; for I can say in the secrets of my
Soul, The Lord is my Portion, and has been and is yours also, which have
waited for him, and in whom is your delight; Oh! Do you not delight to be in
his Presence which is Life unto your Souls? Oh! Is there any other thing that
can take away your hearts? Nay, I know you that have, and do enjoy and witness,
Is Life your Love, when at any time that the heart is upon any thing that is
worldly? You can say, It is not Life unto you, but death: Oh the precious Life
which God has manifested in us, which believe in his Light, it only can
magnify the Lord, and suffer for him and his Son, who is our Life, All in All
to us; Oh! my Soul does bow down before him, who is the everlasting strength of
all his People: Oh! let us fight valiantly under his Banner of Love, who has
lifted up his Standard in this our day, and we have a glorious and victorious
Captain, which is gone and going before us, to lead us to an everlasting and
heavenly Rest, that he has prepared for us in his everlasting Kingdom; there
is the Wine prepared, which he does drink with his Children: Oh my Friends, we
may drink, and that abundantly; Oh! we may suck and draw from those Breasts and
Paps from whence our nourishment comes; Oh feel the Oil of gladness daily
poured down, which comes from the true Olive Tree, which is full of fatness,
and drink of that Wine which comes from that Vine, which is only full of
sweetness, that from the strength of which, you may be fruitful, and bring
forth fruit unto God. Oh! in the Love and Life of the Lamb, look over all
weakness in one another, as God does look over all the weakness in every one of
us, and does love us for his own Seed sake, which is the object of his Love,
that overcomes all the contrary; and that is the object which our Love is unto
in each other, which will in time overcome all evil; for it is the only good
thing by which all evil is overcome. And in so doing, peace will abound in our
borders, and it will flow forth amongst us like a River, and it will keep out
jars, strifes, and contentions from us, and so we shall be kept as a beautiful
and amiable Family; and in the order of God, that so the fame of it may sound
abroad, that others that are scattered from it, may be brought home, that so
there may be a rejoicing in their return from their Prodigal Estate, and that
will manifest us to be in the good order of God, and to be merciful as he is
merciful, and to love the Good, and thereby to eschew the Evil, and it overcome
in the patience and long-suffering, and this leads to repentance and
amendment of life.

So my dear Friends of the Living God, feel me near unto you in that which is
beyond all words, for my Life lies not in words, but only in that which was
before words, which is the Word of his eternal Power, in which is my Love and
Life for evermore; in which I dearly salute you all, and in it desire your
eternal welfare, and your daily growth in the Wisdom and Power of an endless
Life, and in the Living Virtue of him, in whom all our fresh springs are to be
found: So the Lord God Almighty be with you, all dear Babes and Children of my
heavenly Father, that all our strong Groans, Cries, and Tears, may meet at his
heavenly Throne, in the fervency of his own Life, and we may feel and know
assuredly, that we find acceptance with him, and an answer returned into our
bosoms from the bosom of his Love, in which we may dwell and abide for ever and
ever.

These few Lines do manifest something that was upon my heart toward you, in
the feeling of my Fathers Love, as I lay in my Bed in the night season, this
11th of the 9th Month, 1662, from him that travels in Spirit, till the Seed of
God is set up to Reign over all, for evermore, Amen.

Newgate Prison in London. WILLIAM BREND.

THE END.

