A SHORT DECLARATION OF THE PURPOSE and DECREE Of the Everlasting Counsel of
Gods Heavenly Host concerning his Royal Seed, and Noble Offspring, the Eternal
Plant of his own Renown, the Everlasting COVENANT of LIGHT; AND OF THE
Arraignment of all that wilfully oppose and fight against it, at the Bar of
Gods Righteous Judgment; WITH A WARNING To them to Repent, and to fear and
dread the Infinite, Eternal God, who will undoubtedly set up his Son, his
Light, Life, Spirit, and Seed over all to Reign in the pure Dominion and
Authority in the Kingdoms of Men.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

A short Declaration of the Purpose and Decree, etc.
THE sure, firm, and everlasting decree and Counsel of the Heavens, is that the
seed of the everlasting Covenant of the everlasting God shall worship the Lord
God of Hosts, the everlasting Jehovah; and it is determined in the most High
and Supreme Court of the Eternal power that created the Heavens, Earth, and
Sea, and all things therein, that all other things whatsoever, which are the
inventions of the most wise of the sons of men, shall all be separated from the
presence of the most holy God as a polluted thing, and as a menstruous cloth:
and this is the firm and everlasting Counsel, Decree, Purpose and Determination
of the Father, Son, and Spirit, which are one, and cannot be divided in none of
the appearances unto the sons of men unto this day and for ever; unto which
Counsel, Decree, Purpose, and Determination, all the holy men of God, and holy
Angles, and ministering Spirits from the holy measure of the Inspiration of the
most High, do in the Clear Light of the Eternal power give their due and lawful
and just assent as in duty they are bound and obliged thereto, and so set their
seals unto it, which seal is the measure of the same Spirit of the Father and
Son, which is freely given, and they have received of God to worship him by,
which shall stand for ever; and this Decree shall stand upon the heads of all
false worshippers in the whole world, whether called Heathens or Christians,
and all that seem to hold the Truth, but in unrighteousness: Yea all Sects in
the whole world, whether Europe, Asia, Africa, or America, unto which seed of
the everlasting God you must all bow and yield obedience unto, either freely
offering up all unto it, as of due right belongs, or be broken by the
irresistible Sovereignty of its Authority and strength, which is for to slay
the wicked, and make them all to bend by his Eternal wrath, judgment, and
indignation, which is due to the rebellious and disobedient, which will not
yield in obedience to this Noble and Royal seed and offspring of the infinite
mercy of the Eternal God, who has set it more firm then the Heavens which must
pass away and be rolled together as a scroul, and then the earth which must be
burnt up, and all things must be dissolved by the power of him who made Heaven
and Earth, and all things to serve him and his, for his own glory, and the
wicked are for the day of the wrath of this Lamb of God, which takes away the
sins of all who believe in him, and come into obedience to his power, which
works in them that they may receive his virtue, by which alone they worship the
Lord, who has manifested it for the same end to glorify him by; and none of
all the Counsels and workings against it shall stand; for if all the Counsels,
Plottings, Laws, Edicts and Commands of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Emperors,
Kings and Synods, of one, or diverse, or all Nations of the whole world should
agree in one, as one single body compact; and all the Nations of people
concerned in the same, and so all agreed as one man to aid, assist, either by
force of arms, or any other way by words, or arguments, or writings, secretly,
or openly against this firm Decree, Purpose, and Counsel of the Heavenly Host,
shall be brought to naught and confounded by the Power, Dominion, and Authority
of this high born Prince of Peace, who is of the Royalty of the Infinite
Majesty of the most High God, whose Word abides and endures for ever and ever,
which is the seed of everlasting bliss, and in which seed all the Nations of
the earth shall be blessed: and this seed shall have the Dominion, whose right
alone it is, and to it all the Dominions and Kingdoms of the whole World
belongs; and therefore there has been so many overturns, overturns, and must
be till he be acknowledged whose right it is, and his Royal Scepter bowed down
unto, which is a Scepter of Righteousness: And therefore Nations and Kingdoms,
and inhabitable parts of the whole earth, look not for peace whilst your
whoredoms remain; for you are all gone a whoreing from this Noble and Renowned
seed, the Covenant of God, which is his Light that you should be united to, and
receive the Law from his mouth which is the husband you are to ask at home in
your own hearts, where his wisdom is to be received, and Counsel against all
that rises up there to oppose the purity and Righteousness of his Law, and the
Royalty and Sovereignty of his power: the Light there to rule over all your
thoughts and imaginations, words and actions; by which Light you should be
ruled and ordered to the glory and renown of his Everlasting Kingdom; And
therefore in the measure of this seed (which is the Light in the Conscience)
you must believe and own, and receive its Testimony, if you will come to the
knowledge of him who lives for ever, and that leads to the knowledge of the
Power, Dignity, Sovereignty, Dominion, and Authority, Virtue, Excellency,
Glory, and Renown, and the Nobleness of its dissent, birth, being, growth, and
increase which is to have no end, and the glory of its going forth which has
been from everlasting, and is alone the Fathers delight, and was, and is
manifested to do the Fathers will, and to set up the Fathers Kingdom; which
Kingdom is in Righteousness, Justice, Equity, Mercy, true Judgment, Lowliness,
Tenderness, Love Unfeigned, and all Virtue, Holiness, and Truth, which is to
proceed from the heart, placed there by the Righteous power of the infinite
God, where no deceit nor guile shall dwell, nor no unclean thing have a being;
but Righteousness and Holiness in every part of the members of that body of
which Christ is the head, and subjects of that Kingdom which endures for ever
and ever.

Therefore, O ye Judges, Justices, Councils and Counselors, Lawmakers and
Executors of the same against the Innocent ones, which bear this seed, that you
would hear, fear, and dread, tremble and be astonished in the consideration of
the rising up of that power which is from the seed that shall accuse you before
the great and dreadful throne of the Mighty and dreadful God, for your rising
up falsely to accuse and pass unrighteous judgment against them which act
according to the seed, and have hindered the goings forth of it to do the
Fathers will (as much as in you has layn) but before him your nicities and
punctillioes, nor subtleties of you the wise Disputers, Lawyers, and
Counselors, and Learned Judges of the Earth shall stand you in no stead, when
you are called to the Bar of his Divine Judgment, and to give a True, Just,
and Clear answer to the True and Infallible Bill of Indictment preferred
against you by the Infallible witness of the Eternal Light of the Everlasting
God in your Consciences, which Bill will be found against you by the Grand Jury
of Gods holy Martyrs, which have suffered by you for this seeds sake, and have
sealed to it with their blood, by your pretended, fallible, false, infamous
Bills of Indictment against them, which will add much to your Condemnation; for
the Light has, and will clear them before the Throne of God against you; and
it will charge you for high Treason against the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords the Everlasting Jehovah; and before him you must all appear and give an
account of every deed done in your body; and if you have any thing to say for
your selves, you will find more favor, though you be guilty, then the
Innocent have had from you, when they have been brought and falsely accused
before you for Disturbers, and Tumulters, and to meet with force and arms, when
they have been meeting together to serve the Lord in obedience to the seed of
Light, and so have been worshipping the Living God in peace and quietness, and
believing in his True and Faithful Witness the Light of his Son Christ Jesus
[in them] which is the hope of glory, which you have persecuted them for; and
therefore I know you shall all be dumb before the Pure, Just, Righteous, and
Holy Judge of all the Earth, whose nature is to do Righteously, and he will do
no other, but render to every man according to his deeds, whether they be good
or evil; and therefore the charge preferred, and the witness to prove the same
shall be so clear and evident; for the Accuser and the Witness knows your
secret workings, and is free from any guite or deceit, or any desire of
revenge, or seeking your destruction as you are men, as you do, and have done
to the Innocent; but being perfectly pure, and infallibly true, just and
merciful, seeks and has sought your Salvation and Preservation, and does seek
your Repentance from those dead works; of which the witness of God can do no
less then bear witness against, and accuse you before the Throne of the
Infinite Majesty on high, which has manifested it from himself for that end
that man might believe in it, and by it to turn from the evil Works, and to
receive the Testimony of that Everlasting Witness, that by it they may be led
to do the Works of Righteousness, which is to be to the praise and Glory of
his Grace that has so freely given his Light, his Witness, in men) to lead
from the Evil to the Good: And therefore, the standing against the Light (the
Witness and Accuser, and wilfully, and maliciously resisting of it, and hating
its Reproof, it can do no less than do its Office, and stand up and witness
against the Prisoners a (...) Bar of Gods righteous Judgments, and spread the
cause against them before the Righteous Judge, who can do no other than receive
the Righteous witness of his own Seed the Light from himself, which testifies
that they have wilfully and maliciously made void his Righteous Law [the Light]
by their own Traditions and inventions, their corrupt wills set up, to make
void (if they could) the unerring will of God, and have wickedly, by the
instigation of the Devil risen up in a high contempt of his infinite Majesty's
Crown, and Dignity, and Royal Scepter of his everlasting Righteousness, in
setting up of their own Righteousness, their feigned and invented worships,
and their unrighteous lusts, their pride and covetousness, which is the root of
many more evils; and therefore are they ignorant of Gods Righteousness, which
is the glorious goings forth of his Eternal Power, by the bright shining of his
Light and Spirit, which leads all that believe to worship him in the same;
which these have by the force of the arm of Flesh, with Instruments of Carnal
Weapons sought to frustrate, and make his Counsel and purpose of none effect,
and have sought to overthrow his whole work from the beginning unto this days
both by the ministration of Angels, and of Moses and the Prophets; and of the
glorious manifestation of his Son in the flesh, and of the glory of his spirit
in his Apostles and Servants in the Churches, after his Ascension, and the
glorious Records of all the holy men of God, the Scriptures of Truth, and of
their Prophecies of the pourings forth of the abundance of the Spirit of the
Lord God upon his Sons and Daughters in the latter days, and in the Last
days, in which we are fallen, according to Christ our Lords Saying to the
Woman of Samaria, The time is, and shall be, that the true Worshipers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship
him: and this is fulfilled, and fulfilling in this the day of our God; and this
is Gods Prerogative Royal, that all his Worshippers should worship him in his
spirit and Life of his noble Seed, which you Bishops, Judges, and Rulers of the
Earth, and worldly Powers of the Darkness of this World seek to make void by
your Inventions and Traditions, and to bind the Consciences, and would set
Judges there by your Edicts, Canons, and Articles, and Books, in Gods Throne
and Seat; and would at the least set your posts by Gods post, and your
Thresholds by Gods Threshold; and would thrust out and bind down the Glorious
Workings of the pure Power of the Spirit of the LORD GOD in the Hearts and
Consciences of his People; And therefore you are and will be found guilty
before the Lord, of high Treason against Him and his Son, whom he has
appointed Heir of all things, and is the head of his Church which he has
purchased with his own blood [which you trample upon] and so being bought with
such a price they are not to be the servants of men, no, not to touch, nor
taste, nor handle the Commandments, nor Doctrines of men, which have a
voluntary humility and pretense to worship God, but it is in a false manner,
and not in the seed of life; and this have you done, and are doing, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of men, in this the day of the Lord, wherein he
has Redeemed and is redeeming of a People from all men's Traditions and
inventions, in his worship and service: And because this people fear the Lord,
and obey his Son, which is his power in them, by which they worship him in whom
he is well-pleased; therefore do you ( Cain-like) hate and revile them, beat,
knock down, wound, kill, and destroy, imprison, oppress, emulate, malign,
despise, molest, fine, and keep in sore Captivity by your instruments, and so
you are fighters against the Lord, and kickers against the pricks, the Light
both in your own Consciences, and in them that obey it; and you are wilful
Resisters of the of Holy One of Israel, and therefore you cannot prosper, but
stand guilty before the Lord, and must expect the severity of his indignation
to be poured forth upon you, except you speedily repent, and confess, and
forsake your Trasons and Rebellions against his Royal Law, Crown, and Scepter,
the Son, his Light, which must rule over all the powers of the whole Earth, the
immortal Seed of his Everlasting Kingdom which shall honor him for ever and
ever. And therefore be wise O ye Kings and Judges of the Earth; Kiss the Son,
^east he be angry with you, and ye perish from the way, in which kissing of the
Son, you may find mercy, which is more then many have had from you, which have
been innocent, and have been kept in the holy fear of the Lord God, and you
have caused them to suffer for the same, when they have been clear of offense
before the Lord, and also in the eye of any just and equal Law of the Land; and
therefore take heed that you touch not his anointed, and do his Prophets no
harm, and consult not against them, nor make no unrighteous Decree against the
innocent People of the Lord, called Quakers; for this is the saying of the
Spirit of the Lord unto you, and to all that sit in counsel against them, My
purpose it shall stand: and my Counsel is, that you obey my unalterable decree
concerning my seed; for what you do against me in my People, I will turn it to
my praise, and my Peoples good; and your rage I will restrain, though you in
your hearts intend evil to me and my people, it is in my people to believe that
whatever you intend to do with them, I intend their good: though I may try
their faith, hope, confidence, and trust, by you, that you may know of their
faith, hope, Confidence and trust stands in Me, and in my Son, who is my Light
and Life, the power of my right Hand and Arm revealed in them, which they know
has been their strength in the times of their needs, in which I have made them
to trust, when your violence has been upon them; and therefore they are made
willing to suffer, and to undergo whatsoever I suffer you to inflict upon them:
For I restrain your rage that would go forth out of your wicked hearts against
them to destroy: But I will preserve them by the word of wy power and Life, and
chain your wicked, revengfull spite against me in them, and make it turn to
their joy and your torment; and a Crown of deliverance they shall wear, and you
of shame and contempt, except you repent; though you in counsel sit, your ends
to bring to pass against my people which in my truth do stand, I sit and see,
and you behold; to frustrate all your intents, I will not be wanting. Woe unto
them that decree unrighteous Decrees, and that write grievousnesse which they
have prescribed, to turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the
right from the poor, that widows may be their prey, and that rob the
fatherless: Behold, the Lord God will come with a strong hand, and his arm
shall rule him; behold his reward is with him, and his work before him, and he
shall feed his Flock like a shepherd, he shall gather his Lambs in his arms,
and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young,
Isay. 10.1, 2.40.10, 11. Christ the Arm of God shall rule and feed his Flock,
and gather the Lambs with his Arm (the Light) and carry them in his bosom,
and gently lead the young with his Love and Life, the Seed which is immortal.

The 8th Month, 1662. W. B.

THE END.

