A LETTER TO THE PARISHIONERS OF St. B. -- A. -- SHOWING The Use and Necessity
of paying Easter-Offerings, now restored to the Parish Minister.

LONDON, Printed for Geo. Strahan, at the Gold Ball, over against the
R^yal-Exchange, in Cornhill. 1700.

A LETTER To the Parishioners of St. B. -- A. -- Showing the Use and Necessity
of Paying Easter-Offerings.
SIRS,
THE Feast of Easter is now approaching, wherein our Holy Church Commemorates
the great Mercies of God, in accomplishing our Redemption by the Death and
Resurrection of our Blessed Savior. It Is at this time, especially, that we
ought to express our Thankfulness to God, by acts of Piety, and there are no
actions so worthy our thoughts as those which immediately concern the Honor
and Service of God. I think it all times my Duty to promote the Interest of
Religion and the good of your Parish, and have therefore, upon your late
Vacancy, endeavored to make the best choice I could of a Minister, to instruct
you for your Soul's Health: I am verily persuaded, that I have placed one among
you, who is both able and willing to discharge the Duty of his Place; and who,
I doubt not, will be careful to watch over you, as becomes a faithful Pastor.
My next Care is to provide him a more sufficient support, thereby to encourage
his Labors, and to enable him to maintain such Assistance; as will be needful
to perform the great Business of your Parish.

I am willing to forego my right to some part of that Revenue, to which I am
legally Intitul'd, and to apply the same for promoting the Honor of God and
Interest of his Church; therefore I have authorized Mr Kennet, your Minister,
to collect and take to his own use, the Offerings due at Easter; and do
earnestly recommend it to you, as your Duty, to pay the same, justly and
conscientiously, which, I hope, you will do, when I have informed you,

1. Of the Nature of Offerings.

2. The use and necessity of paying them.

1st, The Nature of Offerings.
By Offerings are usually understood those Gifts which are given, by devout
Men, to God and the Church, which Gifts were commonly Offered with Solemnity
and Devotion, at the Altar; some upon certain Festival Days, and others upon
occasion of particular Mercies received by particular Persons: Those which were
offered upon Festival Days, were on Sundays, the general Days of Christians
Assembling themselves, or on certain Feast-Days, appointed by the Church to be
kept Holy, in remembrance of the great Favors received from God, in completing
our Redemption by the Conception, Nativity, Death, Resurrection and Ascension,
of our Blessed Savior. These Offerings were at first the Free Will Sacrifices
of Pious Christians; but when Piety and Zeal grew cold, and Men began to fail
of their Duty, then the Laws provided a Means of ascertaining every Man's
Offerings, thereby to reserve a competent Livelihood to the Parish Minister;
and now the Offerings due by the Laws of the Realm are two Pence for every
Communicant, Note, That at the time the Offerings were settled at that rate, two
Pence was equivalent to a Shilling at this Day.
or of every Parishioner above the Age of 16, payable at the Feast of Easter,
by the Master of every Family, for himself, his Wife, Children, and Servants:
And now having informed you of the Nature of Offerings, I am, in the next
place, to acquaint you with,

2dly, The Use and Necessity of paying Offerings.
The chief use and design of paying Offerings, is, That we may Honor God with
our Substance, as well as our Bodies; for as he made us, so he gives us all
that we possess; and it is reasonable, that we should pay him some portion of
what we enjoy, in token of his Dominion over us, and of our Subjection to him;
it is the advice of the Wise Man, Honor God with thy Substance, and with the
first fruits of all thy increase, Prove. 3.9. And it has been always accounted a
part of our Worship, To bring Presents unto him that ought to be feared, Psalm.
76.11. Almighty God took special Care in the Modelling of the Jewish Worship,
that none should appear before him empty, Exodus 23.15. That so he might be
honored with a tribute from the Hands as well as the Hearts of his People.

The reason why God commanded the Jews to dedicate part of their Wealth, was,
for the Maintenance of the Jewish Clergy, a set of Men appointed to be free
from Secular Employments, that they might offer up Prayers and Sacrifices for
that People. The same Care has God taken of a more Royal Priesthood, that of
the Christian Church; for, as by the particular command of God, Those who
served at the Altar, were partakers of the Altar, so, under the Christian
Dispensation, Christ has ordained, That those who Preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.13, 14. and great reason it is, That those who
dispense to us Spiritual Comforts, should be supplied, by us, with Temporal
Conveniences.

I take the liberty to prescribe you two short Rules for your more faithful
discharge of this Duty; they are, 1. Justice. 2. Cheerfulness.


1. JUSTICE.
All Persons whatsoever, as well Adversaries as Friends, have a right to our
Just Dealing; but more especially they are intitul'd to it, who may be truly
termed our Benefactors; such are the Ministers of Christ, whose Business and
Care it is to instruct us and inform us in all things necessary to Salvation;
they are those who by wholesome Doctrines and Advice, do keep us from
degenerating into wild and savage Creatures; for such were the Inhabitants of
this Island, before the Glorious Light of the Gospel spread its bright Beams
upon this Land. The Errand of those who Preach the Gospel, is not to make us an
offer of short and transient Pleasures, but to lead us into that way which will
bring us to a durable and everlasting Happiness: And surely, those who teach us
Devotion toward God, and upright Dealing toward others, have deservedly a
right to our Justice.

I have no reason to doubt your Justice to your Minister, when I consider with
what Zeal you are promoting some good Works in your Parish, toward the support
of the Poor, and the propagating Christian Knowledge among the younger sort;
but give me leave, in a few words, to acquaint you what Offerings you are
obliged to pay.

The Offerings then that you are legally obliged to pay Mr. Kennet, are two
Pence a Head, according to the Number of your Families, as I have before
informed you; but seeing I have, for your sake, and for the Honor of Religion,
restored them to their first Religious Use, I rather wish that you would think
your selves obliged to do as did the Primitive Christians, those Pious Souls,
who began to Honor God with their Substance, as soon as they had embraced the
happiness of the Christian Faith; for they thought themselves obliged to offer
according to their Ability, and thought nothing too much for them who Preached
the glad tidings of the Gospel; but alas, many in this Age are arrived to that
heinous degree of Impiety, as not only to grudge the giving a little of their
abundance, but even to wrong and deprive their Ministers of what they can
clandestinely conceal from them.

I would therefore exhort you, for your own sakes, as well as that of your
Minister, in the making your Offerings, to consider your own Abilities; and if
you intend to act the parts of good Christians, and are resolved to manifest
your selves true Servants of God, to pay your Offerings not barely according to
the Rules prescribed by the Laws of the Land, but according to the Reason and
Dictates of a good Conscience, and according as God has blessed you; it is
true, that according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, no other Offerings
can be exacted than what are prescribed by Law, but a good Christian will not
think he has done his Duty, when he has done all that the Laws oblige him;
thus, for example, a conscientious Person will think himself bound to serve God
every day, though the Laws compel him only to Worship God on Sundays.

You will also think your selves obliged to offer according to your Ability, if
you consider, when you make your Offering, that God is not pleased with a mean
and sordid Service; for he has discouraged the Offering of those who Offer the
Price of a Dog, or the hire of a Harlot, Deuteronomy. 23.18. That is an Oblation which
is mean and nothing worth, or that which is got by Wickedness and Injustice;
but he has encouraged those to hope for a plentiful Harvest, who sow their seed
plentifully; but they that sow sparingly, shall also reap sparingly.

Now that your Offering may truly become a Religious Performance, I shall
further direct you in the other Rule I proposed, and that is,

2. CHEERFULNESS.
Cheerfulness is at all times the Duty of a Christian, but then especially,
when he is about to exercise a Religious act, such as is the payment of
Offerings toward the Maintenance of our Ministers, those Ambassadors of
Christ; for whether we distribute Alms, or make an Oblation, we ought to do it
cheerfully and not grudgingly or of necessity, because God loves a cheerful
giver, 2 Cor. 9, 6, 7. I am not desirous to boast of my good intention toward
you, in bestowing those legal Dues of mine upon your well-deserving Minister,
but this I desire to assure you, that I have done it cheerfully, with a
prospect of promoting your Good, and therein the Glory of God, and Honor of
Religion.

I entreat you also to remember, That as the just and conscientious payment of
your Offerings will be a well-pleasing Sacrifice to God, for the Reasons
beforementioned, so it is the highest Indignity and Affront to Almighty God,
to withhold whatsoever is Dedicated to the Service of his Ministers; for he
counts it no less than Sacrilege, Mal. 3.8. the worst sort of Robbery, and
which was one great cause of God's inflicting heavy Judgments upon the Jews;
for you may observe a severe Doom pronounced by the Prophet Malachi for this
very Sin, Mal. 3.9. which may serve as a sufficient Warning for all those who
boast themselves in their Cunning of defrauding their Minister, and concealing
his Dues: But let such remember, That though they escape Vengeance here, yet they
are heaping up to themselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath; which, that you
may escape, shall be the humble and fervent Prayer of,

Your Christian Friend and Brother, S. B.

FINIS.

