THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S HABITATION, In the Time of PLAGUE AND PESTILENCE. BEING A
brief Exposition of the XCI. PSALM.

By WILLIAM BRIDGE, sometimes Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge, and late
Preacher of the word of God at Yarmouth.



Psalm. 31. 2, 3. Be thou my strong rock, for an house of defense to save me.
For thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for thy name sake lead me, and
guide me.

LONDON: Printed for T. J. 1665.

PSALM XCI. HE that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty.

2. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge, and my fortress: my God, in him
will I trust.

3. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler: and from the
noysom pestilence.

4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou
trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

5. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night: nor for the arrow that
flies by day:

6. Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness: nor for the destruction
that wastes at noonday.

7. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right band: but
it shall not come nigh thee.

8. Only with thine eyes shall thou behold, and see the reward of the wicked.

7. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High,
thy habitation:

10. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
dwelling.

11. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways.

12. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone.

12. Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon
shall thou trample under feet.

14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him on high, because he has known my name.

15. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in
trouble, I will deliver him, and honor him.

16 With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.


THis Psalm ('it is thought) was made upon the occasion of the plague and
pestilence that was in David's time. So Molerus; wherein you have the best
Antidote against the plague and pestilence. The whole Psalm is nothing else but
a great promise of special protection for those that trust in the Lord in the
time of the plague: wherein three or four things are most especially
considerable, the Evil, Danger and Misery of the Plague and Pestilence;
protection and deliverance promised in the time thereof: the persons upon whom
the promise is intailed; the way, mode, means, and manner, how God will deliver
and protect in the time of a plague. As for the evil, danger, and misery of the
plague or pestilence, you have it in many terms expressed in several verses. In
the third verse it is called the snare of the fowler; He will deliver thee from
the snare of the fowler; it is called the snare of the fowler, because it takes
men before they are aware; the word and, that follows, should not be in the
line, so the next words do explain it, He shall deliver thee from the snare of
the fowler: from the noisome pestilence: then it is called the noisome
pestilence. In the Hebrew it is called the pestilence of woes or calamity, that
is, most calamitous pestilence, that disease or sickness, that is accompanied
with the most calamity. In the 5th verse it is called the terror by night, and,
the arrow that flies by day: for with this arrow God does kill and hit men at
a distance, a great way off, when they think to fly away and be at rest. It Is
said in the sixth verse, that it walks in darkness; and it is called
destruction that wastes at noonday, in regard of the spreading and infective
nature of it. At the thirteenth verse it is compared unto the lion and adder,
the young lion and the dragon, for the destructive and devouring nature of it,
which nothing can stand before.

Secondly, as for the protection promised in the time thereof, you have that in
the general at the first verse, He that dwells in the secret place of the
most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; more particularly at
the third verse, Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler,
from the noisome pestilence: He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under
his wings shall thou trust. His truth shall be thy shield and buckler, at the
4th verse. At the 5th and 6th verses again, Thou shall not be afraid for the
terror by night; nor for the arrow that flies by day; nor for the pestilence
that walks in darkness; nor for the destruction that wastes at noonday. And
again, A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand:
(in the 7th verse) but it shall not come nigh thee. In the 10th verse, No evil
shall befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall
give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. And at the
last verse, With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.

As for the persons whom this promise of Protection is entailed upon, they are
such as do trust in the Lord. He that dwells in the secret place of the most
High; that say of the Lord, he is my refuge and my fortress: my God, in him I
will trust, verse 2. And at the 9th verse, Because thou have made the Lord,
which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation: there shall no evil
befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. Thou shall not be
afraid for the terror by night: nor for the arrow that flies by day, at the
fifth verse. And as for the means, and way, and mode how God will deliver in
the time of the plague, he will do it by his Angels; There shall no evil befall
thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For he shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up
in their hands, etc.

From all which then, I take up this Doctrine or Observation: Though the
danger, evil, and misery of the Pestilence be exceeding great, yet God will in
an especial manner protect and deliver those that do trust in him in the time
of a plague.

For the clearing and prosecution whereof, first of all, I shall a little
labor to show you, that the evil, misery, and danger of a Plague is exceeding
great. 2ly. That yet the Lord will protect and deliver those that do trust in
him. 3ly. What that Faith is, and what that Trust is, that God has promised
this protection to in the time of a Plague. 4ly. I would answer to some
objections, questions, or cases of conscience. Then 5ly. show how, and by what
means God will protect and deliver in the time of a plague. Then call upon you
and my self, to do our duty in this Day.

As for the first, I shall not be long in it. The misery and danger of the
Plague is sufficiently known. It is called the Plague above all other diseases,
as if it were the Plague of plagues.

The several and particular judgments and evils that fell upon Pharaoh, they
were called Plagues, they were all plagues; but now the Pestilence carries the
name of the Plague, as if that of all other diseases were the plague of plagues.

It is, first of all, a most dreadful and terrible disease: it is here called
in this Psalm, the terror by night, 5. verse, Thou shall not be afraid by the
terror by night: terror by night, why? the night it self is a time of fear
and terror: darkness brings fear; but the Plague is the Night of nights, and
the King of Terrors. How do men quake and tremble, and fly away at the noise
of this? the report of this? When God appeared in his greatness, majesty and
glory, gave a terrible appearance of himself, it is said in the third of
Habakkuk, that the Pestilence went before him, in the 3d. verse, God came from
Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran, Selah. His glory covered the heavens,
and the earth was full of his praise, and his brightness was as the light. He
had horns coming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power. In the
5. verse, Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his
feet. Before him went the Pestilence, as his Officer and Executioner. When the
Lord does set forth his terrible appearance, thus he sets it forth, The
pestilence went before him. Without all doubt, it is that disease that is most
dreadful and terrible. And 2ly, as it is the most dreadful and terrible disease,
so it is the most painful disease. The more suddenly any man is taken away in
his strength, the more painful is his disease he dies of: a man that is spent
with sickness, he is easily blown out; but when a man in his full strength
shall suddenly dye, it costs him a great deal of paio. Thus it is, when the
Plague takes one away in his full strength in a little time, therefore it is a
very painful disease; and as it is a very painful disease, so it is an
uncomfortable disease: then all friends leave us, then a man or woman sit and
lie all alone, and is a stranger to the breath of his own relations. If a man
be sick of a fever, it is some comfort that he can take a bed-staff and knock,
and his servant comes up and helps him with a cordial. But if a man be sick of
the Plague, then he sits and lies all alone; it is the most uncomfortable
disease: and as it is that disease that is most uncomfortable, so it is that
disease that is most mortal, and therefore of all other diseases it is called
Death. In the sixth of the Revelation, we read of the sword and famine, in the
former part of the Chapter: but in the 8th. verse, And I looked, and behold a
pale horse; and his name that sat on him was Death. The sword is spoken of
plainly before in the 4th. verse, And there went out another horse, that was
red: and power was given to him that sat thereon, to take peace from the earth,
and that they should kill one another: and there was given unto him a great
sword; there is the Sword: then at the 6th. verse there is a Famine, I heard a
voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and
three measures of barley for a penny: Now at the 8th. verse comes on the
Pestilence, and that is called Death; not the sword, or famine, but the Plague
is that which has the name of Death; because of all other diseases it is the
most mortal; and as it is the most mortal disease, so it is the most unavoidable
disease. It may be avoided through the goodness of God; but I speak
comparatively, of all diseases it is the most unavoidable. And it is the disease
that is the most emptying disease; it empties houses, and it empties towns, and
empties cities. God threatens to empty a Nation as a man empties a dish, and
wipes it, and turns it upside down. So to a family it is the most emptying
disease of all other. But I will not stay here; it is too manifest, that this
evil, misery and danger of a Plague is exceeding great.

But yet in the second place, there are a generation whom God will protect and
deliver in the day of a Plague. It was always so in the most desolating
judgments: when the Flood came was Noah and his house spared; and, when Sodom
was destroyed, there was Lot and his house preserved and delivered. In the 6th.
Chapter of Isaiah, ye read of a Desolalation that looks like a Plague, Then
said I, Lord, How long? And he answered (at the 11th verse) until his cities be
wasted and without inhabitants, and the houses be without man, and the land be
utterly desolate, and the Lord have removed men far away: Yet, says he, at the
13 verse, There shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten as a
teyle tree, and as an oak whose substance is in them, etc. yet there is a
generation whom the Lord will preserve and deliver in such a general desolation
as this. But who are these? this Psalm tells us, they are such as do trust in
the Lord; those that trust in the Lord in the time of a Plague.

But why is there such a promise of protection entailed upon those that trust
in the Lord in the time of a Plague? why, first of all, God will be all that to
us which we make him, and build upon him for: as in the 31 Psalm 2. and 3. v.
Be thou my rock, for thou art my rock; be thou my defense, for thou art my
fortress: in the latter end of the 2d. verse, Be thou my strong rock, for an
house of defense to save me, for thou art my rock and my fortress. Lord, be
that unto me, which I build upon thee for. Thou art my rock, therefore be my
rock: this is his argument. Now by Faith and trusting in the Lord, we do make
God our protector, and therefore he will be a protector to those that trust
unto him in time of a Plague.

2ly. Those that honor providence, shall be kept by providence. Jacob, what a
wonderful great estate he attained unto? he presented Esau with a present fit
for a King to give; how came he by this great estate? there was a controversy
betwixt Laban and him, and he puts the business upon providence, and providence
made him rich: those that honor providence, shall be kept by providence. Faith
and trusting in God in the time of a Plague, honors providence; therefore they
that trust in God in such a day, shall be kept.

3ly. Thereby God is engaged to help and deliver. In the 37. Psalm, last verse,
The Lord shall help them and deliver them, he shall save them because they
trust in him; because they trust in him. God is engaged to help and deliver, if
men trust in him. So in Isaiah 26. v. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. Our very trusting in
the Lord for deliverance, and protection, does engage God to deliver and
protect.

4ly. When did God do ever any great thing, but it was put upon Faith. Ye read
of great Victories in the time of the old Testament, and these were put upon
Faith: ye read of great cures in the time of the new Testament, and those were
put upon Faith. When did God do any great thing but it was put upon Faith? Now
to be preserved and protected in the time of a Plague, when thousands fall on
the right hand and on our left, it is a great matter, next unto a miracle,
therefore it must be put upon Faith.

Again, God will honor those persons, and those graces most, that honor him
most: of all graces Faith honors God most, therefore God will honor that
most; no wonder then that this protection is put upon Faith and trusting in the
Lord.

One thing more. There lies a blessing in course for all those that put
themselves under the wing of the Lord in trusting him. In the second of Ruth,
ver. 12. says Boaz to Ruth, The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be
given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust;
under whose wings thou have put thy self. It Is ^aith, and Faith only that puts
us under the wings of God. Psalm. 57. at the first verse, Be merciful unto me, O
God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee, yea, in the shadow of
thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be over-past: it is
Faith that does put a man under the wing of God. In the 36. Psalm. and 7. verse.
How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God, therefore the children of men put
their trust under the shadow of thy wing. Faith of all other graces puts a man
under the shadow of Gods wing, and there lies a blessing in course (I say) for
all those that put themselves under Gods wing; therefore no wonder that this
great promise of protection and deliverance in the time of a Plague is entailed
upon trusting in God.

Well, but then thirdly, what Faith is this, what Trust is it that God has
promised protection and deliverance to in the time of a Plague; what act of
Faith is it? what Faith is it? I answer, First, there is a faith of persuasion,
called Faith, whereby men are persuaded and verily believe that they shall not
dye nor fall by the hand of the Plague. This is well; I do not find in the 91.
Psalm, that this protection is entailed upon this persuasion, neither do I find
this faith here mentioned.

2ly. There is a Faith of Relyance, whereby a man does rely upon God for
salvation; this is a justifying faith, true justifying faith; this is true
Faith indeed; but I do not find in this Psalm, that this promise of protection
and deliverance in the time of a Plague is entailed upon this, nor that this is
here mentioned.

But again 3ly. There is a Faith, I may call it a faith of recourse unto God,
whereby a man does betake himself unto God for shelter, for protection, as to
his habitation; when other men do run, one this way, another that way to their
hiding places, in the time of a Plague; for a man then to betake himself to God
as to his habitation, I think this is the Faith that is here spoken of in this
91. Psalm; for do but mark the words of the Psalm: at the first verse, He that
dwells in the secret place of the most High, in the hiding place of the most
High; as if he should say, when others run from the Plague and pestilence, and
run to their hiding places, he that dwells in the secret place of the most
High, that betakes himself to God as his hiding place and his habitation, he
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, shall be protected, and so at the
9th. verse, Because thou have made the Lord which is my refuge, even the most
High, thy habitatation, there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any
plague come nigh thy dwelling; as if he should say to us, in time of a Plague
men are running and looking out for habitations and hiding places; but because
thou have made the Lord thy habitation, and have recourse to him as thy
habitation, no evil shall befall thee, neither shall the plague come nigh thy
dwelling: and again at the 11. verse, it is said, He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, the ways of thy calling; as
if he should say, in the time of a Plague men will be very apt to leave station
and calling, and so run away from the Plague and pestilence: (says he) he
shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, the
ways of thy calling and place; that is, look when a man in the time of a
Plague shall conscientiously keep his station and place, and betake himself to
God as his habitation, this is the Faith that is here spoken of, and this is
the Faith that God has promised protection to, here in this 91. Psalm.

But you will say then, is it not lawful to fly in the time of Persecution?
yes, without all doubt it is, so you carry God along with you for your
habitation, so you make God your habitation still, a man may lawfully seek the
preservation of his life and the life of his family.

But stay; the Plague is called the hand of God; and can a man flee fron the
hand of God; mark a little for answer: The hand of God is either mediate or
immediate; suppose that the Plague or pestilence were the immediate hand of
God, and nothing of nature or infection in it: yet it is lawful to fly, it is
lawful to go out of that place where the immediate hand of God rests. In the
16th of Numbers there was an immediate hand of God upon Korah, Dathan and
Abyram, for the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up; here was an
immediate hand of God: yet the Lord speaks unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying,
in the 21. verse, Separate your selves from amongst this congregation, that I
may consume them in a moment; and at the 24. verse, Speak unto this
congregation, saying, get ye up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan and
Abiram; which was the immediate hand of God, and yet notwithstanding they were
to go from among them that the hand of God fell upon, though 'twere an
immediate hand. And in the following part of the Chapter the same expression is
used for the Plague: in the 44. v. They murmured, and the Lord struck them with
the Plague. Well, the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, in the 45. verse, Get you
up from amongst this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment: the
same that is said before, is said here concerning the Plague. So that I say,
although the Plague were the immediate hand of God, and there were nothing of
nature or infection in it, yet it were lawful to fly.

But secondly, the Plague or Pestilence is not so the hand of God, as if there
were no infection in it; for if there were no infection in it, if there were
not something of nature in it, it could not be cured by remedies, nothing would
do good; therefore it is not so the hand of God, as if there were nothing of
infection in it; but it is called the hand of God because Gods providence has a
special hand in the sending and ordering of it. So now, the Famine may be
called Gods hand: God sends it, I will call for a famine upon the land, says
God: a Famine is of Gods sending, and therefore may I out fly from a Famine?
Abraham, when there was a Famine in the land went down to Abimelech: Isaac,
when there was a famine in the land went down: and Jacob when there was a
famine in the land went down to Egypt. And is it lawful to fly in the time of
Famine, and is it not lawful to fly in the time of a Plague? Certainly the one
as well as the other.

But then you will say, if the Lord has promised protection and deliverance to
those that trust in him in the time of a Plague, whether is it possible for a
believer to dye by a Plague, seeing the whole Psalm is made to those; and
Promise such protection to those that trust in the Lord, whether may a believer
dye of the Plague? without all doubt he may. Seventy thousand dyed in Daivd's
time; do you think there was not a good man among them? it is recorded of
several good men, that they dyed of the Plague; but you know what is said, All
things fall alike to good and bad. If a good man may not dye of the Plague, how
can all things fall alike to good and bad?

But how then is the promise fulfilled, if that a believer may dye by the hand
of a Plague? yes, very well: for possibly a believer may be out of his way as
good Josiah was, and dyed, though God promised him that he should dye in peace.
No disparagement to the promise, for he was out of his way, and this promise of
protection in the time of a Plague is made to those believers that are in Gods
way: He will give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all his ways;
therefore if a believer be out of Gods way and dye, it is no disparagement to
this promise.

But 2ly. You must know that this promise of protection and deliverance is not
made to a believer as a believer, but as acting and exercising Faith; for
though a man be a believer if he do not act and exercise his faith, this
promise will not reach him; therefore if a believer dye not exercising faith
and trusting in God, no disparagement to the promise.

Thirdly, you must know that this promise is made to a believer barely
exercising and acting faith; but such an act of faith, and such an act of trust
as you have heard of: therefore, though a believer dye, and dye exercising some
faith, ye^ this promise is fulfilled; for it is made to such an act of ^ai^^ as
you have heard of.

But then again 4ly. you must know this promise is not mad^ to a believer
absolutely, but in opposition to the wicked: therefore it is said, the Lord
having promised this to a believer, that no evil should befall him, though a
thousand should fall at his side, and ten thousand at his right hand; at the 8.
verse it is said (so Montanus, rather then only but) with thine eyes shall thou
behold, and see the reward of the wicked: as if he should say, though this or
that particular believer dye of the Plague; Believers shall outlive the
wicked, and be last upon the ground, and they shall see the reward of the
wicked; they shall see this judgment sweep away the ungodly.

But again further, if I should interpret this as Austin does in the first of
John concerning Christ; where it is said, he enlightens every one that come into
the world, that is (says Austine) all that are enlightened are enlightened by
him. As you say of a Schoolmaster in a Town, this Schoolmaster teaches all
the boys in the Town; not that he teaches every particular boy in the Town, but
that all that are taught, are taught by him. So says he, Christ enlightens
every one that comes into the world, that is, all that are enlightened, are
enlightened by him. So here the Lord does promise protection and deliverance to
all those that do believe in the time of a Plague, that is, all that have
protection and deliverance (in the time of the Plague) have it from him.

But to end this, I do think that this 91. Psalm does ^old forth a promise of
special protection in the time of a Plague, for believers; the scope of it is
not, that every particular believer shall not dye; but the drift and scope of
the Psalm is, to hold forth a speciality of protection for believers in the
time of a Plague. For as the time of a Plague is a time of special danger; so
God has given out a special promise, and there shall be a speciality of
protection for his people in the time of this danger; and that is the meaning
of this place.

Well, but how, and by what means will God protect and deliver those that trust
in him in the time of a Plague?

For that I shall say only thus much, He will do it by the ministration of
Angels, specially by the ministration of Angels: when Angels go forth to
destroy, then Angels must go forth to deliver, seal, and secure; as in the 7th.
of the Revelation, and first verse, After these things I saw four angels
standing at the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth,
that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree.
And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living
God; and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to
hurt the earth, and the sea, saying, hurt not, etc. When Angels go forth to
hurt, then Angels must go forth to seal, and save, and protect. Now in the time
of a Plague, Angels go forth to destroy; therefore, says the Lord here, I will
give my angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, they shall bear
thee up in their hands, least thou dash thy foot against the stone. Have I
given my Angels commission to destroy? I have given my angels charge over thee
to keep thee in all thy ways. Thus now men shall be preserved and delivered in
the time of a Plague, by the ministry of Angels. And so you have the words
opened.

Now to bring things home to our selves by way of application. Here we may see
what is our work, our great work in this day. The day we are fallen into is a
dark day, a day of the Plague and the Pestilence: it is good for us to inquire
what our works is, it is good at all times, but now especially to inquire what
our work is. Oh, what is my work this day? Now the work of this day, our work
is to trust in the Lord; this is the work that protection and deliverance in
the time of a Plague is entailed upon. Who is there that does not desire to be
protected and delivered from this Plague? Oh, that I and my family may be
preserved! behold here your Antidote to keep you from the Plague; Trust in the
Lord, as ever you and your family may be protected now in this evil day. Trust
in the Lord, and call upon yours to trust in the Lord!

But what shall we do that we may trust in the Lord in this day of the Plague?
First of all, you must repent of your own sins, and be sorrowful for the sins
of others, and of the times wherein you live. When the Plague cam^ in David's
time, you know what David did, he repented, Lord (says he) I have done
foolishly; as for these sheep, what have they done? It Is I Lord, it is I. So let
every one do; this God expects in the time of a Plague. In the 4th. C^apter of
Amos, says the Lord there in the 10. verse, I have sent among you the
pestilence after the manner of Egypt: your young men have I slain with the
sword; and have taken away your horses, and I have made the stink of your camps
to come up unto your nostrils; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the
Lord. When God sends the pestilence, then he expects that men and women should
return unto him; repent and return unto him, in the 9th. of Ezekiel; those that
sigh and mourn for the abominations, they are marked, when men go into the City
with their destroying weapons. Those that sigh and mourn for the evil of the
times, they are the marked men. They are not marked for deliverance, that do
abstain from sin; a man may be given to drunkenness, and may leave his
drunkenness, but that will not bring him under the mark: Men are not brought
under the mark for deliverance, that do repent of their own sin; but the mark
is set upon those that do mourn for other men's sins: but now I put both
together; If you trust in the Lord in this evil day, in the time of a Plague,
repent for your own sins, and mourn for the sins of others. For how can I trust
in the Lord for protection, if I do not repent of my sins? if I live in any
sin, and do not turn from all my evil ways, how can I trust in the Lord? I
cannot do it: therefore repent and be sorrowful for your own sins, and for the
sins of others.

Secondly, Get assurance of your interest in Christ: Christ is our great High
Priest that makes the atonement, as Aaron did in the time of a Plague; it is by
the ministry of Angels especially that we are kept in the time of a Plague. Now
says our Savior Christ to Nathaniel, because I saw thee under the fig tree,
believe thou? thou shall see greater things than these.

And he says unto him, verily, verily I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see
heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the son of
man. The Angels ascend and descend upon Christ, all the ministry of Angels is
upon Christ's account, and you are preserved and protected in the time of a
plague by the ministration of Angels: what then? get an Interest in Christ, and
if you doubt of your interest, get assurance, do not let that slip now; now get
an interest in Christ, now get assurance*

Thirdly, Go to God to make good this promise; in this 91. Psalm, if you do but
mind it, the Lord does not only promise protection and deliverance from the
Plague to those that trust in him, but he promises grace to trust in him; he
promises protection upon condition that you trust in him, and he promises you
grace also to trust in him: (says he) at the 5th. verse, Art thou afraid, and
can not trust in me! Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor
for the arrow that flies by day; at the 4th. verse, He shall cover thee with
his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust; Thou shall not be afraid,
etc. thou shall be secure, and I will keep thee from fear. The Lord that has
promised protection in the time of a Plague, has also promised freedom from
fear, and grace to trust in him; therefore go to God for this grace, go to him
to make good this promise.

Then again fourthly, consider what motives ye have to trust in God in the time
of a plague; you will say, what arguments or motives have we in the
consideration whereof we may be moved to trust in God in the time of a plague?
there are many; give me leave a little, that we may help one another faith in
this needful day.

First of all, though the destroyer be abroad, yet there is a man with his pen
and ink-horn by his side also abroad, and that man is your friend, it is Christ:
as you read in the 9th of Ezekiel, there goes a man out with a pen and ink-horn
by his side, to mark those that sigh, and mourn, and cry for the abominations
that are done. Now to this man Christ is a friend, and therefore why should not
you believe? why should you not trust in the Lord?

But 2ly. If that the Lord do know those that do trust in him in the time of a
plague, why should you not trust in him? In the first Chapter of Nahum you find
very great expressions of Gods anger and indignation; it is said (at the 2.
verse) God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth and is
furious; the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth
wrath for his enemies, etc. At the 5th verse, The mountains quake at him, and
the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his presence, yea, the world and all
that dwell therein; who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in
the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks
are thrown down by him: What then? (in the 7th verse,) The Lord is good, a
strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knows them that trust in him. The
Lord when he is angry, does distinguish betwixt those that trust in him, and
those that do not trust in him. If a man be angry and in fury, he strikes any
that comes in his way, he does not know his friends from his enemies; but the
Lord knows them that trust in him, though he be angry, and in fury, and in
indignation, yet he knows them that trust in him; and therefore why should ye
not trust in the Lord in the day of a Plague.

3ly. If that Plague and Pestilence do make room for Gods people, why should ye
not trust in the Lord in the time of a Plague? what (think you) should be the
meaning of that which we read in the 3d of Habakkuk? Before him went the
Pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet. When was this? it was
when God led his people into Canaan: God came from Teinan, and the Holy One
from mount Paran. (Selah.) His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was
full of his praise; before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went
forth at his feet. He sent the pestilence among the Canaanites, and the
Hittites, and the Peresites, to consume them and make way for his people. God
can send a Pestilence into a City, to make room for his people, and to take off
persecution. You see you have Scripture for it, before him went the pestilence:
now I say, if God by a Pestilence can, and does, and will make room for his
people, why should not ye, who are the people of God, trust in the Lord in the
day of a Plague?

4ly. If there be mercy with the Lord in the time of a plague, if God be ready
to be entreated, and to receive atonement, and to show mercy unto his people,
why then should not you trust in the Lord in the time of a Plague? Now I pray
look upon the story of David's time, and you may see how ready God was to show
mercy in the day of a Plague. First of all, upon that ground God told David
where the Temple should be built, which he never told him before: but 2ly. look
into the story, and you shall see what abatement there is; how God threatened,
and abates. There was threatened seven years famine, and observe two abatements;
first Chron. 21. 12. God came to David, and said, thus says the Lord, choose
thee either 3. years famine. In the 2 Samuel 24, it is 7. years famine^ in the
13. v. God came to David and told him, and said unto him, shall seven years of
famine come unto thee in thy land, or will thou flee three months before thine
enemies: seven years of famine, says one place; three years of famine says
the other: why? because God abates. Well, but there is a great abatement if you
look upon the business of the Plague. The Lord gave David his choice; Shall
seven years of famine come unto thee in thy land, or will thou fly three months
before thine enemies, or that there be three days pestilence in thy land? well,
at the 15th verse, 2 Samuel 24. 15. So the Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel,
from the morning even to the time appointed: the time Appointed, how long was
that? what, three days? no, there was abatement; how does that appear? So the
Lord sent a pestilence upon Israel, from the morning even to the time
appointed; even to the Evening Sacrifice, for so it signifies: but how do you
prove that it did not last three days? by two reasons, says Peter Martyr; one,
because it is said, The Lord repented him of the evil; and another, because
(says he) at the 16. verse, When the angel stretched out his hand upon
Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord repented him: why if the three days had been
at an end, the Angel would not have stretched out his hand to have destroyed
Jerusalem: therefore the Angel still putting forth his hand to destroy, shows
that the three days were not at an end; so that there was an abatement. I speak
it to show Gods readiness to abate, and to show mercy in the time of a Plague.

Thirdly, You may observe here in this story, that when the Plague came to
Jerusalem, which was the most populous place, there it stayed, at the 16.
verse, And when the Angel stretched out his hand ever Jerusalem to destroy it,
the Lord repented him of the evil; when it came to the most populous place,
where 'twas most likely to be infective, there it stayed; see the readiness of
God to show mercy.

But 4ly. you may observe, if you look into this story, that the Lord repented
him, and gave command for the staying of the Pestilence before David repented.
I confess there is somewhat of his repentance before. But afterward David said
unto God (1 Chronicles. 21. 17.) is it not I that have commanded the people to be
numbered? even I, it is I that have sinned and done evil indeed; let thine hand
I pray thee, O Lord, my God, be on me and on my fathers house, but not on this
people that they should be plagued. David lift up his eyes, (in the 16. v.) and
saw the Angel of the Lord stand between the earth and the heaven, having a
drawn sword in his hand stretched out over against Jerusalem; and then follows
the speech of David. But if you look before, you shall find the Lord made an
abatement before this speech of his, before this humiliation of his; the Lord
showed mercy and gave him his choice before, in the 2 Samuel 24. 16. And when the
Angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the Lord repented
him of the evil, and said to the Angel that destroyed the people, it is enough,
stay now thine hand; and the Angel of the Lord was by the threshing floor of
Araunath the Jebusite. And David spoke unto the Lord, when he saw the Angel
that smote the people, and said, lo, I have said, and I have done wickedly; but
these sheep, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me,
and against my fathers house, at the 17. verse; but the Lord repented him, at
the 16. verse; as if the Lord did prevent David's repentance with his loving
kindness; before his full repentance came out, the Lord gave commission to stay
the Plague: look well upon this story, and you may see how ready the Lord is to
show mercy, and to be entreated by his people in the time of a Plague.

But 5ly. If this promise in the 91. Psalm, which is nothing else but a promise
in the time of a Plague, if this promise be full, and certain, and solid, as it
may obviate all our fears and objections; why then should we not trust in the
Lord in the time of a Plague? Now, do but mark the Psalm, and you shall see the
words are so said, as may obviate all your fears and objections.

Will you say the destroying Angels are now abroad, the arrows of the Almighty
are now about us, (says he) He will give his angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou dash
thy foot against a stone. Will you say, I but hundreds fall on this side and on
the other side, and thousands may quickly; then (says he) yet it shall not come
nigh thee: there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh
thy dwelling, ver. 7, 10.

Will you say, O, but this same disease of the Plague, it is like a Lion and an
Adder, and as a young Lion and Dragon; yet, says he, Thou shall tread upon the
lion and adder, and the young lion and the dragon shall thou trample under thy
feet, in the 13. verse.

Will you say, O, but suppose the Plague should come; all my friends would
leave me, I shall be left all alone, and what shall become of me then? why
(says he) at the 15. verse, He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I
will be with him in trouble, spoken in regard of the Plague; I am of Molerus
his mind, that the whole Psalm relates to the Plague.

Will you say, O, but I cannot believe this, there is no likelihood that I
should escape in a general Plague; mark what he says in the last verse, With
long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation, it shall be my
salvation, thou shall not be saved by second causes, but it shall be my
salvation; and in the 3d verse, says he, Surely he shall deliver thee from the
snare of the fowler, from the noisome pestilence; do not doubt it, surely he
shall deliver thee. The words of this Psalm are so said as to take off, and to
obviate all our objections and fears; therefore why should we not trust in the
Lord in the time of a Plague?

But you will say then, how shall this work of faith and trusting in the Lord
be carried on? I shall say no more in it, but only two or three things from
this Psalm. It must be carried on with love to God, knowledge of his name, and
prayer. In the 14. verse, because he has set his love upon me, therefore will
I deliver him. As you must believe and trust in God, so you must set your love
on God; and says he, I will set him on high because he has known my name. He
shall call upon me, and I will answer him: Here are three things; Love to God,
knowledge of his name, and prayer; your faith and trust in such a day must go
along with these three: Some say, they do believe and trust in God, but they
don't set their love upon God; some say they love him, but do not know his
name, that whereby God is distinguished and worshipped; some say they know Gods
name, but they do not pray. But now if you would carry on your faith and trust
in the Lord as you ought to do, your trusting in the Lord must be carried on
with Love to God, Knowledge of his Name, and Prayer.

2ly. Go on in your way Christians, do not start out of your way; He shall give
his angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways: In all thy ways, the
ways of thy calling; take heed you be not found out of your way, that the
Plague don't find you out of your way, look that you do not start out of your
way.

3ly. And so to end; go to God, and tell the Lord that you do trust in him, and
make him your Habitation; He that dwells in the secret place of the most
High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord (in
the Hebrew) I will say to the Lord, my refuge, my fortress, my God, in him will
I trust. It Is not enough to trust in the Lord, but you must go to God and tell
him, that you do trust in him, that you make him your Habitation; say, Lord, I
make thee my Habitation, I trust in thee, thou art my refuge, and my fortress,
in thee do I trust.

FINIS.
The 91. Psalm, verse. 11. and 12. For he shall give his angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.

They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone.


FOr he shall give his angels charge over thee, etc. Having treated of this
Psalm already, I shall not spend much time in showing you the coherence of
these words with the former; you see they are brought in with a for: For he
shall give his angels charge over thee; as giving an account and reason of that
which was said before. In the former part of the Psalm, you read of the Saints
protection in, and their deliverance from the Plague and pestilence in the day
thereof. At the 10. verse, There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any
plague come nigh thy dwelling. Why? For he shall give his angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, etc. So that here still you have the
promise of protection in the time of the Plague and pestilence; the means
whereby God will protect and deliver. The condition of this promise in these
words, keep thee in all thy ways. So that though the danger of the Plague and
pestilence be never so great, yet if we be found in our ways, Gods angels under
him shall be our protection. He shall give his angels charge over thee, etc. In
which words, you may read the special and singular care and providence of God
over his people in the time of Plague and pestilence to be managed by the hands
of Angels. God will take special order with the angels for the safety of his
people in the time of the Plague and pestilence.

For the clearing of which argument, three things will fall under our
consideration. First, that God has singular care and providence over his
children. 2ly. That this care and providence is managed by the hands of Angels
3ly. That this and all this, is and shall be excited and drawn out specially in
the time of the Plague and pestilence.

As for the first, it is so full and clear in the words, that I shall need go
no further. He does not say, that God will provide for his people in the
general, but there is a singular and special care and providence that God has
for his people. For if you mind the words: first, he says, he will give his
angels charge over thee: Charge, charge is a strict command, more than a bare
command; as when you would have a servant do a business certainly and fully,
you lay a charge upon him, I charge you that you do not neglect that business;
you don't barely tell him what he should do, prescribe him his work; but you
charge him to do it. So says the Lord unto the Angels; my servants or
children, now they are in the Plague and Pestilence, O my Angels, I charge you
stir not from their houses, I charge you stir not from such a ones bedside;
it is a charge, He shall give his angels charge.

2ly. He does not only, and will not only charge his Angel, but his Angels; not
one Angel charged with the safety of his people, but many Angels, for their
better guard and security; he shall give his angels charge.

And 3ly. He will give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee; to keep thee:
charge over thee, and to keep thee: not only over the whole Church of God, but
over every particular member of the Church of God; He will give his angels
charge over thee, to keep thee: this is his mavelous care.

Well! but besides this, he will give his angels charge to keep thee in all thy
ways; not in some of thy ways, but in all thy ways. As Gods providence is
particular in regard of our persons, so it is universal in regard of our ways.
He will give his angels charge ever thee, to keep thee, not in some, but in
all thy ways.

But is this all? no, they shall bear thee up in their hands; as every servant
desires and loves to take up the young heir, or the young master into his
arms; so the Angels. It is a great matter, that the Lord promises to pitch
his tents, and the Angels of the Lord shall pitch their tents round about them
that Fear him: but here is more, the Angels shall not only pitch their tents,
be their guard; but their nurses, to bear them up in their hands: but why? that
thou dash not thy foot against a stone: when children begin to go, they are
very apt to fall, and get many a knock; to stumble at every little stone: now
there are many stones of stumbling that are in our way, and we are very apt to
fall and mis-carry; but such is the goodness of God, the providence of God, the
goodness of his providence, that as he has provided his Angels to be our
guard, in opposition to all our soreign enemies; so he has provided his Angels
to be our Nurses, in opposition to all our weaknesses and infirmities, that we
get no hurt, that we miscarry not in the least, that we dash not our foot
against a stone: Oh how tender is the Lord of his! in other Scriptures you know
the Lord is said to keep his people as the apple of his eye: what is a man more
render of, than the apple of his eye? and when does the Lord keep his people as
the apple of his eye, but when they are lowest, and in the worst condition? In
the 32. of Deuteronomy, verse. 10. He found him in a desert land, and in the
wast howling wilderness: he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as
the apple of his eye. When they came out of Egypt, and when they were in the
howling wilderness, the Lord did keep his people then at the apple of his eye:
and if you look into the 2d. of Zachary, you shall find he did the same when
they came out of Babylon, Zach. 2. verse. 6. Ho, ho, come forth and flee from
the land of the North, deliver thy self, oh Zion, that dwell with the
daughter of Babylon: there were some that staid still behind, that were so
wedded to their houses there, that they would not stir out of Babylon, some of
the worst of them; concerning these he says at the 8th verse, After the glory
has he sent me to the Nations which spoiled you; for, he that touches you,
touches the apple of his eye: sinful poor unworthy people, that would not go
home when they might, would not go out of Babylon when they might; yet how
tender was the Lord of them? But I say, I shall need go no further than the
Text: the Lord has said it, that He will give his Angels charge over you, to
keep you in all your ways, that you dash not your foot against a stone. So
that thus then you see the singular care and providence of God over his
servants and children, That Is the First.

But then 2ly. this care and providence of his is managed by the hands of
Angels, the Angels are the people that are especially betrusted with this
protection of the Saints. Mistake not; not as if the Lord himself did quit his
hands of their protection; though the Angels should be our protection, yet if
God should withdraw his protection and presence, we could not be satisfied with
the protection of Angels. Look into the 33. of Exodus, and you shall see there,
how the Lord by Moses tells the people, he would send an Angel before them, I
will send an Angel before thee, and I will drive out the Canaanite, the
Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perezite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; unto
a land flowing with milk and honey: for I will not go up in the midst of thee,
for thou art a stiff-necked people, lest I consume thee in the way: what then?
and when the people heard these evil tidings they mourned, and no man did put
on him his ornaments; when they heard these evil tidings: what was this evil
tidings, that their enemies should all be driven out before them, and that God
would honor them with an Angel to go before them? yes, they called this evil
tidings, because they had not the Lord himself to go before them. So that the
bare presence of Angels without the Lord himself, could not satisfy a gracious
soul: still therefore God himself is our great protector: and therefore the
angels are said to be sent forth; are they not all ministering spirits sent
forth? and who is it that does send them forth? he whose they are: whose are
they? they are called in the first of the Hebrew, the angels of God; and the
Text says they are his angels, His: Indeed in the 18th. of Matthew, they are
called the Saints angels, Take heed that ye despise not one of those little
ones, (10. verse.) for I say unto you that in heaven their angels, etc. their
angels, and yet His angels; theirs in regard of profit, for they are sent forth
for the good of the elect; but His in regard of authority, they are his
servants, his ministers. So that I say still, though the angels have the
management of this protection, yet God is the protector of his people: but yet
I say, though God be our great protector, and God does not quit his hands of
this protection; ye he has betrusted the protection of the Saints very much in
the hands of the angels; and therefore they are called Cherubims: and wherefore
are they called Cherubims? because they do hide and protect. Upon this account
the King of Syrus is called a Cherub, in that place of Ezekiel, because of his
hiding and protecting the people that were under him. And the angels have
wings, not only for their swiftness, but for protection; the wings being for
protection, as well as to fly with. So that I say, though God be the great
protector of his people, yet that protection lies much on the hands of angels.

But what need God make use of angels to protect his people? he is able to do
it alone; and is it not for Gods dishonor to make use of them for the
protection of his people? no, it is for the honor of God: for the more
honorable the servants are, the instruments are, that a King or Prince does
use for the protecting of his people, the more honorable is that King or
Prince. Now the angels, they are honorable creatures; frequently they are
called Gods: thou have made him a little lower than the angels, in the Hebrew
it is a little lower then the Gods: worship him all ye Gods (in the Hebrew) all
ye Angels. Well! but why are the Angels called into this protection, into this
Nursery, into this Ministry? God has several creatures that he can use to
protect and safeguard his people; why are the Angels in a special manner
called into this work of protection of the Saints?

They are the fittest people in the world for this employment; fittest in
regard of themselves; fittest in regard of the Saints. They are fittest in
regard of themselves; for, first, they are an exceeding strong and potent
people; who more fit to look to, and care for the concernments of the Saints
and people of God, than those that are strong and potent? It Is said of the
Angels in the 103. Psalm, that they excel in strength; Bless the Lord ye his
angels that excel in strength, verse. 20. They are called, powers in the Host
of God, they are the chariots and the horsemen, in the 68. Psalm, verse. 17.
The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels; thousands of
Angels: they are the chariots and horsemen in the Host of God: other
foot-companies he has, but his Chariots and horsemen, they are the Angels. One
Angel (you know) destroyed an hundred and fourscore thousand of the Host of
Assyria in a night; as one Constable will scare away twenty thieves, so one
good Angel invested with Gods authority, is able to drive away a thousand evil
Angels, Devils; they are an exceeding strong and potent people.

2ly. As they are an exceeding strong and potent people; so they are a very
knowing and a wise people: and who so fit to manage the affairs and concerns of
the Saints, and people of God, and to protect and defend them, as a knowing and
understanding people? such are the Angels: the devils indeed, they are called
knowing? but the Angels, good Angels, they are called intelligencers: you know
what Joab said to David; Thou art for wisdom as an angel of God: says our
Savior, no man knows that day and time, no not the angels in heaven; as if
the Angels in heaven knew every secret, and were acquainted with every hidden
thing, they are an exceeding knowing people, very prudent, and very wise.

3ly. As they are an exceeding knowing and wise people, so they are also
exceeding active and expeditious, quick in dispatches; who more fit to defend
and protect the Saints and people of God, than those that are active, expedite
and quick in their dispatches? such are the Angels. In the first of Ezekiel ye
read, that every one had four wings; why? because of their great activity and
expedition, and the quick dispatch they make in all their affairs.

Again; as they are an active and expeditious people, so they are a people very
faithful both to God and man; in the 103. Psalm, they are ready to do Gods
will, and not only ready to fulfill Gods will, but they do it; Bless the Lord
all ye his Angels that excel in strength, (20. verse) that do his commandments,
harkening to the voice of his word. Bless ye the Lord all ye his hosts, ye
ministers of his that do his pleasure. They are very faithful; and who so fit
to do this work, to attend and look to the concernments of the Saints, and
people of God, as those that are faithful.

3ly. As they are an exceeding faithful people, so they are a people that are
very loving to the Saints and children of God, very loving; otherwise they were
not fit to be their nurses: what is a nurse without love? they are loving to
the Saints: Do is not (said the Angel unto John) I am thy fellow servant; don't
give divine worship to me, I am thy fellow servant; fellow servants are loving
to one another; they are fellow servants with the Saints. Are the Saints and
people of God members of Christ, and is Christ their head? so is Christ the
Lord of Angels; he is the Lord of Angels, and they follow him. In the first of
Zachary, the 8. verse; I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red
horse, and he stood among the myrtletrees that were in the bottom; these
Myrtle-trees in the bottom, are Saints in a low condition, And behold a man
riding upon a red horse, this is Christ; and he stood among the myrtle trees
that were in the bottom; and behind him there were red horses, speckled, and
white; behind him: mark, who are those red horses, speckled and white, (in the
9. verse) Then said I, oh my Lord, what are these? and the angel that talked
with me said unto me, I will show thee what these be; and the man that stood
among the myrtle trees, answered and said, these are they whom the Lord has
sent to walk to and fro through the earth. These are the Angels that stand
behind Christ, that are the followers of Christ; they are his followers: the
more union there is betwixt persons, the more they love; and as the union is,
such is the love. If there be a natural union betwixt persons, their love will
be natural; if their union be civil, political, their love will be political,
civil; if the union be spiritual, ecclesiastical, the love is spiritual,
ecclesiastical, more than natural. Now the union that is betwixt the Angels and
the Saints, it is a Church union. Ye are come, says the Apostle in the 12 of
the Hebrews, verse the 22. unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the
general assembly and Church of the first born: so that they are of the same
Church, the general assembly and Church of the first born, and therefore they
must needs be an exceeding loving people to the Saints, and people of God, and
therefore a people fit for this employment, of all other the fittest for this
employment, to be employed under God for the protection of the Saints, fittest,
in regard of themselves.

But then again 2ly. fittest they are for this employment in regard of the
Saints; for who more fit to be employed in this protection under God, the
protection of the Saints, than those that are in some respect above the Saints,
and in some respect beneath them; if a nurse be above the child, she may
despise it, if the child be altogether above the nurse, the nurse cannot rule
it. Now the Angels they are in some respect beneath, and in some respect above
the Saints; they are above the Saints in regard of their nature, as you all
know; but in some respects they are beneath the Saints, and below the Saints:
for the second person did not come into their nature, as he did into the nature
of the Saints; he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham; and in that respect the Saints are above them: and the Saints
are clothed with the righteousness of Christ, such a garment as never came
upon the back of an Angel, herein the Saints are above the Angels: and the
Saints and people of God, they are members of Christ, and therein above the
Angels; Christ is the Lord of Angels, but you don't read that the Angels are
the members of Christ. So that I say, in some respects the Angels are beneath
the Saints, and in some respects above them; and so the more fit for this
employment. Ye see how it is with a mean man that sits at dinner at a Noble
man's table; he sits down at the table with the Noble man, and the servants of
the Noble man, they attend upon him; it may be the servants are better men than
he, but because he sits down at the Noble man's table, these servants attend
upon him, as upon their master. Now the Saints and people of God are members of
Christ, they have communion with Christ, and sit down at his table; and
therefore his followers the Angels, they attend upon the Saints and people of
God; and thus now ye see why the Angels are in a special manner called to this
work of protection of the Saints and people of God.

Well, but then 3ly, why are the Angels called to this work of protection of
the Saints, specially in the time of Plague and pestilence? why does the Lord
give a special charge to his Angels, to have a special care of his people in
the time of the Plague and pestilence, why at that time especially?

First of all, that time is a time of the greatest danger; when should the
Nurse look unto the child, if not in the greatest danger? now in the time of
the greatest danger, then come the angels to the succor of Gods people. In the
32. chapter of Genesis we read of the angels meeting of Jacob (at the 1. verse.)
Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him; and when Jacob saw them,
he said, this is Gods host; they met him then: why then? he had a vision when
he went out from his Country, a promise in the way of a vision, the angels
ascending and descending, and now he had the promise accomplished upon his
return; why then? then he was in the greatest danger, he was betwixt Laban and
Esau; and though he had passed the pikes of Laban, yet now he was to meet an
old provoked enemy, a wicked man, Esau: insomuch that he was grievously afraid,
and he prayed, Lord deliver me from the hand of my brother; well, and what
then? then comes the angels; then comes this great danger, and then come the
angels, and he called the name of the place Mahanaim; it is the same expression
that is used in the 6. chapter of the Canticles concerning the Jews returning
unto their own Country, at the 13. verse, Return, return, oh Shulamite, return,
return, that we may look upon thee; what will ye see in the Shulamite? (in the
Jews returning) as it were the company of Mahanaims, Mahanaims; two armies you
read it, but it is the same word: why? possibly to show that God will send an
host of angels to guard the Jews into their Country, as he sent an host of
angels to guard their father Jacob into his Country. But I bring this to show,
that when the Saints and people of God are in greatest danger, then come the
angels to succor them. Now the time of sickness and of the plague is a time of
great danger.

2ly. Look when all visible means and helps fail, then is a fit time for
invisible help to come in. Now the help of the angel is invisible, his hands
are under his wings; you cannot see his help: when all visible means and helps
fail, then comes Gods invisible help, then come the angels, a fit time for the
angels.

But 3ly. Look when the destroying angel is abroad, then is a fit time for the
protecting angel to step in, and be at work. Now in the time of the Plague and
pestilence, the destroying angel is abroad; only here then this question does
arise, whether the destroying angel, and the protecting angel differ? whether
they be diverse, or the same? I shall resolve it in two or three Positions.

First, although the same angel may destroy, and spare, as in David's time: yet
the destroying angel, and the protecting angel seems to be diverse; in the 7th.
of Revel. four angels came out to hurt, and another came out to save: in the
9th. of Ezekiel, six men came out with their slaughter-weapons in their hands,
and another came out to mark.

The second position is this; as the destroying and protecting angel may seem
to be diverse, so God does sometimes employ an evil angel to afflict and destroy
good men, and does sometimes employ a good angel to afflict bad men; sometimes
God does employ a good angel to afflict and destroy wicked men, as in the case
of Sodom, they were good angels that destroyed Sodom: sometimes on the other
side, God does employ evil angels to afflict (and shall I use the word destroy)
good men; the Devil wasted Job, and killed his children.

But 3ly. Though the angels may be thus employed, the destroyer, and the
protector; yet this is certain, that all protection of the Saints falls into
the hands and the lap of the good angels, for he shall give his angels charge
over thee; his, why his? in distinction from the devils and evil angels, that
did not stay by him, but left him in the time of their apostasy: and they shall
bear thee in their arms; Devils don't bear the Saints in their arms,
therefore the business of the Saints protection, this falls wholly upon the
good angels to do; but look, I say, when the destroying angel is abroad, then
is a fit time for the protecting angel to be abroad too. Now in the time of the
Plague and pestilence, the destroying angel is abroad; therefore then
especially is the good angel to be at work for the protection of the Saints.

4ly. The time of the Plague, is a time when the Saints and people of God may
want outward provision, good people may be shut up and starved for want of
victuals, in the time of the Plague: Now it is the work of the good angels to
provide meat and victuals for the people of God sometimes. In the first of
Kings 19. verse. 5. it is said of Elijah, that as he lay and slept under a
juniper tree, an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat, and he
looked, and behold there was a cake baked on the coals, and a cruse of water at
his head; and he did eat and drank, and laid him down again. And the angel of
the Lord came again the second time, and touched him, and said, arise and eat,
because the journey is too great for thee, etc.

5ly. The time of the Plague and pestilence, as it is a time of want, want of
provision; so it is a time when many of Gods people are put to go for it, to fly
for it, to run for it, to seek abroad for their houses and habitations, don't
know which way to go; it is the work of a good angel to go before them, to order
and direct their way. In the 24. of Genesis, verse. 7. says Abraham to his
servant, He shall send his angels before thee; it is the work of a good angel to
order, and direct, and guide the people of God in their way.

Lastly, the time of the Plague and pestilence is a time when people need
Physicians and Surgeons, Surgeons and Physicians against their malady; a good
angel can do this, and sometimes does it: in the 5. of John, verse. 4. For an
angel went down at a certain season into the pool and troubled the water,
whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in, was made whole
of whatsoever disease he had; this is the work of an angel, to prepare a
medicine; this is the work of an angel.

Ay, but you will say, all these instances are extraordinary; what is this to me
in this time of the Plague and sickness, what is this to me? these are
extraordinary things; does their ministry still continue, or no?

Mark! yes certainly: the Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
refuge; and how God was the God of Jacob, and how his refuge, ye heard even
now: in the first of the Hebrews, 7th. verse, it is said, And of the angels he
says, who makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire; Who
makes, in the present tense; as if 'twere always a doing, not who has made,
but who makes; who makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of
fire, it is the present tense, it is continually a doing; and if you look into
the old Testament, and compare the Cherubims that were in the tabernacle, with
the Cherubims that were in the Temple, you shall find that the Cherubims that
were in the tabernacle were but two, and the Cherubims that were in the Temple
were four; why? but to show that their protection shall rather be enlarged than
lessened; in the first Chapter of John, says our Savior Christ there to
Nathaniel, (last verse.) Verily, verily, I say unto you, that hereafter ye shall
see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the son
of man; hereafter, this is a Gospel truth, and the more you know and see the
mystery of the Gospel revealed, the more will this mystery be revealed to you;
hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending, etc.
hereafter in Gospel times; and pray mark the words of the text, He shall give
his angels charge over thee, over thee; say you, I confess this a comfortable
truth, the protection of Angels in the time of the Plague and pestilence
especially, but what is this to me? yes, (says he) He shall give his angels
charge over thee, over thee. Now pray tell me when you read the Commandments,
Thou shall not steel, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall do no murder;
do ye think that the Thou there does belong to you? yes; I dare not steal, I
dare not do any murder, I dare not commit adultery; for it is said, Thou shall
not murder, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal, and this
Thou belongs to me; and why should not the Thee of the promise belong to you,
as well as the Thou of the Commandment? Oh that those that are afflicted and
troubled in conscience would think but of this one thing. If thou concernest
thy self in the Thou of the Commandment, thou art concerned in the Thee of the
Promise; the thee of the promise concerns thee as certainly as the thou of the
Commandment: and thus now ye see I have gone through the Doctrine. The Lord
has a singular care and providence over his people, especially in the time of
the Plague and pestilence, which is managed by the hands of angels. God will
take special order with the angels for the safety of his people in the time of
the Plague and pestilence.

Now I come to the Application.

If these things be so; first, great is the dignity of the Saints, of the
Saints here on earth, though never so much despised by the world; they are
attended with angels, they have angels for their attendants; is it not an
honor to have such attendants as these? the great ones of the earth think it
an honor to have a company of glittering fellows attending upon them, and
following them in reds and ribbands, and gold and silver laces. Oh the beggarly
attendants of this earth, unto the attendants the Saints have, glorious angels
attend them; 'twas much that Paul spoke: All things are yours, whether Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, all are yours: Paul's, or Apollo's, or Cephas's; why what
were they? they were Ministers, and Ministers are called angels, angels of the
Churches; but not only these angels are the Saints attendants, but heavenly
angels are the Saints attendants; ah what dignity, what honor is here? who
dare despise any of the Saints or people of God, although they be never so
mean? you see what our Savior says, Mat. 18. ver. 10. Take heed that you
despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven their
angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven: that is the
first.

2ly. If these things be so, why then surely the highest enjoyment, and the
meanest employment commanded may and can stand together: what meaner employment
than to attend upon a man that has a plague sore running upon him? this the
angels are to do, and they have the highest enjoyment at the same time; says he
after, they always behold the face of my Father. So that then our highest
enjoyments, and meanest employment commanded, may and can stand together; it
may be you say, I will not go to my calling, it is a poor and mean calling, I shall
not enjoy God in it: ay, but know this, you may enjoy God in the lowest
employment: the highest enjoyment and the meanest employment commanded, may and
can stand together; that is the second.

3ly. If these things be so, great is the Saints security, great is the Saints
safety; are they not in safe hands, that are in the hands of angels? not of one
angel, but many angels; if this be not enough, why the angels bear them up in
their arms: if this be not enough, God himself carries them in his arms, as
in the days of old; Gods eye is upon them, his ear is open to their cry;
Christ's left hand is under their head, and his right hand does embrace them,
all the angels attending upon them; Oh the safety and security of the Saints
and people of God, even in the worst of times, in the time of the Plague and
pestilence.

4ly. If these things be so; how good and gracious is the Lord unto you, you
that are the Saints and people of God? how good and gracious is the Lord to
you? no sooner had David said Psalm. 34. 7. The angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and delivers them; but the next words he
subjoyns, Oh taste and see that the Lord is good. Ay, here you may taste and see
the goodness of the Lord indeed, in the ministration of angels; that the angels
nurse you, and carry you up and down in their arms: the more you look into
this, the more you will see how good and gracious the Lord is. In the 8th.
Psalm, when David had considered the creatures round, Lord (says he) what is
man, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him;
for thou have made him a little lower than the angels, for a time; all sheep
and oxen, and all creatures thou have put under his feet: He begins the Psalm
thus, Oh Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! and
because his heart was full of the sense of Gods love, he ends the Psalm with
the same words, O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!
ay, this is a taking thing indeed; here you may see how gracious and good the
Lord is to you.

5ly. If these things be so; how infinitely are we all beholden unto Jesus
Christ, upon whose account it is that the Angels are your attendants in this
time of the Plague and sickness; he is the ladder that Jacob saw: Christ's
explains that ladder himself; You shall see heaven open, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the son of man; it is upon Christ's account, all
the ministry of angels is upon Christ's account: here you have more than Adam
had in the state of innocence; whem Adam fell, then you read indeed of the
Cherubims set to keep the tree of life, to keep Paradise; but you don't read
that before the fall he had the angels to minister to him; but now in and by
Jesus Christ, we have the ministration of angels, we are reconciled unto all
the angels, and not only so, but they are brought in to be our attendants. Oh
blessed be God for Christ! why should we not say, I love thee dearly, O Lord my
Savior, by whom I am made partaker of this infinite privilege of the
ministration of angels.

6ly. If these things be so; what a mighty difference is there betwixt the
godly and the wicked, even in the time of the Plague. Your great desire in this
sickness time, is that God would make a difference betwixt the one and the
other; whatever outward difference there is, I am sure there is this
difference, the Saints and people of God have the angels to attend upon them,
but the wicked have not. The Corn and the weeds are cut down by the same sithe,
by the same stroke; but the corn and the weeds are differenced. Two men, a
godly man and a wicked man, lay sick of the Plague at the same time: the wicked
man has little or no attendance when his friends leave him, it may be he has
no body to attend him, except it be a halberteer at the door; no Angels to
attend him: but the good man, when all his friends are gone then come the
Angels and comfort him, and attend upon him and he may comfort himself, and
say, though my friends have left me, yet here are the Lords Angels to look to
me and comfort me. What a mighty difference is there betwixt the one and the
other? Oh who would not be godly? who would not get into Christ upon this very
account?

7ly. If these things be so; why then, why should we not trust in the Lord in
this day of great mortality, this sickly time, this time of the Plague and
Pestilence? what, shall the Angels be your attendants, (now especially) and
will not you trust in God? what have you such a promise as this is, and will you
not trust in the Lord? shall the Lord himself be your protector, and charge
his Angels with you for such a time as this, and will you not trust in the
Lord? It Is recorded of Alexander, that being in great danger, and to fight next
day with his enemies, he slept very soundly the night before, and he being
asked the reason thereof, said, Parmenio wakes, meaning a great and faithful
Captain of his, Parmenio wakes, says he. The Angels are called watchmen, they
watch and are faithful, therefore you may be secure, quiet and at rest; trust
in the Lord for ever upon this account, in this day trust in the Lord.

8ly. If these things be so; then (friends) why should we not stoop to any work
commanded, though it ly much beneath us? Don't you think that the attending
upon a sick man, a man that has a Plague Sore running upon him, is a work that
lies much beneath Angels? yet the Angels do it because it is commanded, though
much beneath them, yet they stoop to it because it is commanded: and what
though a work ly much beneath you, yet if it be commanded, why should you not
stoop to it? you will say, such a one is much beneath me, I wont lay my hand
under his shoes, he is much beneath me; ah but the Angels lay their hands
under your shoes, and the work they do for you is much beneath them; why
should we not be like our attendants? this is Angelical obedience; the Angels
do you many a kindness, and never look for thanks from you, they do many a
kindness that you are not aware of: why are you delivered, sometimes you know
not how? here is a hand under a wing, the ministration of Angels is the cause of
it. But I say, the work they stoop to for you is much beneath them, and
therefore why should we not stoop to any work commanded, though it ly much
beneath us?

9ly. If these things be so (friends) what manner of men and women ought we to
be in all holy conversion? what, your attendants so holy, and you so unholy?
let the women be covered, because of the Angels, says the Apostle; so say I,
let us walk holily because of the Angels, they are always about us: if you be
in company with a grave man, you will not giggle, nor be so frothy as with others;
if a man have a servant attending upon him that is grave and sober, he will not be
frothy and vain; behold what grave and holy attendants there are about you; and
will you giggle, and be frothy and vain? Oh what manner of men and women ought
we to be in all holy conversation?

But tenthly and lastly, to conclude; if these things be so, why should we not
always be found in that way, whereby we may come within the compass of this
protection: in the 34. Psalm it is put upon fearing God, they shall pitch their
tents round about them that fear him; in this Psalm it is put most upon
trusting in God. In this 91. Psalm, in this verse, it is put upon (this
protection of Angels is put upon) being in our way; They shall bear you up in
their hands. He shall give his angels charge over thee to keep you in all your
ways, in all your ways; your ways: your ways are Gods ways, your way is
the way commanded by God; if you be out of Gods way, you are out of your own
way; if you be in your way, the Angels shall keep you even in the time of a
Plague, and bear you up in their hands that you dash not your foot against a
stone; but if you be out of your way, I will not ensure you of safety. When Balaam
went upon the devils errand an Angel met him and scared his ass, and the ass
run his foot against the wall, dashed his foot against the wall; the promise
is, thou shall not dash thy foot against a stone; but he was out of his way,
and the Angel met him and scared his ass, and his ass made him rush his legs
against the wall. Jonah went out of his way, when he ran away from God; God bad
him go one way, and he went another; well, what then? were the Angels with him
for his protection? the very sea would not be quiet, till he was thrown
overboard; instead of Angels to protect him, he had a Whale to devour him. I
confess indeed, through the free grace and mercy of God, the belly of
destruction was made a chamber of preservation to him, but he was out of his
way; and instead of an Angel to keep him that he dash not his foot, his whole
body was thrown overboard. Says Solomon, As a bird from her nest, so is a man
out of his place; so long as the bird is in her nest, it is free from the hawk,
it is free from the birding piece, it is free from the nets, and ginns, and
snares, as long as it is in her nest; but when the bird is off her nest, then
she is exposed to many dangers. So, so long as a man is in his way, in his
place and in his way, he is well, and under protection; but when a man is off
his nest, out of his place and out of his way, then is he exposed to all
danger^ out, be but in your way, be but in your way, and then you may assure
your selves of divine protection, and of the management thereof by the hands of
Angels. Oh who would not labor always to be in that way which God has
appointed him to be in! why should we not always consider with our selves and
say, But am I in my way? Old Mr. Dod being upon the water, and going out of one
boat into another, slipped between them, and the first word he spoke was this,
am I in my way? so we should always be saying, but am I in my way? am I in my
way? I am now idleing away my time, but, Am I in my way? Oh my soul, am I in my
way? I am in my calling this day, without prayer in the morning, and reading
the Scriptures; but am I in my way? Oh my soul, am I in my way? I am now in
such frothy company, where I get no good, but hurt; but am I in my way? ever
consider this, am I in my way? you may expect the Lords protection, and the
Angels attendance, if you be in your way, but not else. Now then as ever you
desire the protection of the Almighty, and the attendance of Angels, especially
in this time of danger, sickness, Plague and Pestilence, let us all labor
daily to look to it, that we be found in our way, the way the Lord has set us
in; and what I say to you, I say to my self, and to all, wait on the Lord, and
keep his way.

FINIS.

