THE HUMBLE PETITION OF Many thousands, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others, of
the County of WORCESTER, To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. In
behalf of the Able, Faithful, Godly Ministry of this NATION. Delivered by
Colonel John Bridges, and Mr. Thomas Folly, December 22. 1652. With the
Parliaments Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, and Thomas Underhill, and
are to be sold at their Shops, the three Daggers in Fleet street, and the Bible
(...)

To the Honorable the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The Humble Petition of us Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others inhabiting the
County of Worcester.
SHOWS,
THAT your Petitioners having with grief observed both the Language of many
Pamphlets and persons of late times, against the Ministers of Christ among us,
and Petitions preferred to you against their present maintenance, without any
regard to the substitution of a fitter: and these pretending to the relief of
the impoverished Nation, as if they were the very sense and language of the
body of this Commonwealth: We cannot but suspect, yea discern that there is a
party that desire and endeavor the subversion of the Ministry; yet have we
hitherto remained silent, partly in hopes that they were so few and
inconsiderable, as not to deserve to be publicly taken notice of, and
mentioned, to the dishonor of our Nation: partly that we might not interrupt
your weighty consultations, but chiefly lest we should be mis-interpreted to
suspect your fidelity to the Ministry, and consequently to Christianity and
Christ himself: which we know you must needs resent as an uncharitable
censoriousness, considering how evident you have seen, and how often
acknowledged with greatest solemnity, the Lord Jesus in your preservations; and
how deeply you are engaged to him above most men on earth, and how sensibly you
vindicated a persecuted Ministry in the very beginning of this Parliament, and
how strongly you have obliged your selves, not only to preserve the Reformed
Religion in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government; but also to promote
in all these a further reformation where it is wanting; as also considering
what a tender respect to a faithful Ministry you have all along to this day
professed, and are still consulting for the Propagation of the Gospel, and have
done Justice on some opposers so near you; besides the augmentations you have
allowed to many places where means was wanting. We disclaim therefore all such
ungrateful censoriousness, and thankfully acknowledge all your favors to the
Ministry and Gospel of the Lord Jesus, who is easily able to reward you, and
see that you be no losers by him and his Cause. But yet least our continued
silence should seem to signify our consent to those that would undo us, under
pretense of releiving us; and lest they be thought to speak our sense, lest
their audaciousness increase while none contradict them: and lest we dishonor
our Nation in the eyes of the Christian world, whilst they think that the
voice of these few is the common voice: and lest your own hearts should be
overwhelmed with grief, not only to see such a degenerated people living under
your Government; but also that so few gain*say them, as if the Nation had lost
their love to the Gospel: and that after such light, profession and
engagements; and consequently you may think they will prove an ungrateful
people to you, who prove so ungrateful to the Lord their Savior; We have
therefore adventured on this bold enterpellation, and crave your patience,
while we do with more then ordinary importunity bespeak you, seeing it is in
the zeal of the Lord, for his glory, his Church, his Gospel, and the souls of
our selves and posterity. We know it was by Ministers of the Gospel, that the
Lord Jesus did set up his Kingdom on earth, and has subdued so much of the
World to himself, destroying the Kingdom of Darkness, Paganism, Idolatry, and
wickedness: we know he granted their Commission upon the reception of his
plenipotencie, and upon his ascending he gave them for the perfecting of the
Saints, and the edifying of his body, till they come to his fullness, and that
as a means to preserve them from Seducers, and being tossed and carried about
as children with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4 9. to 15. and has promised to
be with them to the end of the world: which promise he has hitherto eminently
accomplished. It is the Ministry by which Christ has continued his Church to
this day: nor do we know, or have heard of that place on earth where
Christianity was ever maintained in splendour and vigor (if at all continued)
without a Ministry. It was the Ministers by whom Christ did waken the
superstitious world, and discover to them the Romish delusions; and by whom he
begun and carried on the Work of Reformation, by them exciting a zealous
Magistracy; and after all their labors, multitudes of them did sacrifice
their lives in the flames. It is the writings of a learned able Ministry which
yet stand up in the face of Heathenish, Mohammedan, and Romish adversaries, to
their vexation and confusion, which they may sooner reproach or burn, then
answer: by which after-ages are, and still may be stablished in the truth,
against all the subtle endeavors of Seducers. It is a learned, able, faithful
Ministry, which yet is the daunting and discouragement of the Jesuits and
other deceivers, who well know, if these were but taken out of their way, how
boldly they might dare us, how insultingly they might challenge us to dispute
for our Religion, and how easily they might silence and shame us, and thereby
carry away the multitude after them. For who should strengthen the Peoples
hearts, and defend the Cause of the LORD against them, if such a Ministry were
down? It was a faithful Ministry who revealed Gods Mercy, and the precious
Truths of the Gospel to our own souls, and whom God by the Cooperation of his
Spirit has blessed to be the means of converting, or confirming, or both, the
souls of all those of us who have attained to any saving knowledge of himself.
When we remember how often, and how happily our souls have been revived and
refreshed by their Ministry, we are ashamed of the remisness of our Zeal in
this Cause; when we think that they are our Fathers, and confirmers in Christ,
and how they must present us to him at his appearing as their Joy and Crown,
Phil. 2. 19, 20. and that when we have escaped the flames of Hell, and meet
them in glory, we must acknowledge them Instruments of so unvaluable a
blessing; we had rather there were no tongues in our mouths, then that ever we
should join with their reproachers, and had rather suffer greater wants then
ever we yet suffered, then ungratefully deny them their necessary maintenance,
seeing our Lord himself said, when he set them upon his Work, The Labourer is
worthy of his hire; and the Holy Ghost says, Who goes to warfare at his own
charge? They that minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple;
even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 7. to 15. Considering also that they are not
Foreigners, but Englishmen, our own Brethren, and Sons that receive it from
us, even that which by Law is not ours but theirs; and considering also how
much more liberal Papists are to their Mass-Priests and seducing Jesuits then
we are to a faithful Ministry of Christ. And when we consider, that if England
do excel other Nations in the light of knowledge, and power of Godliness, it
is the Ministry that are herein our glory, and the means of what the People do
enjoy, we cannot be so ungrateful to them as to starve them and cast them off;
nor yet such enemies to Englands happiness and honour^ yea* when we consider
how the dreadful, omnipotent King of Saints does call them his Co-workers, and
has sent them in subserviency to his own bloodshed, and Spirit, and said, He
that despises you, despises me; we had rather endure any corporal calamities,
then stand charged with such a sin at the Bar of our Lord: Yea* and when we
consider how he has owned and stood by them, and rebuked Kings for their sakes
and his Churches, charging them to do his Prophets no harm; and how well those
Rulers have sped, that have most obeyed, and encouraged them in the Work of the
Lord; and how God has broken those powers that have disobeyed and abused them,
2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16, 17. and how severely he has dealt in England before our
eyes with that generation of men that silenced, reproached, and persecuted
them; we tremble at Gods Judgments, and dare not venture into the same
consuming fire, whose flames are yet so fresh in our memory.

Your Petitioners having as in the presence of the Lord made this necessary and
solemn profession of their Judgments, Affections, and Resolutions, to acquaint
you how far they are from approving or consenting to any opposers or
underminers of the Ministry and Gospel of the Lord Jesus, do humbly address
themselves, with these earnest requests, to this Honorable Assembly.

First, That you will be pleased, not only to continue your owning of, and
tenderest care for the upholding or an Able, Godly, Faithful Ministry (of
which we dare not doubt) but also that you will so far countenance and
encourage them in the Lords Work, and discountenance all that oppose them,
directly or indirectly that all the World, and especially the People of this
Commonwealth, may still see, and acknowledge your open and resolved adhering
to the Reformed Christian Religion, and Interest of the Lord Jesus: and seeing
all the ungodly (besides misguided distempered Christians) are ever
discouragers of them, God having sent them on a Work so unpleasing to flesh and
blood, you will the more sedulously encourage them, as nursing Fathers of the
Church.

Secondly, that you will be pleased to this end, to take special care of their
competent maintenance, that we may not have an ignorant Ministry, while they
are forced to be laboring for food and raiment, while they should be in their
studies, or watching over their flocks; and that through disability or
unpreparedness, they disgrace not the work of Christ, nor make it and their
office contemptible, thereby rejoicing the enemy, and hindering the saving of
souls; specially seeing it is expected that they credit their Doctrine with
works of Charity: And seeing that a dependant and beggarly Ministry will lose
so much of their Authority with the souls that most need them, and themselves
will be laid open to the sore temptation of Man-pleasing; besides the
probability of the suffering of their children, when they are dead: And if the
Ministers of this Age be never so resolved to continue their work through all
necessities, yet in the next Age the Church is like to be destitute and
desolate, because men will set their sons to other studies and employments: We
therefore humbly crave, that this Honorable Assembly will not take down the
present Maintenance by Tithes (though we have ^s much reason to be sensible of
those inconveniences that it is charged with, as others) or at least, not till
they, instead of it, establish as sure, and full, and fit a Maintenance.

Thirdly, That you will be pleased to take into your compassionate thoughts,
both the dark places in England and Wales which want able godly Teachers; and
the state of great Cities, and populous Towns, where through the exceeding
number of souls, one Minister has more work then can possibly be done by many:
whereby while they are confined to the public work alone, all private
Ministerial Instruction, Admonition, and other oversight, must needs be
neglected: That therefore to such very numerous Congregations, you would allow
a maintenance, if not to Ministers proportionable to the number of souls, and
greatness of the work; yet at least more then in smaller places: We offer but
the same request to you, in your places, which Christ has commanded us to
offer to God himself. That where the harvest is great, and the Laborers are
few, more Laborers may be sent into the harvest.

Fourthly, That you will be pleased to continue your care of the Universities,
and Schools of Learning, and tenderly preserve their maintenance and necessary
privileges, that there may be a meet supply of Laborers for the continuation
of the Gospel, and the glory of England to our Posterity.

Fifthly, And because our sad divisions in matter of Religion, especially about
Church Government, have been such a hinderance to the propagation of the
Gospel, that you will be pleased speedily to employ your utmost wisdom and
power for the healing of them: And to that end would call together some of the
most godly, prudent, peaceable Divines of each party, that differs in points of
Church Government, and lay upon them your Commands and Adjuration, that they
cease not amicable consulting and seeking God, till they have found out a meet
way for accommodation and unity, and acquainted you therewith: And if through
Gods heavy displeasure against us, he shall suffer the spirit of division and
prejudice so far to prevail, as to frustrate their consultations (the contrary
whereto we should strongly hope) that you would be pleased to advise with those
Divines that are most judicious and peaceable, and least addicted to parties;
and thereupon to recommend at least to the people, so much of Church Order and
Government, as you find to be clearly required by Jesus Christ, and vouchsafe
it your public Countenance and Encouragement, though you scruple an
enforcement.

These things we humbly and earnestly request of this Honorable Assembly, in
the behalf of Jesus Christ (to whom we doubt not but you are daily Petitioners)
and of this Commonwealth, and the souls of men: beseeching you to let the
interest of the Gospel have the most speedy and resolute dispatch in your
consultations, and at least to equal it with our most necessary defense,
whereby you will the more engage Christ to defend both you and us, whom you
have so often found to be the surest defense: So shall you be called The
Repairers of our Breaches; And shall oblige us to pray, etc.

[Subscribed by above Six thousand.]

COl: John Bridges, and Mr. Thomas Folly being called in to the House, Master
Speaker told them, the House had read and considered the Petition brought up
out of the County of Worcester, and the House had commanded him to give them
thanks on the behalf of those of the County of Worcester that sent it, for
their good affections expressed therein: And accordingly he did give them the
thanks of the House, and that they would take their Petition into serious
consideration in due time.

FINIS.

