A BREVIATE OF THE Proceedings OF FRANCE, From the PYRENAEAN TREATY to this
TIME.

AS ALSO, I. The Speech of Monsieur Zierowsky, the Emperor's Ambassador to the
King of POLAND. II. A Memorial presented by the said Ambassador to the King of
POLAND. III. A Letter from Monsieur Du Vernay to Count Tekeley. IV. A Letter
from Count Tekeley to Monsieur Du Vernay. V. A Letter from Monsieur Peter
Jaigel, Governor of Cassovia, to Monsieur Du Vernay.


Printed at Cologne, and Reprinted at London, to be sold by Walter Davies in
Amen-Corner, 1684.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Little Discourse was most certainly a French Protestant,
and One who has been a Sufferer among the Rest in the late Persecution of the
Reformed Religion in France. It Is but a small Treatise, but it gives the World
a large Prospect of the Violencies and Cruelties of the French Government, both
at home and abroad; and the Miseries of those that lie under it is Oppression.
How far it may have an Influence upon Other Nations, or Answer the Author's
Expectation, who has made it his Business to exhort them to the Recovery of
their Liberty, wrested from them by Bribery, Breach of Leagues and
Correspondence with the Turks Themselves, to the Destruction of so many
Families as have perished in the Desolation of their Country and the Ruin of
Christianity it self, I know not; but certainly to our own, it may be of Great
Advantage, to make the People consider the Felicities they enjoy under a King
truly Most Christian, a just and peaceable Sovereign, and how much more happy
they are than their Neighbors* and how industriously they go about to bring
Themselves into the same Condition by their own needless Discontents and Fiery
Dissentions: Which certainly they would never do, did they but seriously weigh
in the same Balance the Arbitrary Dominion of the French hereafter displayed,
and the Immunities and Advantages we Enjoy by the Excellent Composure of our
Government both in Church and State.

THE AMBITION OF FRANCE UPON EUROPE.
IT is no difficult thing to discern the Original of those Miseries under which
we labor at this day: They who will give themselves the Trouble to reflect
upon the Transactions, which have been the most remarkable for these Twenty
years last past in Europe, will agree with me, that if we had been so fortunate
to have grown wife by our Sufferings, we should not have seen our selves
reduced to those Calamities under which we now groan. For in short this is not
the first time, that France has been known to have broken Leagues, tho never so
sacred and inviolable. Her Ambition has not been able to keep her self reserved
without appearing in her Colors. But we have been either so weak or so blind,
as never to make a vigorous opposition till it was too late. Therefore we can
only impute our Misfortunes to our selves, and must ingeniously confess, that
if we suffer at this day the punishment of our Imprudence, it is no more than
what we justly deserve.

In a word, to whom ought we to impute the Imbecility of the Spaniards but to
our selves, who have so often contributed to reduce them to their present
condition? Was it not easy for us to see, that they supported themselves only
by the means of those Cabals, that were maintained in France against Cardinal
Mazarin, and that if the Prince of Conde had forsaken their Interest, their
good Fortune and Reputation had been at an end? nevertheless when we observed,
that we had lost the Assistance of that Prince, who was returned to his Duty by
the Pyrenaean Peace, and that France to the prejudice of a League so sacredly
ratified, forbore not however, not only to foment the Troubles of Portugal, but
also to send considerable Supplys to their assistance at several times; I say,
when we saw, that the Peace was no more than a Cloak for France's Ambition,
have we not suffered the Oppression of our Neighbors, without so much as
opening our Lips, as if True Policy had not taught us, that it was time to
oppose the Designs of a Nation, which would never be contented, 'till she had
satisfied her Ambition by the Conquest of the World?

Nevertheless, with what confidence, if I may not call it Impudence, did she
maintain, that she acted nothing but what was conformable to the Peace? Did not
she likewise insinuate, that whatever was done in the behalf of Portugal, was
done without her Order? To which purpose while she covertly sent Supplys of Men
and Money into that Kingdom, she published her strictest Prohibitions to
prevent the Transportation of Arms thither, yet underhand encouraged her
Subjects to carry supplys to that Crown, as the only means to purchase Esteem
and Reputation; yet all this while carried fair with the Ambassador, who made
loud complaints of these Breaches, especially when he saw that the Marquess of
Beauveau had permission to levy a Regiment of Cavalry for the Service of that
Crown in the Metropolis of France, just under his Nose; after he had Articl'd
to outward appearance with the Portugal Ambassador, but in reality with the
Court of France. After all which proceedings she would needs have it, that
whatever the Spanish Ambassador said, was but the effect of his Fancy and
Imagination; as now at this very time she would make us believe that she has no
Design to make a War, tho she has eaten up a Country within these few Months,
to which she has no Right at all, and to which she has not the least of Lawful
Pretenses, if Reason and Justice were the Rule of her Actions.

All this while, though we have observed all along these Practices of France,
without the least opposition, yet neither do we make any advantage of them at
this day, that we see our selves just ready to be made the Unfortunate Victims
of Her Ambition. It Is true I know there are several who will reply that
Succors have been sent to the Spaniards, which if it were done, we are
beholding to the Prince of Orange, who having a deeper Foresight than others,
could not suffer us to be overwhelmed, without doing at least what was his Duty
to do; which is the reason we find him so firmly bent against the Persecutions
and Injuries of France, which esteems not Virtue, but when it agrees with Her
Interest.

But to return to the business, I say that France endeavored to blear the Eyes
of the Spanish Ambassador, who had in mind however to hunt the wrong Deer, when
an unexpected Accident made her act with more boldness, and forbear any longer
to disguise her Thoughts. She had treated with Montgeorges, who was slain in
the late Wars, and who was then a Captain in Candale, a stout Soldier, and one
who loved War above all things, to carry a Supply of Officers and Soldiers into
Portugal: Now Montgeorges, being embarked with his Company, and upon his Voyage
into Portugal, happened to be taken by the Spaniards, which were advertised of
his Departure; upon which there was a necessity for France to take off her
Mask; for that the Spaniards began already to talk of cutting off Montgeorges's
Head.

This apparent Act of Infidelity was attended by several others, and yet no
Neighboring Puissance interposed it is Authority, to the end these things might
be regulated according to Justice: Not but that there was Warranty for the
Pyrenaean Peace; as well as there are now for the Peace of Nimeghen, but that
they are such, who after the Conclusion of the Treaty, never mind afterward
the Breaches which are made of it, so that there is not one at this time takes
any care to send any succor to the Spaniards, whose Ruin is attempted by so
many indirect means. On the other side, the Spaniards, whether they are become
insensible, or which is most probable, that they understand their own
weakness, are contended to see themselves so rudely handled without testifying
the least Resentment, but only by Complaints, altogether misbecoming Sovereign
Princes, especially if not prosecuted with effectual Deeds; so that others
seeing them so patiently swallow all Affronts, did not think themselves
obliged to take their Part.

Which Weakness of theirs was certainly most apparent upon the Occasion of an
Accident that happened in London betvveen Monsieur d'Estrades and Monsieur de
Vataville Ambassadors of both Crowns: For after the Baron of Vataville had got
the Precedence before Monsieur d'Estrades, upon the Entry of another
Ambassador; Spain did not only disclaim and disavovv the Act, but also has for
ever stained her Reputation, by an Ignominious Declaration, which I dare not
repeat, and which I cannot remember without blushing out of my Respect and
Love to the Nation. However if the thing be called to mind, we ought to lay the
Fault upon those other Potentates, that showed themselves so passionately
earnest for the Peace, that they never laid to heart the Affront which was
offered to Spain, who seeing her self abandoned by all the World, was forced to
abate of her wonted Haughtiness.

Nevertheless the more notable Head-pieces, perceiving how proudly France
behaved her self upon that occasion were of opinion, that it was necessary to
withstand Her Ambition before the further Increase of her Strength and Power:
But the Council of these prudent Politicians was listened to by way of
Discourse only, and the Seizure of Blindness began to be so general, that they
looked upon those who discoursed at that rate, as Persons that rather sought to
disturb than preserve the Peace so necessary for all Europe.

Nor did they begin to unhoodwink their Eyes; till France, no longer able to
continue quiet, resolved to carry the War into Flanders under Pretenses
altogether as Chymerical as those at present; But with an Advocate of Paris,
such a one as they were careful to choose out of the sharpest witted of the
Chiurme, undertook to beautify with a specious varnish, an Undertaking, which
a Person of Honesty and Integrity would have been very much troubled to
perform; only he who had served his Apprentiship at the Petty Bar, where for
Two Crowns, they will defend the wickedest Injustice in the World, was of
Opinion, that being much better feed than so, it did not become him to neglect
so fare an Opportunity for his Preferment: So that Interest prevailing above
Truth, in a short time there came forth a Manifesto, wherein they endeavored
to maintain, that though the King by the Pyrenaean Treaty had renounced all
manner of Pretenses which he might hereafter have to the Low Countries or
Netherlands, in right of his Wife, that Renunciation was invalid, because the
Parliament had never confirmed the Articles.

The same Manifesto endeavored further to prove, that the Queen had a Right to
several Provinces; and therefore to give the Manifesto a Title proper to what
they went about to make out, it was Entitled The Rights of the Queen. For you
must understand, that it was the King himself, who had hindr'd the Pyrenaean
Treaty from being Registered in Parliament, to the end that for the future it
might serve for a Pretense against what had been signed by Himself, and the
chiefest Nobility of France.

Which piece of Litigious Craft when it gave occasion to all the World to
reflect upon the Small Faith and Sincerity of the French King, Men were
surpised with wonder, That so great a Prince, who affected the Title of most
Christian King should commit such Violences as would make Infidels to blush;
and took pleasure to recount his Actions, that by comparing the one with the
other, the disadvantage might the better appear on the Kings side. The general
question was, whether a man were not obliged to keep his Word which he had so
solemnly sworn upon the Gospels, confirmed by so Great and Near an Alliance,
and where there was nothing omitted to render inviolable by all the most
considerable Acts that could be performed? And then the question was whether
there were any thing that could disoblige a Man from an Oath so solemn? to
which the General Answer was, that it was an Action dreaded by Men, and which
called for the just Vengeance of God.

And indeed there needs no greater Skill in Theology to understand, that
Christianity and the Church, which is the same Thing, sufficiently teaches us,
that we are to keep our Words, not only to a Father-in-Law, as this occasion
required, but also to a Turk. There is a notable Example of this in the Person
of a French Gentleman of the Family of Anglure, from whence there are several
who derive their Descent that live in great splendour to this day. The
particular History of this Family relates, that one of their Ancestors being
taken in Fight by Soladin, Sultan of Egypt, was set at Liberty after a long
Imprisonment, upon condition that he should return himself in Person with the
Ransom which the Soladin had laid upon his Head; the Gentleman coming home, and
having sold part of his Estate to make good his Word, returned back to Soladin,
and told him he had brought his Ransom in Person according to his own Agreement
and Conditions, and that if he pleased to name any Person to receive it he
would presently tell it out. Soladin, who never thought any more of him, but
believed, that since he had let him go, he should never see him again, was so
surpised at his Generosity, that after he had embraced and caressed him with
all imaginable Endearment, he told him, that from thence forward he should have
a greater respect for the Christians than ever he had; and thereupon he did not
only release him of his Ransom, but ordered his Treasurer to give him Ten
Thousand Franks, which was a great Sum in those days. He further desired his
Friendship, and that always the Eldest of his Family might be called Saladin,
to the end that if Posterity should be curious to know why they bore a Name so
extraordinary among the Christians, they might be informed at the same time of
the Occasion: Which Request of Soladin has been observed ever since; insomuch
that the Count Destoges, the Eldest of the Family, is this day named Soladin.

If I might be permitted to make Reflections upon this Story, I could without
difficulty prove, that the present is far different from the Ages past.
Formerly they kept their word with Turks, now adays, a most Christian King will
not keep his Faith with his Father-in-Law. At this day the Descendants from a
Christian Race are Christened Saladine; because their Ancestor so promised to
the Turk. At this present a most Christian King neither minds the word, which
his Ancestors have past to their Subjects of the Reformed Religion, nor the
Promises which he has made himself: At this day the Family of Anglure, which is
only a private Gentleman's, derives all it is Honor from the Noble Act of one
of its Ancestors, who made good his profligated Faith to the Turk; but the
House of France, the most renowned in the World, for the Breach of an Infinite
Number of the Edicts, granted in favor of the Christians.

But to return to our Subject, the King of France, grounding his Claims upon
Imaginary Pretenses, and upon a Nicety, that the Parliament had not ratified
the Pyrenaean Treaty, resolved to break the Peace, and carry his Arms into
Flanders. But here before I go any further give me leave to tell the World,
what the Authority of this Parliament is, to prevent the Mistake of those, who
may think it equal in Power to the Parliament of England. You are then to
understand that the slightest Order of Council cancels all Edicts of
Parliament, the Power of which is so limited at this day, that though it take
Cognizance only of private and particular Interests, the Council sends for the
Cause before themselves and laughs at all that the Parliament has done in the
same Case. Formerly nevertheless it is Authority was very great, nor was it long
ago, that it was grown to that height, that every one admired at it; I mean
during the Minority of the King: But there is such an Alteration since that
time, that there is little notice taken of the Parliament.

And indeed at that very time, when the forementioned Manifesto appeared, the
King took away all their Privileges, banished all those that were suspected to
have any affection for the public Interest, and in a word, contemned it so far
that he never went thither, but in his Riding Boots and his Cane in his Hand.
He also deprived it of its very Name, as he served the rest of the Tribunals:
For to make it appear, that there were no more Masters but himself, he set
forth an Edict, That neither the Parliament nor the Grand Council, nor the
Chamber of Accounts, nor the Court of Aids should be called by any other Title
than that of Superior, whereas before they were called Sovereign Courts. He
also put forth another Edict, which savoured in my opinion of much more wrong
and Injustice: For whereas, when any new Imposition was thought upon and laid
upon the People, or any other Innovation was imposed upon the Government, the
King was wont to go in Person to see those Edicts ratifyed; the Parliament is
now obliged to make the Ratification upon a bare Letter under the Privy Signet,
many times carried by a Footman; So that this great Tribunal formerly erected
to be a Mediator between the King and the People, and to preserve the one from
the Tyranny of the other, is now it self enforced to bow and crouch to the
Kings Will: For now they dare not make those Remonstrances, which formerly they
did, nor plead as before in behalf of the People. Or if they are permitted to
make any Addresses of that Nature, they must be full of Flattery and
Dissimulation; and as some Parents humble their Children to kiss the Rod after
Correction; so it behooves the People, who are the Kings Children, or should be
so at least, to thank the King by the Mouths of their Magistrates, for all the
Taxes and heavy Impositions, which he lays upon them to satisfy his profusion.

Upon this Authority, which the Parliament has in the Kingdom it was, That the
King laid the Foundation of an approaching War. In a Word, the King of Spain
was not sooner dead, but presently there appeared a small Pamphlet, under the
Title of The Rights of the Queen, by which they endeavored to prove, that the
Renunciation of all Claims which the King had made by the Pyrenaean Treaty was
utterly void, because it was never verifyed by the Parliament. And yet if the
Renunciation had been good, which they did not much matter to dispute, it could
not have been long in force, by reason that the Dauphin had not ratifyed the
Treaty, who might pretend a greater Interest as being his Mothers Heir. In
truth, this Pamphlet was nothing but a Composure of Words well put together,
containing very little or no reason. For to begin with the first, true it is,
That the Parliament were wont to ratify the most remarkable Acts of the
Kingdom, but that such a Ratification was absolutely Essential is that which we
deny, and which I shall endeavor to prove: For Example, if the King happens to
marry with any Foreign Princess, the Parliament has nothing to do with the
Contract: Nor do we find, that the Parliament had any knowledge of that between
H. 4. and Marie Medici; or which is still fresh in Memory, of the Marriage
between the Dauphin and Madam the Dauphiness. And yet the Affairs transacted
were as important, as perhaps the Kings Renunciation made by the Pyrenaean
Treaty: But some perhaps will object, That the Case is far different; For in a
Treaty of Peace is stated and handled the Establishment of the Peoples Peace;
whereas in a Treaty of Marriage there is nothing transacted, but the Concern of
two Persons. I confess the reason seems plausible but easy to refute: For if
it be in respect of the Peoples Interest that a Treaty of Peace ought to be
ratifyed by the Parliament, why are not the Treaties of War ratifyed in the
same manner? They will have a Treaty which exterminates War, and restores Peace
to a Kingdom, instead of Trouble and Confusion that Reigned there before, to be
subject to a Parliamentary Ratification; but they will not have a Treaty of
War, that banishes Peace, and brings in Disorder and Confusion to be ratifyed
by Parliament, which nevertheless was instituted to no other end than the
Preservation of the People. Let us rather say, that the Custom of verifying
Treaties of Peace in this manner was not introduced, till after it was
ordained, that all the Royal Benevolences should be ratifyed in Parliament, and
that such as were not so verifyed, should be of no value, which was done to
prevent Princes who are generally prone to profuse Liberality, from giving away
all their Patrimony, and being afterward obliged, for want of Money to vex the
People. Let us grant then say I, that the Parliament, setting that by some
Treaties of Peace, considerable Alienations were made from the Crown, chiefly
under John the First, to free himself out of the hands of the English; and
afterward under Francis the First, to deliver himself out of the hands of the
Spaniards, had Authority given them to verify Treaties of Peace, to prevent the
Distipation of the Crown Revenues. But their Authority is yet greater, when it
shall be a Law received in France, that the Parliament may vacate Treaties
which are not verifyed, that is to say, if the Treaties were not made in due
Form, or were found prejudicial to the People.

But it cannot be said, that France received any prejudice by the Pyrenaean
Treaty, or that the Treaty was not concluded with all the usual Formalities. In
respect of Formalities there were so many observed as took up much more time
than was necessary for the Repose of the People, who after so tedious a War,
thirsted after nothing so much as Peace; nor was it enough that De Lionne and
Pimentell set their hands to the Treaty, but to render it more solemn; Cardinal
Mazarine and Lewis de Haro, the Principal Ministers of both Crowns, were
obliged to sign it also, so that we may say that it was the most Authentic
Treaty that had been concluded in a long time before. Besides, they had
observed all the Circumstances imaginable, insomuch that the place appointed
for the Conferences, was neither in France nor in Spain, which nevertheless is
very remarkable: For that then they were willing, that Spain should go cheek by
jowle with France; yet afterward they would not allow that the Treaty had been
ratified: But that which seemed to put the Treaty not only out of the King's
but out of the reach of all France to do it Injury was that the chiefest of the
Clergy and Nobility had signed the Contract of Marriage between the King and
the Infanta, wherein the aforesaid Renunciation was contained. So that it was
an idle thing to say that the Parliament, which at most does but represent the
Orders or Estates of the Kingdom would not approve a Treaty, which was already
approved by the King, the Clergy and the Nobility.

Now that this Treaty brought no prejudice to France is as easy to prove: For
though France at that time had a great advantage over Spain, we must consider
nevertheless, that this advantage might one day turn against it self, as being
obliged to share it is Conquests with England, then in Alliance with her. Now
not to mention in the least what are the dangerous Consequences that I could
draw from such a Partition, it shall suffice to say, That the Interest of
France was not to let the English get Footing in Flanders, who were an Enemy
much more dangerous than the Spaniard. Besides, France by that Treaty had made
sure of the greatest part of Her Conquests, and had changed into a certain
Right the Right of Nations, which was a Right subject to several Chances of
Fortune; and then to object that the Dauphin had not ratified the Queens
Renunciation is an Objection so weak that it does not deserve an Answer: For I
wouln fain know, whether a Father and a Mother do not bind their Issue when
they sign a Contract? And whether the Dauphin had more right to question that
which the King and Queen had signed, than they who live under the same Laws and
the same Monarchy.

All these Considerations give us plainly to see that whatever of Right
belonging to the Queen was in the Treaty, was only to amuse the Common People,
and particularly those of Flanders, who being persuaded that the Queen had a
Right to the Netherlands, were in a capacity to foment a Rebellion, to which
they might be provoked by the ill Usage of the Spanish Soldiery, who for want
of Pay, commit many Violences and Disorders. It being therefore a great piece
of Prudence to prevent all Trouble that might arise from thence, the Baron of
Isola, one of the Ministers of the House of Austria, put Pen to Paper, to show
the Vanity of the Consequences, which the pretended Author of the Treatise drew
from the Right of the Queen. Of which a great number of Copies were sent into
Flanders, Germany and the Neighboring Parts; some were also conveyed into
France; but the Court resolving that the People should make it is Ambition an
Article of their Faith, made such an exact Enquiry after the Publishers that
two or three were committed to the Bastile, and were in great danger of their
Lives. For as it was not lawful in that Kingdom to write Truth, either in
Religion or Politics, neither was it permitted to be spoken or taught to any
one whatsoever. And therefore as well they who bought the Book, as they who
published these Books were obliged to keep out of the way, as if they had been
Malefactors. But the more they thought to restrain the Peoples Wills, the more
the People endeavored to set their minds at Liberty, so that many honest Folks
made it their business to content their Curiosity, in spite of all the public
Prohibitions.

By virtue of these Imaginary Pretensions the King failed not to send to the
Governor of the Netherlands to surrender into his hands those places, which,
as he pretended, belonged to the Queen. And because he could not choose but
know, that the Governor would no way answer his Expectations, he followed the
Messenger with a puissant Army, to make himself the Master of them by force;
thereupon, having received the Governors Answer, that the King his Master would
fairly part with nothing, he entered Flanders, took Charleroy, Aeth, Courtray,
Audenard and Lisle, while the Marshal D'Aumont with another Army attacked the
Cities and Towns that lay nearer the Sea.

These Conquests carried on with such a rapid Success, astonished the
Neighboring States, who thought it their Interest to stop these violent
Proceedings; especially the Low Countries, who by no means liked the near
Approach of so formidable and ambitious a Neighbor: Therefore they engaged the
King of England to enter into a League, wherein the King of Swedeland also
joined, by which they obliged themselves all three, to make the French and
Spaniard lay down their Arms, with a Resolution to declare a War against the
obstinate Refuser.

This League was called the Triple Alliance, afterward so fatal to Holland, as
I shall relate in due Place, that it may be thought they had reason enough to
repent their Negotiation. They say it was a Person of Rochel, who laid the
first Foundations of it, after he had made those Powerful Princes deeply
sensible, how little the Ambition of France was to be trusted; however it were,
France, who seldom easily pardons those that have once offended her, well
knowing that the same Person was in Switzerland, laboring to insinuate the
same Opinion among the Cantons, sent thither the two Platells, of which the
Eldest was a Captain of Horse, the other Esquire to Monsieur Turenne, to
apprehend him. It had been a knotty Enterprise and of dangerous consequence for
the Platells, had their Errand been discovered in Switzerland. But being so
cunning as to carry their business private, and to surprise the Person, as he
passed from one City to another, they carried him into France, where he was
broken alive upon the Wheel, after he had endeavored to escape the Torments of
his Execution, by an Action more resolute than Christian-like: For having found
in the hole of the Prison, where he lay a piece of Glass, he cut off his Privy
Members, and hid them under the Bed, that the Jailer might not know what he had
done: but in regard he could not stanch the blood so well but that some drops
would fall from the wound, besides that his Color plainly showed that
something more than ordinary ailed him, the Jailer would see whence the Blood
came: So that after a short search having found, what was hidden under the Bed,
all in a puddle of Blood; he went and gave the Judges notice of it, who being
resolved to make him a public Example hastened to give Sentence. Thereupon
they condemned him to be broken upon the Wheel, and fearing he might not have
strength enough to be carried to the common place of Execution, or that he
might dye, if they delayed till the Afternoon, Order was given for the
immediate Erecting of a Scaffold before the Prison-door, and for his speedy
Execution.

The Triple Alliance, which France did not foresee, astonished her so, that
although she had promised her self the Conquest of the greatest Part of all
Flanders, she was obliged nevertheless to lay down her Arms; not but then she
had an Army on foot of above a Hundred Thousand Men, but in regard that England
and Holland made great Preparations by Sea, and that she had no Fleet was able
to resist two such potent Enemies, she was afraid, least the English and
Hollanders, while her Forces were employed in Flanders, might land either in
Normandy or Britainy, and strike a panick Terror into the heart of his Kingdom.

France having thus made a Peace, as it were by Constraint, she plotted nothing
more, than to revenge her self upon those, who had contributed most effectually
toward it. Now it being apparent that the United Provinces had been most active
upon that occasion, and that all Europe owed the Peace which it enjoyed to
Them, it was their Lot to feel the weight of his Fury; yet was she careful to
watch her Opportunity before she brake forth into an open Blaze of Revenge: For
Holland being as yet in League with England and Swedland, therefore there must
be a way found out to divide her from two such Potent Friends, who being United
were still sufficiently powerful to disappoint all the French Designs: Which as
France had still watched to bring to pass, it was not long before an
Opportunity offered it self, by reason of an unhappy difference between the
English and Dutch about Trade. Nor did France then take any care as she had
formerly done, to offer her Mediation, to close up the breach between the Two
Nations, but on the contrary used all means to incense the King of England, yet
underhand set on foot a Treaty with the Hollanders, least they should have any
thoughts of making Peace with Great Britain. The Hollanders, who had often
proved the good Effects of the French Succors, when they had any quarrel with
England, believed they would be still as effectual; depending upon the King of
France, who ceased not to amuse 'em with daily hopes: But while they were thus
as they thought, upon a conclusion with Him, to oppose the King of England, who
was making powerful Preparations against 'em by Sea, they were not a little
surpised to find that the two Princes were joined both together, and that
while the English attacked 'em by Sea, the French were to fall upon them by
Land, and that with a Force so numerous and dreadful, that the Memory of
History had not Paralleled the like out of France in a long time: And then it
was that the United Provinces found themselves in a strange Disorder; for tho
they wanted neither Ships, nor Money, yet had they not an Army sufficient to
oppose the King of France who had brought his Forces already into the Country
about Cologne, from whence he intended to make the Attack.

In the midst of these Troubles to levy Men in Holland, was looked upon as a
Remedy that would but little avail; when Peace enjoyed for so many years had
rendered the People more fit for Trade than War; raw Soldiers not being proper
to make resistance against inured and hardy veterans: Therefore the Hollanders
sent into Germany to raise Forces, and to treat with those Princes from whom
they expected aid; but all Europe was so astonished at the prodigious Army and
Preparations of France, that every one kept his own Force at home, out of a
Jealousy, least France, under a pretense of assailing the Low Countries,
should break into Germany.

The Hollanders at that time had no more than Five and Twenty Thousand Men; for
tho they had given out Commissions to all that proffered their Service, yet
they could reckon upon none but those that were drawn down to the general
Rendevouze. But that which yet enfeebl'd their Condition the more was, that De
Wit, the Pensionary of Holland, had always kept the Prince of Orange at a
distance from the Management of Affairs; and therefore being a better
Politician than Soldier, yet one who would have a hand in every thing, the
main business was carried with much Disorder and Confusion. There was also one
thing more which very much contributed to the Ruin of the State, tho at that
time not discovered, which was that the King of France had Intelligence of
every thing that was acted in the Country by means of Mombas, then in the
Service of the Republic, which had given him a considerable Command in the
Army: He was a Frenchman born, so that he was easily gained to the King, by the
Industry of Des Roches Captain of the Prince of Conde's Guards, and his near
Relation, and who had prevailed with him to take a Journey into France the
Winter before, where he had been discoursed with by Monsieur the Prince.

This Conjuncture of Accidents had been sufficient to have utterly ruined the
State, according to humane probability, had not God determined the contrary. At
what time, the King of France being ready to enter the Country, the States
assembled together to consider of the best way for the Defense of their
Dominions: Monsieur the Prince of Orange, who maugre all the shuffling and
juggling of De Wit, was chosen Captain General for the States, advised the
quitting of all the Places above the Rhine, to put in Ten Thousand Soldiers
into Maestrick, and to encamp with the rest at Bodegrave, as being a most
advantageous Post to secure Holland. Monsieur D' Opdam and Celidrek, who spoke
in the behalf of the Nobility, were of the same Opinion; but the rest being of
a contrary Judgmeni, it was resolved that they should hold all the several
Places beyond the Rhine, which nevertheless they very much weakened by draining
those Garrisons to supply Maestrick.

In the mean while, the King having lain for some time before Charleroy,
marched in view of Maestrick, and stayed some Twelve or Fifteen Days before
Wise, a small Town in the Territory of Liege, into which he clapped a Garrison;
there having received Intelligence from Mombas, that all the Towns above the
Rhine were slenderly manned, and almost naked of Defense, he passed the Meuse
at Wise, and after he had beaten off certain Troops that were advantageously
posted, he sat down before Orsoy with a formal Siege. The Governor wanted no
Courage, but in regard the Town was neither strong of it self, nor sufficiently
Garrisoned, he surrendered his Charge the day following. The French plundered
the Town, and hanged up all those of their own Nation that they found in Arms,
and among the rest one Man that was Threescore and six years of Age, who was
the chief Canonier in Orsoy. From thence the Army marched to Rhineberg, which
Dossery surrendr'd without striking a stroke. For which not long after the
Prince of Orange caused his Head to be severed from his Shoulders. Nor did the
Governor of Wesel make a Resistance much more to his Honor; though the Place
was able to have sustained a long Siege, who surrendered it to the Prince of
Conde after and Entrenchment of two or three days. Whose Punishment therefore
though not so severe as Dossory's, was something like it: For the Hangman
skimm'd his Sword over his Head, but spared him his Ignominious Life. Buric was
at the same time taken by Marshel Turenne. After which the Prince of Conde
advanced into the Country, and took in Deudetrom, Rees and Emeric with the same
Ease that he mastered other Places.

These Victories though they cost but little Blood, gave the King of France the
Reputation of a Caesar in his Army. For they saw that he might say like Him, I
came, I viewed and vanquished, Therefore to uphold the Glory he had won, he
resolved to pass the Rhine, as formerly that Emperor had done; but he would
pass it after a more Noble and Heroic Manner: For Caesar had passed it by the
means of a Bridge, but he was resolved to swim it over.

Two Gentlemen of the Country, Neighbors to Tholus, whose Names I cannot well
remember, came to the Prince of Conde at Emeric, and offered to show him a
Place, where he had but an hundred Paces to swim. He gladly accepted their
Offer, which made the French now look upon themselves at the End of their
Conquests, in regard the Issel stopped their Entrance into the Country, not
only because of its depth, but also by reason the Enemy lay strongly entrenched
on the other side of the River. Thereupon the Prince of Conde, having highly
caresses'd the two Gentlemen, and promising them large Reward's commanded the
Count de Guiche to go along with them, to try whether or no he might confide in
what they had said; immediately they carried the Count right against Tholus,
and throwing themselves first into the Water, the Count followed with his
Squire, while his Party stayed behind by the River side: Upon this Trial
finding that the Gentlemen had spoken nothing but what was Truth, the Count
returned and made his Report to the Prince, who sent the King an Account of
what had happened, adding withal, if he pleased to take the Honor of the
Enterprise upon himself, how easy it would be for him to surprise the Enemy,
who little mistrusted any such Discovery, and minded nothing but to guard the
Issel. The King eager in the Chase of so much Honor, flew to the Prince of
Conde's Camp, and after he had supped with him, marched all night along the
Bank of the Rhine, and arrived at the Place about half an hour before day.

In the mean time the Prince of Orange, who found more fidelity among the
Meaner Sort than among the Nobility, being advertized by the Boors, who saw the
French, when they sounded the Depth of the River, that the King had some Design
on the other side, sent thither Mombas with the Cavalry and Infantry. Mombas
had already forfeited his Honor by keeping Correspondence with the Enemy, but
tho this Opportunity was no less favorable for him to continue his Treacherous
Designs, was afraid, that for want of being known, he might run some hazard in
the Conflict, bethought himself of writing to the Deputies of the States, who
attended the Prince of Orange; and thereupon sent them a fair Story that there
was no Likelihood, that the French had any Design to pass the River, and that
therefore, if they thought good, he would put himself into Nimeghen, whither it
was most probable that the French intended to march: He took his Time to send
this Letter when the Prince was absent from the Camp with a Detachment; so that
the Deputies not having the least Mistrust of his Fidelity, and believing the
Care of Nimeghen to be of greater Consequence, sent him Orders to march
thither. The Prince of Orange returning to the Camp, was strangly surprised, to
hear what Mombas had done, and being now confirmed by this last Action of his,
in some former Suspicions he had of his being a Traitor, caused him to be
Arrested.

Which done, he commanded Wortz a German, whom the Republic had taken into
their Services to march with all speed to Tholus, with some Companies that were
drawn out of the Army. Wortz did all he could to hasten his Entrenchments, and
ordered the Cavalry to advance to the side of the River. Whither the King being
also arrived, caused several Pieces of Canon to be brought and levelled against
Wortz's Cavalry, who thereupon retired among the Trees that grew by the banks
side. In the mean time the French threw themselves into the River, where they
lost abundance of Men, who were swallowed up in a Gulf, which others observing
took the advantage of the left hand and forded over like Cowes, one at the Tail
of the other.

Wortz his Cavalry beheld the Enemy passing the River, without so much as
giving the least Ground, till they saw some of the French Horse that were
passed the River, begin to Form themselves into a Body. And then indeed they
presently drew out from among the Trees, but they were so far from endeavoring
to repel the Enemy, who were retired back into the Water, that they stopped at
the River side, from whence they discharged a Volley of Shot, but at such a
distance, as did little or no Execution. Which Cowardice of theirs put Life
into the French, who had they been vigorously pursued into the Water, would
never have adventured to make head again, or to have made a stand till more
assistance came to their Relief. So that as soon as they found themselves
strong enough to march against the Dutch Horse, who still kept their Station
without moving, they marched out of the River with their Swords in their hands
and put the Dutch to flight. Thus Wortz's Cavalry having fordidly given ground,
the French rallyed and grew stronger and stronger by the Addition of more
Force; the French continually passing the River, some wading, others in Boats.

Mounsieur the Prince of Conde, also having put himself into a Boat with the
Duke D' Angion, and several other great Personages of the Court, was got near
the opposite Shore, when he perceived that Monsieur de Longueville, having
thrown himself into the River, was very near drowning, so that he was forced to
return back, to take him into the Boat; but then speedily recovering the other
side, he was no sooner landed but he drew up his Forces into Battalia, to
attack the Enemies Entrenchments. The Dutch Infantry seeing but little security
in their slender Works, and on the other side having put all their confidence
in their Cavalry, by which they saw themselves now totally abandoned, took more
care to crave quarter, than to make any resistance, which Monsieur the Prince
of Conde offered them, crying out aloud to them to lay down their Arms: All
this while the French advanced forward without so much as discharging a Gun on
either side, so that the King of France, who saw all that passed, thought
himself sure of a Victory that would cost no Blood: But Monsieur de
Longueville, who had been drinking hard at Emeric, advancing up to the
Trenches, let fly a Pistol, so that the Hollanders, not a little ashamed that
they had forborne so long, and believing now there was no Quarter to be
expected, returned in answer to the Dukes Pistol such a smart Volley, that many
of the most considerable of the Enemy were fetched off their Horses. Monsieur
Longueville who began the skirmish was killed outright, the Prince of Conde
wounded, with many others too long to Catalogue.

The French at first astonished at this unexpected Accident, having recovered
themselves from their Fears rallyed again and fell upon the Intrenchments,
where they found some Resistance; especially at a Barricado, where stood a gray
haired Officer, but one who notwithstanding his Years, showed a Courage
becoming the Prime of vigorous Youth; but at length being overlaid with number,
the rest betook themselves to flight, without demanding Quarter, which they
thought would but be in vain.

The French having now no Enemy to fight, pillaged the Castle of Tholus, and
put the Island of Bettaw under Contribution.

Nor was this the only advantage which they gained by their Passage over the
Rhine; for the Hollanders fearing least the Enemy should come upon their backs,
forsook the Issel, and retreated to Utrech, where the People would have
Sacrificed Mombas to their Fury, upon whom they laid all the blame of what had
happened: But Monsieur the Prince of Orange, though he knew he deserved Death,
but was willing to have him first examined, if not put to the Rack, to the end
he might understand the depth of his Treason, gave Order that he should be
conveyed through a Postern, and hid in a Hay-loft, to preserve him from the
Rage of the People. In the mean while the King in Person took the City of
DOESBERGH, and Monsieur Turenne took in Nimeghen, Zuoll, Deventer, Graves,
Arnheim, the Fort of Skink, Creveceur and several other Places.

Utrech also fell into the hands of the French, without the Constraint of a
Siege: For while the King lay before Doesbergh, the Burgher-Masters of the Town
carried him the Keys, as if they had been afraid they should not have a new
Master soon enough. Thereupon the Marquess of Rochford, in good reputation at
Court was sent thither to command in chief: But not having as yet much
Experience in War, he omitted to make himself Master of Maidam which the Dutch
had quitted; by the possession of which they had assured themselves of
Amsterdam: For had they been Masters of Maidam, it had been an easy thing to
hinder any Vessels from going in or out from Amsterdam; for that they were to
pass by Maidam, which they durst not have attempted, if the French had been
Masters of it; which had been the way to have compelled Amsterdam to have
surrendered of it self, as Utrech had done: Not but that if the King himself
had appeared before the Walls, they had certainly carried him the Keys; in
regard that such was the general Despair, that every one thought of nothing
else but to save his own Family, not minding the public Interest of their
Country: So that without expecting a Summons from the King, they held a Council
in the City, and debated whether they should not go to meet the King, and
beseech him to take as well the City as the Inhabitants into his Protection,
and it was an even Lay, but that they had taken that Resolution, had not two
Burghermasters, whose Memories ought to be Sacred to Posterity, and whose Names
were Offte and Hassenar, encouraged the rest to pluck up good hearts, and
rather to call the Sea to their Assistance which was a more certain remedy,
when they should be reduced to the last Necessity than to receive the French.

After the King had taken the City of Doesbregh, he encamped before Zeist, two
Leagues from Utrech, where he was attended by the States Ambassadors with
Propositions of Peace, but he being swelled with the Suecess of his Arms,
propounded such rigorous Conditions, that the Ambassadors were forced to return
without being able to accomplish their Desires. Nevertheless, when they arrived
at the Hague, the States resolved to send them back again, for that their
Affairs were then in such a desperate Condition, that they thought themselves
happy, that they could be thought to accept of any manner of Conditions.

There was yet another Difficulty in the Treaty; for that the King would
conclude nothing without the King of England, who finding the Conjuncture
favorable, was no less severe in his Demands.

The States Ambassadors being returned to Zeist, and finding there the English
Ambassadors likewise, proposed a New Treaty, but very difficult to conclude:
For besides that the French would not remit any thing of their former
Pretensions, the English Proposals ran so high, that it had been the Ruin of
the State to have agreed them. France demanded a Medal every year, by way of
Tribute, with all the Expenses of the War, which amounted, according to their
Accounts, to a prodigious Sum. England demanded Possession of the Indits, and
so many other things which appertained to the Republic, so that the States had
as good have abandoned all, as to conclude a Treaty so disadvantageous. The
States being advized of these things by their Ambassadors, who were returned
from Zeist, resolved to break down their Dams, which was their last Remedy upon
the utmost pinch of Necessity: But that which made them take this Resolution so
much the sooner, was this, that the People, laying all the blame of their
Misfortunes upon those who managed the public Affairs, had massacred the
Pensionary of Holland together with his Brother, hoping that the Face of
Affairs would change upon the Change of New Masters.

These Extremities causing the States to break up their Dams, gave them leisure
to think and consider of their Affairs: Whereupon they sent to the Princes of
Germany the Propositions of Peace which both Kings had made them, thereby to
prepossess their minds, with what they began already to harbor, as touching
the Ambition of France: They laid before them the sad condition to which they
were reduced, and that if they delayed their Succor any longer, it would be
too late, when they had a desire to do it. That their present Safety was in the
Water, which could not always secure them. That when the Winter came the French
would march over the Ice to storm their Walls: So that if they could not resist
when the Provinces were entire and flourishing, there was little likelihood
they should now withstand so potent an Enemy, when they were fallen from their
ancient Reputation.

These Remonstrances, of which they could not doubt the Truth, considering the
lamentable Condition of the Republic, moved the Emperor to pity, as also the
Marquess of Brandenburgh, and several other Princes of the Empire: The Marquess
of Brandenburgh, as being the most potent, was the first that took the field
for their Relief: So that the King knowing that he had now to deal with a
Prince stout, resolute and a tried Soldier, raised his Camp from before Zeist,
and returned toward France. But before his departure he resolved to try to make
himself Master of Boysleduc, which was blocked up upon one side by the Garrison
of Creveceur on the other by that of Endoue Bois le duc, is a Town seated in
the midst of a Marsh, but notwithstanding the strength of its Situation, the
Fortifications are but weak. Nevertheless there is a Citadel on that side next
to Holland, with two Forts on the other side next Maestricht, which however
would signify little, did not the Situation render it almost inaccessible. The
King took up his Head Quarters at Boustel, but while he was preparing all
things for a seige, God who had began to take Holland into His Protection, sent
such continual Rains for four or five days together, so that the Country being
Level was immediately all under Water, as if the Sluices had been opened. The
King however hoping for hard Weather, stopped at Bockstel for eight or ten days,
but finding the Weather continue bad, he Discamped and returned Home.

And now the Prince of Orange, who after the Death of the Pensionary, had the
sole Authority of command conferred upon Him, seeing the People in some sort of
Repose upon the Retreat of the King of France, bethought himself of giving them
yet further Content by the Punishment of Mombas; whose Head they eagerly
demanded. He had been conveyed from Utrick to Words, and from Words to
Nieurburk, whether the Dutch Army was retired. Thereupon the Prince of Orange
called a Counsel of War, and began to examine the business, which appeared every
day more foul than other; at length his Conscience not permitting him any rest,
and giving himself for lost, he began to think of making his escape, which
nevertheless was a difficult thing to do, by reason he was very strictly
guarded, having Sentinels at his Chamber Door, and under the Windows of his
Lodging: While he was musing what course to take, one of his Friends brought
him a Letter, which gave him to understand that he had but three Days to live,
if he did not find some way to escape: For that the Council of War was resolved
to make him an Example to others, and therefore advised him to look to himself.
Mombas finding himself so severely threatened, discoursed the same day with one
of his Guards, who promised him for a certain Sum of Money to let him escape
out at the Window, when he should be put to stand Sentinel at that Post, which
would fall out the next day. Having gone thus far, he also sounded a Spanish
Officer, who was to be upon the Guard the same day, at a deep Water, to know if
he would let him pass that way, and get him a Guide ready: The Officer no less
covetous of Money than the Sentinel, agreed for an hundred Pistols to all that
Mombas desired, The Bargain being thus driven, gave the Hundred Pistols to one
Villare, who served him in the Nature of his Squire, and had been an Agent in
the business, to carry them to the Spaniard: but Villare, instead of giving
them to the Officer, ran quite away with them; whether it were that he were
naturally inclined to such kind of Varlet's Tricks, or whether his Master were
in his Debt, and so he thought to pay himself while he had an opportunity;
however it were Mombas reckning upon his Payment, made it his business now to
deceive the Watch that guarded him in sight; to which purpose,

He first complained of a great Pain in his Leg, upon which he sent for a
Chyrurgeon, and showing him his Leg, which by reason of a wound he had received
was grown bigger than the other: He also desired the Prince to send him one of
his Chyrurgeons, who concluded, that his Grief required a large Plaster, which
they sent him to apply to the place affected; upon this pretense, he kept his
Bed without any Suspicion, and upon the day appointed he sent for some Tobacco,
telling the Guards he would smoke a Pipe with them after Supper; but pretending
of a sudden to be very sick, he went to Bed in the Soldiers presence,
desiring them withal to smoke their Tobacco in the next Chamber, because it
offended him. The Soldiers seeing him in Bed, and not dreaming that he had a
Design to escape, presently withdrew; who were no sooner out of the Chamber but
Mombas slipped out of his Bed, took the Plaster from his Leg and clapped it upon
his Eye, and leapt out at the Window where the Sentinel stood that had been
bribed, as already has been said.

In this Disguise he got through the Camp without being discovered; but when he
came to the Spaniard he was strangely surpised to find, that he would not let
him pass any farther, unless he gave him the Hundred Pistols beforehand, which
he had promised him. By this dispute Mombas presently discovered the Roguery
and Treachery of his Man Villaire; but there was no retreiving that which was
gone; and therefore he must now satisfy the Spaniard as well as he could; for
the Spaniard was resolved he would have his Bargain, and Mombas had it not to
pay over again. In the end being forced to make a Virtue of Necessity, he
turned his Pockets the inside outermost, and offered him all he had about Him:
But seeing that nothing but the Hundred Pistols would content him, Mombas told
the Officer that he might do with him as he pleased, but if he were the
occasion of his being retaken, he vowed to discover him in the first place, and
therefore bid him quickly consider, for he had nothing farther to say. The
Officer terrifyed with these Threats, took what Mombas was able to give him and
let him pass with his Guides. After this Mombas waded up to the Wast in Water
for three Leagues together, very often in danger of being drowned. But it was
but just that a Traitor who had occasioned the Ruin of a Nation, should have
his turn of Misery; who tho he endured a large Portion of Misfortune and
Hardship, yet suffered not the half of what he deserved.

Mombas being thus arrived at Words, after he had endured an Ocean of
Disasters more easy to imagine than to describe, took a Room in the Boat that
goes from Words to Uytrecht, but he was no sooner sat down, but he perceived
that a Woman who sat next him, knew him and had told his Name to another Woman
that sat next to her. Thereupon in a Peck of Troubles he quitted the Boat,
being resolved to take some other way. But not daring to adventure the High
road for fear of being known, he threw himself into any other guide then his
own despair, having neither Sous nor Doit to help himself.

When he came within a quarter of a League of Utrecht he forsook the Water, but
so bedaub'd with Mud and Dirt, that there was no possibility of presenting
himself in that condition. Thereupon he got leave at the next House to dry his
Clothes, and so getting into the Town, he went to the Sign of the Palace Royal,
where he met one of his Nephews by chance, who was a Captain in the French
Army. His Nephew seeing him enter, was so far from believing him to be his
Uncle, that he took him for an Apparition: For there had lodged the night
before a Person who came from Nieurburgh, who had reported it for certain News,
which he had seen with his own Eyes, that Mombas's Head was cut off. And this
Report was so spread about the City, that no body would believe that Mombas was
come to Town.

In the mean while the Duke of Luxembergh, who was then chief Governor of
Utrech, paused, whether he should admit Mombas into his presence or no? For on
the one side he knew it might be of advantage to discourse him, as who
perfectly understood the Country; and on the other side he considered that it
would be no good Policy, to give him a kind Reception, which would but convince
the World of the private Correspondence which he held with the King; which
latter thoughts prevailing, he resolved not to see him at all, and therefore to
those that told it him for great News, that Mombas was in Town, he made Answer
that he did not believe it, adding withal, that it could never be, that a Man
who had born Arms against the King would put himself into his hands. Every Body
understood what the Duke meant, so that all Peoples mouths being closed after
that, there was no more mention made of Mombas, than if he never had been.

As for Mombas himself, when he understood, that the Duke of Luxembergh would
not see him, he went to wait upon the Prince of Conde, at Arnheim, but that
Prince being as Politic as the Duke of Luxembergh, denied to speak with him,
but in private, and that at such an hour, when all People else were asleep.
Thereupon he sent the Captain of his Guards for him, about three of the Clock
in the Morning, to bring him to his Quarters, where the Prince received him
into his Closet, wrapped up in his great Leaguer Cloack. There he sold Holland a
second time, disclosing all the secrets of that Republic, or at least as much
as he knew before he was Arrested, and after he had informed the Prince of as
much as he desired to know, he retired to Collogne, in expectance there of a
Promission to return into France, which was one of the wry Faces he was to
make, in hopes to wipe off the suspicions which he already lay under. Sometime
after he had intimation given him, that he might go and attend the Duke of
Luxemburgh, who made use of him in the taking of Words, which the French
quitted, after they had been only once Masters of it. He it was also that
brought the Duke before this place, when the Prince of Orange beseig'd it; so
that he seemed now as desirous to make his Treachery public, as he was before
careful to conceal it.

Now though all this that I have said may seem to be rather a History of the
War then a keeping close to my Subject, which is to set forth the falsehood of
France, however I believe it not so remote from the matter neither, since it
serves so well to recall to Memory the Idea's of so many Treacheries and
Breaches of Faith. In a word, though it cannot be denied but that the French
are sufficiently courageous, yet we may say, that she rather chooses to join
Subtlety and Slight to Strength, without which she could never prove so
Successful in all her Enterprises; though we must needs say at the same time
that another great Reason of Her Prosperity is this, that Money costs Her
little or nothing; for to come now from War to Peace, let us examine how she
brought to pass a separation of the Allies, and whether that Metal did not
stand her in more stead then all the Rhetoric of her Ministers.

One of the great Obstacles of the Peace, was the great difficulty of
Reconciling the Interests of the Crown of Sweden, from the Interests of those
Princes who had any thing to do with it. As for the Crown of Sweden, its
chiefest Interest was this, that as it was engaged in a War only for the
Service of France; that France should therefore cause Restitution to be made of
all those Places, which either the King of Denmark, the Princes of
Brandenburgh, or of the House of Brunswick had taken from it. On the other side
it was the Interest of those Princes not to hear talk of Peace, unless they
might preserve all their Conquests, or at least a good part of them. The
difficulty then was to reconcile these opposite Interests; now you shall see
what it was that put this Affair into a fair way, and made it not so impossible
as it seemed to be. It happened one day, at a Collation, that was given by one of
the Three French Ministers, who understood the Court Secret, a Dish of Olives
was set upon the Table, which the Swedish Ambassador tasting, and liking very
well, the French Ambassador promised to send him a Barril, which his Secretary
soon after carried him. The Swedish Minister was not a little surprised to see
the Secretary of the Embassy become a Porter of Olives, but presently
recollecting himself he took the Barril in his hand, and finding it somewhat
ponderous he asked the Secretary what was in the Barril? The Secretary made
Answer, that his Excellency would see when he opened it; and withal desired him
to open it himself, and not to let any body see him when he opened it: Then the
Swedish Ambassador knew what it meant, and so having dismissed the Secretary,
he opened the Barril which was crammed to the bottom with Golden Lewisses,
among which he found a little Note wherein these words were contained, If You
intend that we should send you more Olives, you must let Us have a Peace.

Now you will ask me how a thing that was carried so secretly on the Minister
of France's part, as on the Minister of Swedens, should come to my knowledge,
to which I answer, how do so many secrets transacted in the Cabinet Council,
come to be known? but I must tell ye more then this, that France happening
afterward to be at variance with Sweden, took no great care to conceal a
secret, since it was of no Importance to her to keep it private. Rather she was
glad of an opportuny to Divulge it, on purpose to raise Jealousies and
Mistrusts, among the Chief Grandees of Sweden, where the story is in every
bodies Mouth, insomuch that the Rupture between the two Crowns is attributed to
it. In a word, though the Homage which the King of France demanded of the King
of Sweden, for the Dukedom of Deux Ponts, were a thing which that Young Prince
took very unkindly, yet the more nimble Politicians believe, that it would not
have been a sufficient cause of a Rupture, had not the King of Sweden been
exasperated before, by the Disadvantageous Peace which France had caused him to
condescend to; of which it will not be from the purpose to speak a word or two,
in regard that while I was at Paris, I met with few of the French, who did not
maintain that Sweden was extremely obliged to France, since she would not
endure to hear of any Treaty, till all was restored that had been conquered
from Sweden. But they were Ignorant, that in lieu the Swede was constrained
to deliver up to the Duke of Brandenburgh, several places in Pomerania, in the
Duchy of Bremen several places to the King of Denmark, and several other
places in the Bishopric of Venden to the Princes of the House of Brunswick.
But now I am speaking of Sweden, I will tell ye how the Duchy of Deux Ponts
came to be taken for Her, and under what pretense; the last Duke was a Healthy
Person and like to live long, when France who liked the Country very well, as
lying fit for Her, projected how to get possession of it, having not yet
bethought her self of the Knack of Dependency, under pretense of which she has
since invaded so many Provinces. Now you must understand that the Duke having
no Children, the Dukedom after his Death fell to the House of Swedland, though
not immediately to the King of Swedland, in regard that Duke Adolphus pretended
to exclude him as being the next in propinquity of Blood to the present
Possessor. On the other side the King of Sweden pretended that the Dukedom
should descend to Him, as being the Son of the Eldest House, which seemed a
very likely pretense. For though in several parts of Germany the Custom is
such, that the next of Kin to the Deceased succeeds to his Estate, yet in the
Electoral Families, especially the Palatine, which was then in dispute, the
Usuage is quite otherwise. However it were the King of France, who was willing
to make the Proverb good, That while two are in dispute for the Possession,
there comes a third and carries away the Prize, sent a considerable force to
make himself Master of the Duchy of Deux Ponts, under pretense nevertheless to
preserve it for the King of Sweden, in whose favor he had decided the
difference against Duke Adolph. The Duke of Deux Ponts, who was still living,
was nothing surprised that the French had entered his Country, as having often
been subject to their violences, but he wondered not a little when he understood
that they came to claim the Succession, especially finding himself so likely to
live, and having no desire to die so soon. Nevertheless the French having taken
Possession of the place of his Residence, he saw not only his Country reduced
to slavery, but himself a kind of Prisoner; for in regard the French could not
choose but think that a Prince of such a Noble and Illustrious Birth would not
easily condescend to live under Tutelage, and fearing least that he would call
the Emperor to his Assistance they watched him so narrowly, that he might well
be looked upon rather as a Prisoner then a Freeman.

However France, who was desirous to make sure of the King of Sweden, of whom
she then stood in need (for all this happened during the War) gave him to
understand that what she had done was only in kindness to Him; so that the
Swede not dreaming but that France meant as she said, began to talk of sending
a Governor into the Duchy, but while he offered the Government sometimes to
the Count of Carlson, his natural Brother in lieu of something that he had
taken from Him, and sometimes to a Prince of the House of Baden, the King of
France sent thither the Prince Palatine of Berkenfield, and reconciled the
Prince of Baden, and the Count of Carlson, who began to look with an evil
aspect one upon another, as it is the Custom of two Persons, that aspire both
to one Command.

The Peace ensuing soon after, France, who had no mind to part with so toothsom
a Morsel, bethought her self of the Right of Dependency, and demanded Homage
and Fealty from the King of Sweden. This pretention altogether new, extremely
surprised the Swedish King, but in regard the Duchy lies at a great distance
from his Dominions, the chiefest part of his Ministers concluded to let it
pass, and not to quarrel with France, at what time France, who had laid this
Rub in the way, only because she would not restore what she had got into her
Clutches, caused Duke Adolph to interpose himself to the end, that according as
they had agreed among themselves, she might remain always in the Possession.

And thus as she had despoiled the Old Duke in his life time, who ended his
days for sorrow remote from his own Territories, so she scruples not to keep
from their Rights to other Princes still alive and live like. And it is very
probable, that without considering whether the claim belong to the King of
Sweden, or Duke Adolph, that she will rather choose to surrender it to the
Palatine of Birkenfield, then to either of the other two, as being loath it
should fall into the Hands of the King of Sweden, for fear of enlarging the
Power of a Prince, whose Friendship she has so little reason to hope, and
having the same reason to be jealous of Duke Adolph, whose Interest it is to
keep firmly united to the Head of his own Family.

Moreover, it cannot but be a great trouble to the Palatine House, to see such
a number of Princes become subject to France. For besides that, the Person upon
whom France shall be pleased to confer the Duchy of Deux Ponts, will be
obliged to do her Homage, how many others are there, who at this day groan
under the weight of her Fetters: The Prince de la petite Pierre could say
something, if the unfortunate example of one of his Kinsmen did not oblige Him
to silence. I could speak of the Prince of Weldens, who for having the soul of
a Prince, and being willing to preserve himself in that high Dignity where
Providence has placed him by Birth, might starve, if his own Subjects had not
pity upon him; I say that he might starve; nor do I aggravate the matter; for
it is well known to many others, besides my self, that because he would not do
Homage to France, he has been dispossessed of his Territory, and lives now in a
hired House upon the Alms of his Subjects. It Is as well known to what a mean
condition his Son is reduced. It Is well known, I say, that his Father not
having vvherevvithal to support him, that rides up and down upon a sorry Nag
without any Train or Attendance, like the poorest Gentleman in France, being
at length constrained to put himself into the Service of the States, who have
given him a Foot Company, which is all he has to subsist upon at this Day.

Some perhaps may ask me, why the Prince of Weldens carries himself so
untractably considering his own weakness, against a Power so absolute? why
does he not give way to the Times, as others do; and in a Word, what
difference there is betvveen being a Vassal to the Emperor and a Homager to the
King of France. For I know these are the Discourses generally in the Mouths
not only of those that follovv the Interests of France, but also of several
others, who cannot but compassionate the Misfortunes of this Prince, and
endeavor to help him: To this I answer that the Prince of Wildens, finding
himself reduced to utmost necessity, has sought an Accommodation by all-manner
of ways; but he could never resolve to be a Slave. In short, when he saw that a
great many Princes of his Family had showed him the way, he sent his Son into
France, who offered on his Fathers behalf to do homage to the King, provided he
would use him like a Prince and suffer him to enjoy the same Rights and
Privileges, as before the Change of his Affairs: But the King laughed at his
Proposals, so that the young Gentleman was forced to return as wise as he went.
Nevertheless if I may reflect upon the present Condition of the German Princes,
and what it was formerly, we may easily see how they abuse themselves, that
think there is no difference between a Vassal to the Emperor, and a Vassal to
the King of France: But I do ill, to say a Vassal to the Emperor; for all the
Princes of the Empire, I mean the Sovereign Princes, as the Electors and
several other great Houses, are rather Members of the Empire, not the Emperor's
Vassals. They are indeed obliged to assist the Empire, under Forfeiture of
their Privileges and Territories, but they are not obliged to assist the
Emperor, unless he be first attacked. Let us then conclude that this Word
Vassal is not properly applied to the Princes of Germany, who have Sovereign
Authority within their own Dominions, as much as the Emperor exercises in His
own. They have the Power of Life and Death, they impose Taxes and Subsidies at
their pleasure, and lastly are accountable for their Actions to none but God.
Let us conclude, I say, that such Princes as these, who enjoy all the Marks of
Sovereignty, are far different from the Princes of France, who except that they
stand with their Hats on, when the King gives Audience to Ambassadors, are in
nothing else more than other Subjects. It may be said in some Sort, that they
are inferior to some of the Kings Subjects; for the Dukes and Peers take the
Precedence of them, and that the Princes are obliged not to appear at any
Ceremony, least they should be constrained to walk after them. Nevertheless if
we look back to the beginning of the last Century we shall find that among
those Dukes, there are some, whose Fathers were only Notaries, others no more
than Merchants in Paris. And we know what the Descendants from one of these
great Families did not long since, to conceal the knowledge of such a mean and
ignominious Extraction: We know that they caused an Epitaph in the Church of
St. Innocents to be eras'd, instead of which we find another in the Celestins,
wherein there are as many Falsehoods as there were Truths in the other.

And yet it so falls out, that Princes, whose Ancestors were in the Number of
Sovereign Princes, are at this day forced to submit to Men of that low and
sordid Extraction. To which I may add, that the Princes of the Blood themselves
are glad to court and fawn upon Persons of a much lower and baser Extraction
than what I have already mentioned. We know the way to rise in France is not to
stir from the Antichamber of a Great Minister; and a Colonel of Horse, whose
Name I could tell, and one whom every Body knows as well as I, does not disdain
to be a Buffoon to one of the Secretaries of State: For which reason he quitted
his Regiment, for fear, least in time of War, some other Minion might step into
his Honorable Employment. It Is well known also that while Monsieur Colbert
sat at Diner, the greatest Lords of France sat pumping for a Jest to make him
laugh, and he that had had the best Success, gloried in his happy Fortune, as
if it had been he who had defended Vienna against the Turks. Lastly it is well
known, and yet a thing which a Man would hardly believe, that Monsieur the
Kings only Brother is obliged to have recourse to them, when he has any
particular Favor to beg of the King, and that notwithstanding this Submission,
he many times is forced to go without the Grant of his Petition. I could prove
by a Thousand Examples what I here alledg; but it shall suffice to mention only
what happened about a year or two since, upon the score of a Person whom the
Monsieur had a kind desire to put into one of the King's Farms; for not being
able to obtain what he desired of Monsieur Colbert after many and many
Entreaties, he was forced himself at length to speak to the King.

To give a little farther proof of the Tyrannies of the Ministers of France,
and how the lofty Princes are forced to cringe and bow before those Idols,
there needs no more than to repeat what happened some few days since to Monsieur
the Dauphin, he had begged of Monsieur Segnaly, the Son of Mr. Colbert, the
Employment of Purser of a Ship, for a Son of one of his Domestics, which
Monsieur Segnalay having granted Him with great difficulty, this same Minister
of the last Edition took a Fancy sometime after to displace the Purser,
pretending him incapable of the Employment. The Dauphin understanding this,
told Monsieur Segnaly that it was his desire the Person might be restored, and
that if he had done amiss, it was only for his want of years, and that he
himself would undertake the Young man should do better for the future. Monsieur
Segnalay having heard the Prince with that Gravity which he so awkardly
affects, made answer, that the thing was out of his Power, and that therefore
he must speak to the King: But Monsieur the Dauphin not enduring that a Person
of his Condition should so unworthily requite the Honor which he did him,
Schol'd him so severely that he soon humbled his vainglorious Pride.

Let us then conclude from hence that it is a great Misfortune for a Prince to
be born a Subject of the Crown of France, and a great Imprudence in him that is
free to put himself under the Yoke. Ask the Prince Palatine who is only his
Neighbor, how he likes his Neighborhood, and I am sure he will tell you,
there is no difference from being a Subject and a Neighbor. If he speaks like
a Prince, they speak to him like Masters, and if he intends that France should
let him be at quiet, He must submit to all her Demands. Let us ask him whether
he has any Subjects that are Faithful to him among so many Subjects as are
obedient to him? and whether France have not quite debauched their Allegiance?
Lastly let us ask him whether he dares complain, though every day he finds one
Corner or other of his Territories lopt off from his Subjection, and whither
they do not tell him on the other side, that he is happy to be under the
Protection of so great a Potentate? Let us now visit the Courts of the other
Princes of Germany, and see what passes there, before we make any Reflection
upon the Princes of France. What shall we say of the Ecclesiastical Electors;
of which the one sells his Country by the suggestion of her Emissaries; the
other suffers her self to be scared by her Emissaries: and the other is so
obedient to her Will as if the same Interest actuated in all. Yet at the same
time let us confess, that this is not done without some sort of Violence, for
who questions the various Tricks and gins that are made use of daily to
separate 'em from their real Interests? To some they pretend, that the most
part of their Territories are Dependencies upon the Crown, and that if they do
not use all means to Captivate the Kings favors, he will no longer suffer 'em
to enjoy that to which they have no Right at all; so that while he deprives
them of the true Character of Sovereign, which is to be independent in their
Authority, he endeavors to insinuate the contrary, that their dependence upon
France is the only way to support their Dominion. To others he cries, that they
have nothing to do but to consider his Power, and from thence to assure
themselves that they have no other hopes but in Him; and while he feeds them
with these fair Hopes, he boys up the People in their Disobedienc, to the end
the Sovereigns may always standing in need of him, to suppress their mutinies.
It may well be thought that I speak of Liege, where France holds her Divan
contrary to the Faith of Treaties, and where the Dissentions between the People
and their Sovereign, make her as absolutely Mistress of the City, as if it
belonged solely to Her; for who is so blind as not to see through her Politics
upon this occasion? For being in continual fear, least Monsieur of Cologne
should at length open his Eyes, she resolves to have a Remedy ready against all
manner of Accidents. And therefore as she maintained the People of Messina in
their Rebellion, so will she support the Inhabitants of Liege in all their
Rebellious Practices, should Monsieur of Cologne at any time bethink himself of
re-assuming his Lawful Sovereignty. For indeed if this were not the Intention
of France, what could hinder Monsieur Cologne at this day, from reducing to
Obedience a City which is open on all sides, without Fortifications or any
Garrison. It were then to be wished that he would come again to himself, and
consider that his Alliance with France, has only served to draw upon him the
hatred of his People, and the utter Ruin of his Country for not to mention the
Imperial-Armies, who have been Constrained to feed upon his Country, we see How
he has been treated himself, by those in whom he has put all his hopes and
confidence. Who can be Ignorant of the Horrible Contributions which France has
Levied upon his Subjects, the General Desolation of his Territory, the Sacking
and Plundering of his Towns, and the Destruction of his Citadels and other
Stately Buildings? Who can be Ignorant of what Happened at the Hay, where the
French not contented, to have Tyrannized over the Inhabitants, threw the Castle
to the Ground, and ruined one of the Noblest Bridges upon the Meuse, by which
means that City finds her self deprived of all her chiefest and most
considerable advantages for having admitted them within her Walls. But let us
go on to the other Princes of Germany, and see whether they have any more
reason to boast of the French kindnesses.

I could Epitomize all at once what I have to say to this point, by only
declaring what happened but lately to the King of Danemark. For as it may be
easy for others to judge what they are to expect, by the carriage of the
French toward their Allies, therefore in my opinion, that might suffice to
prove the Violence of her Proceedings, and how she goes about to make her self
Mistress of the whole World. But in regard there are several that would be glad
to see what pretty Courses she takes to bring about her Designs, I will give
you a short account of her Maxims and Devices.

There is no Body can be ignorant of the Marriage of the Dauphin with the
Dauphiness. The great Rephuation which Monsieur of Bavaria, and the great Sway
which he carries in the Empire, as well by reason of the Extent of his
Dominions, as also by reason of their Situation, caused him to be courted of
all hands during the last War, as He who brought a great Accession of Strength
to the side for which he should declare. The King of France being careful of
losing such an Advantage, daily made him a Thousand advantageous Propositions
to engage himself in his Interests. On the other side the Emperor was no less
sedulous to gain him to his Party. So that the Duke of Bavaria judging of his
Power by the Applications that were made to him, resolved to hear both, and to
fix where he could make his best Markets.

As for the Emperor he only offered him a League Offensive and Defensive
against France, whose Ambitious designs he laid before him, beleiving that
enough to bring him over to the German Interest: But Bavaria being in hopes of
something more advantageous, listened more willingly to the propositions of
France, which the French endeavored to make as acceptible as possibly they
could. In short too many politic Arguments, which might have been more
prevalent at some other time, but now of little or no effect, they added most
magnificent Presents, which they were careful to renew from time to time; so
that Princes being wrought upon many times by such kind of Temptations as well
as other Persons, the Duke began to be more and more inclined to France. Madam
of Bavaria, whom the King had formerly had some thoughts to have married, and
who was not a little troubled that she had missed the preferment, hoping to
advance her Daughter to the Throne which she had failed off, pressed her Husband
with all her might to the French Alliance, provided he made sure of the
Advancement of his Daughter, who could not expect a more advantageous match in
all Europe.

Nor was it long before the Ministers of France discovered what had passed in
the Duke of Bavarias Cabinet, and therefore beleiving it would be more kindly
taken to prevent the Duke, by proposing the Match before the Duke offered it
himself, they declared that they had orders from their Master to discourse him
about it; and this they also made known to Madam of Bavaria, who was ready to
leap out of her skin for joy. After this proposition thus made, the Emperors
Ministers were no longer minded, and nothing was discoursed of but the future
Alliance, which was the Foundation of the ensuing Treaty between France and
Bavaria, by which the Duke of Bavaria promised to remain Neuter, which was all
that France desired. For in regard that Bavaria had a powerful Army on foot,
and that he was resolved to stand Neuter, so long at the War endured, France
conjectured, and that not without reason, that the Emperor would be awed by his
potent strength, which would be as beneficial to France, as if the Duke acted
openly. And by the Event it appeared that those Conjectures were not ill
grounded. But not to make a repetition of things known to every body; it will
suffice to say, that this Treaty continued till the Treaty of Nimeghen, and
that the Marriage of Mademoiselle of Bavaria was soon after consummated, there
being at that time no Princes in Europe unmarried, either of a nobler Family,
or endowed with more Princely Qualities.

And now France thought her self secure of the House of Bavaria, but the Duke
and Duchess dying, and the Dukedom falling into the Hands of a Prince, more
clear sighted than his Father and Mother, France finding he did not stand so
right for their Turn, made it their business to fasten him by some new
Alliance. To this purpose, because their is nothing sooner tempts a young
Prince then Beauty, chiefly when it is accompanied by great Merit, the
Ministers of France so ordered it, that they whom they had gained to their
Party, should fill his Ears with their discourses of Madam Blois, the Kings
natural Daughter, who appearing so lovely in her tender Age, promised to be in
a short time, one of the most charming Persons in the World. Monsieur of
Bavaria perceiving himself perhaps smitten with what was imprinted every hour
in his mind, or else out of Curiosity to know whether Fame did not too much
exalt the Beautys of that Lady, seemed to intimate as if he should not be
unwilling to see her Picture. Of which his most faithful Friends, and those
that were more jealous of his Honor being informed, they made him so
effectually sensible of the Snares that were spread for his Youth, that the
Prince recollecting his Thoughts, began to be ashamed of what perhaps he had
only done out of Curiosity.

In the mean time several Portraitures of Madam de Blois were sent from France,
but the Ministers of that Crown, perceiving that the Illegitimacy of her Birth,
defaced all the Impressions that her Beauty could make, gave over the Design of
that Match, of which they had conceived such hopes a little before.

After this they proposed another Match to the Bavarian, which was certainly
much more suitable: And that was between the Duke and Mademoiselle the Queen of
Spains Sister, and Daughter to the Duke of Orleans. But the Bavarian Ministers,
who had diverted his first Passions, easily beat him off from this, persuading
him that it was only a snare to keep him from allying with the Emperor, whose
Daughter he might be in hopes to marry, which would not be only a greater
advantage to him, but more necessary and requisite for his Interests. That it
behooved him to have his Eyes open and to look upon the Designs of France, which
were only to ruin the Emperor and the Empire. That it was true she fed him
from time to time with fair Fancies, as that she would cause him to be Elected
King of the Romans; but that the bottom of her Design was only to disunite the
Princes one from another, that when the Election should happen, she might be
the better able to carve for her self, what she offered to others. That it was
not his Interest to desire a Neighborhood so dreadful to all that had been so
unfortunate to be her Neighbors; which was no Reproach or Detraction, and that
there needed no more than the Consideration of their Condition to make others
sensible of the danger of Falling into the like.

These sage Councels, made that Impression which might well be expected upon
the mind of a Prince, who loved Honor and scorned to stoop under Subjection.
On the other side the French Ministers not relishing these Proceedings, were so
enraged at the Dukes Refusal of their propounded Match; that they had the
Insolence to tell him, that if the Duke of Bavaria had married Madammoiselle de
Blois, it had been no Disparagement to him. That there was no doubt but that
Princes as puissant as himself would desire her in Marriage, who were like to
go without her for all that; and that the King was sufficiently potent to
Revenge one day the scorn and contempt which he had put upon his Alliance.
These Rhodomontadoes gave the Duke sufficiently to understand, how France at
first wound her self in by softness and mildness, but that she was still for
force where that failed. But these Proceedings serving to no other end then to
alienate the Duke the farther off from the French, he presently treated with
the Emperor, with whom he might be certain to find more Honor, and more
Security.

Nor has the Duke of Saxony more reason to applaud the Conduct of France, who
finding that Prince fast linked to the true Interest of Germany, not suffering
himself to be fed with her empty promises, has raised him up several Enemies
both at home and abroad, and used all imaginable tricks to set him at variance
with the Princes of his Family, but not being able to bring her designs to
pass: She had been tampering with the Princes his Neighbors, which occasioned
those jealousies so prudently already laid asleep by the Emperor.

As for the Marquess of Brandenburgh and the King of Danemark, I know nothing
that could beget a greater Aversion to France, then her behavior toward them.
For if we look upon the manner how she came to intrude her self into their
Confidence, we shall find that she has left no Tricks unplaid to bring it to
pass, but after she had got her Ends, there was no sort of Severity and Cruelty
which she did not exercise to their Damage. The Propositions are well known;
which were made by the Count de Roy, upon his Arrival in the North. It Is well
known, I say, that he demanded of the King of Danemark, in the name of the King
his Master, that he might have a share in the Disbursement of the Money which
he received from Him, adding withal, that the Money was wasted to little
purpose: He demanded also little less of the Duke of Brandenburgh; yet fearing
to provoke those Princes, jealous of their Honors, by such kind of harsh
Complements, he kept his Pensioners, or else certain Frenchmen still at their
Elbows to mollify and sweeten those severe Pieces of Courtship; so that those
Princes being detained, as I may say, between hope and fear, knew not what to
resolve upon. But let us admire the Politics of that Crown, which draws it is
Advantages from all things, even from those things that seem to be contrary and
prejudicial to it is Interest.

Every one knows how Monsieur de Bricquant was prosecuted; who after he had
been a long time in the Bastile, for being steadfast to his Principles, was at
length forced to fly his Country, having nothing more to hope from his serving
France; where he had nevertheless spent all his youthful years: but so soon as
France understood, that he was gone to Brandenburgh, and that he was received
by the Elector, her Malice was not only appeased of a sudden, but she would
needs Recommend him to that Prince, not immediately as from her self, for that
would have been suspicious; but indirectly by the means of her Generals, so
that this same Recommendation accompanied with the merit of the Person, got him
in a short time a Regiment of Horse with the Government of Wesel; and of this
Person it is that she makes use, but cunningly and slily to obtain her desires;
For tho he does not appear to be entrusted with the secret, but that on the
contrary, he still complains of his sufferings and hard usage in France, he
knows how to give the blow when Opportunity serves, a Blow so much the more
dangerous, as coming from a kind and unsuspected Hand.

Boisdavid, who was constrained to fly France, where he was a Brigadier and
Colonel of Foot, for having duell'd Monsieur d'Aubijoux, understood the way to
regain her Favor by managing her Interests in the Court of Zell, where he was
advantageously preferred, so that nothing there passed of which Monsieur de
Louvois was not advertised from time to time. And that which was most
extraordinary was this, that though there be no Mercy for those who are accused
of the same Crime that he was, he forbears not to make a Journey sometimes to
Paris, whether it be upon his own occasions, or which is most likely to confer
with Monsieur de St. Povange, about such things as he dares not commit to
Writing.

All the Courts of the other Princes are in the same manner stuffed either with
bannish'd or Malecontented French. But at the same time those Princes give 'em
Entertainment, if it may not be said that they receive Serpents into their
Bosoms, at least we may say, that they are to be very wary how they easily
trust 'em with their Secrets. For besides that the Genius of the French Nation
carrys them to insinuate themselves into all manner of business, they rarely
forget their Fidelity to their Prince, so that it is a great piece of
Imprudence to confide in their Actions.

Having thus discoursed of the Misfortunes daily attending those Princes who
are Neighbors to France or that are in any sort of Amity with Her, let us now
see in what a Condition they are, who are envellop'd by her in her Claims of
Dependencies. I will say nothing of the Prince of Petite Pierre, or of Weldens,
of whom we have spoken sufficiently already, but I will mention something of
the Prince of Baden, who no sooner came to be in the number of Her Subjects,
but he was constrained to give a large Pension to his Wife, who left him a long
time since, with a resolution never to Cohabit with him any more. He might show
himself ready as he did, to take her home again, but there was no regard had to
Reasons, and the first thing imposed upon him was to ascertain Her a revenue,
where he could not come to Finger it. I pass over in silence the Tyranny which
She Exercises over other Princes of less repute; for since the Princes of the
Sovereign Families, are no otherwise spared then as I have related, there is no
likelihood that the rest should fare any better. It would be tedious to recount
what they daily suffer from those Petty Tyrants, who, of great Ministers
Lacquies, becoming Commissaries, and Commissary Intendants, assume to
themselves a Sovereign Authority. Nor are they contented to deprive these
Princes of their Honor, but of their Estates. How many suits do they commence
against them for the Decision of Limits, and several other slight occasions;
insomuch that those Princes, who but lately had the Power of Life and Death
over their Subjects, are now forced to go and answer their suits at the Bar,
and frequently loose their Causes. For it is a Maxim of France to support the
Vassals against their Lords, well knowing, that as long as they have the People
of their side, the Princes and Gentry are not to be feared at all, who can do
little without the People, so that Her Interest sweys Her beyond all manner of
Justice, provided she can thereby Establish her Dominion, or rather her
absolute Tyranny.

If we pass from hence to her usage of the meaner Gentry, how many may we find
ruined by their Garrisons: For she does not stop at ordinary Forms to establish
her Dominion, though it be the Law to seize the Lands only of those that refuse
Homage and Fealty, how many has she nevertheless imprisoned, to the end that by
detaining at the same time, both their Persons and their Estates, necessity may
constrain them to an absolute Subjection to her Pleasure? But the Consummation
of her Tyranny and Injustice was her severity to the Baron de L'Evenop, a
Gentleman of quality, and of a Family that once honored Sweden with a Queen.
For after France had received his Fealty and Homage, she dispossessed him of
his demeans, no person being able to say for what reason, nor could she ever
give any her self, but her own covetous thirst after other Peoples Estates.

There is no Prince in Europe who has not had a taste of her violences: who
though they are sufficiently powerful to repress her Insolence, yet such is
their blindness, that instead of uniting together for the common good, one
would think they had conspired by their Disunion to surrender into her hands
the Empire of the World. They know that she is in League with the Turk to
harrass Germany, one on one side, and the other on the other side, and yet they
will not unite to destroy an Enemy that seeks to reduce them to utter Slavery.

And now since I have mentioned this Alliance with the Turk, it may not be
amiss to convince those who have hitherto seemed to make some question of the
Truth of it, and that by one Circumstance against which there is no Reply.
Every one knows the vigorous Resistance which the Count of Starenbergh
Governor of Vienna made against the Turk. So that the Grand Vizier after the
loss of an Infinite Number of his Men, would have raised the Siege, if he could
have done it with Honor. To which purpose he sent back Count Albert Caprara,
who was Ambassador at the Emperors Court, whom he would never permit to return
before that, to make him some Propositions of Peace, much more reasonable than
those which he had proposed before: But the Marquess of Seppeville who attended
the Emperor from the King of France, being advertised thereof, dispatched a
Currier to his Master to give him advice of it; upon which Information France
sent another to the Grand Vizier, to lay before him the Dishonor it would be
to his Reputation, to raise the Siege so ignominiously after had lost such a
Number of Men: Therefore that he would enter Flanders to constrain the Princes
of the Rhine to recall their Succors, which they had sent to the Emperor; by
which Diversion he might soon accomplish his Design. Monsieur Seppeville's
Currier arrived at Fountain Bleau the 22d. of August between eight and nine of
the Clock in the Morning. The Person who was dispatched to the Grand Vizier, or
to Monsieur Seppeville, which is the same thing, went away at one of the Clock
in the Afternoon; and the same Afternoon they did not only noise abroad their
Intentions of invading Flanders, but orders were also given out in order
thereto; so that the Grand Vizier not questioning but that the French would
keep their words this time more punctually than they had done before, continued
his seige, and it is very probable that he would never have raised it, had he
not been constrained to it, till he had been Master of the Town. Which having
brought me to speak of France's breach of Faith to the Grand Vizier, it will
not be amiss to tell the cause of it. Certain it is that by a Private Treaty
between France and the Ottoman Port, for which Teckeley became security, and
one whose name was Bohan the Instrument that managed the business, France was
obliged to attach the Empire upon the side next the Rhine, at what time the
Ottoman was to invade Hungary. To which purpose the King of France was already
advanced upon the Frontiers; but finding that the Turks having made such a
prosperous Progress at the beginning, that he made no question but that they
would carry Vienna, where they had already planted their seige, had put all
Germany into such a Consternation, that all the Princes of the Empire gave
themselves for lost, he stopped his March neither out of Moderation nor
Christianity; but fearing to loose the good opinions of the Princes, imagining
that in the condition to which they were reduced, they would be constrained to
fly to him for Succor. And therefore thinking himself cock sure of the Empire,
he would not carry Terror and Desolation into a place which he expected so soon
to command; which was the reason that he rather set upon Spain than the Empire.
For he was always in hopes, that if the Turks got possession of Vienna, there
was not any but himself that could oppose so formidable a Power, as if the
Princes of the Empire would not rather have chosen to have become Tributary to
the Turk, then to have submitted to the Yoke of French slavery. In a word, not
to speak any more of Her Tyranny, which is incomparably more intolerable than
Pagan Servitude, may we not probably believe that she will exercise the same
severy over their Conscience, not permitting the public worship of God,
whereas among the Heathens you shall never hear of those terrible Edicts, that
commanded the demolishing of Churches, nor of Soldiers that only serve for
Hangmen and Executioners, to those that assembled together upon their Ruins, to
sing Praises to their Creator.

But though it be an easy thing, at least as I imagine to inculcate a horror
and dread of this unsufferable Domination, it is not so easy to teach the
means to avoid it; considering, as I have already said, that all the Princes of
the Empire seem to conspire to lay poor subjugated Germany in Fetters, at Her
Feet. For is it not a thing that would move both Pity and Indignation at the
same time, to see that at a time when every one should labor their utmost, to
withstand such an encroaching Violence, they daily strive to enlarge and
support her Power? For what may they be said to think, who went about to Elect
the Bishop of Cologne, or rather of Strasburgh to the Bishopric of Munster? do
they not know that they are both entirely devoted to the Interest of France? Or
if Monsieur of Cologne should chance to open his Eyes, Monsieur of Strasburgh
has such an Ascendant over him; that he would still prevail over him to
continue in his Blindness? Do they not know, that if Monsieur of Cologne be a
lover of Peace, Monsieur of Strasburg affects nothing so much as War? Do they
not know, that it was by the persuasions of the Deceased Archbishop of Cologne,
and the defunct Bishop of Strasburgh, that France so furiously invaded the
United Provinces; and that to increase the Power of their Successors, no less
passionately inclined to enslave Europe, they have the same Repute, the same
Inclinations, the same Designs with the Deceased? as having the same Blood in
their Veins, and the same Souls in their Bodies? And yet when they saw into
what a Precipice the Deceased had plunged all Germany, as if they had quite
forgot what was past, they would needs put the same Power into the Hands of
their Nephews to Execute those things, which the Uncles had only in their Wills
to do. The one already has surrendered the Capital City of his Bishopric into
the Hands of the French; and they would have the other to deliver up the rest
of Germany, which is already sufficiently captivated by their Treachery. They
would in a word tie up the Hollanders Hands, by the Vicinity of a new Enemy,
and by that means enchain the rest of Europe, whose hopes depend upon 'em.

But let us conclude a discourse which it is to be feared will do but little
good, in regard that all the World is of that disposition; as not to love to be
too nakedly told the Truth. So that as much as France may be offended with me
for discovering her Maxims and Policies, as much will others bear me ill will
for reprehending their Weakness and Blindness. Yet I cannot forbear from saying
this, with the hazard of what ever they may think, that they make themselves
Accomplices in all the Enterprises of France, if they do not put an end to
those differences that have so long kept them in Disunion. For what can we say
more? For one strives to invade Lubec, another Pomeraenia, others make head
against them, while on the other side a Potent Enemy minds nothing more then to
bring them altogether under his subjection. They will not permit one Neighbor
to grow more powerful then another, but the never consider that there is an
Enemy approaching, who not contented to have increased his Dominions by large
Conquests, will never be satisfied with being no more then their Neighbor,
agreeable to what is said by the Author of a late Pasquil upon the present
condition of Europe. For when he speaks of the United Provinces, he brings them
in saying, That they will not have the Prince of Orange Reign over them; to
which answer is made, That they Act like Fools and Blindmen; they are afraid
lest the Dog should bite 'em, but never mind the Wolf who is ready to devour
'em. Thus the Northern Princes perceive that Danemark would fain join
Hamborough and Subeck to the Crown; but they do not see that France will not
only join to her Crown, not only both those Cities, but their own Territories
themselves, if they do not Unite to hinder Her. They find that the Marquess of
Brandenburgh has a design upon Pomerania, from whence he believes himself
Excluded contrary to Reason, but they do not observe, that while they oppose
the Enlargement of His Dominion, another increases his Power so fast, that they
run the hazard of being totally swallowed up by his Oppression. What remedy
then against so many Mischiefs, but to forget the Old Quarrel, and to begin a
new one. But first it behooves 'em to banish from their Councils those
Treacherous Souls, who having crept into the favor of their Princes, reward
'em with continual Treasons for their kindnesses. They must give ear to none
but their old Servants, whose Fidelity they have so often experienced that it
would be an injury to suspect 'em. For in the age we live in, we ought to
distrust all the World, considering the general Corruption that shows it self
every day; For had not Strasburgh been free to this day, had she had no oother
then Persons of Fidelity within her Bosom? But let us here I beseech ye
consider and admire the differences between the Services that France receives
from her Subjects, and that which other States receive from theirs, which are
in the service of France. I have showed ye before, how Boisdavid and Brignant
banished and proscribed as they are, notwithstanding serve as spies, the one in
the Court of Brandenburgh, the other in the Court of Zell. I find I have showed
ye before that their Fidelity ought to have been little Credited by those
Princes; but now let us on the other side see why the Fidelity of Count
Hasfield, born a Subject to the King of Sweden, should be suspected by the
Prince his Master.

Every own knows his Birth, and it would be superfluous to speak of it here,
were it not to tell ye, that his Father being a French Man, and his Mother a
French Woman, it is no wonder he retains the nature of a French Man himself.
Nevertheless there is this to be said against him, that after he had been born
in Sweden, and raised from nothing by the favor of the King, all other
Obligations ought to have given place; for that, what was a Virtue in his
Father was a Crime in Him. Now who could ever dream without having an enmity to
his person, that while France treats the King his Master after so gentile a
manner, that he should conspire the slavery of Germany? and yet was it not he
that made so many Journeys to Strasburgh, where he had more advantage to treat
then others, by reason of his familiarity with the Language, and for that he
was least suspected? Is not this he that kept so many Cabals in Sweden? where
he knew the Great Personages were discontented, by reason that the King has
taken from them sundry great profits, which they enjoyed rather by the
Profusion then Liberality of his Predecessors? I only call the great Persons to
Witness these things, and whether it be not likewise true, that at a drinking
bout, where there were about seven or eight in Company, one of the Gang said to
the rest, that if Hasfield were to be believed they would soon make a Teckeley
among themselves. However it be, he cannot say but that France has recompensed
him very well for his good Service. For besides that he receives very
considerable Pensions and large Presents, She has advanced all his Family: He
has two Brothers, of which the one is suddenly to be a Bishop, the other an
Abbot, the King having promised them, who never fails of his Word, unless it be
that which he and his Ministers call Word of State. He has also two other
Brothers, of which the one is at Hamborough, employed by the King of France,
the worthy Brother of Monsieur Hasfield, that is to say, one as ready as
himself to sell Germany, if it were in his Power, and the other in Sweden, who
gives Intelligence of all that passes there; besides all those other Noble
Gentlemen there, the Son of Monsieur Bidal a Merchant, the famous Bankrupt whom
Bolleau has not failed to paint forth in his Satyrs, though he was lately
commanded by an express order of the Court, to leave that passage out in in his
next Edition. For Monsieur Hasfield performing so many remarkable Exploits, to
render his Name immortal, it is but just to deface the Monuments of his Infamy.

The way then to prevent so many Abuses, is to imitate the Example of France at
this day; for she does not only confiscate the Goods of such as betake
themselves to the Service of other Princes, but she always prohibits them under
strict Penalties and corporal punishment, to go abroad. Nevertheless if she
shows her self indulgent to any, it is easily thence to be inferred; they only
serve as spies in the Courts of those Princes that employ them; which is too
serious a Truth.

Let us then conclude, that so long as there is no order taken to prevent these
abuses, it is impossible we should ever prosper; but that France on the other
side will have all the Advantages she can desire. For how is it possible that
any undertaking of ours should be Crowned with happy Success, of which the
Enemy has Intelligence long before it be put in Execution. To this let us add,
that if it will not suffice for a Prince to distrust his own Ministers, or to
change them, let him be himself his own Minister, as one that may be assured
that if there be one Person in his Council who is Temtation-proof, there are
hundreds that cannot resist the Golden Charms. And let him consider that if he
himself as frequently now adays it happens will suffer himself to be purchased
by him that offers most, his Ministers may well do the same, who have more need
of Money then he has.

There might be something also said touching the Remedy to be applied for
prevention of these Mischiefs, with which we find our selves at this day
overwhelmed. But in regard I can say no more then what other People have said
before me, I had rather be silent, then to make too many repetitions in vain,
and for the most part rather Speculative then Real. For when I consider what I
have read in so many Authors, and heard in so many places, that it behooves all
the Protestants to unite together, since the Catholics are so negligent, to
oppose themselves against the common Ruin, may not I conclude, that it is much
more easy to discourse in this manner, then probable to see the Effect of such
advice. For how is it possible that the Protestants should singly undertake a
War against France, when the Catholics keep such a strict Watch upon them. We
find at this day an apparent example of the Catholic designs, by which it is
easy for us to judge how little Reliance there is upon the French Protestants
in Silesia, and other adjoining Provinces, where they are reduced to that
misery, that they have more need of our Assistance. But they had rather the
whole Empire should perish, then remit any thing of their Cruelty.

The House of Austria, which is maliciously incensed to our Destruction, does
not perceive the heavy Hand of God upon her for so many Crimes, for which she
is accomptable to his Justice in respect of us, provoking still the same
Justice by new transgressions, in contempt of Heavenly Mercy. Nor does she
perceive that the Authors of all these violent Councels, I mean the Jusuits do
not advice these things but for their own Interest. She is resolved to
sacrifice the rest of the Empire to them, as she has already sacrificed a good
part. Nevertheless let no man believe that what I have said proceeds from any
natural Aversion to them, so natural to those of my Religion. I protest before
God, that I bear malice to no Man; and that I would not impute to them the
least of our Miseries, but that I find that none of the honest and moderate
party of their Religion, have any greater affection for them than my self. It Is
well known that it was their Hunger after the Estates of these four Hungarian
Lords, whose Heads the Emperor caused to be struck off, rather to satisfy
their urgent Importunities then for any Crime (unless yo will say their zeal
for their Religion was a Crime) that was the main occasion of sheding their
Blood. But seeing all that I could say, would as little prevail as what others
have said before me, it will be better to make an end, and to confess that all
our Miseries are at this day reduced to such a Condition, as well as the
Calamities of Germany, that our Preservation is only to be expected from God
alone.

The Speech of Monsieur ZIEROWSKI, the Emperors Ambassador in Poland. Spoken in
the Royal Palace before his Majesty of Poland, and in the Presence of the
Princes, Noblemen and Ambassadors at that Court, at Tavoravia, the 6th. of
October, 1682.
Most Great King,
AMongst other Books, I have hit upon that of the Life and Exploits of Cardinal
Commendon, who was sent to this Court by the Pope, with the Quality of
extraordinary Legate in the Empire of Sigismond, and Reign of Henry de Valois:
I have observed in it, that it was that Cardinal's Maxim, Never to answer but
with an affected Silence and Contempt, to all that his Ememies could do or say
against him. Without doubt, in his Time, the State of Affairs, the Customs and
Spirits were very different from what they now are; at least a long experience
has made me judge them very different; and I know I cannot, without great
disadvantage, conceal or connive at a thing that very much troubles me. I have
understood that the French King's Minister's, published some days ago certain
Letters, which brought, as it were, assured Testimonies, that His Imperial
Majesty's Envoyes only Business, with the Ottoman Court, was to endeavor, by
all possible means, to turn the Turkish Armies against Poland.

There is no Body but sees, and your Majesty must needs perceive, how injurious
this is to the Empire; and to what end it is done. They give this out to
disunite two Kingdoms; both which, at this present Conjuncture of Affairs, have
their chief Interest in being firmly united. But the Letters took not so great
an effect as they expected. The Spirits of this Court, were not so credulous as
to believe them. They are too well satisfied in Poland, of the Piety and
Affection of those of the House of Austria; to think that the Emperor, my
Master, gives his Ambassadors such base and unworthy Commissions. There is no
body here that can doubt that his Imperial Majesty, would be as sensible of the
loss of Poland as of Hungary, since it is as much his Interest to preserve the
one as the other.

I come not hither, great King, to tell you what through my Aversion, I could
publish upon little Rumors that have been spread among us: I bring your
Majesty those things, which I can beyond all dispute, produce before the whole
World, as the true Originals of Letters and Answers, which the most Christian
Kings Ambassador, Monsieur Du Vernay Boucauld, who is here present, has writ to
Count Teckeley, the Head of the Malcontents, or received from him. These will
evidently discover to your Majesty, what Affairs Monsieur Du Vernay has Treated
about, with so much Secrecy and Circumspection with Count Teckeley; and the
reason he had so cautiously to conceal from you, the Commission he had in this
Kingdom.

I humbly entreat your Majesty to remember how earnestly I entreated you, to
remove the Sieur Du Vernay from your Court and Dominions, as a man pernicious
to the Empire and Poland. You would have, great King, invincible Proofs and
Testimonies of what I related; Here they are such as you will wish for, and I
am persuaded they will be sufficient to make you judge the speedy departure of
Monsieur Du Vernay, out of your Kingdom, very necessary. But I fear, troubling
your Majesty with a long Discourse; I pass by a thousand things which I could
add; this Memorial is enough: To you I present it with all imaginable respect.

A Memorial presented to the King of Poland, by Monsieur Zierowsky, the
Emperor's Resident. Which was read in the Presence of his Majesty of Poland,
and before the Princes and Ministers of his Court; at Tavoravia, the 6th. of
October, 1682.
SInce the lact Memorial, which I had the Honor to present to your Majesty, I
have endeavored, according to the Advice of the Illustrious Lords of the
Senate, to furnish my self with some piece that might evidently appear what
Correspondence the French King's Agents have in your Kingdom with Count
Tekeley, Head of the Malcontents in Hungary. These wanted also to inform you,
what Bargains and Agreements passed between them, which, as I said, tend to the
breaking off the Peace and Treaties, that are between your Majesty and the
Emperor, my Master. You could not easily be informed of it, from any but my
self. I know the French King's Ministers daily assured your Majesty, that they
had a hand in no such thing; and that we accused them falsely. And the French
would no longer be suspected to have any ill Design against the Empire, after
the Declaration the French King had made, at the raising the Bloccade of
Luxembergh. His most Christian Majesty would inform all Europe, how he behaved
himself in that occasion; and they were careful to carry his Declaration to all
the Courts of the chief Christian Princes. The French King plausibly declares,
that having been informed of the Designs which are carrying on in the East
against the Empire, he would put nothing in execution which might hinder his
Imperial Majesty, and the most august House of Austria, from opposing the Turk
with all their Forces, and providing for the common good of Christendom.

This could by no means allow your Majesty to believe, that the French were in
League with the Malcontents and Turks; and that they contributed to the
taking and plundering the Towns of Hungary; for that appeared to be quite
contrary to such fair Declarations; but God the Defender and Revenger of
Christians, has ordered those things to fall into my hands, which I lay at the
foot of your Majesty's Throne; and which I lay before the Eyes of the whole
World. These are the Sieur Du Vernay's Letters, and Correspondence with Count
Tekeley; which you will find diametrically opposite to those Declarations, so
worthy the piety and generosity of the most Christian King.

I have made use of no evil practice for the obtaining these Letters: I have
not, though I could have done it, so much as employed any Body to observe the
French. And to tell you all, I got these Letters by the means of the Steward of
the most Illustrious Lord Stadnick's Estate. The Sieur Du Vernay, after having
long importuned the Monks of a Monastry of St. Basil, went also to importune
the Steward, who is Castellan at Premislaw. So much he did, that he stirred up
the Gentleman's anger against himself, and so consequently he became my friend,
and has ever since been very favorable to my Intentions. This Castellan, some
days ago, stopped certain Hungarians coming back from Nimiravia, whither they
went to see the Sieur Du Vernay; immediately he ordered them to be brought to
me, with the Letters he found about them. I presently took care to convey them
to the Emperor my Master's Territories; sending at the same time the Letters,
to the end that all the World might judge, whether I had not just Cause to
suspect, that the Sieur Du Vernay exceeded his Masters Orders.

Certainly, this Agent, this Minister, this Spy, this Ambassador, I know not
what to call him, but I mean Monsieur Du Vernay, has committed a great Outrage
against all Christendom. Against the Emperor, in fomenting and contriving what
he has against him. Against your Majesty, in entertaining a Commerce so
unworthy, so pernicious, and for so long a time, without your knowledge, and in
your Kingdom, as if he had been at home. I must add, for the Interest of your
Kingdom; that this Conduct has given the World occasion to believe, that the
Polanders were blind enough, not to see the dangers their Neighbors made them
fear, and that they would themselves drive the Poniard to their own Breast, in
permitting the Sieur Du Vernay to live amongst them. His Proceeding will,
without doubt, appear very injurious to the French King; for that Posterity may
judge and believe, that the great King, Lewis the XIV, authorized or commanded,
what the Sieur Du Vernay, his Agent did in his Name.

Your Majesty will not take it ill, that we have discovered to the Assemblies
at Francfort and Ratisbone; the Famous Exploits of the French, with the Turks
and Rebels of Hungary, in your Kingdom, which for so many Ages has been closely
united with the August House of Austria; and has always acknowledged its own
Interest, to preserve Hungary to the Empire, thinking it impossible for Poland
to subsist if Hungary shall fall.

It is now a year, that the Sieur Du Vernay travels up and down several parts
of your Majesty's Dominions, on the Borders of Hungary. He always pretends his
Masters, as if we could see that Dantzick or Rogiomont, which are the Places
the French come through, were not nearer and more proper to receive what Orders
the French King would send, but he stays there to observe the nearer, the
Affairs of Hungary: It may be also, to be in a better condition to give Count
Tekeley Joy, and to get the reputation with him, of the progress the Turks by
his means, might make in that Country

I desire your Majesty, That after you have seen the Memorial, I present; and
after you are convinced of all the Arts the French have used in this Kingdom,
you will be pleased to order the Seiur Du Vernay to depart your Dominions,
since he abuses his Employments to the prejudice of all Christendom; and
renders himself unworthy the protection the Law of Nations allows.

You may do so much the more justly, great King, because the Roman Catholic
Church, your Mother, esteems them as Excommunicated Persons, who side with
Infidels, whether it be carrying them Arms, or treating with them.

The Seiur Du Vernay has drawn this upon his own head, and if he is punished
according to his deserts the most Christian King will banish him his Kingdom,
for exeeding his Orders, and engaging his Master's Honor and Reputation. In
fine, he has committed his Vilanies in the French King's Name, and broke his
Masters word; acting in all things contrary to the observance of it, which if
it should fail in the world, could be no where found but in the Mouth of a King
or Prince.

I doubt not, great King, but all my pressing, reiterated and just Instances,
will at last take effect. The Alliances and Treaties that are between this
Kingdom and the Empire, require it from your Majesty. And I also, with a most
profound respect, beg to be admitted to the honor of some part of your
Affecti(...)

A Letter from Monsieur Du Vernay, to Count Emery Tekeley.
My Lord,
I Received with great joy the Letters, you did me the honor to write to me,
from the Camp before Filleck, enclosed in the Pacquets of our Ambassadors at
Constantinople; nevertheless, I was a little surprised that you should seal
them before he had seen them. I wonder also you said nothing about the Siege of
Filleck. However, I doubt not but that place, by this time is in your power.
Monsieur Jaygel, I believe, knows by my last Letters, that I have several times
endeavored to send him what I promised and let him have what I have received,
but I always wanted an opportunity. When you send any of your People to me,
order them not to come to my House but at night, to the end we may do our
business without any bodies knowledge. But what I most earnestly desire is,
that above all things, they take care not to follow the Road that goes directly
from Tavoravia to Nimirovia. For here are several Polish Gentlemen, who by the
most Serene King of Poland's Order, search, visit and detain all strangers that
pass. The safest way in my opinion is, that they leave Premislaw and Toreslavia
on the right hand, and follow the Road that leads to Sandomiria, least they be
seen to enter Nimirovia, where I am surrounded with Spies. I recommend the
Enclosed to you; and desire you to send them according to their Directions, by
the first opportunity. I will take the same care in all things you shall be
pleased to command me. I am most cordially,

Sir, Your most zealous Servant, Du Vernay Boucald.
Nimirovia, Sept. the 22d. 1682.

The Superscription was thus, To the most Illustrious Lord, Count Emery
Tekeley, Lord of Kesmark and Arve, General of the Hungarian Army, that fights
for it is Country.

THE Audience being ended, His Majesty of Poland said, he was convinced of the
French Correspondence with the Malcontents. He showed himself very angry that
the thing had been concealed from him. Next day some of the Chief Officers of
his Court, had Orders to go and command the Sieur Du Vernay, immediately to
depart the Kingdom. He said, he would obey his Majesty's Order; but that he
earnestly desired those Gentlemen to give him some days, that he might take the
Coach of Transylvania. On the other side, the Emperor's Resident used all
diligence, and with great Success; for Monsieur Du Vernay's Letter carrier
called Kelemeschi, returned to Nimirovia, before his departure. This Courier
came with those whom Tekeley sent to the Sieur Du Vernay, with his Letters; and
those of his great Agent and Confident Jaygel. These Couriers were seized, and
the Letters they had intercepted, were partly writ in Ciphers, which you will
here find interpreted.

A Letter from Count TECKELEY to Monsieur Du VERNAY.
SIR,
I Doubt not, but you have made much of Monsieur Valentine Nemessani my Envoy.
He has always been faithful to me, and very true to my Interest. The
Recommendations you gave him touching the Affairs he communicated with you,
will without doubt be of great Importance to him, with the most Christian King.
I am beholding to you for all you have done for him, and shall acknowledge it as
occasion serves: It is time I should inform you, of the present State of my
Affairs. After I had taken Cassovia, and entered some Forts about it; I went
with the Vizier of Budas's Troops, to attack the Famous Fort of Filleck: The
Inhabitants refused, at first, to put themselves under my Protection; but after
a Fortnights Siege, they came to beg I would admit them to capitulate; I
granted them what they asked; which was, that the Garrison, and what other
People there was, should go out, carrying with them as much as they could upon
their Backs: Then I raised the Fort, in sight of the Imperial Army, which was
hard by in the Mountains. As I am now informed, it is marched away; and having
sacked the Town of Vieuxsols and other Places retires very hastily. I design to
follow the Imperialists, and drive them far off, to restore my Country to its
former Liberty. At length the Emperor will be forced to yield by Force, what we
beg as a Favor. Heaven has commiserated my Fortune indeed somewhat late; but I
also hope, it will draw on a greater and more speedy Vengeance. Sir, I will
take care to inform you of all my other Affairs; however I desire you always to
stand my Friend. I am

Sir, Always ready to serve you, EMERY TEKELEY.
At the Camp before Filleck Sept. 18. 1682.

The Superscription was: To the Most Illustrious Lord, Monsieur Du Vernay
Boucauld, Ambassador Extraordinary from the French King.

A Letter from Monsieur Peter Jaigel, Governor of Cossovia, To Monsieur Du
Vernay.
SIR,
LAst Wednesday we took and raised Filleck; where above a Thousand Janissaries
were slain. Afterward, the Vizier made all the Hungarians that were present,
and were under the Prince of Transilvania's Dominion, be brought before our
Illustrious Count; then all the Estates of the Upper Hungary being Assembled,
Monsieur Tekeley was Proclaimed King, and confirmed in that Quality by the
Great Turk, who sent him from the Port, a Hat instead of a Crown, with a
Standard and Scepter. After the Ceremony, the Count very modestly refused the
Title of King: He is satisfied with that of Prince Regent of Hungary: His
Titles are, Emericus Thokolius Princeps, ac partium Regni Hungariae Dominus,
etc. After this Election, the Vizier gave him the best Troops, to pursue at the
Head of the Army, those of the Imperialists. Caprara having deserted the
Mountains, pillaged the Towns, and abandoned the Forts Vigles and Zolian, and
is at last retired and has taken his way toward Threnezin. Sir, we had done
something more, but we have not received what you promised us, and without that
supply, we are forced to proceed gently in our business. Monsieur Nemessani is
gone to treat of Affairs, at the French King's Court. He needs your
Instructions; we have ordered him in all things, to Act to your Honor. We will
very suddenly send you an Express; I beg of you for God's sake, make him up as
large a Sum as you can. I always remain, as I ought,

SIR, Your most obliged Servant, Peter Jaigel.
Gassovia, Sept. 22d. 1682.

The Superscription was, To the most Illustrious Lord, Monsieur Du Vernay
Boucauld, Ambassador Extraordinary from the French King.

After the Emperors Resident had the second time produced these Letters, and
the Days appointed were expired, his Majesty of Poland sent word to the
Marquess de Vitry, the French Ambassador in Poland, to cause the Sieur Du
Vernay, immediately to retire, that he was weary of hearing daily of his new
Designs.

FINIS.

