A Brief DESCRIPTION OF The Province OF CAROLINA On the COASTS of FLOREDA. AND
More perticularly of a New-Plantation begun by the ENGLISH at Cape-Feare, on
that River now by them called Charles-River, the 29th of May. 1664.

Wherein is set forth The Healthfulness of the Air; the Fertility of the Earth,
and Waters; and the great Pleasure and Profit will accrue to those that shall
go thither to enjoy the same.

Also, Directions and advice to such as shall go thither whether on their own
accounts, or to serve under another.

Together with A most accurate MAP of the whole PROVINCE.

London, Printed for Robert Horn in the first Court of Gresham-Colledge near
Bishopsgate-street, 1666.

CAROLINA
CAROLINA described

map of the Carolina coast

A Brief DESCRIPTION OF The PROVINCE of CAROLINA, etc.
CAROLINA is a fair and spacious Province on the Continent of America: so
called in honor of His Sacred Majesty that now is, Charles the Second, whom
God preserve; and His Majesty has been pleased to grant the same to certain
Honorable Persons, who in order to the speedy planting of the same, have
granted diverse privileges and advantages to such as shall transport themselves
and Servants in convenient time; This Province lying so near Virginia, and yet
more Southward, enjoys the fertility and advantages thereof; and yet is so far
distant, as to be freed from the inconstancy of the Weather, which is a great
cause of the unhealthfulness thereof; also, being in the latitude of the
Barmoodoes may expect the like healthfulness which it has hitherto enjoyed,
and doubtless there is no Plantation that ever the English went upon, in all
respects so good as this: for though Barmoodoes be wonderful healthy and
fruitful, yet is it but a Prison to the Inhabitants, who are much straightened
for want of room, and therefore many of them are come to Carolina, and more
intend to follow. There is seated in this Province two Colonies already, one on
the River Roanoak (now called Albemarle River) and borders on Virginia; the
Other at Cape Fear, two Degrees more Southerly; of which follows a more
particular Description.

This Province of Carolina is situate on the main Continent of America, between
the degrees of 30. and 36. and has on the North the South part of Virginia; on
the South is bounded by the 30 degree of Latitude not yet fully discovered; on
the East is Mare Atlanticum, part of the great Ocean; and on the West the
wealthy South Sea is its Confines.

The particular Description of Cape-Feare.
IN the midst of this fertile Province, in the Latitude of 34 degrees, there is
a Colony of English seated, who Landed there the 29 of May, Anno 1664. and are
in all about 800 persons, who have overcome all the difficulties that attend
the first attempts, and have cleared the way for those that come after, who
will find good houses to be in whilst their own are in building; good forts to
secure them from their enemies; and many things brought from other parts there
increasing to their no small advantage. The entrance into the River, now called
Cape-Feare River, the situation of the Cape, and trending of the Land, is
plainly laid down to the eye in the Map annexed. The River is barred at the
entrance, but there is a Channel close abord the Cape that will convey in
safety a ship of 300 Tons, and as soon as a ship is over the Bar, the River is
5 or 6 fathom deep for a 100 miles from the Sea; this Bar is a great security
to the Colony against a foreign Invasion, the channel being hard to find by
those that have not experience of it, and yet safe enough to those that know it.

The Earth, Water, and Air.
THe Land is of diverse sorts as in all Countries of the world, that which lies
near the Sea, is sandy and barren, but bears many tall Trees, which make good
timber for several uses; and this sandy ground is by experienced men thought to
be one cause of the healthfulness of the place: but up the River about 20 or 30
mile, where they have made a Town, called Charlestown, there is plenty of as
rich ground as any in the world; It is a blackish mold upon a red sand, and
under that a clay, but in some places is rich ground of a grayer color, they
have made Brick of the Clay, which proves very good; and Lime they have also
for building. The whole Country consists of stately Woods, Groves, Marshes and
Meadows; it abounds with variety of as brave Oaks as Eye can behold, great
Bodies tall and straight from 60 to 80 foot, before there be any Boughs, which
with the little under-wood makes the Woods very commodious to travel in, either
on Horseback or a foot. In the barren sandy ground grow most stately Pines,
white and red Cedars, Ash, Birch, Holly, Chestnut, and Walnut-trees of great
growth and very plentiful: There are many sorts of fruit Trees, as Vines,
Medlaas, Peach, Wild Cherries, Mulbury-Trees, and the Silkworm breeding
naturally on them, with many other Trees for Fruit and for Building, for
Perfume and for Medicine, for which the English have no name; also several
sorts of Dying Stuff, which may prove of great advantage; The Woods are stored
with Deer and Wild Turkeys, of a great magnitude, weighing many times above 50
l. a piece, and of a more pleasant taste than in England, being in their proper
climate; other sorts of Beasts in the Woods that are good for food; and also
Fowls, whose names are not known to them. This is what they found naturally
upon the place; but they have brought with them most sorts of seeds and roots
of the Barbados which thrive very well, and they have Potatoes, and the other
Roots and Herbs of Barbados growing and thriving with them; as also from
Virginia, Barmoodoes, and New England, what they could afford: They have
Indico, Tobacco very good, and Cotton-wool; Lime-trees, Orange, Lemon, and
other Fruit Trees they brought thrive exceedingly: They have two Crops of
Indian-Corn in one year, and great increase every Crop; Apples, Pears, and
other English fruit, grow there out of the planted Kernels: The Marshes and
Meadows are very large from 1500 to 3000 Acres, and upwards, and are excellent
food for Cattle, and will bear any Grain being prepared; some Cattle both great
and small, which live well all the Winter, and keep their fat without Fodder;
Hogs find so much Mast and other Food in the Woods, that they want no other
care than a Swine-herd to keep them from running wild. The Meadows are very
proper for Rice, Rape-seed, Linseed, etc. and may many of them be made to
overflow at pleasure with a small charge. Here are as brave Rivers as any in
the World, stored with great abundance of Sturgeon, Salmon, Basse, Plaice,
Trout, and Lpanish Mackrill; with many other most pleasant sorts of Fish, both
flat and round, for which the English Tongue has no name. Also in the little
Winter they have abundance of Wild Geese, Ducks, Teals, Widgeons, and many
other pleasant fowl; and (as is said before) the Rivers are very deep and
navigable above 100 miles up; also there are wholesome Springs and Rivulets.
Last of all, the Air comes to be considered, which is not the least
considerable to the well being of a Plantation, for without a wholesome Air all
other considerations avail nothing; and this is it which makes this Place so
desirable, being seated in the most temperate Clime, where the neighborhood
of the glorious Light of Heaven brings many advantages, and his convenient
distance secures them from the Inconvenience of his scortching beams. The
Summer is not too hot, and the Winter is very short and moderate, best agreeing
with English Constitutions. Cape-Feare lies about 34 degrees from the Equator,
the Nights nor Days are so long when at longest as in England, by somewhat
above two hours. A remarkable Instance of the Healthfulness of the Place, is,
That at the first setting down of the Colony, when they had no house nor
harbor, but wrought hard all day, in preparing Wood to build, and lay in the
open Air all night, yet not one of them was ill, but continued well all the
time; they Sympathize most with the Barmoodoes, which is the healthfullest spot
in the World, and yet the last year they had a Fever and Ague that troubled
them much, which also was at Cape-Feare, but was not dangerous to any that took
care of themselves, and had things convenient. This place had been aimed at
many years since. Sir Walter Rawleigh had a design to have planted it. Those of
the Barmoodoes, whose Habitations are too straight for them, have with longing
desire waited for the discovery of this place that is near their own Latitude,
where they may expect the same healthfulness they do now enjoy, which is now
perfected as to the first Settlement, and wants nothing but a diligent
prosecution of so noble an Enterprise.

If therefore any industrious and ingenious persons shall be willing to partake
of the Felicites of this Country, let them embrace the first opportunity, that
they may obtain the greater advantages.

The chief of the Privileges are as follows.
First, There is full and free Liberty of Conscience granted to all, so that no
man is to be molested or called in question for matters of Religious Concern;
but every one to be obedient to the Civil Government, worshipping God after
their own way.

Secondly, There is freedom from Custom for all Wine, Silk, Raisins, Currance,
Oil, Olives, and Almonds, that shall be raised in the Province for 7. years,
after 4 Ton of any of those commodities shall be imported in one Bottom.

Thirdly, Every Freeman and Freewoman that transport themselves and Servants
by the 25 of March next, being 1667. shall have for Himself, Wife, Children,
and Menservants, for each 100 Acres of Land for him and his Heirs for ever,
and for every Woman-servant and Slave 50 Acres, paying at most d. per acre, per
annum, in lieu of all demands, to the Lords Proprietors: Provided always, That
every Man be armed with a good Musket full bore, 10 l. Powder, and 20 l. of
Bullet, and six Months Provision for all, to serve them whilst they raise
Provision in that Country.

Fourthly, Every Manservant at the expiration of their time, is to have of the
Country a 100 Acres of Land to him and his heirs for ever, paying only d. per
Acre, per annum, and the Women 50. Acres of Land on the same conditions; their
Masters also are to allow them two Suits of Apparel and Tools such as he is
best able to work with, according to the Custom of the Country.

Fifthly, They are to have a Governor and Council appointed from among
themselves, to see the Laws of the Assembly put in due execution; but the
Governor is to rule but 3 years, and then learn to obey; also he has no power
to lay any Tax, or make or abrogate any Law, without the Consent of the Colony
in their Assembly.

Sixthly, They are to choose annually from among themselves, a certain Number
of Men, according to their divisions, which constitute the General Assembly
with the Governor and his Council, and have the sole power of Making Laws, and
Laying Taxes for the common good when need shall require.

These are the chief and Fundamental Privileges, but the Right Honorable Lords
Proprietors have promised (and it is their Interest so to do) to be ready to
grant what other Privileges may be found advantageous for the good, of the
Colony.

Is there therefore any younger Brother who is born of Gentile blood, and whose
Spirit is elevated above the common sort, and yet the hard usage of our Country
has not allowed suitable fortune; he will not surely be afraid to leave his
Native Soil to advance his Fortunes equal to his Blood and Spirit, and so he
will avoid those unlawful ways too many of our young Gentlemen take to maintain
themselves according to their high education, having but small Estates; here,
with a few Servants and a small Stock a great Estate may be raised, although
his Birth have not entitled him to any of the Land of his Ancestors, yet his
Industry may supply him so, as to make him the head of as famous a family.

Such as are here tormented with much care how to get worth to gain a
Livelihood, or that with their labor can hardly get a comfortable subsistence,
shall do well to go to this place, where any man whatever, that is but willing
to take moderate pains, may be assured of a most comfortable subsistence, and
be in a way to raise his fortunes far beyond what he could ever hope for in
England. Let no man be troubled at the thoughts of being a Servant for 4 or 5
year, for I can assure you, that many men give money with their children to
serve 7 years, to take more pains and fare nothing so well as the Servants in
this Plantation will do. Then it is to be considered, that so soon as he is out
of his time, he has Land, and Tools, and Clothes given him, and is in a way of
advancement. Therefore all Artificers, as Carpenters, Wheel-rights, Joyners,
Coopers, Bricklayers, Smiths, or diligent Husbandmen and Laborers, that are
willing to advance their fortunes, and live in a most pleasant healthful and
fruitful Country, where Artificers are of high esteem, and used with all
Civility and Courtesy imaginable, may take notice, that

There is an opportunity offers now by the Virginia Fleet, from whence Cape
Fear is but 3 or 4 days sail, and then a small Stock carried to Virginia will
purchase provisions at a far easier rate than to carry them from hence; also
the freight of the said Provisions will be saved, and be more fresh, and there
wants not conveyance from Virginia thither.

If any Maid or single Woman have a desire to go over, they will think
themselves in the Golden Age, when Men paid a Dowry for their Wives; for if
they be but Civil, and under 50 years of Age, some honest Man or other, will
purchase them for their Wives.

Those that desire further advice, or Servants that would be entertained, let
them repair to Mr. Matthew Wilkinson, Ironmonger, at the Sign of the Three
Feathers in Bishopsgate-street, where they may be informed when the Ships will
be ready, and what they must carry with them.

Thus much was convenient to be written at present, but a more ample Relation
is intended to be published in due time.

FINIS.

