A brief and true Remonstrance of the Illegal Proceedings of Roger Osburn (an
Irish man born) Governor of MOUNT SERRAT, one of the Caribba Islands, with his
Irish Accomplices against Samuel Waad the younger, of Topsham in the County of
Devon, Gent. And of his barbarous and inhuman murdering of the said Waad in
the said Island upon the first day of May 1654.
THat the said Samuel Waad took to wife Elizabeth the Relict of one Anthony
Brisket in the year 1650, who had been some time Governor of the Island, the
which Waad shortly upon his marriage went with his said wife unto the Island
aforesaid to possess the estate that his Predecessor formerly enjoyed, and at
his arrival there the estate was valued by the then Governor Roger Osburn and
others of the Island; since which time the said Waad has paid of the debts of
the said Anthony Brisket more then the then value thereof, so about the end of
December 1653. the said Elizabeth his wife dyed, who was sister to the then
Governor Roger Osburn, the which Osburn maligning the said Waad, who lived in
better state than himself, reported in the presence of one Elizabeth Collings
wife to the then Secretary, that if his Sister (meaning the wife of the said
Waad) were dead, that he would order him the said Waad well enough, and ever
after the said Governor and his Irish Accomplices, used what means they could to
entrap the said Waad by affronts, suggesting alarums upon the Island, but his
devices prevailed not. And about the beginning of April following the said
Governor took an occasion to send for one Mr. Thomas Hurst by his Marshall
from out of the said Waads house, and committed him to prison for stiking a
Tailor with his Cane that affronted him, which occasioned the Writing of a
Letter by the said Waad unto the said Governor, bearing date April 2. 1654,
the Copy whereof (written by the said Waads own hand) is as follows.

A true Copy subscribed, To the Honorable Col. Reger Osburn Governor of Mount
Serrat.
SIR,
SVspending the Circumstances you were pleased yesterday by virtue of an ^ll
favored Capias ad Respondendum to fetch an English Gentleman out of my house,
and without Baylor Mainprize to commit him close Prisoner, had you dealt so
with the Irish Murderer or late acquitted fellon immediately employed in your
service, it had been just. I cannot think of these passages without Reluctance,
it will be one day accounted for, with the pretended alarm. Is this the way to
preserve the Peace of an Island, by you wholly neglected and left as a Prey to
the next Invader? have we not enemies enough abroad to ruin us, but that you
must command and keep the Barbarous Irish and their Abetters in arms, I will
not say to the terror but to the admiration of our Nation, should we be so
precipitate as to meet your spleen in its full career upon the Defensive
posture, you might have just cause to repent it. Surely the plot is spoiled, we
are resolved to bear with patience the yoke till God in Mercy remove it. Sir
had I been of yoar Council, I should have put you in mind of the word
Moderation, and not have animated a Crew of idle Fellows to prosecute the
deserved consequences of Affronts. Give me leave to tell you, it is beneath a
Gentleman; and if you think to catch me by so mean a stratagem't will not hold
twice. I know you too well already, and only now desire you either to enlarge
the Prisoner upon my Recognizance of 1000. l. sterling, to his Highness the
Lord Protector of England, etc. for his Appearance at the next Sessions,
according to Law; or give me leave to supply his necessity during restraint;
for I may not in point of Honor suffer a Gentleman to perish for want of
sustenance. We are to be regulated by Law, not your exorbitant will, nor the
satisfaction of a Ladies fancy. I should be loath to hazard my Estate upon a
Frolic; yet rather than comply with palpable injustice, let me die a Beggar.
All these forced Depositions will come to nothing but your shame at last. For
your own sake I beseech you, Remember there is a God which can never fail.

April 2. 1654. Sir, Your very humble Servant. SAM: WAAD.


Then the 26. of the same April the said Waad having occasion in their Court
then held, did voluntarily repair thither, being one of the eminentest men of
the Island, amongst other business, he the said Waad with one Cap. Matthew
Floyer disliking the exorbitant Government of the Island did solicit the
Governor in open Court that they might be regulated by due course of Law, as
other of the Islands were, which was to be by a Common Council and assembly,
and with all told him that he would justify the contents of the said Letter
and much more before the Lord Protector of England, upon which the said
Governor committed the said Waad and Floyer to several prisons, keeping Floyer
in Irons for certain days, and upon submission released him, so Apr. 25. he
commanded a strong guard of Irish to be in arms, and the 29. (being Saday in
the afternoon) the said Governor constituted Officers, that is to say,
Nathanael Read who married an Irish woman, William Bentley a Papist, one Dabram
an Irish Papist, Lieutenant, and Nathaniel Stephens a Chyrurgian, who together
with himself, on Monday following, being the first of May, condemned the said
Waad to be shot to death, his hands manakled with Iron by five Irish and one
English man, which about two of the clock the same day was accordingly done,
never suffering all the time of the said Waads imprisonment, nor hour of death,
any one Friend or Servant of his to speak with him, but as is reported, the
said Waad wrote much the time of his imprisonment; but the said Governor (the
said Waad being dead) seized all his estate real and personal, entering into
his house, taking possession of all his books and writings, which amounted to a
very great value, and to our best knowledge we here declare.

A plantation called Newark, whereon is one of the stateliest Sugar works in
all the Caribba Islands, set up by the said Waad.

A plantation at the Wind-ward of the Island, whereon is a fair house, being a
Tobacco Plantation.

A plantation whereon the said Waad lived, called States Castle, whereon is a
Stately built Stone-house richly furnished, with all sorts of furniture, to a
great value, being esteemed the fairest of any house in the Caribba Islands; In
the which house was great store of merchandice, to what value we cannot
express. Belonging to these plantations were

Seventy head of Cows, Bulls, and Oxen.

Five hundred Sheep, Two Horses and two Colts.

Hoggs a great number.

Thirty Christian Servants. Fifty Slaves young and old.

Many debts, amongst which the said Osburn owed him about twenty thousand
weight of Sugar and Tobacco.

Twenty thousand weight of sugar and a great quantity of Tobacco at the time of
his death in his Magazine, all which as aforesaid the said Governor took
possession of, and presently shipped aboard the Ship called The Industry of
Plymouth, Henry Wiseman Master, three hundred and fifty Rolls of the said Waads
Tobacco, being about four and twenty thousand weight, and consigned it unto his
Brother Robert Osburn, a Minister in the County of Cornwall, which said goods
came to the hands of the said Robert Osburn, and by him sold to one Mr. Richard
Lobb of the Parish of Myler in the County of Cornwall, about the end of August
last, at the price of sixteen pounds the thousand pound, clear of all cost and
charges.

This we are ready to testify upon our Oaths, when ever we shall be thereunto
called, who were all then resident upon the said Island.

Henry Waad. Richard Waad. Henry Wheeler. William Medford. George Wyke.



