A BRIEF RELATION OF THE Persecutions and Cruelties That have been acted upon
the PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS In and about the City of London, Since the beginning
of the 7 th Month last, til this present time.

WITH A general Relation of Affairs, signifying the state of the People through
the Land.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.

A Brief Relation of the Persecutions and Cruelties that have been acted upon
the People called Quakers, etc.
IN our last Intelligence we concluded with the Relation of proceedings of what
happened the last day of the sixth month, at the meeting at the Bull, and how
cruel and merciless the Train-bands were toward our friends that day; and how
that many were wounded, and bruised, and knocked down in a barbarous manner;
the woeful effects of which persecution has more then sufficiently appeared, to
the amazement of many in this City, who have admired the sufferance of such
dealing, so illegal and cruel in this famous City. And we shall not need at this
time to aggravate the cruelty of that day by many circumstances, for the woeful
effects shall prove the matter; for since that day diverse are departed this
life, that were beat, and wounded, and abused in that meeting; and particularly
one man who lay under the grievous pangs of death for ten days after he had
received such cruel bruises and blows, then departed this world; and upon some
considerations by his friends that were present with him on his deathbed, and
especially they knowing (as by all appearance it was manifest) that, he was
killed and murdered, and that his wounds and bruises received at the Meeting
were the absolute occasion of his death: It was found convenient, that the
Coroner of the City should be sent for, and that an Inquest should pass upon
his dead body, that the murder might be manifest, and not be hid in secret;
accordingly it was done; the dead Corpse were carried to the Bull into the
Meeting-room where he received his death-blows, and his body was exposed to
public view; to which place multitudes of people of the City did resort to see
the woeful sight of the dead Corpse, which was such a sad sight, that it made
many beholders astonished; his dead body was so black with bruises, and even
rotten, and like a Jelly, that none can scarce express the grievous symptoms of
cruel blows that had fallen on that body, which had occasioned his death; and
for diverse hours together many came to behold the same, and went away
afflicted in their hearts by the sight that their eyes had seen; and the
Coroner came and impanelled a Jury of the Neighbors, and gave them a charge
(according to his Office) to make true inquiry upon their oaths, and to present
what they found the cause of his death to be; accordingly they viewed the Corpse
thoroughly, and had a Surgeon or two with them to advise concerning the cause of
the death of that person; and after some time spent in consulting among
themselves, and in viewing the Corpse; then passed together in private (desiring
the Friends to bury the body, which that evening was done) and that time they
suspended to give in their Verdict for diverse reasons known to themselves;
though without doubt it was the judgment of the Surgeon then present, and of
themselves also according to their evidence, and of all that beheld the dead
Carkase, that he was absolutely murdered, and that the blows received at that
Meeting aforesaid were the real cause of his death; and diverse times since the
Coroner and Jury have met together upon the occasion, to hear witnesses, and to
determine concerning the matter; and many substantial evidences have been
brought in, testifying of that grievous cruelty acted that day by the
Train-bands aforesaid, which have sufficiently proved the manner of the said
murder, with its several aggravating circumstances, according to the expressed
method of this following Letter sent by a Friend to the Mayor of the City, the
next day after the death of the said person.

Friend,
I Am moved of the Lord to write unto thee concerning a person lately dead, who
being met with many others of the people of God at the Bull and Month, the 31.
day of the last Month, (the usual time and place of their Meeting for the
worship of the living God) was so beat and bruised by that party of the Trained
Bands of the City which were sent to that place to disturb the Meeting, who did
so beat and wound many of our Friends, and use that violence toward the
innocent people, that it is scarce to be believed that men should be so
inhumane, cruel and merciless to their honest neighbors, as they were at that
time and place: But that there is now a sufficient witness of their cruelty, by
the death of this person, who was absolutely murdered* yea purposely and
wilfully, as may be justly suspected: I may suppose thou have heard of this
thing; for it was done not in the night, but at the mid-time of the day; not
suddenly, unawares, by mishap, but intendedly, and in a long space of time a
doing; and not in a corner, but in the streets of the City of London; All which
circumstances does highly aggravate this Murder, to the very shame and infamy
of this famous City and its Government. And now seeing it is thus come to pass,
consider in the fear of God, and take his counsel what thou ought now to do
as chief Magistrate of this City, wherein such Murder is so hainously
committed) for the end that innocent blood may not be hid, nor this cruel deed
be covered with hypocrisy; but that this matter may be enquired into (as of
right it ought) and sought out by thee, and Justice and true Judgment brought
forth; that thou may for ever stand clear both before God and men (when
called to an account) and that the City may be cleared also of innocent blood,
which now lies upon it, by this man's death.

Friend, I say again in dear and tender love to thee, Consider what thou have
to do in this case; it is not to be over-looked and connived at by thee, as a
thing of naught; for really and in truth, the City is defiled by the innocent
blood of a servant of God, who is slain for his Worships sake; and these things
will be brought to account before God the Judge of all, who is provoked to
anger because of these things, and may also ('it is not impossible) be brought to
an account in this world, when the sufferings of Gods people are finished,
which will once be as sure as the Lord lives, whose purpose is to deliver his
people from all their Oppressions, and they shall be free, though the Rulers of
the earth do what they can to the contrary, whom God will deal with as he dealt
with Pharaoh, if the [now] Israel of God may not be permitted to meet to
worship the true and living God, and a generation shall not pass till it be
accomplished; And the innocent blood of his servants is now touched, and this
City has defiled it self therewith, which will hasten vengeance and
destruction: And as for this thing, if thou now art silent, and it be hid, how
shall the Lord look upon thee clear, who art the chief Magistrate, and have the
Power, and ought by the Law of God to search out, and judge this cause of
innocent blood. I am moved to warn thee, that thou may exercise that Power
and Understanding which God has given thee, for the end to prevent the
shedding of the blood of God's servants for the time to come: I seek no
revenge, nor the lives of our adversaries, but rather, that the Murderers, and
all ungodly men may be converted, and their souls and bodies may live for ever;
though by the Law of God, and the Law of this Land, Eye for eye, and life for
life; and this is just and equal. And certain it is, not only one man us
guilty of this cruel deed, but many who were then present, assenting,
consenting, and acting their parts in this bloody Tragedy; and all such are
liable to answer the Law, if Justice be done; yea, and if they had a command to
kill men, as some of them said, such a one is liable to the Justice and
Judgment of the Eternal God for the same, and God will render to every man
according to his ways: Though we desire the repentance of all, and that they
may have mercy from God and man; yet in conscience, according to my duty, have
I laid this thing before thee, that thy heart may be stirred up to remove the
weight and guilt of innocent blood, that now cries in the ears of the City.

I am thy Friend, and a lover of the immortal souls of mankind, though an
afflicted and oppressed sufferer for the Name of Christ, and his Gospel, E. B.


But though they have had diverse meetings about the business, and many
consultations, and had much evidence for proof of the murder; yet for some
reasons not well known to us, they have not till this time given in their
Verdict, whether they find upon their oaths, that person diseased as aforesaid
to have been murdered or no? The reasons rendered by some for such suspense of
Verdict is, That because they cannot by any evidence yet given to them charge
any one particular man with the said murder, as that such a person did give the
deceased person his deaths blows, though it is testified that the same person
now dead was seen beaten and knocked down; but it being in such a confused
crowd as was at that time on that occasion, that no particular man can be fixed
upon, as that any can say, this man did the deed; this is not yet found out,
though the Jury have sought for it; and it is supposed, that if a particular
person could be charged with the murder, he would be turned over to the Law,
and tried accordingly; but if no particular person can be charged herewith,
then the City is liable to be a merced some great sum at the pleasure of the
King, for suffering such murder in the City on the daytime, and in such
public manner, and the murderer suffered to escape, and not apprehended; which
thing it is supposed the City fears; so this is the reason given by some why
Verdict: is suspended till the particular person can be found out on whom the
said murder may be charged: But however the matter is plain to many thousands
in this City, that the said person was murdered, and it is well known to the
whole City that for three months together, scarce one First Day, but the
soldiers came violently and cruelly into our Meetings; beating, abusing, and
knocking down many for dead; and thus much for present shall suffice concerning
the death of the aforesaid person, till we have further occasion to publish the
whole matter about the business, which in due time may be done, as good
occasion shall justly require it.

The first day of the seventh month a Friend suffered some persecution in and
near Smithfield in the Fair-time, who was moved to go through the Fair naked,
with a pan on his head full of fire and brimstone, flaming up in the sight of
the people, crying repentance among them, and bad them remember Sodom, etc. for
which some rude people did abuse him much, and took him to an Officer, but he
was not committed to Prison, but the Lord delivered him out of their hands.

About the 7 th day of the month two Women were committed to Old Bridewel, for
going into Paul's in the time of their worship; the one of them being moved to
go at that very time into that place with her face made black, and her hair
down with blood poured in it, which run down upon her sackcloth which she
had on, and she poured also some blood down upon the Altar, and spoke some
words, and another Woman being moved to go along with her, they were both
taken away to Bridewel, where they remain to this day, and were not yet
tried for any fact, nor any evil yet justly laid to their charge.

The same day a person was committed to Newgate, for giving abroad a printed
paper (to diverse persons he gave diverse of them) it was Concerning the
cruelty acted in the meeting that day the man was killed, as aforesaid; and
though one of the same was delivered to the King, by a person that was moved to
acquaint him with the murder of the person aforesaid, at which the King seemed
displeased, that one of our Friends should be killed at a Meeting, in these
words expressing himself; I assure you it was not by my advice that any of your
friends should be slain, and you must tell the Magistrates of the City of it,
and prosecute the Law against them, these were the Kings words; but the person
aforesaid was taken up by some Officer, and charged with giving Papers abroad,
being had before Rich. Brown, who committed him to Prison for dispersing
scandalous papers, as he said, though the Authors name was at the Paper; and
yet he was Committed to Newgate, where he now remains.

Our Friends meetings for these six Weeks last past, in and about this City,
have been for the most part quiet and free from disturbance by Soldiers, the
Meetings at the Bull and diverse other places have been kept in the fear and
name of the Lord, peaceable and quiet, and not violated by soldiers, as of
late heretofore; only for these three last first days, in Wheeler-street, at
the Meeting Place, soldiers have appeared in a very rude manner, and shut up
the doors, and kept a Guard against our Friends, and would not permit them
entrance into their own house, but did beat, knock and abuse friends in a
wicked manner in the streets; and one Lieutenant uttered these words, He
mattered not if he killed a Quaker, he should not be hanged for it: And seeing
they would not suffer friends to pass into their Meeting-room, they stood in
the street before the door, and could not depart, though the rude soldiers
continued to abuse them with their Kanes and Swords, beating them in a pitiful
manner; though some of the soberest of them desired that some of our friends
would go to the King, and acquaint him with these proceedings, that they might
be spared from that duty, for they were wholly weary of it.

And one first day there were four of the friends taken out of the Streets, and
committed to New-Prison, where they remained till the Sessions, and were then
discharged. And this has been most of the disturbance our friends have had in
their Meetings for the time aforesaid.

About the middle of the 7th. Month one Henry Bowerman was taken out of his
Ship, and brought before Richard Brown, and committed to Newgate for selling of
our Friends Books, which they say are unlicensed by the Bishop, and therefore
not suffered to be sold, though to this day neither the Bishop, nor any other
person has ever detected any point of doctrine or principle in any of our
Books, or proved any unsoundness in them, or contrary Doctrine to the
Scriptures of truth; but notwithstanding the said Henry was committed close
Prisoner upon that pretense, and for three Weeks laid among the Felons, and
suffered many great abuses, because of which, distemper of body grew upon him,
and he grew very weak till death, and the 17. day of the 8. month dyed in
Newgate; thus this honest just man finished his Testimony in Bonds for the Name
of Jesus in faithfulness, whose reward is with him for ever; and he is
accounted among the suffering Martyrs for the truth of Jesus: And without all
doubt his close imprisonment, and the abuses he suffered, was the cause and
ground of his sickness, and so of his death; and this was the opinion of diverse
of the Jurymen that passed upon his dead Corpse*

We cannot omit in this place, to mention the state of our dear Friends in
Southwark, and how it has fared with them in this stormy season.

In the 4 th. Month last, the Meeting of our Friends at Horsely-down (the usual
place of their peaceable meeting to worship God for these diverse years) was
disturbed and violated by Soldiers in Arms, in the same rude, illegal manner
as the Meetings in the City, of whom ye have heard heretofore; and at diverse
times on three first days, were taken out of the said meeting to the number of
about 50. persons, and from time to time committed to prison at the White-Lyon,
where they remained till the Assise, which was held at Guilford, to which place
the Prisoners were had in order to trial, the Jailer taking their words to
travel to the place, being 25. miles distance from the Goal, without any
Keeper; which they did faithfully, and appeared at the time and place
appointed; but few of them were called before the Bench, for there was no
witness against them, nor preparation of Indictments; for which cause (it is
supposed) Orlando Bridgeman, then Judge of the Assize, did discharge all the
Prisoners saving four, who had the Oath then tendered them, and for refusing,
were re-committed back to prison, and the rest were all released, and they
only detained. And this was the proceeding toward our friends at that time.

But the rage and malice of some men were not yet an end; for though the Judge
of Assize had ordered the release of our friends in the face of the Country,
yet in a little time after their return home, they were fallen upon again in
their meeting at the place aforesaid, and by rude Soldiers violently halled,
pulled and dragged out of their peaceable Meeting, and led by force before some
Justices of the peace, who took some examination of them, and committed them to
the Gaol for the County, according to the following Relation received from the
Prisoners themselves.

ON the 3 d* day of the 6th. Month (called August) being the first day of the
week, we being met together as our manner is, in the fear of the Lord to feel
and enjoy his presence, and to be refreshed in his precious life, and one in
another; for indeed in the Unity to meet together, and in the Unity to bow or
worship before the Lord, and together in the unity to live, is very precious
unto us, and we cannot but exercise our selves therein, notwithstanding the
Decrees and Laws of men are to the contrary: And being met together (even out
of the fear of man) after some time came a Constable with some Soldiers, and
found us very peaceable and quiet; yet notwithstanding they soon began to
thrust, hale, and carry forth of the Meeting all Women-Friends, some with much
violence; and when they had wrought their design upon them (we all this while
siteing still, eying the dear loving kindness of the Lord to us, and little
regarding the cruelties of men, feeling in our hearts that Love which casts
out fear, which Love envieth not, but teaches us to pity, and to pray for them
that despitefully use us; knowing that their eyes are blinded, and their hearts
hardened, and that they understand not what they do.) Then they began with us,
and after much thrusting, halling and pulling, we were brought six or eight
sometimes in a company, and sometimes more, every Soldier his prisoner, as
though we had been great Malefactors; We were strongly guarded, and brought to
the Court at Margarets Hill, where they kept their Main-Guard, especially on
the first days of the Week, having little other service at present for their
Soldiers, than to range up and down like Wolves greedy of prey, to find where
the Lambs and Sheep of Christ meet together; drudging about this day many miles
for no other purpose. So when we were all brought into their Guard, they set a
strong watch at the door, scarce suffering or admitting any Friends Wives to
come in: After some time we were called to go up into an upper room, which was
over the Court of Guard, where there were two Magistrates called Justice Moor,
and Justice Lee, and several other persons, most as spectators; so by parcels
as aforesaid, we were brought before them; and the Constable and two Soldiers
were sworn to witness against us, the Magistrates having the late Act made
against us, lying upon the Table before them: And being called one by one to
the last, the Constables evidence was, That we were taken met together. So they
set down our Names, and asked us for sureties to be bound for our appearance
next Sessions or Assizes to be holden in this County: They were answered, That
we had transgressed no just Law; and having broken no good Law of the Nation,
we ought not to be asked for sureties; requiring and challenging them or any
other Magistrates or People in the Nation, to charge us justly with the breach
of any one good Law of the Nation, since we were a people in scorn called
Quakers: But as for such Laws; Decrees, and Ordinances of men, which were not
according to the Law of God and right Reason, but contrary to both; their own
Law says, That such Laws, Decrees, Customs and Ordinances, are utterly void,
and not to be obeyed. And further, they were told, That we were subject readily
and willingly to all good Laws, and wholesome Customs of the Nation, which tend
to the preservation of Mankind, not for fear, but for Conscience Sake; and that
it did not concern them, nor any other Civil Magistrates, to trouble us for the
exercise of our Consciences toward God in spiritual things; and that the King
had also said and promised, That none should be molested or troubled about
matters of Conscience, provided they did not disturb the public peace; which
we have not at any time done, but have endeavored and do endeavor to the
utmost, to follow peace with all men. This and much more they heard somewhat
moderately; but they said we must obey the Kings Laws; and there must be an
Uniform of Worship; and that we would ruin our selves, and they were (they
said) sorry for us, and such like. So still it was urged upon them, to convince
us of the breach of any good Law, and if they could, we would put in security
to answer that Law: And further also told them, That if we did err in our
minds, and were wrongly persuaded in our hearts, in and about matters of
Worship and Religion, yet had not they any Precept nor President from the
Primitive Christians nor Christ, to imprison our bodies, and ruin our Estates
for that cause only, it being wholly contrary to Christianity, or the Spirit
of Christ.

But we answering not their request as to sureties, the whole Guard most of
which in the mean while being in the lower room behaving themselves very rudely
and cruelly toward some; one woman being by a Soldier punched on the belly,
being big with child, and thrust with much violence backward upon the Pavement,
appearing for some time as dead; but little notice would be taken by the
Magistrates of the fault without an Oath.) So the wholeGuard, consisting of
near one hundred, were ordered and commanded to guard us to the County-Gaol,
many hundreds of people attending to behold us with much pity. So we were
delivered into prison, thirty four in number, for the Testimony of a good
Conscience; for if we would make shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, we
need not suffer by this generation. So in the true patience, long-suffering and
love, which thinks no ill, we rest in the hope which makes not ashamed,
knowing our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us; but if he will not, be it
known to all, he will, and does enable us cheerfully to suffer whatsoever the
sons of men are permitted to inflict upon us; believing in the end, That Love,
Patience and Innocence shall overcome all that is contrary; and in the end, the
Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory.

From the White-Lyon, being the County-Gaol for Sarry, the 6th. day of the 6th.
Month, 1662.

In like manner the said Meeting of the people of God was assaulted for diverse
days; till such time as they had taken from time to time out of the Meeting,
and committed about Eighty of our Friends to the White Lion, where they lay
grievously thronged up together in noisome stinking places, till the Sessions
held at Kingstone for that County, which was the beginning of this Month, to
which place the Prisoners were conducted in order to hearing and trial; and
accordingly here they were arreigned and indicted upon the Statute of the 35 of
Elisabeth (though it is the judgment of diverse Lawyers that that Statute is
repealed) for unlawful Conventicles, and unlawful Assemblies, etc. And demanded
to plead Guilty, or not Guilty? to which most of the Prisoners pleaded, Not
guilty; and they were demanded to give Bayl to answer the next Sessions. Though
some of the Prisoners spoke home to the Court, and told them their Indictment
was made up of lies and falsities; upon which occasion some disturbance grew in
the Court, so that some party of the Train-bands were commanded into the Court
to keep all quiet; who did make a bussle and stir, and some received some
blows; one man in particular being no Quaker (so called) who was struck, made
some defense to keep the blows off him, upon which a lying report was raised in
the Town and Country, that the Quakers fought and opposed the soldiers, which
was not true at all, but a very lie; for none of our Friends made the least
resistance, no not in the defense to save their heads from blows; and this may
be taken notice of to prevent false reports. But none of the Prisoners were
tried, but all recommitted to prison, and the Court adjourned till the 28 day
of this instant to sit on Margarets Hill in Southwark; in the mean time all our
friends are kept prisoners for refusing to put in Bayl for their appearance;
though their denial to give bayl is not as though their crime was so great as
they could not answer it, but it is usual if at any time any friends give bayl,
they are more ensnared thereby, and made more liable to greater sufferings; for
which cause, with some others, our friends cannot give such bayl demanded of
them; so at this present there are remaining in prison, in White-Lion, near
Eighty of our Friends as aforesaid.

The Sessions for the general Gaol delivery was held at the Old Baily the 9,
10, 11, and 12 days of this Month; where several Murderers, Fellons, and some
Coyners were arraigned and tried, and only six persons condemned, three whereof
were executed, and the rest Reprieved. And there being about twelve of our
Friends in prison in Newgate, which were detained from the Sessions before, for
refusing to give Bayl for appearance, and for their behavior, etc. though they
were discharged by the Kings late Letter sent to the Magistrates of the City
for to release all our Friends out of the Gaols for London and Middlesex, of
which ye have heard heretofore; and being yet continued prisoners, it was
expected they should have been called to the Court at the Sessions; but was not
brought before them, only their names called over, and they returned in the
Gaolers Calendar, to continue prisoners, or to give Bayl for appearance the
next Sessions, in the mean time to be of good behavior, etc. upon which they
are detained still in Newgate, though very unjustly, as may be made appear, if
need require, in due season; and how men who unjustly do these things, will be
able to answer before God when they are called to account, is to be considered;
For though this people have none among men to plead their cause, yet will the
Lord God arise in his season, to hear the cry, and plead the cause of his
innocent people who suffer for his Name sake, in patience bearing all things,
till God from Heaven work deliverance for the oppressed.

About the 18th. day of this Month was an Order sent from the King to the
Sheriffs of London, for to release John Boulton, John Crook, and Isaac Gray,
the three persons formerly convict of Praemunire, who were committed during the
King's pleasure, and had their Estates seized upon, according as ye have
formerly heard, which Order contained thus much: That whereas the said three
persons stood convicted of Praemunire, and was committed during the pleasure of
the King, his Will and Pleasure was thereby signified, That the said three
persons should forthwith be enlarged and set at liberty, etc. According to the
intent and meaning of the said Letter, the said three persons are delivered out
of prison after their five months imprisonment, and the hard sentence passed
upon them.

The same day Rebecca Travers was committed to the New-Prison by the Lieutenant
of the Tower, who being moved to go to him on the behalf of some Prisoners that
he had committed for being at Meetings; in some discourse with him, pressing
upon him for pity and compassion to poor men, he was much discontented; and she
being passing away from him one of the Keepers used some violent speeches
toward her at her departure; to whom she replied and exhorted him to be good
in his place while it was the Lords Will he had it, etc. At which he was so
vexed, that he went back speedily to the Lieutenant, and swore she had spoken
Treason; for which her Mittimus was made, and she immediately committed, where
she now remains. Thus instead of hearing her sober requests in the behalf of
the poor prisoners, he committed her also.

So this is the sum of proceedings in and about this City* There remains at
this present of our friends Prisoners, in Negate twelve, in New-Prison four,
and in Southwark near eighty: And for these late Weeks Meetings are generally
quiet, and much pity in the hearts of sober people raised up toward friends,
who have observed the patient and long-suffering spirit of the Lord amongst us,
through this hard time of trial and persecution, and to continue in the same we
are resolved through the strength of Christ Jesus, even till our deliverance
come; and we shall never seek vengeance against our Enemies, nor rise up
against them to redeem our selves by our own strength; and we desire
like-mindedness among all that love us; for the Lord will accomplish his own
Work in his season.

At a Meeting at Ham, five miles out of the City, diverse Friends have been
taken of late, through the instigation of a wicked Priest, who has stirred up
the Officers of the Town to disturb the Meeting; and they have sent diverse
friends, some to Colchester-Gaol, and some to the House of Correction: And one
Friend in particular, was dragged at a Horses tail for some part of the way.
Thus the cruelty of the Priests is daily made manifest, to their shame and
reproach through the Land; even these men, who were themselves in a suffering
condition some of them; and yet without regard either of God or man, stir up
the hearts of men to be cruel toward the Innocent.

By late Letters from Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex, we have lately understood,
That for the most part our Friends Meetings are quiet and peaceable in all them
East-Counties, except in some places where the Officers are violent and rude
men, and are willing to do our friends mischief, and there our friends are most
molested: But there are not many of our Friends Prisoners in them parts at this
present.

By Letters lately received from Plymouth and Bristol, and out of the West, we
understand, That there are very few of our Friends in prison in them parts: At
Bristol three remains taken from meetings some Weeks since, two of whom are
convict by the late Act against meetings, and the other detained for refusing
the Oath. In Exceter some lately released out of the prison, who were committed
for meetings* though meetings at this present are generally quiet in the West:
For our Friends are so well known to be of peaceable deportment, and of
inoffensive conversation, and their meetings so clearly for the Worship of God,
that sober men have no great mind nor desire to use violence to their honest
neighbors, in halling them out of meetings, and carrying them to prison; for
all sober men must needs confess, That such kind of dealing toward our
Friends, as of late practiced in this City, by persecution and cruelty acted
upon them, can never make (in the effect of it) for the happiness of the King
and Government; but it is liberty and freedom in the exercise of Conscience in
spiritual matters, that must make for the prosperity of the King and his
subjects.

By Letters lately received from the North, we understand, that in York Castle
there are about an hundred* of our friends prisoners, committed for meeting
together in the Worship of God, some of whom have lately been tried at the
sessions, and some are fined 40. s, some more, some less, and some sentenced
into Praemunire, and all returned back to prison again, saving some about
Wakefield-side, who were released. And thus they go on to persecute the
innocent through their enmity, till the Lord arise, and work the deliverance
for his people.

In Leicestershire and Northamptonshire diverse were released out of prison this
last Sessions, though some are committed again since for meeting together to
worship God: Also we have been given to understand of late, that very much
goods have been distrained from our friends in the Countries, for meeting
together, and for not going to Parish-Houses to hear Common Prayer, and for
Tithes and Priests hire; so that great are the sufferings of the innocent every
way; the wicked plow furrows upon their backs, and are like pricking briars and
thorns unto upright men, and this is a very trying day unto all that fear the
Lord, whether they will suffer for the truth they profess, or whether they will
deny their God and Religion: But blessed and happy are the faithful this day,
who follow Christ through suffering; for they that suffer with him, shall reign
with him.

At Hartford last Sessions, four honest Friends were tried for refusing the
Oath of Allegiance, and sentenced into a Pramunire, and are kept close
Prisoners ever since: Take the account of it in the Letter following.

Dear Friends,
IN the bowels of endeared love and perfect unity, in that measure of Light and
Life which we are made partakers of in the Father, do we salute you, with the
rest of our dear Friends and suffering brethren in bonds for the testimony of a
good Conscience in the Prison of Newgate. We thought it convenient to acquaint
you from our own hands, with the cause of our suffering in these bonds, and to
give you some brief account of the Sessions-proceedings against us: On the 6
th. and 7 th. days of this Month was the Quarter Sessions for the County of
Hartford, where we with diverse other of our friends were arrested with Sessions
Processes for not going to our Parish Church, (as they called it) where is to
be observed, that we are Inhabitants of the Corporation, and so by the Law not
accountable at the County-Sessions: But the morning before the Sessions, the
Mayor, Steward and Company gathered together, and went to the County Justices,
and told them we were a people too mighty for them to deal with, and therefore
desired them to take us into their cognizance. So we four persons whose Names
are under subscribed, were called, and after a few words spoken to us on the
account of our Indictment for not going to hear Common Prayer, some said,
Tender them the Oath of Allegiance: So we pleaded to our former business, and
asked if we were discharged from that? They said we were, only paying our
Fees, which we denied; but they made haste to the Oath, having intended what to
do before, and read the Oath to us, and asked us to swear: We asked time of
consideration, which he, called the Lord Fanshaw, acknowledged to be a
reasonable question; so they would grant us till the morning; but withal, we
must say whether we would take it or not, then; so they recorded the refusal.
On the next day we were called again; for they were so eager on it, as if they
were in great haste, and took so much pains, as if that were the only business
they had to do, (and some in the Court said, three or four of these would do
the Work, or to that purpose.) They had prepared an Indictment, and read it to
us, and besides, alleged many Scriptures to prove the lawfulness of swearing;
but when we spoke to those Scriptures, as they asked us to do, then Fanshaw
would cry out Grand Imposters; and yet would often in his words pity us, and
say, he would help us, but the Law would not permit unless we would take the
Oath. When the Jury were going forth with the Indictment, we would have spoke
to them, but they would not permit us, and said we must not speak to the Jury
until they came in (which is contrary to the Law.) Some few words we did speak
to the Jury, and some of them said they were more sorry than we were, but they
could not help it; and some (or one of them) said, that they would not have
found it, but that they durst do no other; and though they are reputed but
Enemies to us, most of them, yet they said, That scarce one was willing to find
it. After some more time, about three quarters of an hour, they brought in the
Indictment, and found us guilty: So without sentence we were sent away to
Prison. And after about three hours we were called again, the Lord Fanshaw
being gone, and but few Justices left, the Judge of the Sessions, one Hen.
Chansie, and about four more present, after some impertinent quotations of
Scripture to prove the honorable esteem the servants of the Lord had of
swearing, he said, That he was sorry that it was his hard misfortune to
pronounce so sad a sentence as this was against us, and bid the Clark of the
Sessions to read our sentence, which was, That we should be put out of the
Kings protection, and have no benefit of the Law, and to forfeit our Lands,
Goods and Estates to the King, and to answer it before the King and his
Council, or else Processes of Praemunire to be issued forth against us, and we
to be kept close Prisoners, the which we are continued. And it was said by the
Jailer, That we should be kept without pen, ink or paper; and he to be fined
20. l. if he let any come at us beside such as brought us provision; but this
latter is not so executed on us. They have not yet seized our Estates, but they
say, they expect it hourly; and many are their threats against us; that the
loss of our Estates, and thus imprisoning of our persons, is not all, but to
send us beyond sea, and that one has begged us for that end already; but we
are kept above the terror of these things, knowing that our God can, if he see
it good for us, deliver us out of all these things.

This we thought meet to lay before you; and if you think it for truths
advantage that any thing further should be done, let us hear from you: And so
we remain your Friends in the pure truth.

Henry Sweeting, Rich. Thomas, Abraham Rutt, John King.

Hartford the 14th. of the 8th. Month, 1662.

From Durham.
Friends and Brethren!
THe Beloved of God our Savior, and the Lord Jesus Christ; for as much as it
has pleased God through the riches of his Grace to make us partakers with you
in this suffering fellowship of the Gospel; as also of the love, joy, peace and
presence which attends all who in uprightness of heart suffer in the like sort,
though indeed ours is not to be compared to what we have heard has been in the
City, by a certain intelligence which has its date (as I remember) from the
first 6th mo. to the first 7th. And gives us a full and ample account during
that time; and we do credibly believe it to be according to truth; and it much
satisfies us here to see their rudeness and cruelty so rightly Stated:
Wherefore we shall give you a short hint of what was done in these our Sessions
concerning the said people commonly and scornfully called Quakers; use it as
you shall see fit. Upon the 8th of this instant 8. month, -- 62, the prisoners
being called, all but those three whom we hinted to you in our last were so
unlawfully Praemunir'd the last assizes, being prosecuted against and cast into
prison upon the late Act against unlawful Assemblies and Meetings, until the
time of the Judges sitting here, and then at that self same time run into this
relapse, and here left with several others who were cast in here, and lies upon
the account of Tithes, who were not as this time called forth. Upon the first
day of their Sessions was called one William Foster, a man of sober and good
repute in his Country, who has laid here since the Assizes for not consenting
to find Bond for the good behavior, he not being convinced of any evil that he
had done, but contrariwise suffered that peaceable people to meet sometimes in
his house to wait upon God, was called forth, and asked, if he could yet find
Sureties for the good behavior, which he for conscience sake denying, is cast
into prison again as formerly, there to continue. That self same day in the
evening some more of the said people were called, the Bishop being then upon
the Bench; after the reading of the Act made against that people, and some
debate betwixt him and the Justices about their proceedings at the other
Sessions, which he thought (the said Bishop) not to be cruel enough toward
them, yet said, he loved mercy in his heart; But the very first that was called
before him, having been fined 50 s. before, and then coming upon the second
account, the Bishop sitting as Judge of the Court (and will not let to be
accuser al^o) being a furious man, had it seems forgotten all his mercy, so
that there was not one Groats-worth of mercy for the prisoner; for James White
being called, he was sentenced 10 pounds, according to the Act, and the Bishop
cried out, Abate him not one Groat: Thus they proceeded against nine in the
like condition, fined them ninety pounds. The rest, it being the first time,
less; there being twenty, or above, men and women, which all of them bare it
with a great deal of boldness, courage, and patience, blessing God that they
were found worthy to suffer for his sake. Also one William Fallowfield a
Westmoreland man, coming into this County to visit some friends, and so to pass
toward York to visit a brother he had living there, being taken at a Meeting
before he got out of this County, was cast into Prison, and there continued
nine weeks, was fined 50 shillings, returned to prison there to remain* so that
here remains only nine prisoners at this present; four for Tithes, three
Praemunir'd; one for having Meetings in his house, the other for his Fine. As
to the body of friends in these parts all are valiant for the truth upon earth,
and not at the least dismayed at the manner of these proceedings; finding daily
by experience the peace and presence of God with them* having faith that God
will assuredly finish the good work which he has begun amongst us, to his own
praise and glory for ever; for which we with you, and all the Elected and
Chosen of God remain waiting until the accomplishing thereof:

Your dear Brethren in the bowels of the love of God, I.L. I.H. H.N.

Durham Gaol 12th 8th Mon. -- 62*
For the King and his Council. Being an account of above seven hundred of the
People called Quakers, who remain Prisoners in England for good Conscience.
SUffolk 24 Bucks, about 40 Hartfordshire 60 Staffordshire 02 Hide in Kent 14
Kings Bench 12 White Lion 80 Newgate 114 Fleet London 03 New-Prison 04 Reading,
many lately released, remaining 8 Maidstone 08 Cumberland 53 Westmorland 12
Leicestershire, many lately released, remain 4 Counter London 02 Hole in
Martins 01 Worcestershire 03 Norfolk 27 Lincoln 05 Warwick 26 Oxford 17
Shropshire 07 Gloucestershire 7 Hampshire 07 Cambridge 20 Sussex 06 Darbyshire
02 Essex 19 Bishopric of Durham 20 Stafford 01 Nottingham 06 Cornwall 18 Exon
02 Northampton 25 Yorkshire 1^^ Dorsetshire 11 Bristol 03 Ipswitch in Suffolk
08 Ilchester about 40 Salisbury about 30 Bridewell London 32 Isle of Ely diverse
lately committed.
This is the most exact Account that at present we can procure.

Most of these were committed since the Act came forth against our Meetings.

And several remain in prison that were committed before this Act came forth,
to the number of about four hundred.

We desire that the King would favorably consider the afflictions of these
persons who suffer for righteousness sake, and not as evildoers, nor as
Enemies to the King; and that he would grant a Release to those oppressed
persons for their grievous bonds: So may the King be more happy and prosperous,
and escape the Judgments of God, which the Oppressions of his people (if
continued) will doubtless bring upon the Land, which the Lord is provoked unto.

And that the King be prosperous in good things, is our desire.

London, this 22. of the 8th. month, 1662.
POSTSCRIPT.
BEtween 30. and 40. Horsemen, who said they were the Kings soldiers,
quartering in Southwark, went to a Friend's House near London, and broke open
the doors, notwithstanding there was one there that would have opened any door
to them, and under pretense of searching for Arms, robbed a poor serving-man
who was left to look to the house, and took away two pair of Stockins from him,
and a pair of Shoes, and a Bible and Knife, and drank four or five Bottles of
Wine up, and swore God damn him, and called him son of a Whore, and so went
away.

A Relation of what fell out the 26. of this Month.
THE conclusion of our present News is not the least material* This same day a
great stir was in the City, and both many Horse and Foot marching in the
Streets all the day; and in the forenoon (the Friends being met for the Worship
of God at ths Bull) there came Horse and Foot great number, and took away all
the men, and dispersed the Meeting, and guarded the men all away to Newgate,
and took up diverse in the Streets as they passed along. In like manner they did
at the Meeting in John's street, and at the Meeting in Aldersgate Street, and in
Wheeler-street, and at the Meeting in Jameses, and in Southwark, and Friends
were hardly used at every Meeting; and to Newgate that day were committed of
our Friends about one hundred and twenty persons and put in the Common Gaol
above one hundred in one room among the Felons; and in Old-Bridewell were
committed above thirty, and to New-Prison about twelve, and are all continued
Prisoners.

Likewise there were taken very many of the Baptized People and others. Not one
Meeting that we hear of about the City, but was dealt with in like manner; and
Rich, Brown himself was in the head of the Soldiers about the Streets on that
day. So there were diverse hundreds committed that day to diverse Prisons.

THE END.

