A Brief and Summary Narrative of the many Mischiefs and Inconveniences in
former Times as well as of late Years, occasioned by Naturalizing of Aliens.
THE Wisdom of all Ages has accounted it one of the greatest acts of Prudence
to cherish and encourage all such persons and things as have mostly tended to
the preservation of the general Body of Men in an united, peaceable, and
prosperous Estate; And as the natural Body is most at ease, and in the most
calm and serene Estate, when discharged of those ill humors which do surcharge
and weaken nature: So also does the Body Politic best flourish and thrive when
discharged of Encroachments and Inroads made on the Native Liberties and
Privileges, by the Law of Nature due unto them. Hence is it that Princes in
former Ages, have always taken care to make a distinction between natural born
Subjects and Aliens of other Kingdoms, and have never encouraged, nor indeed
tolerated them in any thing further than that which might directly, or
collaterally be judged and esteemed for the interest of their Natives. Neither
were Aliens in any Age for any proposed advantages favored and eased in any
thing; but Experience immediately discovered many greater Mischiefs to attend.
Some of which are enumerated in an Act made for redressing those Grievances,
An. 1. Henrici Septimi cap. 2. and are hereafter mentioned.

First, and principally, The advancing Aliens in Riches and Honor, and
impoverishing the Native Subjects.

Secondly, The exhausting the Treasure of the Nation, and remitting the same
into Foreign Nations.

Thirdly, The great hurt in impairing and lessening the King and Queens
Customs, the public Revenue of the Nation.

Fourthly, That Merchants Aliens color the Goods and Merchandises of other
Strangers (not Naturalized or made Denizons) and Export great and considerable
substance in their Names.

Herewith agree the Statutes of 11 H. 7. cap. 14. and 22 H. 8. cap. 8. pursuant
to the design of which Laws, few or no Aliens were Naturalized during the
Reigns of King Edward VI. Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James. And how
greatly the Trade and Wealth of the Nation were thereby increased during the
prosperous Reigns of the two latter of the said Princes, none that are
conversant in History can be ignorant of. And then it was rare to hear of a
Merchant that failed: So that the Clothing Trade was in great request abroad:
And the Clothiers and Country Farmers did much improve their Estates, by the
punctual Payments that were made for those Commodities, and the good price the
same then bore.

Besides which Mischiefs, experience has discovered further inconveniences,
in admitting Aliens and Strangers to have and enjoy a free Trade upon equal
Terms with their Majesty's Native Subjects. As

That the Trade, by Commission would be by Aliens taken out of the hands of
their Majesty's Subjects, both at home and abroad, and the English Merchants
would be undersold in the prices of their Commodities by Aliens, who can live
more hardly, and at less Charges, in Lodgings, etc. than the King and Queens
Subjects, to the discouragement of the Gentry, in training up their younger
Sons in Trade, which was formerly esteemed and proved a good Provision for
them, and many arrived thereby to great Estates and preferment formerly, which
few now do.

By the second rule in the Book of Rates, annexed to the Act of Tonnage and
Poundage, Goods Imported, and again Exported by English in twelve Months, and
Aliens in nine Months, draw back from their Majesty's half the Customs paid by
them on the Importation, and in some Cases more than half. And how much more of
their Majesty's Treasure will be exhausted, by admitting Aliens to the same
advantages of Trade with the English, by Naturalization in this very Case, may
easily be computed; They being allowed three Months longer time to Export their
Goods, and draw back half Custom, than if they were not Naturalized they are
allowed by the said Act and Rule.

By the Act of Tonnage and Poundage, Merchants English sustaining loss in their
Goods Exported, by Enemies, Pirates, or perishing in the Sea, (...) back the
whole Custom from his Majesty, which prejudice their Majesty's will sustain
from Aliens Naturalized.

By the Act of Navigation for the increase of Mariners and Shipping, It Is
provided, that sundry Commodities, such as Masts, Timber Boards, Foreign (...)
Pitch, Tarr, etc. imported in any other Ship or Vessel than what is English
built, or truly, and without fraud, belonging to the people of England, and
which is otherwise Navigated and Manned than the said Act directs ( viz.) the
Master, and three fourths of the Mariners, not being English, shall be deemed
Aliens Goods, and pay Customs, and City, Town, and Port-Duties, as the Goods of
Aliens. Now if Aliens be Naturalized, the true intent of this Act is
frustrated, the Mariners discouraged, and driven into Foreign Parts for a
Livelihood, and the building of Shipping (the strength of the Nation) made of
little or no advantage.

The increasing the Importation of Commodities, and thereby their Majesty's
Customs, the only advantage proposed by the Naturalizing Aliens, will in half a
years time, at furthest, be frustrated; Inasmuch as this Nation cannot consume
all the Commodities Imported, which will occasion the price to fall, and so the
importation by consequence to cease: for it is evident, that no Commodity bears
a price, and turns to account, but the supplies are so considerable in three
Months, that the same becomes a Drug.

^^sides all which it is evident, That Naturalization of Aliens has been a
great cause of our Divisions in Religion. And Errors both in Doctrine and
Discipline have thereby privily crept into the Church. And principally the
Papists have by this project greatly strengthened their hands, and thereby
gained opportunities of spreading their Erroneous Doctrine boldly and barefaced.

And moreover it is not to be forgotten, That even in Holland, where for reasons
inconsistent with the nature and constitution of this Kingdom, they have
admitted Foreigners to a Free Trade with them; Yet even there a very
considerable difference is made between Aliens and Natives: for Aliens pay
there, upon Importation or Exportation of their Commodities, considerable
Duties and Tolls to the City, Town and Port, where they unla^e their Goods,
which are not paid by Natives.

The sum of all is, That it should seem great Prudence for all English
Subjects, for the benefit of themselves and their Posterity, to use all
discreet and lawful means to prevent the future Naturalization of Aliens; Or if
any hereafter shall for weighty Reasons be Naturalized, that it may be under
this Proviso, That they pay a greater Custom to their Majesty's for the Goods
and Merchandises they shall Import or Export, than their Majesty's Subjects
pay. And all City, Town, and Port Tolls and Duties payable therefore by Aliens:
And hereby will the Protestant Religion be more likely kept pure and undefiled;
The Customs (being the public Revenue of the Nation) increased; The Honor and
Interest of the English and Native Merchants be preserved and maintained; The
younger Sons of the English Gentry preferred; and generally the good of all
their Majesty's Subjects be advanced.


