A BRIEF NARRATION OF THE IMPRISONMENT OF Mr. FRANCIS BAMPFIELD, A Pious and
Loyal Minister late of Sherburn in Dorcetshire.

With Mr. Phillips (his Assistant) being now both turned out for their
Nonconformity,

As also The Imprisoning of several of the Inhabitants who came to hear him
Exercise at his own house, September the 19. 1662.

Together with The manner of their carrying away, and hard usage when they were
in Prison.

Printed in the year, 1662.

A Brief NARRATION Of the Imprisonment of Mr. FRANCIS BAMPFIELD, etc.
SIR,
It Is possible the small affairs of this Town may go far, and be
misrepresented; to the end you may be truly, and (as far as I could learn)
fully informed, you have this Narrative, which I had from eye and ear-witnesses
of the whole. My self was present only part of one day, viz. at the paying off
the Bill, whereof more anon. That you may the better consider of the whole, you
may understand, that Mr. Francis Bampfield, some years since, was long and
earnestly solicited by the Town of Sherborn to succeed Mr. Lyford (a very
Reverend and Loyal Minister deceased) in the Vicaridge of that place; and
besides other Reasons, they were especially importunate with him for this, viz.
his loyalty to the King, (for you must know that this Town has been notorious
for their Loyalty) whose Cause he constantly asserted under all the changes to
the last, as it is in these parts generally known, and what he suffered upon
that account, and was also a painful Preacher of the Word, which two, it seems
by him for one (amongst many others) are things consistent, viz. Piety and
Loyalty. This Mr. Bampfield continued some years amongst this People, instant
in his work, and was, as I have heard and do believe, utterly unsatisfied in
conscience with the conditions required by the late Act for uniformity:
whereupon he (as many other good men beside, which many every where, as far as
I can learn, do most sadly lament) The Lords day before Bartholomew day last
took his solemn leave of his people; at which (as I hear, for I was not
present) there were a great Church full of weeping eyes, and sad hearts, though
some it may be secretly rejoiced, (for so goes the World now adays) and in a
short time after he removed himself and Family to another hired house in the
Town, where for the most part he has continued ever since, till Friday last,
being the 19th of September, when in the evening he was in his house, and with
his Family praying, and opening and applying of a Scripture, (as his manner was
for some years before he came to Sherborn, which my self have sometimes heard)
which was at this time, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7. whence he had this Observation:
That way the Devil and his Instruments take to hinder Grace, God will wisely
overruled to further it. To this work diverse of the Town came and took their
part, (as all other good Subjects and good Christians, as I should judge, if
they might would do; for certainly one may serve God and be a good Subject,
whatever some may think) and whilst he and his Neighbors were attentive at
this Exercise, in comes one Sugar with other Soldiers (a man noted for no great
bashfulness or sobriety, but it seems one that would serve for such a purpose)
and required them all in the Kings name (I am sorry any should abuse it to such
a purpose) to be silent, and depart the Room; which, as bold as he was, he did
not without so great consternation upon himself, speaking a word in a breath,
as was much observed by many.

Now you must know, that some time before this, some were sent to two of the
Deputy Lieutenants of the County, to know whether the course of Duty used in
Mr. Bampfield's Family were conceived by them to be against Law, and if so,
that they would desist; but without any answer, one Thornton of this Town, an
Apothecary, who came in with Sugar, said he had a Warrant from the Deputy
Lieutenants to serve upon Mr. Brampfield and Mr. Phillips his Assistant, and
ten more of the chiefest that were there, (a rare president to leave it to
Underofficers to insert whom they please as the chiefest, and so to wreak
their malice) and thereupon took the Ministers, (I do not reckon the
interruption of the Duty) and about five and twenty more (for to so many were
the ten presently grown) and carried them (all men, what reason priviledg'd the
women I know not) to prison, to the Provost-Marshal, (an Officer that Magna
Charta has no acquaintance with) in the same Town, where they all continued
Prisoners till Wednesday night after, dividing the Ministers in a room a part
from their People. I had almost forgotten to tell you, that all this was not
only without hearing any defense, but without so much as a Summoning, or any
other notice of complaint (if any ever were) made against them.

Whilst they were thus imprisoned, their entertainment was somewhat unusual;
about two and twenty of them (whereof one was a very aged man) had but one room
for five days and nights, wherein was but one bed: but the Prisoners spent the
time better there than in sleeping, as I have heard from many, viz. in praying,
repeating of Sermons, and singing of Psalms. Saturday about 7 or 8 of the Clock
in the Evening, the Prisoners had got leave to meet and pray together, (for you
must know that was a thing not to be endured without leave) and whilst one of
them was at Prayer with the rest, the Soldiers opened the door, brake in and
spoke aloud to him that prayed, calling him Rogue, and bidding him make an end,
and with other Soldiers, laid hands on him, and with great violence wholly
interrupted him, and forced away the Prisoners.

Lords Day there was no public Worship of God in the Town; in the Forenoon the
Prisoners again desired leave to hear their Minister in the Goal, which at
first (it seems it was an unreasonable request) was denied; but afterward Mr.
Bampfield should have leave to preach to the Prisoners, but none of the Town
must come in (which yet many desired, and some at other times purchased of the
Soldiers, who were presently after they had paid the fine plucked out again)
Mr. Bampfield preaching in the Prison, diverse of the Town got into a backside
where they could hear his voice, which did belong to one Vincent, who threatens
them all with Writs for the trespass, though leave was first obtained of his
Wife, and ten times more offered than he received damage. You see how many
ways are taken to vex and ruin such as are quiet in the Land.

One evening, that the Soldiers also might show a little devotion, they would
needs have Common Prayer in the Goal amongst themselves, and when he that read
it was come as far as Lighten our darkness, one of them thinking that to be
part of a Psalm, began to put it into a tune, which made the rest no small
mirth. Lords day at night the Prisoners and Ministers had leave upon request to
come together again, and Mr. Philips to preach; but whilst he was in prayer
before Sermon, the Soldiers came in violently and took away his Chair,
disturbed that Exercise also, so as they had no Sermon, and to be short (for it
seems such things may not be long) upon Wednesday there came together 4 or 5
Deputy Lieutenants who called before them first Mr. Bampfield then Mr. Philips,
and afterward the rest of the Prisoners, where Sir John Stroad of Parwham had
the Chair (who as common fame says, formerly abjured the King,) and probably
was by the Gentlemen his Companions now preferred to this service for his
eminent Loyalty) Mr. Bampfield being examined, owned that he had been at prayer
with (and was at the time of the interruption preaching to) his Family, and
that his door being open diverse of the Town came in and took their share
therein (and by the way observe, that during this inquisition the door was
shut, and none of Mr. Bampfields friends suffered to come, though the Law
require all Courts of justice to be open, and if it should be otherwise, the
mischiefs were almost infinite.) After several hearings and withdrawings, in
all which the Deputy Lieutenants did not lay to his charge any one the least
expression in Prayer or Preaching (and yet me thinks the quarrel should not be
against these two) which was seditious, or any other way peccant against any of
their Laws, which I think worthy of some observation. However, cause or no
cause, the Deputy Lieutenants (for so I call them yet) by their Sir John
aforesaid, declared this meeting tending to sedition, and required sureties of
Mr. Bampfield for his good behavior and appearance at next Assizes, which Mr.
Bampfield gave accordingly, as afterward did his assistant Mr. Philips, and all
the rest of the Prisoners, and thus the cause was transferred from the Court
Marshal to the ordinary Courts of Justice, and yet the Prisoners were fain to
pay not only fees to the Justices Clerks for their Recognisances, but fees to
the Provost Marshal of the Deputy Lieutenants, in the mean time the same
individual persons being both Justices and Deputy Lieutenants, besides what
they paid for the Soldiers diet and their waiting and their drinking, which
were several particulars in the Bill, besides that some of the Prisoners were
so poor as to be judged not worth the fees demanded. I had almost omitted some
passages during this imprisonment. Diverse that brought victuals to their
friends or relations, were not suffered to deliver it, some also the Soldiers
made themselves merry with, and took amongst themselves. Some had their
sustenance brought in polls of hats, that so it might be concealed and not
taken from them by the Soldiers. To one of the Prisoners (who had been Soldier
in the late war for King Charles the first) his sister bringing victuals, had
it violently taken from her.

Some were imprisoned, who came only to visit the Prisoners, another also of
the Prisoners, (and Soldier of the Kings) had bail of a 1000 pounds offered for
his liberty, that he might go home to his Wife, who then lay in at his House
about a flight shot from the Goal, but (it seems this offense was very heinous)
could not prevail, others that came to visit the Prisoners were violently
handled, one tumbled, another kicked down stairs by the Soldiers, (the charge
of whose good attendance and service all the while, came all in upon the
Prisoners Bill) and whilst the Prisoners were praying the Soldiers were doing
as you know some Soldiers use to do. Thus you see how kindly some of his
Majesty's Loyal Subjects are dealt with up and down the Country, which I the
rather write, because if he were thoroughly informed, probably some would be
more moderate, for I cannot yet persuade my self, that these and such like
doings are any whit for his service. The Lord wisely overruled that way to
further (which the Devil and his Instruments take to hinder) his work.

Sherburn September. the 25. 1662.
FINIS.

