Brief Reflections Upon the Inconveniences attending Wilful and Malicious
Forgery and Perjury, With some REASONS why such Crimes Ought to be made FELONY.
By a Truly Loyal Subject, and a Sincere Lover of his KING, Country, And the
LAWS of this Realm.
THese two pernicious and inseparable Companions of Forgery and Perjury, like
poisenous Vermin, have often sucked out, and destroyed the very juice and
beauty of many flourishing flowers; nor has the Royal Oak escaped being
encompassed about with the malignant Ivy of those horrid Crimes, even to that
dangerous degree of Rebels, gaining a Point almost fit for laying their fatal
Axes to the root of that Sacred Tree.

To discourse of the late grand Impostors of State, or their flagitious
practices, would be a task too tedious for me, or my present purpose; and only
fit for an Age more stupid, and less capable of observation, and rational
Sentiments than this.

Their unparalled Villainies, are now become too apparent to every discerning
eye, either to be questioned or doubted; for it is most certain, that the
extravagant pranks and projects of those Monsters, still beat very convincingly
intense, upon the Nerves and intellectual parts of all truly Loyal and
unprejudiced Subjects, who now perhaps cannot but reckon it a very great
blemish to the English Air, that ever such Miscreants should have the happiness
of breathing in it.

And if there be any reason to find fault with the imperfection or deficiency
of the Statute-Laws of this Realm in Criminal Cases, (which undoubtedly are
otherwise the best and most rational Laws in the world) it is principally
because there are none yet severe enough against the pernicious and dangerous
Crimes of wilful Forgery and Perjury.

For if a Thief steal a Horse, or a Mare, or but the value of two or three
shillings, it is Felony, and by the Law he ought to die for that Offense; but if
a pack of Rogues join together, and by Forgery and Perjury ruin men in their
Reputations and Estates, they are usually only exalted to stand in the Pillory,
or Fined, or Imprisoned for it: which minute punishment, seldom produces any
other effect than barely to make the Criminal the more incorrigible, and proves
many times but as Sauce to craving Stomachs, preparing them the better to
devour and consume the next dainties they can meet with, never scrupling to
make a prey of men's Lives and Fortunes, though the ungodly and illegal
disinheirsinof Kings, the unhinging of Monarchy, and the utter devestation and
destruction of Kingdoms, Societies, and Families, should inevitably fall into
the bargain, and therefore if an Argument drawn ab inconvenienti (which is
generally held to be very force (...)) ought to have any power in any Case,
certainly it ought to have so in ^his, to make wilful and malicious Forgery and
Perjury Felony: For it is almost impossible almost to prove (suppose what you
will) that greater inconveniences will attend the making of such Crimes
Felony, than have attended, ^o may be s^ared will attend the not making of them
so.

That many particular persons have severely smarted in their Reputations and
Estates, as well as the Kingdom in general, by Forgery and Perjury, it is
presumed will not be denied by any judicious, observing, and thoughtful man*
Nor durst I presume any man so totally unacquainted with the Affairs of this
World, but either he knows or has heard wha^ havoc and mischief those two
abominable and destructive sins have made amongst the Widows and Orphans of
this Age.

However, that you may be furnished with some few fresh instances of that kind
(for to give you all, as it is impossible, so 'twere fitter for a large Volume
than the narrow compass of a sheet of Paper) I am obliged to assure you
(particular instances of matter of Fact, being the most cogent and prevailing
Arguments) that two persons of good Quality and Reputation, have been lately
damnified and prejudiced in their Estates, to the value of at least 3000 l. in
different Cases, by the Male-contrivance and false Oaths of common
Hackney-Swearers and Knights of the Post, who with their Confederates and
Abbettors (after many years prosecution (in forma pauperis) of the Persons and
Executors whom they have so ^rosly abused, and oppressed) are at last found out
and detected; and now it appears, that the Deeds and Instruments in writing by
them set up (and whereon Verdicts and Judgments at Law for great sums of money
were obtained) were actually forged, several months after the Deaths of the
Persons and Testators, whole Deeds they were pretended to be; though so
cunningly and artificially contrived, as to bear date many years before their
decease. And one of the principal Forgers (being served with process to appear
and answer an Information of Forgery and Perjury lately exhibited against him)
soon after, and before Justice could come to bestow upon him his due reward,
died: but one of his Champions, and Brother-Confederates in that horrid
Iniquity, having survived him, is now under prosecution for the same Crimes,
which undoubtedly will be so fully and plainly proved, that 'twill be almost
impossible any thing should be wanting to do him right, save only severer Laws
for his punishment; for such has been his confidence (as though unexpressible
impudence were one of the least ingredients in the composition of his
Rogueries) that he has confessed that he has been Hired and Suborned to swear
false for money, even since the Information exhibited against him) has boldly
affirmed, that he neither regarded nor valued a Pillory, declaring that better
men than himself were daily brought thither, and that 'twas but to have a
little patience for an hour or two, and the whole business would soon receive a
determination, and be over (with as much ease and little trouble) as a nine
days wonder; which Language, without question, is very agreeable to the rest of
his wicked Crew: So that it is plain the petitness of the punishment usually
inflicted upon such Offenders, makes them persist the more obstinately in the
practice of their black and hellish crimes: And therefore it is conceived the
most probable way to abate their confidence and assuage their courage, is, to
make and execute more stricter Laws against them, than yet there are in being.

Besides, it is credibly reported, that this famous Artist (for all sorts of
notorious contrivances and mischiefs) has as great reputation for his Wit and
Cunning in Forgery, amongst all the Rogues and Knights of the Post about this
Town, as ever any Criminal had that was hanged at Tyburn, boasting that he
could so exactly counterfeit the handwriting of men's Names, that 'twas
impossible to find out the cheat, unless the persons whose Names were so
counterfeited (he usually dealing with the Names of dead men) should arise out
of their graves and swear that 'twas was none of their own handwriting. And
that he formerly got by his subtle tricks, at least a 100 l. per Annum from
the Catholics; it being his practice (about six or seven years since) to forge
Writs against several Catholics of good Quality, privately pretending that the
same Writs regularly issued against them upon penal Statutes out of the Courts
of Westminster Hall, and thereby affrighted them (he being then a common
Informer) into secret Agreements, to pay him several sums of money; whereas in
truth there were never any such Writs or Process granted out against those
persons from whom he thus vexatiously extorted Money.

But to resume, and give you one or two instances more, for all the rest, of
the great inconveniences attending the faintness and deficiency of our Statute
Laws (in point of punishment) against wilful and malicious Forgery and Perjury.

If any person lie in wait to wound or deface another, or if a High-wayman rob
you (though only of your traveling Coin) he becomes thereby guilty of Felony,
and according to Statute Law, he ought to be hanged for it; besides you have
your remedy by the Statute (in the last case made and provided) to recover of
the Hundred wherein you were Robbed, the vallue of all that was so taken from
you: And this is concluded (as indeed it is) to be both reasonable and just,
but if a Knight of the Post (by premeditated and malicious Forgery and Perjury)
ruin and undo honest men, and their Families, by taking away and destroying
both of their Lives and Fortunes at once (as too too often by sad and
lamentable experience it has happened) yet in this case (by the Statute Laws,
as now they are) there is no provision made, either to punish the malicious
perjured person with death, as a just recompense and satisfaction to the Law of
God, for shedding innocent blood, or to subject his Estate (if he have any) to
make restitution to the injured persons Family, for the loss and ruin of his;
which ( prima facie, besides the ill consequences of it) seems to be a very
severe and hard case; and wherein, in this case does that just proportion lie
(which ought to be) between the Punishment and the Crime? Or how is the
punishment proportionable to the Offenses, in the cases of wilful Forgery and
Perjury? when after a man shall be thereby utterly ruined and undone, he shall
have no other remedy or satisfaction left, but (at the rate of great trouble
and expense) the empty shouts and laughter of the Mobile and Rabble, with (it
may be) the unwarrantable discharge of a few vollies of rotten Oranges and Eggs
to the profligate and incorrigeable Villain, that stands in the Pillory.

It Is therefore (and for other weighty reasons, too tedious here to be
expressed) high time (with submission to better judgments) both with respect
to His Majesty's Interest, and the safety and security of His Kingdoms and
People, that such inconveniences should be remedied and redressed, and
stricter Laws made (with greater punishments, than yet there are) against such
Offenders: for if it be contrary to principles of Justice and Reason, that such
Transgressors should be exempt from punishments, adequate to their Crimes, then
it is both reasonable and just that a Law should be made, to punish them
according to their demerits: for Ratio est annima Legis.

And in regard the grand Council of this Nation (by His Majesty's special
Grace, and Favor) are now Assembled in Parliament; it is humbly offered to the
serious Consideration of His most Sacred Majesty, and His great Counsel
assembled, that such a Statute Law may be made this Session of Parliament,
against wilful Forgery and Perjury, as may not only tend to destroy that
wicked Herd of perjured Satanists in this Kingdom, but to relieve and discharge
those that have been oppressed by their malicious contrivances, from the
Judgments at Law obtained thereby; and curb their unbridled insolences for
time to come, with Enacting that such Crimes shall be made Felony, which
certainly (notwithstanding what can be rationally objected against it (after
serious consultation, and advising with the learned in the Law concerning the
due qualifying, limitting, and well penning of such an Act) will not at all (as
some fancy) discourage honest and good men from a cheerful Swearing the Truth
in Courts of Law and Justice, for the determination of Controversies (their own
intorest, and that most excellent rule of doing for others, as they would that
they should do for them, indispensibly requiring it) but on the contrary, for
the future will certainly afright and deter all Knights of the Post, and
hackney Swearers, from offering any more to attempt the ruin either of Kings,
Kingdoms. Societies or Families, by such their most destructive Practices and
Diabolical Crimes.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Mark Pardoe over against Bedford-House in the Strand. 1685.


