A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE STATE of the DIFFERENCES Now Depending and Agitated
about Justification, And some other POINTS of RELIGION: Declaring plainly
Wherein both Sides AGREE, and wherein they DIFFER.

OONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs, over against
Stocks-Market. MDCXCII.

A Brief Account of the State of the Differences now depending and agitated
about JUSTIFICATION, etc.
I Thought it might much conduce to the service of Truth and Peace, to State
plainly the Points that are in present Dispute among us. For I find many are
led to one side and another, and yet understand not aright the Grounds of what
they do; but are led by their Affections, animated with Passions, and the
respect they bear unto men's Persons. And in many things I observe the Dispute
is about Words, when both Sides mean the same Thing. Now so far as I can
gather, both from Discourses and Writings on one Side, and the other, I shall
here set down wherein both Sides agree, and wherein they differ; If they have
declared their minds plainly and sincerely, and will stand to their own
Assertions, and not revoke what they have granted. Now the more sober and
judicious on both Sides agree in these things.

1. Both Sides agree, That there is an Eternal Election of a determinate number
of Persons to Eternal Life.

2. Both Sides agree, That all these shall be certainly Called, Justified and
Saved.

3. Both agree, That eventually none others shall be Saved; though they yield,
That if any others should Repent and truly Believe, they might be Saved, which
is more than can be supposed of the Fallen Angels: And that no Adult Persons do
perish merely and only because they are not Elected.

4. Both agree, That there is no Justification by the Law of Works, but by the
Righteousness of Christ alone; and that not by the Effects of his
Righteousness, but the Righteousness it self.

5. Both agree, That there was an Eternal Compact betwixt the Father and the
Son in the Covenant of Redemption about man's Salvation: A Council of Peace
betwixt them both, and Antecedent to Christ's Sufferings.

6. Both agree, That something is required to be done by men in order to their
Justification; and that they are not merely Passive in it; and none are
Justified from Eternity, but only in the Decree of God; nor actually Justified,
either by the Death or Resurrection of Christ, till they actually Believe.

7. Both agree, That what God requires of man to do, it is his Grace that
enableth him to do it; and the improvement of Nature or common Grace, is not
sufficient of it self, much less Meritorious of special Grace.

8. Both agree, That whatever Qualifications God works in man, as they do not
Merit Justification, neither are they the Righteousness wherein he is Justified
before God.

9. Both agree, That though Justifying Faith is always accompanied with other
Graces, yet it is Faith alone that does Justify a Sinner in the sight of God;
and that not as a moral qualification, as other Graces are, but as a recipient
instrument, receiving Christ and his Righteousness as a free gift tendered to
Sinners in the Gospel.

10. Again, both agree, That it is Christ's Obedience, both Active and Passive,
that is the meritorious and material cause of Justification, and not any
Obedience performed by our selves.

11. Both agree, That the Covenant of Grace is absolute to the Elect; tho
conditionally administered in the Preaching of the Gospel; as, He that
believes, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned.

12. Both agree, That a man is Completely justified as to his State at his
first Believing; and that there is not a second Justification to perfect the
first, but only declarative at the Day of Judgment, and by good Works in this
World.

13. Both agree, That Justification consists not only in the Pardon, or not
imputing of Sin, but in the imputing of Christ's Righteousness, whereby a
Sinner is reputed and accepted as Righteous in the sight of God, and so differs
from Sanctification by infusing Grace.

14. Both Sides agree, That no Works men perform, are acceptable to God, but
through Faith, and the Mediation of Jesus Christ.

15. Both agree, That Jesus Christ is the only Mediator of the New Covenant,
and the Surety of it both on God's Part and Man's; and therein does discharge
the Office of a Mediator.

16. Both agree, That Jesus Christ was without all Sin, Holy, Harmless, and
Undefiled; and though he had the Sin of all his People imputed to him, yet God
never looked upon him as formally a sinner, as he looks upon wicked men.

17. Further both agree, That more is required to our complete Salvation, than
to our first Justification; as in Marriage, mutual Consent does enter Persons
into the Married state; but many more Duties are required, as conditions of the
Marriage Covenant, to be performed afterward.

18. Both also agree, That the Moral Law is still in force as a rule of life to
Believers, though it is abolished as a Covenant of Works, so as to live by
doing it, though done by the special help of God's Grace; and that every
Transgression does in its own nature deserve Death still.

19. Both agree, That some preparatory Work upon the Soul usually goes before
Justifying Faith; yet that it is not the like in all; nor any further
necessary, than to make the Sinner willing to come to Christ, and to accept of
him as offered in the Gospel. And that a Legal Repentance, wrought by the
Spirit of Bondage, may be before Justifying Faith.

20. Both Sides agree, That tho no Act of Obedience concurs with Faith in our
Justification, yet all Justifying Faith contains in it a purpose of Future
Obedience, and will certainly bring it forth.

And it is hoped that both Sides agree to exalt Christ, and the freeness of
Grace in man's Salvation, and Holiness and Righteousness among men; and not to
expose their present Liberty to Hazard, or Religion to Contempt, by any
passionate heats; which are the fruits of the flesh, and not that true Zeal
which is the grace of the Spirit.

The Differences, wherein they Disagree. Which I shall state impartially on
both Sides.
1. THAT the Gospel is a Law of Grace, wherein God as a Sovereign Rector, does
dispense Pardon, Adoption, and all saving Benefits to men, according to the
Terms of the Moral Law, as it is mitigated in Christ, and some other Terms of
Faith and Repentance required by the Gospel: yet not without respect to the
Merits of Christ herein, which they term a subordinate Righteousness; wherein
others differ from them, and say, that this is not a Covenant of Grace, but a
milder Covenant of Works: wherein a man is justified before God by some Works
done by himself, tho done by the help of Grace, and through the Merits of a
Mediator are accepted with God. For the Apostle, speaking of Abraham's
Justification, Romans 4.3. mentions none of his Works, but says, Abraham
believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness. And does make our
Justifying Righteousness to consist in a gracious Act of God upon the Sinner,
in covering, and not imputing his sin; And not in any Works of his own, either
of Nature, or of Grace, Romans 4.7, 8.

2. That Christ made a Compact with the Father for us in a distinct Covenant by
himself; and was not ever himself a Party in the Covenant; and was not as a
Surety bound in the same Bond with men; but as a Surety, giving a Bond of his
own to obey the Law, and suffer death for us, and to pay our Debts owing to the
Law, or Justice of God. Whereas others say, this is a great mistake; and say,
That Christ came under the same Law that man was under, Gal. 4.4. and thereby
became obliged to give obedience to the Law; and not only so, but to suffer the
penalty of the Law: For those that had broken the Law, being in the same Bond
with them, as the Apostle says, Gal. 3.16. That the promises were made to
Abraham, and his seed; which Seed, he says, is Christ. And the Covenant God
made with David, was made with him as a Type of Christ, and with his Seed,
Psalm. 18.50. So that God says of this seed, Psalm. 89.33. If his children break
my law, I will visit their iniquities with stripes, but my loving kindness I
will not take from him, that is, Christ; nor break my Covenant with him, as it
follows in the new Verse.

And in the Covenant of Redemption it self, made before the foundation of the
World, Christ stood not alone in that neither. For then all the Elect were
chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. And Grace was given them in Christ then, 2 Timothy
1.9. before the world began. So that they judge it a great mistake to say, that
the Covenant of Redemption is only pleadable by Christ himself: For tho part of
that Covenant respect himself only, that he should come into our Nature, and
suffer, etc. yet then he undertook for all that God gave him, to bring them to
glory.

3. Further, They say that God looked upon Christ's Obedience as a valuable
Consideration only, why he should make a Covenant of Grace with men; and that
there was no necessity that Christ should come into the nature of man, and be
made under the Law, and suffer death for our sins, from the nature of the work
of our Redemption, but only from the designation and appointment of his Father
thereunto. And if he had appointed him to perform some Heroic Acts of
Obedience in any other nature, or of another kind, it might have been as
available for our Redemption, and as meritorious for us, as what he did perform.

But others look upon this as a great Error, and say, That the nature of the
work of our Redemption did necessarily require, that Christ should not only
merit for us, but make satisfaction, which they don't consider; and should
satisfy Justice in the same Nature that sinned, and perform obedience to that
Law which man had broken, and bear the Curse of that Law which man was under,
to redeem him from it. For it seems necessary that God should secure the Honor
of his Law, and Justice of his Government.

4. They will not allow Christ to do and suffer what he did, as a Public
Person, representing all the Elect, comprehending a Spiritual Seed in himself,
as the first Adam did his Natural Seed, so that the Elect may be said to obey,
suffer, and satisfy Justice in him. Though they yield, that he did do all this
for them. For then, they say, the Elect may be said to merit in him, as Christ
merited; and to be Redeemers of the World, as Christ was; and to perform
sinless Obedience, as Christ did.

But others judge this a great mistake: For the Apostle in the fifth Chapter to
the Romans, does parallel the two Adams, and says the first was the Figure of
him that was to come. And that all Mankind sinned in him, and not only by him,
through the Corruption of Nature derived from him; And as in Adam all died, so
in Christ are all made alive, 1 Cor. 15. All died, not only by him, but in him.
Even Infants that have committed no actual Sin; As an Insolvent Debtor may be
said to pay the Debt in the Sureties paying it for him, or in his stead. Or if
a Friend dies for a Malefactor, the Malefactor may be said to satisfy the Law
in him.

And the Objections against this, they answer them thus.

That though Christ merited, yet it does not follow, that those that are
justified in his Merits, did merit in him. For Christ and they are not the same
person naturally, but only legally; as the Client and the Advocate, the Surety
and the Debtor. And Christ's Merits did arise from the Dignity of his Person,
and his voluntary Undertaking that for us, which he was not antecedently
obliged unto; which is not the case of those whom he undertook for.

A Surety that pays another's Debt, may merit from the Debtor; but the Debtor
is not at all concerned in that Merit, but only in the Discharge that he
receives thereby. So, if a Believer is justified in the sinless Obedience of
Christ, does it therefore follow, that he must be accounted no Sinner? Is it
necessary that a Debtor who pays his Debt in a Surety, be Partaker of all the
Endowments and Qualifications of his Surety? Or be judged so to do? It may be
yielded that hereby a Believer is justified in a more excellent Righteousness
than his own, tho it should be perfect, or than Adam had in innocence; but not
that we should be accounted in all respects as righteous as Christ himself was;
tho it seems necessary that we should be justified in a Righteousness which
should answer to the Infinite Justice of God offended by man's Sin. And if any
object, Christ fulfilled not the whole Moral Law, not performing many Duties
required of us, as of an Husband, a Father, etc. Answer. He that performs all
that the Law requires of him, fulfils the Law. Thus Christ did; and so being
under the Ceremonial Law, he performed all required of him by that Law: And
being also in the Gospel Covenant, he did all required of him there. He did not
indeed repent, because not required of him, not being a Sinner. And if it be
objected again, That if our debt be paid in Christ, and we justified thus in
him, What need any thing more to be done by a sinner for his discharge? They
Answer to this, That though the Elect Believer is thus virtually and
fundamentally discharged and justified in Christ's Obedience; yet God has
appointed Faith to be the mean or way whereby he should be actually justified:
God having so provided, that his Grace should be dispensed in a way that might
conduce to his own Glory, as well as man's Salvation. May not a Surety who pays
the Money to discharge the Debtor, require something from him to do, whereby he
may be made sensible of the kindness he has shown him?

5. Again, some say, There are no habits of Grace, but the influences of the
Spirit are instead of them; which is a mistake, for this denies all Sanctifying
of the faculties, growth in Grace, distinctions of Grace in Believers, etc.

6. Again, some say, That the sufferings Christ underwent, were not the very
same that were threatened in the Law, and the damned suffer; but only equivalent
to them. For they say, Christ suffered not the loss of God's Image in his Soul,
as man did as a Punishment for sin. To this it is answered, This is to say, That
Christ must become a Sinner that he may save Sinness; when, if so, he could not
save them at all. Cannot a Surety pay a debt for the discharge of the Debtor,
unless he become as wicked as, it may be; the Debtor is? Christ was never sick,
and yet sickness came upon men's bodies as a fruit and punishment of Sin. Christ
suffered the Idem of that Punishment that was due to man for Sin, so far as
might consist with the work he came upon, which was to Redeem and Restore man:
And he redeemed man by his Blood, and restores him by his Spirit. Had he
suffered the Loss of God's Image, he could not have performed perfect Obedience
to the Law; he could not have offered up himself a pure Sacrifice for Sin; he
could not have been a pattern of perfect Holiness to his People; But it behoved
him in all things to be made like unto his brethren, sin only excepted, Heb.
2.17. Was man under the Curse of the Law? So was he. Was man by Sin deprived of
the light of God's Countenance? So was he for a time. Was man to suffer the
sense of God's wrath? So did he. Was man to die, and to return to the Earth out
of which he was taken? So did he. So that he suffered the same kind of
Punishment that was due to man. It Is true his sufferings were not Eternal,
because he paid the debt to the full, which the damned in Hell cannot do; and
therefore also they despair, which Christ never did, because he knew he should
and could deliver himself, which they know they cannot do, and therefore
despair. So that in this there is a Difference.

7. Another Difference is about the Moral Law, That it does not remain as it
did, requiring perfect Obedience, and threatening death to every Trangression
still. Which is judged an error: For Christ tells us, Mat. 6.18. That heaven
and earth shall pass away, but not one tittle of the law. Luke 16.17. And that
he came not to destroy the law, but fulfill it. Only there is provision made in
the Blood of Christ for the Pardon of sins against the Law, to Penitent
Believers. So that some lower degrees of Obedience are not come in the room of
that perfect Obedience which was at first required by the Law.

8. That no Believer ought to have respect to any benefit to himself in any
Duties he does perform. Which is judged a great mistake: For may we not ask
that we may have, and seek that we may find, as our Savior speaks? And look to
the recompense of reward, as Moses did, for what we either do or suffer for God
in this World? And by the same reason we should not have respect to another's
good neither.

9. That not only the guilt, but the filth of Sin was laid upon Christ: That
is, the obliquity of the very act; and the rebellion that is in it against God
was charged upon Christ as guilty of it; which is judged a very false and
blasphemous Error. Whereupon they say, Christ became odious to his Father, and
abhorred by him when he Offered up himself a Sacrifice, an offering to God of a
sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. Christ indeed had our sin imputed to him, and
the sense of God's wrath against sin in his Soul; whereby God testified his
indignation against sin, but not against his Son: What was laid upon Christ,
was done away; but the Act of sin was not done away, though the guilt of it was.

10. That Faith and Repentance are contained in the Moral Law, and were written
in man's Nature: Which is judged a mistake. For what was writ in man's heart,
did respect only the Moral Law, or Covenant of Works; where there is no mention
of the Righteousness of Faith, or any admittance of Repentance for sin.

11. That the Gospel does not promise life to Penitent sinners, but the
Impenitent, because the Penitent have life already. Which is judged an Opinion
contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel. It offers life to the Impenitent,
but does not promise it.

12. That the Gospel is nothing else but a Promise. Which is judged a great
mistake, unless taken in a very strict sense. For we find many Precepts and
Threatenings in it, according to which Christ (...) in executing his Kingly
Office in his Church. And there^^^^ (...) ^^^tainly a mistake, that for sins
against the Gospel men (...) to the Law for Punishment, and shall not be judged
by the Gospel at all.

13. That a Christian ought not to make (...) inward Grace or Qualifications to
examine his State by: Which is judged a great mistake. Does not the Apostle
Paul judge of the Thessalonians Election by their Faith, receiving the word
with much assurance, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. And the Apostle John, by love, by love to
the brethren, 1 John 3.14. As a Man's bad state may be judged of by evil habits
and qualifications, so may not his good state be judged of by good habits and
qualifications? Especially when made evident in an holy Conversation. Does not
our Savior himself direct us to judge of the Tree by the Fruits? Mat. 7.20.
And the Apostle, of the good state of the Philippians by partaking of his
Grace? Phil. 1.7.

14. That Justifying Faith is a full persuasion of heart that we are Justified:
Which is another great mistake. For the Scripture sets it forth by a coming to
Christ, receiving him, and trusting in him that we may be Justified, Gal.
2.16.3.24.

15. To give Obedience on the ^^count of any Law-Sanction, is legal Obedience,
whether new or old Law: Which is a mistake, and does exclude all Obedience.

16. That there is a work of Sanctification wrought in the Soul before
Justification, in a sinners first Calling; the Apostle saying, Romans 8.30. Whom
he called, them he justified; which is judged an error. For calling taken in a
strict sense, is either the outward Call of the Gospel, or the first answer of
the Soul of a sinner to this Call, in a willingness to leave his former sin,
and to come to Christ as King, Priest, and Prophet, that he may be Justified
and Sanctified by union with him. Some other Differences I might mention, but
these are the Principal.

Thus for the sake of those that have not time to read long Discourses, and
cannot comprehend nice distinctions and controversies in Religion, I have
published this plain Sheet: Which I wish may be a Winding Sheet to our late
Differences, and an Instrument of Truth and Peace; and of maintaining that
Brotherly Union which has been long desired, and much endeavored, and at last
happily effected, and in the presence of God and Angels Attested and
Solemnized. Amen.

FINIS.

