VINDICATION OF THE Parliamentary Proceedings Against the Late KING JAMES II
PROVING That the Right of Succession to Government (by Nearness of Blood) is
not by the Law of God or Nature, but by Politic Institution.

WITH Several Instances of Deposing Evil Princes, Showing, That no Prince has
any Title Originally, but by the Consent of the People.

Ad generum Cereris, sine caede aut sanguine pauci Descendunt Reges, and sicca
morte Tyranni. Licensed July 20. 1689. J. Fraser.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by Randall Tailor at Stationers-H^^^ 1689.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Should not think it necessary to prefix a Preface before this small
Treatise, especially since it handles only Matters of Fact, such as the
Judicial Acts of Commonwealths, did I not suspect, that some Malicious Persons,
whose Inclinations and Opinions are hereby thwarted, would brand it with the
Name of Seditious and Antimonarchical; therefore I shall here enter my
Protestation against such malicieus Aspersions, by declaring, That nothing
herein mentioned has the least design to lessen the Duty and Obedience of
Subjects toward their Princes. And I do sincerely abhor the Principles of those
Men, who make so little account of their Duty, that upon the least private
Disgust or Discontent, do invent a thousand Calumnies to the discredit of their
Prince, without Conscience or Reason, intending only the revenge of private
Injuries, and not the public Good, as they would plausibly insinuate.

These men I take to be such as the Apostles S. Peter and S. Jude spoke of,
when they said, God knows how to reserve the Wicked unto the day of Judgment,
to be there tormented; but yet much more those which do contemn Domination or
Government, and are bold and liking of themselves. Nay further, I am of
Opinion, That whatsoever a Princes Title be, if once he is settled in the Crown,
and admitted by the Commonwealth, every man is bound to settle his Conscience
to obey him in whatsoever he lawfully Commands, without examination of his
Title or Interest: For God disposes of Kingdoms, and brings many things to pass
in the Affairs of Princes, by great and extraordinary means; so that if we
should examine the Titles at this day of all the Princes in Christendom, by the
ordinary Rule of private Men's Rights, Successions, or Tenures, we should find
so many knots and dissiculties with which they are perplexed, that it would be
impossible to reconcile them.

And this is my Opinion for true and quiet Obedience; dand yet on the other
side, I am as far off from the abject and wicked Flatteries of such as affirm
Princes to be subject to no Law or Limitation, either in Authority, Government,
or Succession; as tho by Nature they had been created Kings from the beginning
of the World; or as tho the Commonwealth bad been made for them, and not they
for the Commonwealth; or as tho they had begotten or purchased, or given life
to the Public, and not that the Public had exalted them, or given them their
Authority, Honors and Dignity.

These, and such like, are the absurd Paradoxes which some Men have writ in
flattery of Princes, who in my Opinion deserve no Commendation or Reward, since
such Assertions destroy all Law, Reason, Conscience and Commonwealths; and do
bring all to such an absolute Tyranny as no Realm ever did, or could suffer, no
not under the Dominion of the Turk himself at this day, where some proportion
of Equity is held between the Prince and People, both in Government and
Succession, tho nothing near so much as in Christian Kingdoms.

It is therefore the intent of the ensuing Treatise to evince, that our
Predecessors have not been such Slaves to their Kings, as some men would
persuade us; and that the Deposition of King James, (granting it to be so, and
waving the advantage of the Abdication) is no new and unheard of thing; as we
hope to make appear beyond all doubt or exception. For if we can prove, that
most Christian Commonwealths have (upon just and reasonable Causes, and to
prevent Tyranny and Oppression) excluded Princes from Reigning, when their
Title by Succession was apparent; and also Deposed Evil Princes, when they had
lawful possession of the Crown. If commonwealths (I say) have in all former
Ages exerted this ample and transcendent Jurisdiction, what Reason imaginable
is there why they should not do so still; and save themselves from Public ruin
and desolation, by resisting and removing their evil Heads, whenever they are
able so to do; since God has wonderfully concurred (for the most part) with
such Judicial Acts of the Commonwealths against their Evil Kings, not only in
prospering the same, but by giving them also some notable Successor in place of
the Deposed, thereby both to justify the Fact, and remedy the Fault of the
Predecessor; as is evident by the following Examples, and also by this last of
our own Country, where in place of a King, that endeavored nothing so much as
the utter subversion of our ancient and fundamental Laws and Liberties, the
extirpation of our Religion, and the subjecting us to the unsufferable Took of
the Sea of Rome, our Old and Capital Enemies: Instead of such a King (I say) it
has pleased God to bless us with one (as it were in token of his approbation of
our late Proceedings) who designs nothing but the universal Interest and
Welfare of the Nation, as is apparent, since in six Months he has confirmed and
established those Laws and Constitutions, which his Predecessors have been 60
years undermining; who instead of suspending Laws, has only suspended his
Negative Voice.

And we may send the same Message to the late King James, which the States of
France sent unto Charles of Lorain, after their Election of Hugh Capet, ^ard.
lib. 6.
and his Exclusion, which Gerard the French Historian records in these Words:
Every Man knows (Lord James,) that the Crown and Realm of England and Scotland
belonged unto you, according to the ordinary Law of Succession; but yet the
very same Laws which gave unto you this Right of Dominion, have judged you also
unworthy of the same, being you have not endeavored to frame your Life, and
govern your People according to the prescript of those Laws, nor according to
the use and custom of your Country of England; but rather have allied your self
with the French Nation, our old and inveterate Enemies, and acquainted your
self with their vile and base Manners. Wherefore seeing you have forsaken and
abandoned the ancient Interest of England, we have also abandoned and left you,
and have chosen the Prince of Orange for our King, and this without any scruple
or prejudice of our Consciences at all, esteeming it far better and more just
to live under WILLIAM the present possessour of the Crown, with enjoyment of
our ancient Laws, customs, Privileges and Liberties, than under you the
Inheritour by Propinquity of Blood, in Oppression, strange Customs, and Cruelty

This is the Speech made by Command of the States to Charles of Lorain, (the
Name and few other Circumstances only varied) giving their Reasons why they had
excluded him, which in my Opinion are very weighty ones, and such as ought to
be considered by all Commonwealths before Admission of their Princes: For as
those who are to make a Voyage in a Ship upon a dangerous Sea, do not so much
respect, whether the Pilot who is to guide the Stern be the Owner of the Ship
or not; but rather whether he is skilful, and likely to bring them safely to
their desired Haven, or to drown them amongst the Waves: Even so our principal
Care ought to be, that we have a good Prince to lead and guide us happily in
this way of Civil and Politic Life, which is the end why Princes and
Governors were appointed.

It was a wise Saying of the Emperor Valentinian, viz. Digna vox est Majestate
regnantis, legibus se alligatum fateri; It is a Speech worthy of the Majesty of
him that Reigus, to confess himself bound unto the Laws. And the contrary
Saying of the Tyrant Caius Caligula is justly detested by all Men, who said
unto one (as Suetonius reports) Memento mihi omnia, and in omnes licere;
Remember that all things are lawful unto me, and against all men without
exception.

Such a King as this is to be resisted in all his Illegal Commands, as much as
the former (Ruling by Law and Equity) ought with all due submission to be
obeyed. And this is sincerely my meaning, in writing the ensuing Treatise; so
that by giving this Caution, Thope it will not be perverted to any other sense.

A BRIEF VINDICATION OF THE Parliamentary Proceedings AGAINST The Late King
JAMES the Second.
IT is certainly obvious to the meanest Capacity, how various and different
men's Sentiments are concerning this great and happy Revolution; they who have
been so injurious to their Country, as to assist and further the pernicious
Designs of the late King, cannot but exclaim against those who have so timely
frustrated their arbitrary and damnable Devices. Others there are, who have
industriously labored to intimate to the late Government, how subservient they
would be to its ends, when it would think fit to employ them as Actors in a
National Tragedy. It cannot therefore be expected that any thing imaginable can
be sufficient to silence the Clamours of such Men, whose Opinions are still
broader or narrower than their Consciences, but always squaring with their
InteresTs; who endeavor to destroy the Public Peace, by their opposition to
the present Government, as they did by their submission to the former.

For tho it has been reputed as the Characteristick of a good Government, Vbi
quisquis, quod vellet, sentit, and quod sentit, dicere licet; yet it must be
taken with due restrictions: For as it is unreasonable and injurious to
persecute Men to the utter loss of their lives and Fortunes, for not obeying
the Commands of a Prince, which are notoriously repugnant to the known and
approved Laws and Constitutions of the Nation they live in; so it is not
convenient for any Government (tho acting by the foundest Rules of Policy, and
endeavoring to the utmost the Public good and welfare) to permit Incendiaries
with an impetuous and unbridled Malice, to misrepresent their Actions to the
People; who easily give Credit to the most absurd Assertions, if but plausibly
insinuated. And like Heresies in the Church, tho built on the weakest
Foundations, notwithstanding the most solid Reasons imaginable are applied to
suppress them, often spread their Contagion so universally, that they threaten
the Peace of the whole Community, and are very rarely suppressed, till the
Authors are crushed by the weight of the Civil Power: So dangerous a thing it is
(both to Church and State) to permit Men to broach Opinions publicly, which
tend to alienate the Hearts of the Subjects from their Princes.

It was an usual thing in the last two Reigns, either to ruin such as opposed
the Court Intriegues by formal Trials at Law, for Sham plots and Conspiracies,
when the Treasonable Words or Pamphlets were for the most part so evidently
true, that it was pity to punish the Authors. Another Project was frequently
practiced, which was to buy off such Men who were more than ordindary bold in
canvasing their Designs: A thing necessary to be used by such Princes who would
transgress the Legal limits which have been prefixed to prevent their
Exorbitances, and have resolved to acquire an absolute and despotick Power; tho
it be with the hazard of their own, and the Nations downfall, whose Designs only
want discovery to be exploded.

But in this present Government, where we are blessed with a King that designs to
carry on the true Interest of the Nation, (which is apparent by his many large
and advantageous Concessions to his People, since His Accession to the Crown,
having in a manner suspended his Negative Voice) there is no need to practice
the aforesaid Stratagems; seeing he will have as well the Natural, as the
Political Strength of the Kingdom, and may safely bring such Male Contents to
condign Punishment. For those Men that either Lost any thing, or expected to
gain any thing by the former Government, will in no wise be satisfied without
having a share in this, which I am persuaded the King does not intend to grant.

So that I direct not my Discourse to any of the fore mentioned Men, knowing
they will be against Reason, as often as Reason is against them: But there are
another sort of Men who highly approve of our Deliverance; but not of the
Methods by which it was accomplished. Which is implicitly, tho not in direct
Terms, to desire Effects without their Causes; for the Gordian Knot is to be
Cut, not untyed.

Now it is expedient to satisfy these Men, because they are numerous, and also
because their Disgust springs from Conscience or Inadvertency, and not from
Prejudice.

First then it is observable, that many were for making Terms with the late
King, and bringing him to a temper more suitable and agreeable to our Laws and
Constitutions. This would have been an admirable Project, if we could have
obliged our present King to return from whence he came, and be always in a
readiness with a sufficient Fleet and Army to come and assist us, when the late
King should again invade our Properties. Nay, this would not serve our turn,
unless we could entreat the French King to lie still with his Fleet, and not
obstruct our Second Deliverance. And herein consists the weakness of this
Invention, being it requires little less than Impossibilities to sustain it.

Now one would think, that we above all other People, had sufficiently
experienced how incapable the most exquisite Laws are to defend us from the
encroachments of a Prince, whose Inclinations persuade their violation, and are
absolutely inconsistent with his Religion: So that if we consider, how all the
Laws were enacted against Papists that could be devised or thought necessary,
were with the greatest ease imaginable eluded and rendered useless; 'twill be
natural to conclude, That the Means we have used were the only effectual ones
for our Peace and Happiness, and that one Restoration is enough in an Age.

Now there are some superficial Objections made against the Deposition of the
late King, viz. That many Kings have been privately Assassinated; but that we
hear of none who have been publicly Deposed by the Jurisdiction of a National
Council or Assembly, without the Limits of our own Kingdom.

In Answer to which I shall endeavor to make it appear, That it has been the
practice of all Nations, and at all times, to assert their Jurisdiction (as we
have done) by the Deposition of Evil Princes, whenever they had the means to
effect it. And we may safely bid any of our Neighboring Kingdoms, who have not
been in our Circumstances, to cast the first Stone at us.

Now, as previous to our main design, we shall lay down this Position, (and
show our Reasons for it) That as Government and Authority in general is from
God; so the particular Forms and Magistrates are left to the Election of the
People; that is, Whether they will have Democracy which is Popular Government, by
the People it self, as Athens, Thebes, and many other Cities of Greece had in
old times; or as the Cantons or Switzers at this day have; or else Aristocracy,
which is the Government of some certain Chosen number of the best; as the
Romans many years were governed by Consuls and Senators, which the States of
Holland imitate at this day: Or else Monarchy, which is the Regiment of one,
and this of an Emperor, King, Duke, Earl, or the like. These particular Forms
(I say) are not determined by God or Nature, as Government in general is; for
then they should be all one in all Nations, as the other is, seeing God and
Nature are one to all; but it is left to every Nation and Country to choose that
Form of Government which they shall like best, which Aristotle proves
throughout all the second and fourth Books of his Politics very largely;
laying down diverse kinds of Governments in his days, as in Greece, that of the
Milesians, Lacedaemonians, Candians and others, and shows the Causes of their
difference, which he attributes to the diversity of Men's Natures, Customs,
Educations, and other such Causes, that inclined them to make Choice of such or
such Forms.

And this might be proved also by infinite other Examples, both of Time past
and present, and in all Nations and Countries, which have not had only
different Forms of Government the one from the other; but even among
themselves, at one time one Form, and another at other times. For the Romans
first had Kings, and after rejecting them for their Evil Government, they chose
Consuls, which were two Governors for every Year, whose Authority they limited
by a multitude of Senators, which were of their Council; and these men's Power
was restrained also by adding Tribunes of the People; and sometimes Dictators,
and finally they came to be governed last of all by Emperors. The like may be
said of Carthage in Africa, and many Cities and Commonwealths of Greece, which
in diverse Seasons, and upon diverse Causes, have taken different Forms of
Government to themselves.

The like we see in Europe at this Day; Naples has a King for its Sovereign;
Rome, the Pope; Venice and Genoua have Senators and Dukes, but their Dukes have
little Authority. Florence, Mantua, Parma, Vrbin and Savoy have their Dukes
only, without Senators, and their Power is Absolute. Milan was once a Kingdom,
but now a Dukedom. Burgundy and Lorain had once Kings, and after Dukes, and now
Kings again. Bohemia and Polonia were formerly Dukedoms, and now are Kingdoms.

The like may be said of France, after the expulsion of the Romans, which was
first a Monarchy, under Pharamond their first King, and so continued for many
years under Clodion, Merovis, Childerik and Clodovaeus their first Christian
Kings; but after it was divided into four Kingdoms, one of Paris, another of
Soissons, the third of Orleance, and the fourth of Metz; and so it continued
for many years; but afterward it was one Monarchy again. England also was
first a Monarchy under the Britains, and then a Province under the Romans, and
after an Heptarchy under the Saxons, and now a Monarchy again under the English.

And all this by Gods permission and approbation, who in token thereof,
suffered his own Peculiar People of Israel to be under diverse manners of
Government in diverse Times; as first under Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob;
then under Captains, as Moses, Joshua, and the like; then under Judges, as
Othniel, Ehud and Gideon; then under Highpriests, as Ely and Samuel; then
under Kings, as Saul, David, and the rest; and then under Captains and
Highpriests again, as Zorobabel, Judas Machabeus, and his Brethren, until the
Government was taken from them, and they brought under the Power of the Romans.

Wherefore there can be no doubt, but that the Commonwealth has power to choose
their own Form of Government, as also to change the same upon reasonable
Causes, as we shall make appear they have done in all Times and Countries; and
God no doubt approves what the Realm determines in this Point, for otherwise
nothing could be certain; for on these Changes depend the Titles of all Princes
and Potentates from the foundation of the World; and if they should not be
justifiable, we must condemn as Illegal the Acts and Jurisdiction of almost all
the Princes and Governors that ever have Reigned, which were great rashness
and folly to do.

In like manner it is evident, That as the Commonwealth has Authority to choose
and change her Government, so has she also to limit the same with what Laws
and Conditions she pleases; from whence ensues the diversity of Power which
each of the former Governments had; as the Dukes of Venice at this day are for
their Lives, (except in certain Cases, wherein they may be Deposed;) and those
of Genoua only for two years, and their Power is very small and much limited,
and their Heirs have no Claim or Pretense at all after them to that Dignity, as
the Children and next of Kin of other Dukes of Italy have, tho in different
sort also: For that the Dukedoms of Vrbin and Parma are limited only to the
Heirs Males, and for defect thereof, to return to the Pope or See of Rome,
Florence and Mantua are to return to the Empire for like defects, and not to
pass to the Heirs Female, or next of Kin, as Savoy and others do.

And now if we respect God and Nature, as well might all these Governments
follow one Law, as so different; for that neither God nor Nature prescribes
any of these particular Forms, but concurreth with that the Commonwealth
appoints; and so it is to be believed, That God concurred as well with Italy,
when it had but one Prince, as now when it has so many; and the like also with
Switzerland, which once was one Commonwealth under Dukes and Marquesses of
Austria, and now are divided into Thirteen Cantons, under Popular Magistrates
of their own; and its certain, that God approves of our most Gracious Prince
King WILLIAM, since his Election by the People, as he did of the former
Princes, while the Commonwealth were contented with them: so as when Men talk
of a Natural Prince, or Natural Successor (as many times I have heard the Word
used if it be understood of one that is Born in the same Realm or Country, and
so of our own Natural Blood, it has some Sense, tho he may be good or bad, and
none have been worse or more cruel many times than Home born Princes:) but if
it be meant, as tho any Prince had his particular Government or Interest to
succeed by Institution of God or Nature, its ridiculous, for that God or Nature
gives it not, as has been declared; but the particular Constitution of every
Commonwealth within it self.

Now the Government of every Prince is to be respected according to the benefit
that redounds to the Subject, for whose good it was ordained; and when the
Subjects live well and prosperously, are defended and maintained in Peace,
Safety and Wealth; when Justice is done equally to all Men, the Wicked
punished, and the Good rewarded; when true Religion is maintained, and Virtue
promoted; this is that which imports the Realm and Subjects, and not where,
or in what Country the Prince or his Officers were Born, or of what Nation,
Language, or Kindred they be; for that as soon as he is placed in that Dignity,
he becomes a Stranger to me, and it avails me little whether he be of my
Blood and Country, or not. And I may say, as the People of Israel said to
Rehoboam, who being King David's Grandson, and of the House of Jesse, thought
his State assured, and so might oppress the People at his pleasure; Quae nobis
pars in David, vel quae haereditas in filio Jesse? and so they left him, and
chose to be under Jeroboam a Stranger.

For what availed it them that lived in Spain under Peter the Cruel; or in
England, under Richard the Third, commonly called the Tyrant; what did it
import them, that those Princes were of their own Country or Blood, seeing they
did that to them, which a Stranger (tho never so barbarous or cruel) would
scarce have done? As in like manner, What did it import those Noble Families of
the De la Pools, Staffords, Plantagenets, and others, destroyed by Henry the
Eighth? What availed it to them, that the said King was not only their
Countryman, but their near Kinsman? What profit or commodity was it to Thomas
of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester, that he lived under King Richard the Second,
who was his Nephew, or to George Duke of Clarence, that King Edward the Fourth
was his Brother; when both were disgraced and put to death by them, and lost
their Lands and Dignities, which perhaps under a strange Prince they might have
enjoyed many years? And lastly, what avails it to Scotland or England, that
the late King James was descended of them, and born with us, or to the present
Queen, that he was her Father, when he endeavored utterly to destroy the Peace
and Tranquillity of those Nations, and unnaturally to exclude his Royal Daughter
from the Inheritance of these Three Kingdoms, to set up a suspected Child, to
finish the Game which he had begun; so as we may say (as before, What part have
we in James, or what Inheritance in the Son of the Martyr?

And so much for this first Point, which is the ground of all the rest I have
to say.

Now since we have (as I take it) fully proved, That no King or Goverour has
his Interest from God or Nature, but from the particular Institutions of the
Commonwealth; I shall proceed to evince both by Reason and Example, that they
have Laws and Rules prescribed by the said Commonwealths, by which they are
bound to Rule and Govern their People.

Now I do really believe, that of all other Governments Monarchy is the best,
and least subject to the Inconveniences that others are, and that Popular
Governments are the worst, and have soonest come to ruin; as may be showed not
only by old Examples of Greece, Asia and Africa, but also many Cities in Italy,
as Florence, Bolonia, Siena, Pisa, Arezzo, Spoleto, Perugia, Padua, and others,
which upon the fall or diminution of the Roman Empire (under which they were
before) took unto themselves Popular Governments, wherein they were tossed with
continual Seditions, Mutinies, and banding of Factions, and could have no end
of their Miseries, until after insinite Murders and Massacres, they came in
the end under the Monarchy of one Prince, as at this day they remain. So where
the Government of Aristocracy took place, there were perpetual Divisions among
the Senators; as in Carthage, which was the Reason that Succors were not sent
to their Captain Hannibal in Italy, after his so great and important Victory at
Canna, being the preservation of the Roman Empire, and the loss of their own.
As also afterward, the Emulation and Disunion of the Roman Senators among
themselves in the Contentions of Marius and Silla, and of Pompey and Coesar,
was the occasion of all their Destruction, and of the Commonwealth with them.

Now if the Prince who governs alone, and has Supreme Authority to himself,
as he resembles God in this point of sole Command; so could he resemble him
also in wise, discreet and just Government, and in Ruling without Passion;
Nothing more excellent in the World could be desired for the perfect Felicity
of his Subjects. But because a King is a Man, as others be, and therefore not
only subject to Errors in Judgment but also to passionate Assections in his
Will; therefore it was necessary that the Commonwealth, as it gave him this
great power over them, so it should assign him the best Helps that might be,
for directing and rectifying both his Will and Judgment, and make him as like
in Government to God, whom he represents, as man's Frailty can reach unto.

For this Consideration they assigned to him the assistance and direction of
Law; Which ( Aristotle says) is a certain Mind disquieted with no disordinate
Affection, as men's Minds commonly be; for that when a Law is made, for the most
part its upon due consideration, and without perturbation of evil Affections,
as Anger, Envy, Hatred, Rashness, or the like Passions; and it is referred to
some good End and Commodity of the Commonwealth; which Law being once made,
remains still the same, without alteration or partial Affection, being
indifferent to all, speaking alike to every Man, in which it resembles the
Perfection of God himself. For which cause the said Philosopher says, Aristot.
lib. 3. cap. 12.
That he who joyneth a Law to govern with the Prince, joyneth God to him; but
he that joyneth to the Prince his Affections, joyneth a Beast: So that a Prince
Ruling by Law is more than a Man, or a man Deified; and a Prince Ruling by his
Will, is less than a Man, or a man Brutified. In another place the same
Philosopher says, Aristot. lib. 1. cap. 2.
That a Prince who leaves Law, and Rules himself and others by his Appetite,
is of all Creatures the worst, and of all Beasts the most furious and
dangerous: For that nothing is so outrageous as Injustice Armed, and no Armor
is so strong as Wit and Authority; the first he has as Man, the other as a
Prince.

For this cause all Commonwealths have prescribed Laws unto their Princes,
whereby to govern as by a most excellent, certain and immutable Rule; to which
sense Cicero said, Leges sunt inventoe, Lib. 2. Offic.
ut omnibus semper una, and eadem v^ce loquerentur. For which reason they have
been called by Philosophers a Rule or Square inflexible: But the Prophet David
(who was also a King) seems to call them by the Name of Discipline; for that
as Discipline keeps all the parts of a Man, or of a particular House in order;
so Law (duly administered) keeps all the Members of a Commonwealth in Peace and
Plenty. And to show how severely God exacteth this at all Princes hands, Psalm.
2.
he uses these Words; And not learn ye Kings, and be instructed ye Princes of
the Earth: Serve God in fear, and rejoice in him with trembling. Embrace the
Discipline, lest he enter into wrath, and so ye perish from the way of
Righteousness. Which Words being spoken by a Prophet and a King, contain many
Points worthy of Consideration:

As first, That Kings are pound to learn Law and Discipline: Secondly, To
observe the same with great humility and fear of Gods Wrath: And, Thirdly, That
if they do not, they shall perish from the way of Righteousness. As if the
greatest Plague imaginable to a Prince were to lose the Way of Righteousness,
Law and Justice, in his Government, and to give himself over to Passion and his
own Will, whereby he is sure to come to Shipwreck.

From like Authority, and for like Consideration, have come the Limitation of
all Kings and Kingly Power, in all Times, and in all Countries, both touching
themselves their Posterity and Successors. Which is apparent in the two most
Renowned States of the World, that of the Romans and Grecians, who both began
with Kings but yet with far different Laws and Restraints about their
Authorities.

For in Rome, the Kings that succeeded Romulus had great Authority, but yet
their Children, or next in Blood, succeeded them not, unless chosen by the
Senate and People; so as of the Three most excellent Kings that ensued
immediately after Romulus, viz. Numa Pompilius, Tullius Hostilius, and
Tarquinus Priscus, Tit. Live. lib. 1. do. 1.
none of them were of the Blood Royal, nor of Kin to one another, nor yet
Romans born; but chosen rather from amongst Strangers, for their Virtue and
Valor. In Greece, among the Lacedaemonians, which was the most eminent Kingdom
at that time, the Succession of Children was most certain; but yet their Power
was so restrained by the Ephori, as they were not only checked and chastned by
them, if occasion served, but also Deprived, and sometimes put to Death. For
this Cause Aristotle did justly mislike this eminent Jurisdiction of the Ephori
over their Kings; but yet we see hereby what Authority the Commonwealth had in
this case, and what their meaning was in making Laws, and restraining their
Kings Power, viz. thereby the more to bind them to do Justice.

We may repeat a multitude of such Examples in Heathen Kingdoms, but being they
may be rejected, as being no President for us, we shall haste to show, How
Christian Kingdoms have limited their Princes.

Now, if we consider the Roman Empire as it is at this day annexed to the
German Electors; tho it be the first in Dignity amongst Christian Princes, yet
we shall see it so restrained by particular Laws, as the Emperor cannot do so
much as other Kings; for he can neither make War, nor exact any Money but by the
free leave and consent of the German Dyer or Parliament; and as for his
Children, or next of Kin, they have no Interest or Pretense to succeed in their
Fathers Dignity, but only by free Election, if they shall be thought worthy.
Nay, one of the chiefest Points that the Emperor must Swear at his Entrance
is, Sleyden, lib. 8.
That he will never go about to make the Dignity of the Empire Peculiar or
Hereditary to his Family, but leave it to the Electors (free in their power) to
choose his Successor, according to the Law made by Pope Gregory the Fifth, and
the Emperor Charles the Fourth.

The Kingdom of Polonia is much of the same manner with the Empire, both for
its restraint of Power, Cromenias, lib. 3. hist. Polo.
and successions of its King, for they have great Limitations, being they can
do nothing of great moment without the consent of certain Principal Officers,
called Palatines or Castellans; neither may their Children succeed them, unless
they are Chosen; as in the Empire, in Spain, France and England, the
Privileges of Kings is much different from the former.

The Kings of Spain and France have greater Power than the Kings of England;
for that every Ordination of these two Kings is Law it self, without the
Approbation of the Commonwealth: But in the Point of Succession it appears,
that the restraint is far greater in those two Countries than in England; for
in Spain the next of Blood cannot succeed but by a new Approbation of the
Nobility and Bishops of the Realm, as it is expressly set down in the two
Ancient Councils of Toledo the 4th and 5th. In France the World knows, that
Women are not admitted to succeed in the Crown, be they never so near in Blood,
neither any of their Issue, tho it be Male. For which cause Edward the Third of
England, tho he were Son and Heir to the Daughter of France, whose three
Brothers were Kings, and left her sole Heir to her Father Philip the Fourth,
yet was he put by the Crown, and Philip de Valois, a Brothers Son of Philip the
4th preferred to it by general Consent of the whole Parliament of Paris. And
tho the Salic Law is not very ancient, as the French themselves do confess, and
much less made by Pharamond their first King, or in those ancient Times, as
some without ground do affirm; yet we see its sufficient to bind all Princes
and Subjects of that Realm to observe the same, and alter the course of Natural
Descent and Nearness of Blood, as we have seen; but such things are not
suffered in England, for that our Laws are otherwise, which were made by the
Commonwealth.

By all which it is manifest, that most Kingdoms have different Laws and
Customs, both as to their Authority and Succession; and it is not enough for a
man to allege bare propinquity of Blood, for that he may be excluded for
several other Reasons, which we shall hereafter discuss.

I know it has been confidently asserted by some base Flatterers, that in all
successive Monarchs the Heir should enter by title of Birth, without condition,
consent, or approbation of the Realm; as also without Coronation Oath, or
Obligation to fulfill any Law, or to observe any Privileges of Church or State.
These are things which only serve to terrisie the People, and set them more
against his Entrance, than to advance his Title.

Another of their Propositions is, That albeit the Heir apparent, which is next
by Birth to any Crown, should be never so impotent or unfit to govern; or if it
should be known, that he were most Malicious and Wicked, and should go about to
destroy the Commonwealth, and drown the Ship he had to guide; yet (say they) he
must be Sacred, and admitted without contradiction to his Inheritance, which
God and Nature has designed him, and his direction, restraint or punishment,
must only be remitted to God alone; for that no Man or Commonwealth may reform
or restrain him.

This Doctrine (one would think) should be no sooner delivered, but contemned by
any Rational man, who regards the end why all Commonwealths and Kingdoms, and
all Governments were ordained by God and Nature, and not the flattering or
adoring of any one miserable Man, who shall endeavor to destroy the whole.

But to come to the particular Matter we are to treat of, which is, What is to
be attributed to Succession or Propinquity of Birth alone?

First therefore, I am persuaded that Succession is much to be preferred, not
for that it wants all all Difficulties and Inconveniences; but like as before
I have showed of the particular Government of Monarchy in respect of other
Forms, viz. that it wanted not all, but had sewer Inconveniences than other
Forms of Regiment have; so I say also of this, That tho some Inconveniences are
not wanting in Succession; yet they are commenly far less and fewer, than would
follow by mere Election, which is subject to great and continual danger of
Ambition, Emulation, Division and Sedition, which do evidently threaten the
universal destruction and desolation of the whole Body at the Death of every
Prince, which Inconveniences have no place in Succession.

Secondly, The Prince who is in present possession, knowing that his Son or
next of Kin is to succeed, takes care to leave the Realm in good order; as the
Husbandman does to Till and Manure the Ground, which is his own, and must
remain to his Posterity.

Thirdly, There are less alterations in Commonwealths where Succession
prevails, for that the Son commonly retains the same Friends, Counselors and
Officers which his Father had before him, and often pursues the same Actions
and Intentions.

Fourthly, He that enters by Succession is either born a Prince, or has been
much respected for his Title to the Crown, and brings less Passions of
Hatred, Emulation, Anger, Envy or Revenge against particular Men, (for that no
man durst offend him) than he who enters only by Election; for he having been
a Subject and equal to others before his Advancement, and therefore had
contention with many, especially about his Election, which he will seek to
revenge when he is in Authority. As on the other side also, such as were his
Equals before will bear him less respect, and be more unwilling to obey him,
than if by Birth he had been their Sovereign.

Now as by Succession we remedy the difficulties of Election, yet there remains
one great and manifest Inconveniency in the former; namely. That some unapt,
impotent or evil Prince may offer to enter by priority of Blood, which is to be
prevented by adding Election, Consent and Approbation of the Realm to
Succession, so as Succession by Election, and Election by Succession will be
helped, and the one made a Preservative and Remedy against the other. And this
is the wisdom and high Policy left by God and Nature to every Commonwealth, for
their own Conservation and Maintenance, and every Man that is void of Passion,
will not only allow, but also commend the same.

Now we shall proceed and show what Interest a Prince has before he is Crowned
or Admitted by the Realm, which I take to be the same as the King of the Romans
has to the German Empire, after his Election, and before he is Crowned Or to
use a more familiar Example to Englishmen as the Mayor of London has to the
Majoralty, after he is Chosen, and before he is admitted or taken his Oath. For
as this Man in rigor is not truly Mayor, nor has his Jurisdiction before his
Oath and Admission, nor the other properly Emperor before his Coronation; so
is not the Heir truly King, though his Predecessor be dead, and he next in
Succession, until he is Crowned or Admitted by the Commonwealth; tho for better
keeping of Order, and avoiding Tumults and Consusion, most Commonwealths that
have their Princes by Succession, have consented, that from the Death of the
former Frinces all Matters of Government shall pass in the Name of the
Successor, (if his Succession be clear under supposition of the Confirmation
and Approbation of the Commonwealth afterward.

Now as for the Princes of England, it is expressly noted by English Historians,
that it only happened to Henry the Fifth, among all his Predecessors, to have
Homage done unto him before his Coronation and oath taken, and that for the
exceeding Love and Affection the People had for him. Whereof Polydore writes
in these words: Polydor. Virgil lib. 22.
Prince Henry, after he had finished his Fathers Funeral, caused a Parliament to
be convened at Westminster, where whilst Consultation was had according to the
ancient Custom of England, about Creating a new King; behold on a sudden
certain of the Nobility of their own free wills began to Swear Obedience and
Loyalty to him: Which demonstration of love and good will was never showed to
any Prince before, until he was declared King.

And Stow expresses the same thing in his Chronicle, Stow in the beginning of
the Life of Henry the 5th
in these words; To this Noble Prince, by assent of the Realm, the Nobles after
three days offered to do Fealty before he was Crowned, or had solemnized his
Oath, well and justly to govern the Commonwealth; which Offer before was never
found to be made to any Prince of England. Thus much Stow.

In whose Narration, as also in that of Polydore, it may be noted, that King
Henry was not called King till after his Coronation, tho his Father had been
dead almost a Month before: As secondly, That the Parliament consulted about
making a new King, according to the Custom of their Ancestors; which argues
that he was not yet King, tho his Father was dead; and that the manner of our
Old English Ancestors was not to account him so before his Admission. Thirdly,
That this good Will of the Nobility, to acknowledge him for King before his
Coronation and Oath solemnized, truly and justly to govern the Realm, was very
extraordinary and mere kindness. And lastly, That it was never done to any
Prince before Henry the Fifth. All which Points do demonstrate, that it is the
Coronation and Admission that makes a true and perfect King, let the Title by
Succession be what it will; and that the Consent of the Realm is of much
greater consequence than nearness of Blood.

This may be proved by many Examples in England, where Admission has prevailed
against Right of Succession, as in William Rufus, who succeeded the Conqueror,
and King Henry the First his Brother, in King Stephen, King John and others,
who only by Admission of the Realm were Kings against the order of Succession.
To these we may add Henry and Edward, both Surnamed the Fourth, whose Entrances
to the Crown, if we well consider, we shall find that both of them founded the
best and surest part of their Titles upon the Election and Consent of the
People: And both of them having Remorse of Conscience at their dying days,
being they put so many Men to death for maintenance of their Rights and Titles,
had no better way to appease their own Minds, but by thinking they were placed
on the Throne by the Voice of the Realm, and consequently might lawfully defend
the same, and punish such as intended to deprive them.

Moreover, if we look into the Actions of Princes in all Ages, we shall find
that such Kings as were most politic, and had the least doubt or suspicion of
Troubles about the Title after their Deaths, have caused their Sons to be
Crowned in their own days, as trusting more to that, than to their Title by
Succession, tho they were never so lawfully and lineally descended. And of this
I could allege many Examples out of diverse Countries, but specially in France,
since the last Line of Capetus came to that Crown; for Hugh Capetus himself
procured Robert his eldest Son to be Crowned in his own days and Robert did the
same for his youngest Son Henry. Henry also did entreat the States of France to
Admit and Crown Philip the First, his eldest Son, in his own time; and this
Kings Son Lewis did the same to both his Sons, first to Philip, and after his
death to Lewis the younger. And for the same cause, the Prince of Spain is
Swore and admitted by the Realm, during his Fachers Reign. The same
Consideration also moved King David, to Crown his Son Solomon in his own days.

And finally our King Henry the Second of England, considering the alteration
the Realm had made in admitting King Stephen before him, against the order of
Lineal Succession; and fearing the like might happen after him, caused his
eldest Son Henry to be Crowned in his life time: But this Device had but ill
success, for King Henry the younger made War upon King Henry the elder, and got
both the Kings of France and Scotland, and many Nobles both of England and
Normandy to take his part; for which cause it is probable, that this thing has
never since that time been used in England. But yet hereby its evident, what
the Opinion of the World was in those days of the force of Coronation and
Admission of the Commonwealth, and how little the propinquity of Blood
prevailed without it.

I might bring insinite Examples from the Grecians and Romans to this purpose;
but that it may be ojbected, that they are too old and far fetched Examples,
and ought not to be Presidents to us in these Ages. Wherefore I shall only give
some few Examples of the Jews, being they were Gods Elect People, and so fit
Presidents for us to follow, and then hasten to those of kiter Times.

First, then Tho God made Saul a true and lawful King, and consequently gave
him all the Kingly Privileges, Benefits and Prerogatives belonging to that
degree and state; whereof one was, That his Children should succeed after him
in the Crown; yet after his death, God suffered not any of his Generation to
succeed him, though he left behind a numerous Issue; and among others, Ishbosheth
a Prince of 40 yeras old, whom Abner the General Captain of that Nation
followed for a time as their lawful Lord and Master by Succession, until God
checked them for it, and induced them to reject him, and to receive David,
newly elected King, who was a Stranger by Birth, and no Kin to the King
deceased.

Now if any one shall say, that it was for the Sin of Saul, whom God had
rejected, I do confess; it, and yet it makes nothing against our purpose, being
we do not pretend that a Prince, who is next in Blood, can justly be put back,
unless for his own defects, or those of his Ancestors. And it is to be noted,
That Jonathan (who was a good Man, and much praised in Holy Writ) being slain
in the Battle, and leaving a Son named Mephibosheth, who was also put back,
tho'b y nearess of Blood he had great interest in the Succession, and much
before David, and that only (for ought appears) upon the account of Saul his
Grandfather.

After David succeeded Solomon, who was his younger and tenth Son, and the
fourth only by Bathsheba, though Adonijah the Heir apparent, seeing his Father
old and ready to dye, had called many of the great Men of that State, both
Spiritual and Temporal, intending to have proclaimed himself Heir apparent to
the Crown; but Bathsheba and Nathan the Prophet coming to the old King, as he
lay on his Bed, put him in mind of his Promise to Bathsheba, made for
preferring of her Son; telling him, (which pleased him well) Quod occuli totius
Israel in eum respicerent, ut indicaret eis, quis sederet in solio suo post
ipsum. Which was as much as to say, That the whole Commonewealth referred it to
his choice, which of his Sons should Reign after him. Upon these Reasons and
Persuasions the old King was content they should take Solomon out of hand, and
put him on the Kings own Mule, and carry him about the Streets of Jerusalem,
accompanied with his Guards, and crying with found of Trumpets, Long live King
Solomon.

Hereby we may learn, That these and the like determinations of the People,
about admitting or refusing of Princes, to Reign or not to Reign over them,
when their Designs are to good Ends, and for just Respects and Causes, are
allowed also by God, and many times are his own special Drifts and
Dispositions, tho they seem to come from Man.

Whereof there can be no more evident Proof, than that which ensued afterward
to Prince Rehoboam, the lawful Son and Heir to King Solomon, who refusing to
take away some hard and heavy Impositions, laid on the People by Solomon his
Father, lost ten of the twelve Tribes, who refused to admit him for their King;
but chose rather one Jeroboam that was a mere Stranger, and God allowed
thereof, 1 King. 12.21.
as the Scripture in express words testifies: For when Rehoboam took himself to
be openly injured, would by Arms have pursued his Title, and had gathered an
Hundred and fourscore Thousand chosen Soldiers to reduce the Rebels (as he
called them) to their Obedience. God appeared to one Semia, an holy Man, and
commanded him to go to the Camp of Rehoboam, and tell them, that they should
not fight against their Brethren, who had chosen another King, but that every
Man should go to his House, and live quietly under the King they had chosen,
and so they did; and this was the end of that Tumult which God for the Sins of
Solomon had permitted and allowed of.

And thus much I thought good to relate concerning the Jewish Commonwealth, for
that it may give light to all the rest I am to treat of; for if God permitted
and allowed this in his own Commonweal, that was to be the Example and Pattern
of all others that should ensue, no doubt but he approves also the same in
other Realms, when just occasion offers, either for his Service, the good of
the People, or for the punishment of the Sins and Wickedness of some Princes,
that the Line of Succession should be altered.

Now then, to pass on further, and to begin with the Kingdom of Spain; which
has had three or four Races or Descents of Kings, as France also and England
have had; First Race.
And the first Race was from the Goths, which began their Reign in Spain after
the expulsion of the Romans, about the year of Christ 416, to whom the Spaniard
refers all his Nobility, as the French does to the German Franks, and the
English to the Saxons, who entered France and England in the same Age, as the
others did Spain; and the Race of the Gothish, Kings endured Three hundred
years, until Spain was lost unto the Moors.

The second Race is from Don Pelago, Second Race.
that was chosen first King of Austria, after the destruction of the Kingdom by
the Moors, about the year of Christ 717; which Race continued, and added
Kingdom unto Kingdom for the space of Three hundred years, until the year of
Christ 1034, when Don Sancho, King of Navarre, got the Earldom of Aragon and
Castile, and made them Kingdoms, dividing them among his Children, to his
second Son Don Ferdinando, Surnamed afterward The Great; he gave not only the
Earldom of Castilia, but by Marrying also the Sister of don Dermudo, King of
Leon and Asturia, he joined all those Kingdoms together; Third Race.
and so from that Day began the third Race of the Kings of Navarre to Reign in
Castile, and so endured for Five hundred years, until the year of Christ 1540;
when the House of Austria entered to Reign by Marriage of the Daughter of Don
Ferndinando, Surnamed The Catholic; Fourth Race.
and this was the fourth Race of the Spanish Kings after the Romans.

Now in these four Ranks of Regal Descents, diverse Examples may be alleged for
my purpose; yet I shall pass by my first Race, for that its evident by the
Councils of Toledo, which were held in those Times, That express Election was
joined with Succession; for in the 4th Council of Toledo, Cap. 74. are these
Words, Let no man among us snatch the Kingdom by presumption; but the former
King being dead, let the Nobility of the Kingdom, together with the Priests and
Clergy, appoint the Successor of the Kingdom by Common Council. Which is as
much as if they had said, Let no man enter upon the Kingdom by presumption of
Succession alone; but let the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, by Common Voice,
see what is best for the Weal-publick.

Don Pylao (the first King after the destruction of the Kingdom by the Moors)
died, and left a Son named Don Favilla, who was King after his Father, and
Reigned two years, aftes whose Death none of his Children werre admitted for
King, tho he left many; but Don Alonso was chosen by the unanimous Consent of
the Gothish Nation; and for no other Reason, Ambro. Moral. lib. 13. cap. 6. 9.
10.
but that the Kings Sons were young and unable to govern; and this Alonso
proved an excellent King, and as Sebastianus, Bishop of Salamancha (who lived
in the same time) writes, was for his Valiant Acts Surnamed The Great.

To this Famous Don Alonso succeeded his Son Don Fruela, who was a Noble King
for Ten years, and had many great Victories over the Moors; but after declining
to Tyranny, he became odious to his Subjects, and was Deposed and put to Death
Anno Domini 768; Moral. l. 13. cap. 17.
and though he left two Sons, yet for the Prejudice conceived against their
Father, neither of them were admitted by the Realm to succeed him; but rather
his Cousin Don Aurelio, who Reigned Six years, and died without Issue; and
because the Hatred which the Spaniards conceived against the Memory of Don
Fruela was not yet extinguished, they would not yet admit any of his
Generation, but excluded them a second time, and chose Don Silo, a
Brother-in-Law of his; so that the right Heirs of Don Fruela were twice put
back for his evil Government.

But Don Silo being dead without Issue, as also Don Aurelio was before him, and
the Anger of the Spaniards against Fruela being well assuaged, they admitted
his Son Don Alonso, whom they had twice put back: But he dying without Issue,
Don Ramiro his Cousin was chosen; Moral. cap. 33.
and tho Don Ramiro was next in Blood to Alonso, yet he was elected by the
States, as the Historian expressly writes.

But in the time of Don Ramiro, the Law of Succession by propinquity of Blood,
was much revived and strongly confirmed, and from this time forward the King
always caused his eldest Son to be named King or Prince, and to be always Sworn
by the Realm and Nobility; yet we shall find this Ordinance to have been
frequently broken upon several Considerations. As for Example, after some
Descents from Don Ramiro, which were Don Ordonio (this Man's Son) and Don Alonso
the Third, Don Garzia and Don Ordonio the Second; all four Kings by orderly
Succession: It happened that in the year of Christ 924, Don Ordonio the Second
dying, left four Sons and one Daughter lawfully begotten, and yet the State of
Spain displaced them all, and gave the Kingdom to their Uncle Don Fruela,
second Brother to their Father; and for no other Reason, but their being young,
and not so able to govern as their Uncle was. But after a year this Fruela
died, leaving many Sons of a full Age; yet the Spaniards put them all by the
Crown, and those Don Alonso the Fourth.

And this shall suffice concerning the Race of Don Pylao, first Christian King
of Spain, after the Entrance of the Moors.

Now for avoiding prolixity we'll omit many Instances that are for our purpose,
and be content to repeat a few of latter Date. And,

First, In the year of Christ 1276. Don Sancho (Surnamed El Bravo, for his
great Valor) was chosen, and his Nephews, who were Heirs apparent, put back,
because he weas a great Warrior, and more like to manage better the Matters of
War than they: And this was done in a General Parliament, which was held at
Segovia in the year 1276. and the two Princes his Nephews were put in Prison;
but afterward by the intercession of their Uncle King Philip of France, they
were released, and had certain Lands given them; and of them came the Dukes of
Medina Coeli, and all the rest of the House of Cerda, which are of great
Nobility in Spain.

Not long after this, Garab. lib. 15. (...) 1. An. 1363.
when Don Pedro (Surnamed The Cruel) King of Castile was driven out, and his
Bastard-Brother Henry the Second set up in his place; John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, having Married Dono Constantia, the said King Peter's Daughter and
Heir pretended by Succession to the said Crown of Castile, which was really his
Right; but yet the State of Spain denied it flatly, and defended it by Arms,
and prevailed against John of Gaunt, as did also the Race of Henry the Bastard
against his lawful Brother, and the Race of Don Sancho the Uncle against his
lawful Nephews; and this happened in the third and principal Descent of the
Spanish Kings, when this Matter of Succession was most assuredly and perfectly
established; and yet who will deny the Kings of Spain, who held under the latter
Titles, To be true and lawful Kings?

By which it appears, how frequently the Line of Succession has been altered in
Spain, upon any reasonable Consideration, which they imagined to be for the
Public good: And the like we shall find in France and England, which we shall
begin to treat of.

Now concerning the State of France, tho since the Entrance of King Pharamond
with his Franks out of Germany, which was about the year of Christ 419. they
have never had any Stranger come to wear the Crown, which they attribute to
their Salick Law, that forbids Women's Reign; yet they have twice changed their
whole Race and Lineage of Kings, once by the Entrance of King Pepin, who put out
the Line of Pharamond, about the year 751. and again in the promotion of Hugo
Capetus, who put out the Line of Pepin in the year 988. so as they have had
three Descents and Races of Kings, as well as the Spaniards.

Now I Will pass over all the first Race of the Franch Kings, as I also did the
Spanish, because some men may say, That the Commonwealth and Law of Succession
was not so well settled in those days, as it was afterward in the time of
Pepin, Charles the Great, and their Descendents. Therefore I shall only mention
the second Rank, which began with the Exclusion and Deposition of their lawful
King Childerick the Third, and Election of King Pepin in the year of Christ
781, after 22 Kings, which had Reigned of the first Line of Pharamond, for the
space of Three hundred years.

This King Reigned 18 years, being a famous King, as all the World knows, left
his Kingdom by Succession to his eldest Son Charles, Surnamed aster The Great,
for his Famous and Heroical Acts. And tho the whole Kingdom belonged to him by
right of Succession, yet did the Realm of France show her Authority in his
Admission, ^^rard. du ^ilan. lib 3.
as the Historian relates in these Words; King Pepin being dead, the French
chose for their King his two Sons, Charles and Carlomon, on condition that they
should divide the Realm equally betwixt them; which was a heavy Condition to
the elder Brother to part with half his Kingdom.

After these Brothers had Reigned together three years. King Carlomon died, and
left many Sons; but the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of France Swore Allegiance
to Charles, without any respect to the Children of Carlomon, who by right of
Succession should have been preferred.

After Charles the Great Reigned his Son Lewis the First, Surnamed Debonnaire,
of his Courtesy, who entered with great Applause of all Men, for the exceeding
grateful Memory of his Father; but he was Deposed by the means of his Sons, and
was put in a Monastery; tho after he came to Reign again, ^erard. lib. 5. ^n.
834.
and his fourth Son by his second Wife named Charles the Bold, succeeded him in
the Crown, after many Battles against his elder Brother Lothair, to whom it
belonged by Succession.

After Charles the Beld succeeded Lewis the Second, who was the third Son, for
the Second died before his Father; and the Eldest was put by for his ill
Demeanor: This Lewis also had like to have been deprived by the States at his
Entrance, for the Hatred conceived against his Father, Gerard. lib. 1.
had he not called a Perliament at Campeigne, and sweetened the People and
Nobility with many fair Promises. This Lewis left two Bastards by a Concubine,
who were called Lewis and Carlomon, as also an Infant newly born of his lawful
Wife Adeltrude, Daughter to King Alfred of England, which Infant was King of
France after, by the Name of Charles the Simple, tho not immediately after the
Death of his Fahter: For the Nobles of France said. They had need of a Man to
be King, and not a Child; and so the whole State of France chose for their
Kings the two aforesaid Bastards; and they were Crowned most solemnly, and
divided the whole Realm between them, An. 881.
and Queen Adeltrude with her Child (true Heir of France) fled into England to
her Fahter, and there kept him many years; in which time she saw four or five
Kings Reign in his place successively.

Of these two Bastards, the Elder named Lewis Reigned but Four years, and died
without Issue, the second, named Carlomon, lived but one year after him, and
left a Son called Lewis, which succeeded him in the Kingdom by the name of
Lewis the Fisth, and Surnamed Faineant, for his idle and slothful Life; for
which, as also for his vicious Behavior, and in particular for taking out and
Marrying a Nun of the Abbey of S. Saveour, he was deprived and made a Monk in
the Abbey of S. Denis, where he died, and in his place was chosen King of
France, and Crowned with great Solemnity, Charles the Fourth, Emperor of Rome,
who was Nephew to Charles the Bold, before mentioned; and therefore the French.
Historians say, That he came to the Crown, partly by Succession, and partly by
Election; but for Succession we see it was of no account, being Charles the
Simple the right Heir was alive in England, and as it were forgotten, being
they had thrice excluded him, and would not receive him, after they had
deprived Charles for his evil Government; and rather chose one Odo, Earl of
Baris and Duke of Angiers, and caused him to be Crowned.

But after a few years being weary of this Man's Government, and moved with
Compassion toward the Youth in England, they Deposed him while he was absent
in Gascony, and called Charles the Simple out of England, and restored him to
the Kingdom of France, leaving only to Odo the State of Aquitain, with Title of
a Duke, wherewith in rine he contented himself, seeing he could get no more.
But yet his Posterity by virtue of this Election, ever after pretended a Title
to the Crown of France, and never desisted until by Hugo Capetus they got it;
for Hugh was descended of this King and Duke Odo. This Charles the Simple was
decoyed into the Castle of Perene in Picardy, where he was made Prisoner, and
fore'd to resign his Kingdom unto Ralph King of Burgundy, and soon after he
died in the Castle and his Queen Odin and English Woman fled into England, with
her little Son Lewis, unto her Uncle King Adelstan, as Queen Adeltrude had done
before.

But this new King Ralph lived but three years aster, and then the States of
France considering the Title of Lewis the Lawful Son of Charles the Simple,
which Lewis was commonly called by the name of d'Outremere, that is, beyond
Sea, being he was brought up in England; the said States being continually
solicited by the Ambassadors of King Adelstan, and by William Duke of Normandy,
in behalf of the young Prince; they resolved to call him home, as they had done
his Father, and to admit and Crown him King, and so they did; and he Reigned
Twenty seven years, and was a good Prince, and died peaceably in his Bed in the
year of Christ 945.

This Lewis d'Outremere left two Sons behind him, the eldest succeeded him by
the name of Lothair the First, and the youngest he made Duke of Lorrain.
Lothair dying left one Son named Lewis, who succeeded him by the name of Lewis
the Fifth; but dying without Issue, the Crown was to have gone by Lineal
Succession to his Uncle Charles, Duke of Lorrain, second Son of Lewis
d'Outremere; but the States of France put him byfor mislike of his Person;
chose Hugo Capetus Earl of Paris, and so ended the second Line of Pepin, and of
Charles the Great, and entered the Race of Capetus.

Now tho all the French Chronicles are carnest defenders of their Law of
Succession yet they justify the Title of Capetus against Charles of Lorrain,
as may appear by the Words of an ancient and diligent Chronicler of the Abbey of
S. Denis, who defends King Capetus in these Words: We may not grant by any
means, that Hugh Capet should be esteemed an Invader or Usurper of the Crown of
France, seeing the Lords, Prelates and Princes of the Realm did call him to
this Dignity, and chose him for their King and Sovereign Lord. Upon which Words
Belforest says, as follows: Bell. lib 3. cap 1.
I have laid besore you the Words and Censure of this good and religious Man,
for they seem to me to touch the quick; for in truth we cannot defend the Title
of Capetus by any means from Usurpation and Felony, but by justifying his
coming to the Crown, by the consent and good will of the Commonwealth.

And these Instances out of the second Line of France, I take to be sufficient
proof of our Assertion, without going any further; for if we do but number
these Kings already named of this second Race, from Pepin to Capet (which are
about Seventeen in Two hundred thirty eight years) we shall sind, that not few,
but the most part of them did both enter and enjoy their Crown and Dignity
contrary to the Law of Lineal Descent, and of next Succession by Blood.

We shall therefore instance some Examples for our purpose out of the English
History, and so conclude this Point.

First then it is to be noted, That the Realm of England has had as great
variety, changes and diversity in the Races of their Kings, as any Nation in
the World: For after the Britains, it had Romans for their Governors for many
years, and then of them and their Roman Blood, they had Kings of their own, as
appears by that Valiant King Aurelius Ambrosius, who resisted so manfully the
Saxons for a time; after his they had Kings of the Saxon and English Blood, and
after them of the Danes, and then of the Normans, and after them again of the
French; and last of all of the Scotch, of whom King james the Sixth was
descended, which continues to this day.

Now I mean to pass over the first and ancient Races of Kings, as well of the
British and Roman, as also of the Saxon Races, until King Egbert the First of
that Name, King of the West Saxons, and almost of all the rest of England
besides, who therefore is said to be properly the first Monarch of the Saxon
Blood, as he that first commanded the Realm to be called England, which ever
since has been observed.

Thsi Egbert was banished the Realm by King Britricus, for the suspected that
he might be chosen King, by reason of his great Prowess and Valor. He lived
many years in France under the Famous King Pepin; afterward hearing Britrious
was dead, he came into England, Polydor. lib. 4.
and was chosen King by universal Consent of the People; and he proved one of
the best Kings that ever the Saxons had before, or perhaps after; and he and
King Pepin of France began their Reigns as it were together, and came both to
their Crown by no other Title, but the Election of the People.

This King Egbert left a lawful son behind him named Ethelwolf, who succeeded
him in the Kingdom, and was a Famous a Man as his Fahter. This Ethelwolf had
four lawful sons, who all in their turns succeeded by just and lawful Order in
the Crown, viz. Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelred and Alfred, and all the latter
Three were most excellent Princes, especially Alfred, who drow Rollo, that
Famous Captain of the Danes from the Borders of England with all his Company
into France, where he got the Country, then name Neustria, and now Normandy,
and was the first Duke of that Nation, from whom our William the Conqueror
came afterward in the 6th Descent.

This Alfred left one Son behind him named Edward, who dying left two Sons,
lawfully begotten of his Wife Edigna, one called Edmond, the other Eldred,
Polydor. lib. 5. ^tow page 130.
and a third Illegitimate, named Adelstan, whom he had by a Concubine. This
last was preferred to the Crown before the other two legitimate princes, only
for his Valor and Conduct.

This Man dying without Issue, his lawful Brother Edmond, put back before, was
admitted to the Crown, who Reigned six years, and left two lawful Sons; but
they bing young were both put back, and their Uncle Eldred preferred before
them; who after Nine years Reign died without Issue, and so his elder Nephew
Edwin was admitted to the Crown, who after four years was Deposed for his lewd
and vicious Life and his younger Brother Edgar admitted in his place.

This King Edgar, who entered by Depositio; of his Brother, was one of the
rarest Princes that the World had in his time, both for peace and War, Justice,
Piety and Valor. He lest two Sons by different Wives, Edmond and Etheldred;
the first was Murdered, after which many good Men of the Realm were of
Opinion, not to admit the Succession of Etheldred, both in respect of the
Murder of King Edward his elder Brother, committed for his sake; as also for
that he seemed a Man very unsit for Government; and of this Opinion was that
holy Man Dunstand, Archbishop of Canterbury, who in flat words denied to
Consecrate him; but seeing the most part of the Realm incline to his side, he
told that it would repent them afterward, and that in his Life the Nation
should be destroyed; as indeed it was, and he forced to Normandy, and left
Sweno and his Danes in the possession of the Realm, tho after Sweno's Death he
returned and died in London. He had two Wives, the first an English Woman, by
whom he had prince Edmond, Sirnam'd Ironside, for his great strength and
courage.

Now he that will consider the passage of the Crown of England from the death
of Edmond Ironside, eldest Son of King Etheldred, until the acquisition thereof
by William Duke of Normandy, will easily se what Authority the Commonwealth
has had, to alter Titles of Succession, according as public necessity
required.

Now since King William the First, commonly called the Conqueror, (tho in
truth he never grounded his Title upon any thing, but the Election of the
Confessor and Consent of the people) the exclusion of Princes against the
ordinary course of Succession, is more notorious than in elder times; therefore
I shall only refer the Reader to their particular Lives, who succeeded before
the lawful Heirs by propinquity of Blood. As first, William Rufus and henry the
First, before Robert their elder Brother, King Stephen before Henry the Second,
and King John before Arthur Duke of Britain. Some years afte, when the Barons
and States of England disliked the Governent of King John, they rejected him
and chose Lewis the Prince of France to be their King, and swore Fealty to him
at London, and deprived the young Prince Henry his Son; but after the death of
his Father king John, they recalled again that Sentence, and admitted this
Henry to the Crown by the name of Henry the third, and disannulled the oath,
and Allegiance made to Lewis of France. Now from this Henry the Third, the
Houses of Britany, Lancaster and York, do seem to issue, as a triple Branch our
of one Tree.

Now if we consider the Titles of the Kings of the House of York and those of
Lancaster, we shall see plainly, that the best of all their Titles (after the
deposition of King Richard the Second) depended most or the Authority of the
Commonwealth; for as the People were affected, and the greater part prevailed,
so were their Titles either confirmed, altered, or disannulled by Parliament;
and yet we may safely affirm, that either part, when they were in possession of
the Crown, and confirmed therein by parliament, were true and lawful Kings, and
that God concurred with them, as with true Princes for government of their
People: For if we should deny this Point, great Inconveniences would follow,
and we should shake the States of most princes in the World at this day, as by
Examples which I have already alleged may appear. And sO I shall end this
point, affirming, That as propinquity of Blood is a great pre-eminence toward
the attaining of any Crown, yet it does not bind the Commonwealth to admit it,
if weightier Reasons should urge the contrary.

Now it will be a further proof of what I have before alleged, ( viz. That all
Commonwealths have prefix laws to their Princes, which they are as much bound
to keep as any Subject) if we consider their oaths at their Admission or
Coronation. And first of the Emperor, who Swears to defend the Christian
Religion, to minister Justice equally to all Men, to keep and observe all laws
and privileges of the Empire; not to alienate or engage the possessions of the
Empire, to condemn no man but by course of Law, and that whatsoever he does
otherwise, shall be void and of no validity. Unto these Articles he Swears
first by his Legates, and he gives a Copy of his oath to each Elector, and
after he goes to be Crowned; where in the middle of Mast the Archbishop of
Colen asks in the presence of all the the People, Whether he is ready to Swear
to the aforesaid Articles? and he answers that he is; then the Archbishop leads
him to the high Altar, where he Swears to them in express words; which being
done, the Archbishop turning to the princes of the Empire and People there
present, asks them Whether they be content to swear Obedience and Fealty to
him? who answers, Yes: then he is Anointed, and the other two Archbishop lead
him into the Vestry, where Deacons are ready to put on his Robes; then the
Bishop of Colen delivers him a drawn Sword, and puts a Ring on his Finger,
and a Scepter in his Hand; and then the three Archbishops put the Crown on his
head, and so he is placed on the Imperial Throne, where all the Princes swear
Obedience to him.

Now it is to be noted, that the Emperor Swears three times, twice himself, and
once by his Deputies, before his Subjects Swear once to him.

In Polonia, the manner of Crowning thieir King is in substance the same as of
the Emperor. His Oath is in these Words; I do promise and swear before God and
his Angels, that I will do Law and Justice to all, and keep the Peace of
Christ's Church, and the Union of his Catholic Faith; and if (which God
forbid) I should break my Oath, I am content that the Inhabitants of this
Kingdom, owe no Duty or Obedience unto me, as God shall help me, and gods Holy
Gospel.

In Spain I find, that the manner of admitting their Kings was different, and
not the same before and after the destruction thereof by the Moors; but yet in
both times their Kings did Swear in effect the self-same Points, which before
have been mentioned in other Kingdoms.

Now Ambrosio Moral. reports, Ambro. Moral. lib. 13. cap. 2.
That a certain law was found written in the Gothish Tongue, and left since the
time of Don Pelayo the first King after the Moors; which prescribed, how Men
must make their King in Spain, and how he must swear to the privileges and
Liberties of that nation. Before all things it is established for a law, Liberty
and Privilege of Spain, that the Kings shall be made by Voices and Consent
perpetually; to the intent, that no Evil king may enter without the Consent of
the people, seeing they are to give him that which with their Blood and Labors
they have gained from the Moors. Thus far goes the first Article of this Law,
which is the more to be noted, because the most ancient of the Spanish
Historians do say, that from this Don Pelayo the Succession of their Kings was
ever by propinquity of Blood; and yet we see, that Election was joined with it
in express terms. The second part of that Law contained the Ceremonies used in
those old times at the admission of their Kings.

Now as fro France, their ancient Ceremonies of Crowning their old Kings, was
much after the manner which I noted before out of the Law of Don Pelayo, first
King of Spain after the Moors: But as concerning the principal Point of that
Action, which is the substance of admitting the King unto his Royal Authority,
and of Oath by him made of governing well and justly, and of the reciprocal
Oath of Obedience made to him by his Subjects, it was not much different from
what is now used: The Archbishop of Rhemes being vested in Pontifical Attire,
and come to the Altar to say Mast 9where the King is also upon a high Seat
placed) he turns to him and says these sords; Sir, that which we require at
your hands this day is, that you promise unto us, that you will keep all Canonical
privileges, Law and Justice, due to be kept and defended, as a good King is
bound to do in his realm. To which the King answers, I do promise to every one
of you, that I will keep and maintain all Canonical privileges, Law and
Justice due to every Man, to the utmost of my power, and by Gods help will
defend you, as a good King is bound to do. This being done, the king Swears and
makes his oath, laying his hands upon the gospel, in these Words following; I
do swear and promise to all Christian People, subject unto me, these Points
ensuing: First, To procure that all my Subjects be kept in union of the Church,
and I will defend them from all Excess, Rapin, Extortion and Iniquity.
Secondly, I will take care that in all Judgments, Justice shall be kept, with
Equity and Mercy. Thirdly, I Will endeavor (as much as possible) to chase and
drive out of my Realm, all such as the Curch has, or shall declare Heretics,
as God shall help me, and his holy Gospel. Thus Swears the King, and then
kisses the Book, and immediately is sung Te Deum; and then the King's vested,
and the Ring, Scepter, Crown, and the other Kingly Ornaments are put on him,
with Declaration first what they signify; and then particular Prayers are made
to God, that their signisication may be by the King fulfilled.

Now England has particularly taken her Ceremonies from France, Belfor. in
vita Phil. 2.
being many of our English Kings have come from thence, as William the
Conqueror, born in Normandy, Stephen Earl of Blois and Bullen, a Frenchman,
and Henry the Second, born likewise in France, and Son to the Earl of Anjou.
Now the Arcbishop of Canterbury, does ordinarily perform the Ceremonies at the
Coronation in England, as the Archbishop of Rhemes does in France; and we may
collect the substance of what the Kings of England formerly swore, from the
Bishops Letter to Henry the Seocnd, as also from the Speech of Thomas Arundel,
Archbishop of Canterbury to Henry the Fourth. In the former are these Words; Do
you remember the Confession which you made and laid upon the Altar at
Westminster, for keeping and defending the liberty of the Church when you were
Consecrated and Anointed King by Theobaldus our predecessor? By which it
appears. that he not only Swears, but gave up his oath also in Writing; and for
more solemnity and obligation, laid it down with his own hands upon the Altar.

That to Henry the Fourth, was occasioned by his attempting to take the
temporalties from the Clergy; wherefore the Archbishop desired him to remember
the Oath which he made, that he would delend the Church and Ministers thereof;
and therefore prayed him, to permit and suffer the Church to enjoy the
Privileges and Liberties which it did in the time of his Predecessors; and he
also desired him, to consider his Promise made to the Realm, which was, That he
would preferve unto every Man their Right and Title, so far as in him lay. At
which the King was so moved, as he would hear no more of that Bill of Laity;
but said, He would leave the Church in as good, or better condition than he
feaund it. The other conditions of good Government are expressly set down in the
king of Englands oath, recorded by ancient Writers in these Words; Holing. p.
47 and 1005.
That he will (during his Life) bear due reverence unto Almighty God, and to
his Church; and that he will administer Law and Justice equally to them all,
and take away all unjust Laws. Which after he had sworn, then did the
Archbishop 9turning to the people) declare whatthe King has promised, and by an
Herald at Arms asked their Consents, Whether they were content to submit
themselves unto this Man, as unto their King, or no, under the Conditions
proposed? And when they have yielded, the Archbishop beings to put on the Regal
Ornaments, as the Sword, Ring, Scepter and Crown, as in the French Coronation,
and bids him hold his Place and keep his Oath.

And this is the sum of the English Coronation, which may be read in Stow; Stow
in the Life of Ric. 2.
but especially the Admissions as well of the said henry the Fourth last
mentioned; as also of King Edward the Fourth, at their first Entrances to the
Crown; for in the Admission of KIng Henry, Stow shows how the People were
demanded thrice. Whether they would be content to take him for their King? And
then the Archbishop read to them, what this new King was bound by oath unto. At
the Admission also of King Edward the Fourth, Staw shows how the Peoples
Consent was solemnly demanded in S. John's Fields by London; notwithstanding
King Edward had proved his title by Succession in the parliament at
Weslminster; And now the Consent of the people being had, (or, He being thus
Elected, as Stow's Words are) he was with great Royalty conveyed to
Westminster, Stow in the L^^^ of Hen. 6. p. 7
and in the Hall set in the Kings Seat, with S. Edwards Scepter in his hand;
and then the people were asked if they would have him King? and they cried, Yea,
yea. Thus far Stow.

Now if any except against these Instances, because they entered and began their
Reigns upon the deprivation of other Kings then living, let them look into the
Coronations of Edward the 6th, Queen mary and Elizabeth, and they will find,
That the Consent of the People and their Acceptance of those Princes, is not
only demanded by the public Cry of a Herald at Arms, which stands on the side
of the Scaffold whereon the Prince is Crowned, and the peoples Answer expected
till they cry, Yes, yes; but also that the said Princes gave their Corporal
Oath unto the Bishiop who Crowned them, to uphold and manintain the true Faith,
with the Liberties and Privileges of the Church; as also to govern by Justice
and Law: Which Oath no doubt has been most solemnly sworn by all the Kings and
Queens of England, from the days of Edward the Confessor at the least, and
whosoever would see more Points of these Oaths set down in particular, let him
read Magna Charta and he will be satisfied.

By all which, and by much more that might be alledg's in this matter, it is
evident, that this Agreement, Bargain and Contract between the King and his
Common wealth at his first Admission, is as certain and firm (notwithstanding
any pretense or interest he has by Succession) as any Contract or Marriage in
the World can be; which is an act that lively expresses the other; so as we
must condemn the Assertions of those Men, as absurd, base and impious, who say,
That only Succession of Bloor is the thing without further Approbation, which
makes a King, and that the Peoples Consent to him who is next by Birth, is
nothing at all needful, be he what he will; and that his Admission or
Coronation is only a matter of external Ceremony, without any effect, for
increase or confirmation of his Right.

having now proved by Examples of our own and neighboring Nations, That all
their Kings have been Sworn to the observation of their Laws and Constitutions,
before their Coronation or Admittance by the Commonwealth; I shall proceed to
make it appear, That Kings in all Christian Kingdoms have been Deposed for
breach of the aforesaid Original Contract; but with this Protestation
beforementioned, that I do not intend any disrespect against the Sacred
Authority of Princes and Governors, but only to show, that as nothing under
God is more honorable, prositable or Sovereign, than a good prince; so nothing
is more pestilent, or brings so great destruction and desolation, as an evil
one. And therefore as the whole Body is of more Authority than the Head, and
may cure it, if discomposed if they infest the rest; seeing that a Body Civil
may have many heads by Succession, and is not always bound to one as a Body
Natural is; which Body Natural, if it had the same ability, that when it has
an aching or sickly Head, it could cut if off and take another; I doubt not but
it would do so, and that all Men would confess that it had sufficient Authority
and Reason to do the same, rather than all the other Parts should perish, or
live in pain and continual torment. But yet the matter is much clearer that we
have in hand for easing our selves of wicked Princes, as I shall now begin to
declare.

First therefore, I should allege some Examples out of Scripture, but that
some Men may chance to object, That those things recorded there of the Jews,
are not so much to be reputed for acts of the Commonwealth, as for particular
Ordinations of God himself: Which yet is not any thing against me, but rather
makes much for our purpose, by reason the matter is much more authorized
hereby, seeing whatsoever God did ordain and exercise in his Commonwealth, may
also be practiced by others, having Gods Authority and Approbation for it.
Wherefore I shall hasten to Examples nearer home, and more proper to the
particular purpose we treat of; yet I cannot omit noting two or three out of
the Bible, that do appertain to this purpose also; and these are the
deprivations of two wicked Kings of Judah, Saul and Amon; (tho both were
lawfully placed in that Dignity) and the bringing in of David and Josias in
their rooms, who were the two most excellent Princes that ever that Nation, or
any other ever had to govern them.

And first, King Saul, tho he was chosen by God to that Royal Throne, yet he
was slain by the Philistines, by Gods Order, as it was foretold him, for his
disobedience, and not fulfilling the Law, and living within the Limits
prescribed unto him. Amon was lawful King also, and that by Natural descent and
succession; for he was Son and Heir to King Manasses, whom he succeeded; and
yet he was slain by his own People, because he walked not in the way prescribed
unto him by God: And unto these two Kings so deprived God gave two Successors,
the like whereof are not to be found in the whole Race of Kings for a thousand
years together; for of Josias it is written, He did that which was right in the
sight of god, neither did he decline to the right hand nor to the left; He
reigned 32 years; and Jeremiah the Prophet, who lived in his time, loved this
good King so extremely, as he never ceased to lament his Death. As for King
David, it will be needless to report how excellent a King he was; for (as many
Learned men do note) he was a most perfect Pattern for all Kings that should
follow in the World; not only in matters of Religion Piety and Devotion, but
also of Chivalry Valor, Wisdom and Policy; neither is it true which Machiavel,
and some others of his School affirm, for defacing of Christian Virtue, That
Religion and Piety are often Lets to politic and wise government, and do
weaken the high Spirits of magnanimous Men, to take in hand great Enterprises
for the Commonwealth. This (I say) is extremely false, for Grace does not
destroy or corrupt, but perfecteth Nature; so as he who by Nature is valiant,
wife, liberal or politic, shall be more, if he is also pious and religious.
Which is evident in King David, who notwithstanding all his Piety, omitted
nothing belonging to the State and Government of a noble, wife and politic
Prince.

And now if we leave the Hebrews and come to the Romans, we shall find many
notable things in that State for our purpose: For when Romulus their first King
declined into Tyranny, he was put by by the Senate, and in his place was chosen
Numa Pompilius (a notable Prince) who prescribed all their order of Religion
and manner of Sacrifices, imitating therein the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Jews, as Tertullian and other Fathers do note; he began also the building of
their Capitol, and did other beneficial things for that Commonwealth. Again,
when Tarquinus the Proud, their 7th and last King was expelled for his evil
Government, we see the success was prosperous, for that not only no hurt came
thereby to the State, but exceeding benefit, being their Government and
increase of Empire was so prosperous under their Consuls, that whereas at the
end of their Kingly Government they had but 15 Miles Territory without their
City, it is well known, that when the Consuls Government ended, and was changed
by Julius Caesar their Territory reached more than 15000 Miles in compass;
being they had not only Europe under their Dominion, but the principal parts of
Asia and Africa also; so as this Chastisement so justly inflicted on Tarquin,
was profitable and beneficial to their Commonwealth also. Moreover, when Julius
Caesar had broken all Law both human and divine, and taken all Government into
his own hands, he was (as the World knows) slain by his Senators in the
Senate House, and Octavianus Augustus preferred in his room, who proved the most
famous Emperor that ever was. When Nero the 6th, Emperor of Rome, who
succeeded lawfully his Uncle Claudius in the Empire, was deposed and sentenced
to death by the Senate for his wicked Government, tho Peace ensued not
presently; but that Galba, Otho and Vitellius, three Captains of the Empire,
made some little interludes of Tragical killing one another; yet within few
Months the whole Empire by that means fell into Vespastan and his Son Titus's
hand, two of the best Governors that ever those times saw.

The like may be noted of the Noble rank of five excellent Princes, viz. Nerva,
Trajan, Adrian, Antorinus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius, who succeeded in the
Empire by the just Death of cruel Domitian; which Execution its thought the
Senate secretly procured, (not being able to perform it openly by Justice)
which appears, because when the act was done, the Senate did presently by
public Decree allow it, and disannulled all his barbarous acts for their
exceeding Cruelty, and commanded his Arms and Memorials to be taken down every
where, and chose for his Successor one Cocceius Nerva an Italian, a Man of
excellent Virtue, by whom they not only enjoyed the most prosperous time of his
Government; but of all the four who ensued him, no less worthy than himself.
Not long after the Succession of these excellent Emperors, there came to the
Crown by lawful descent, a youth named Antoninus Heliogabalus, Son of the
Emperor Antoninus Caracalla, and Grandchild (as was supposed) to the famous
and noble Emperor Septimius Severus, who died in England; which Youth, as he
was highly honored for a time upon the account of his worthy Grandfather; so
after for his own Beastly life, he was deprived and put to death by the
Soldiers, at the request and common desire both of the Senate and People; who
ordained also in his detestation, That no Emperor after him should be called
Antonius. This Man being deposed as aforesaid, there was preferred to the Empire
in his room a hopeful young Man of his next Kingdred, named Alexander Severus,
being admitted by common Consent both of Senate and People, who proved one of
the rarest Princes (for Valor and Virtue) that ever the Roman Empire had; so
as the excellency of Severus seemed fully to recompense the wickedness of
Heliogabalus.

I may name many other such Examples, and among the rest that of Maxentius, who
being lawfully possessed of the Empire (being Son to Maximinianus the Emperor,
which Reigned with Dioclesian) yet for his Tyrannical Government that was
intolerable, its supposed that the Senate (not being able to match him in open
strength) sent privily into England and France, to invite Constantine to come
to their relief, and so he did; and Maxentius being drowned in the River Tyber,
Constantine (afterward Sirnam'd the Great) succeeded in the Empire, who was
the Emperor (as the World knows) who first publicly professed himself a
Christian, and planted our Faith over all the World. And so I shall end with
the Roman Empire.

Now if we come lower down, and nearer home, we have yet another Example more
remarkable than the rest; which is, the change of the Empire from the East to
the West, for the evil Government of Irene and her Son Constantine the 6th, who
was deposed first, and his Eyes put out by his own Mother Irene, and the Empire
usurped by her; who not being able to Rule it in such order as was requisite
for so great a Monarchy, she was deprived thereof by the Sentence of Pope Leo
the Third, and by Consent of all the People and Senate of Rome, Charles King of
France and Germany (after Surnamed the Great) was Crowned Emperor of the West;
which Succession continues as it were to this day, and many Worthy men have
succeeded therein, and insinite acts of Jurisdiction have been exercised by
that Authority, which were all unjust and Tyrannical, if this change of the
Empire, and deposition of Irene and her Son, for their evil Government, had not
been lawful. It were too long to run over all other Kingdoms, and therefore I
shall only touch some in those Points that are most notorious.

Now the two famous Changes that have been made in the Royal Line of France;
the first from the Race of Pharamond and Clodoveus to the Line of Pepin, and
the second from the Race of Pepin to Hugo Capetus; whereon are they founded,
but upon the Judicial chastisement and deposition of two evil Princes, the
first of Childeric the third lawful King of France, the second of Charles of
Lorain, who was kept Prisoner during his life in the Castle of Orleance? And
thus muhc all the French Histories do affirm, and do attribute to these Changes
the prosperity and greatness of their Kingdom. And so much for France, where
many other Examples might be alleged, as of King Lewis the Third, Surnamed
Fainant, and of Charles Surnamed Le Gross. who succeeded him, both of them
deposed by the States of France, as before I have noted.

But now if we step over the Pyrenean Mountains, and look into Spain, where we
shall not fail of many Examples to our purpose, both before the oppression of
that Realm by the Moors, and after. for before, in the year of Christ 630, we
read of a lawful King named Flaveo Suintila, put down and deprived with his
whole Posterity, in the fourth Council National of Toledo, and one Sissinando
confirmed in his place; Ambrosio Mora lib. 11. cap. 19.
notwithstanding that Suintila was at the beginning of his Reign, a very good
King, and much commended by S. Isidorus Archbishop of Sevil; who yet in the
said Council was the first Man who subscribed to his deprivation. After the
entrance of the Moors also, when Spain was reduced again to order and
government of the Spanish Kings; Garib. lib. 13 cap. 15.
we read that about the year of Christ 1282. one Don Alonso the 11th of that
name, King of Castile and Leon, succeeded his Father Ferdinand, Sirnam'd the
Saint, and he obtained the name of Sabio and Astrologio, that is, of Wise and
so an Astrologer for excelent Learning and peculiar skill in that Art as may
appear by the Astronomy Tables that at this day go under his Name, which are
the most perfect and exact that ever were set forth, by Judgment of the
Learned. This Man, for his evil government, and especially for Tyranny used
toward two Nephews of his, was deposed of his Kingdom by a public Act of
Parliament in the Town of Validolid, after he had Reigned 30 years; and his Son
Don Sancho the 4th was Crowned in his place, who for his valiant Acts was
Sirnam'd El Bravo, and it turned to the great commodity of the Commonwealth.

The same Country of Spain some years after, about the year of Christ 1368,
Garib. lib. 14. cap. 40, and 41.
having to their King one Don Pedro, Surnamed the Cruel, who for his injurious
Proceedings with his Subjects, they deposed, and sent for his Bastard Brother
out of France, and made him King. And tho Edward, Surnamed the Black Prince, by
order of his Father Edward the 3d of England, restored the said Peter again;
yet it was not durable, for that Henry having the favor of the Spaniards,
returned and deprived Peter the second time, and slew him in fight hand to
hand, who proved an excellent Prince, and for his great nobility in
Conversation, and prowess in Chivalry, was called El Cavalero, the Knightly
King, and for his exceeding benignity and liberality was Sirnam'd also El delas
Mercedes, i.e. the King who gave many Gifts, or the liberal, frank, and
bountiful King; which was a great alteration from King Peter the Cruel, his
Predecessor.

In Portugal also, before I go out of Spain, I will allege one Example more,
which is of Don Sancho the 2d, fourth King of Portugal, lawful Son to Don
Alenso Sirnam'd El Gardo, 3d King of Portugal. This Don Sancho (after he had
Reigned 34 years) was deprived for his defects in Government, by the universal
Consent of all Portugal; Garib. lib. 4. de hist. Port. cap. 19.
and this approved by a general Council in Lions; and Don Alonso, third Brother
to the said Don Sancho, succeeded; who enjoyed the Kingdom of Portugal
prosperously and peaceably all the days of his life, and he was a notable King;
who among other great Exploits set Portugal free from all subjection, Garib.
hist. Port. lib. 34. cap. 20.
dependence and homage to the Kingdom of Castile, which unto his time it had
acknowledged, and he left for his Successor his Son and Heir, Don Dionysio el
Fabricador, that is, the Great Builder, for he built and founded above 44 great
Towns in Portgual, and was a very excellent Prince.

In Polonia, Henry the 3d, who was King of France, tho before Sworn King of
Poland, Vide Gagnen. part. 1.
of which Crown he was deprived by public Act of Parliament, for departing
thence without License, and not returning at his day, by the State appointed
and denounced, by public Letters of peremptory Commandment. This was a clear
Abdication, and the said State proceeded against him much after the same
manner, as ours did against the late King James.

In Denmark, Cisternus their lawful King, if we respect his descent in Blood,
being Son to King John, who Reigned before him, and Crowned in his Fathers
life, was deposed for his intolerable Cruelty, and driven into Banishment,
together with his Wife and three Children, which were all disinherited and his
Uncle Frederick, Prince of Holsatia was chosen King; and Cisternus, tho he
married the Sister of Charles the 5th Emperor of Germany, and was Related also
to Henry the 8th of England; yet he could never prevail to be restored, but
past his time miserably, partly in Banishment, and partly in Prison, till he
died.

Now I think it convenient to end this short Narration with an Example or two
out of England being I have not read of more remarkable Accidents concerning
this Point, than in the History of this Kingdom: But for brevities sake, I
shall content my self with three or four Examples which happened since the
Conquest, tho I may well look higher, as appears by the deprivation of King
Edwin and others.

Now I might instance King John, who the States had deprived, first at
Canterbury and after at London, in the 18th year of his Reign; but being he was
in actual War with the Barons, and had a considerable Party to espouse his
Quarrel, and not being deprived by Parliament I shall therefore pass it by, not
accounting it so complete a Deposition, as that of Edward the Seconds was,
Polydor. lib. 18.
it being done by Act of Parliament assembled in London in the year 1326, and
his Body adjudg'd to perpetual Imprisonment, he being Prisoner at that time in
the Castle of Wallingford, Stow in the Life of Edw. the 2d.
whether diverse (both Bishops, Lords and Commoners) were sent to him, to
denounce the Sentence of the Realm against him, viz. how they had deprived him,
and chosen Edward his Son in his stead: For which act of chasing his Son he
thanked them heartily, and with many Tears acknowledged his own unworthiness.
Whereupon he was degraded; his name of King first taken from him, and he
appointed to be called Edward of Carnarvan; and then his Crown and Ring were
taken away, and the Steward of his House brake the Staff of his Office in his
presence, and discharged his Servants of their Services, and all other People
were discharged of their Obedience and Allegiance to him; and toward his
Maintenance he had only 100 Marks a year allowed for his Expenses, and then he
was delivered into the hands of particular Keepers, who led him Prisoner from
thence to many other places, using him with extreme Indignity in the way, until
at last they took away his Life in Berkley Castle, and his Son Edward the 2d
Reigned in his stead; who (if we respect either Valor, Prowess, length of
Reign, acts of Chivalry, or the multitude of Famous Princes his Children left
behind him) was one of the noblest Kings that ever England had.

After him succeeded Richard the 2d, Son and Heir to the renowned Black Prince
of Wales; who forgetting the miserable end of his Great Grandfather for evil
Government, and the felicity of his Grandfather for the contrary, suffered
himself to be abused and misled by evil Counselors, to the great prejudice and
disquiet of the Realm: For which cause (after he had Reigned 22 years) he was
also deposed by Act of Parliament held at London 1399, and condemned to
perpetual Imprisonment in the Castle of Pomfret, where he was soon after put do
death, as the other before had been; in whose place (by free Election) was
chosen the Noble Henry Duke of Lancaster, who proved a notable King, and was
Father to Henry the 5th, commonly called the Alexander of England; for as
Alexander the Great conquered most part of Asia in the space of 9 or 10 years,
so did this Henry conquer France in less time.

I may also reckon in the number of Princes deprived for defect in Government
(tho otherwise of no ill life) Henry the 6th, who after 40 years Reign was
deposed and imprisoned by Edward the 4th of the House of York; and the same was
confirmed by the Commons, and especially by the People of London, and also by
public Act of Parliament; not only in respect of the Title which King Edward
pretended, but also by reason that King Henry suffered himself to be over ruled
by the Queen his Wife, and had broken the Articles of Agreement made by the
Parliament, between him and the Duke of York, and solemnly sworn on both sides;
in punishment whereof and of his other negligent and evil Government, Sentence
was given against him, and Edward the 4th elected in his place, who was an
excellent Prince.

But after this there sell another Accident much more notorious, which was,
That Richard Duke of Gloucester, this King Edward's Brother, did put to death
his two Nephews, and made himself King; and tho he acted very barbarously by
taking the Crown in this wicked manner, yet when his Nephews were once dead, he
might reasonably seem to be lawful King, both in respect that he was next Male
after his Brother; as also, because his Title was authorized and made good by
many Acts of Parliament, both before and after the deaths of those Infants; and
yet (I think) no man will say but that Henry of Richmond had very good reason
to come out of France, being Called and Invited by the People of England to
revenge the Cruelties and Arbitrary things done by Richard the 3d; and that
this undertaking was no less successful than generous, and obtained the Crown
for his pains, after that Richard had died in the Field, and became King by the
name of Henry the 7th; and no man (I suppose) will deny him to have been a true
and lawful King. And moreover, as I said before, I would have you consider in
all these mutations, what Kings always succeeded in the places of such as have
been deposed, as namely in England, in the place of those Five Kings
beforementioned viz. John, Edward the 2d, Richard the 2d, Henry the 6th, and
Richard the 3d, there have succeeded three Henry's, the 3d, 4th, and 7th, and 2
Edwards, the 3d and 4th some of them most rare and valiant Princes who have
done many important Acts in their Commonwealth; and among others have raised
many Houses to the Nobility, put down others, changed States both abroad and at
home, distributed Ecclesiastical Dignities, altered the course of Descent in
the Royal Blood, and the like; all which was unjust, and is void at this day,
if the Changes and Deprivations of the former Princes were not lawful; and
consequently King James the 6th of Scotland, nor any of his Descendents, had
Title to this Crown, because they descend from those Kings who were elected in
place of the deprived. And this I take to be a sufficient proof, That lawful
Kings have many times been lawfully deposed by the States of the Kingdom, for
Misgovernment.

Now I suppose it will be readily granted, That this ample Authority has been
actually exercised by the aforesaid Commonwealths against their evil Princes:
but yet many perhaps will ask Quo jure, by what Law or Right? I answer, By all
Laws both Divine and Human: Divine, by that Form of Government which every
Kingdom does choose unto it self, as also the Conditions, Statutes and
Limitations which it shall appoint to their Princes, as largely before has
been declared: And by Human Law also; being all Law, both Natural, National and
Positive declares, That Princes are obliged to govern by Law and Order: For if
they should be bound to no Rules of Justice, but must be obeyed, be their
Commands never so illegal and wicked then is the end of all Royal Government
and Authority utterly defeated and useless; then may we submit to all the
Injustice and Arbitrary Commands that can be given to public Murderers,
Ravishers, Thieves and Spoilers, to devour us; for such indeed are they who
follow no Law, but Passion and Sensuality, committing Injustice by their
public Authority.

And finally, (which is the chiefest Reason of all and the very ground and
foundation of all Kingly Authority among Christians) the Power and Authority
which the Prince has from the Commonwealth is not absolute, but a Power
delegate, or Power of Trust delegated by Commission from the People, which is
given with such Restrictions, Limitations and Conditions, even with such plain
Promises and Oaths of both parties, (I mean between the King and People at the
day of Admission or Coronation) as if the same be not kept, but wilfully broken
on either part, then is the other not bound to observe his Promise, though never
so solemnly made or sworn; for that in all Bargains, Agreements and Contracts,
where each part is mutually and reciprocally bound to the other, by Oath, Vow
or Condition, there if one party break his Promise, the other is not obliged to
perform. And this is so evident by all Law, both of Nature and Nations, and so
conformable to all Reason and Equity, that it is inserted among the very Rules
of both the Civil and Law of Nations, where it is said, Frustra fidem sibi quis
postulat servari ab co, cui fidem a se praestitam servare recusat; He does in
vain require a Promise to be kept to him by another, to whom he refuses to
perform that which himself promised. And again, Non astringitur quis Jaramento
adimplendum, quod juravit, si ab alia part non impletur, cujus respectu
praebuit Juramentum; A man is not bound to perform that which by Oath he
promised, if on the other part that be not performed, in respect whereof his
Oath was made. As for Example, if two should swear to assist each other upon
the way in all respects, and after falling upon Enemies who were Relations of
Friends to one of them, and he should take their part against his Companion,
its clear that the other was not bound to keep his Oath to that Man, that had
so wickedly broken his to him: Nay, not only in this case, that is so evident
by Nature it self, but in many others also, it is both lawful, honest and
convenient, to leave sometimes the performance of our Oath, when by fulfilling
it, there would accrue any notable Inconveniences against Religion, Piety,
Justice, Honesty, or the weal-publick, or against the party himself to whom it
was made. As if one had sworn to restore a Sword to a mad or furious Man,
wherewith it were likely he would destroy himself or others; and such like
cases, which Cicero sets down in his first Book of Offices, and deduces them
from the very ground of Nature, and Reason it self, and says, that it were
against the duty of a good or honest Man, it such cases to perform his Promise.
Our Divines also do allege the Example of Herod, who had sworn to the Daughter
of Herodias, to give her what she demanded, who demanded the Head of S. John
Baptist, tho Herod was sorry for it; yet says the Text, For his Oaths sake he
commanded it to be performed; which yet no man will deny, but that it had been
far better left unperformed, according to the Rule of Law, In malis promissis
fidem non expedit-observare, It is not expedient to keep our Oath when
unlawfully made. And in the second Part of the Decretal there is alleged this
Sentence out of Isidorus, and established for Law, In malis promissis rescinde
fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum, impia enim promissio quae scelere impletur;
In evil Promises perform not your word, in an unlawful Vow or Oath change your
determination; for its an impious Promise that cannot be fulfilled, but with
Wickedness. So as nothing is more largely handled both in the Civil and Canon
Law, than this matter of Promises, how and when, and in what case they hold or
bind, and when not.

All which to apply to our matter of Kings; We are to understand that two
evident Cases are touched here, when a Subjects Oath or Promise of Obedience
may be left unperform'd to his Prince: The first, when the Prince observes not
the Promise or Oath made to the Commonwealth at his Admission or Coronation;
the second, when it should turn to the great damage of the Weal public, (for
whose sake only good Princes were ordained as often before has been said and
proved) if the Subject should keep his Promise and Oath made unto him. For if
in my Opinion he is an Enemy to the Truth, and that his Religion obliges him in
Conscience to destroy and extirpate all that are not of it, shall act against
my Conscience and sin damnably in the sight of God, if I do not endeavor to
render him incapable of destroying others that are not of his own erroneous
Opinion, and of bringing their to perdition, wherein I am persuaded he remains.
This Doctrine is founded upon the discourse of S. Paul to the Romans and
Corinthians, against such Christians as were invited to the Banquets and Tables
of Gentiles, (...) 14. Cor. 10.14.
and finding Meats offered to Idols (which they esteemed unlawful to eat) did
yet eat the same against their own Judgment and Conscience, which the Apostle
says was a damnable Sin; not because the thing it self was evil or unlawful,
but because they judged it so and yet did it.

And now to apply all this to our present purpose, affirm and hold, That for
any man to give his help, consent or assistance to the making or upholding of a
King whom he believes to be of a wrong Religion, and obliged to root out and
extirpate those he thinks Heretics, and who consequently will endeavor all he
can to promote it and ruin ours, our Liberties, Property; and what else is
valuable to us, is a most grievous and damnable Sin For if S. Paul has plainly
and absolutely pronounced in the place before alleged, that even in eating a
piece of Meat that its damnable for a man to discern and yet eat: What may we
think will it be in so great and important: matter as he making of King if, for
a man to dissemble or act against his own Conscience or Judgment? that is to
say, to discern and judge that he is a declared Enemy of our Religion, and
obliged t destroy the Professors o^ it; and yet to further or uphold his
Authority and Government over Protestants, where he may be able to ruin or
pervert many, and to obstruct all Honor and true Worship due to God? and
whether he does this or not yet I shall be guilty of it all; for that knowing
and persuading my self, that he is like or disposed to do it by the Principles
of his Religion, yet for fear, slattery, carelessness, emulation against others,
vain pretense of Title, want o^ Zeal to Gods true Religion and Worship, or for
such other passions or temporal respects, I favor or further his Pretenses, or
do not resist him when it is in my power, by which I do justly make my self
guilty of all the Evils, Miseries and Calamities both Temporal and Spiritual,
which afterward by his evil Government do, or may ensure, for that I knowing
him to be such an one, did notwithstanding assist his promotion. And thus much
for matter of Conscience.

But if we respect Reason of State also and Worldly Policy, it must be great
folly and oversight for a man to promote to a Kingdom; in which he must live,
one of so pernicious and destructive Religion to himself; for let the Bargains
and Agreements be what they will, and fair Promises and vain Hopes never so
great, yet seeing the Prince once made and settled, must needs proceed according
to the Principles of that Religion, and consequently must soon break with the
other Party, tho before he loved him never so well, (which perhaps is very
hard, if not impossible, for two of so opposite Religions to love sincerely;)
but if it were so, many suspicions, accusations, calumniations and other
aversions must needs light on the Party, who is of so opposite and different
Religion from his King, as not only he cannot be capable of such preferments
and honors which he may desire and deserve in his Country, but also he shall
be in continual danger, and subject to a thousand Molestations and Injuries,
always incident to those men who are not current with the course of their
Prince in matters of Religion: Which to remedy, they must either dissemble
deeply, and against their own Conscience pretend to favor and forward the
Designs of the Government, how pernicious soever they may be to the welfare of
the Kingdom; or else to avoid this slavish dissimulation, they must wave all
the temporal Commodities of this life, and leave the benefits which their
Country might afford them, and live Exiles in a foreign Kingdom; which has been
the fate of many brave Men in our time: So as of all the disabilities which
serve to exclude or remove a Prince, the adhering to so destructive and
pernicious a Religion as Popery is, is the principle, and ought to be the first
and chiefest thing considered by the Commonwealth; especially he being of that
Religion which denies all charity, peace, happiness, or security of Life or
Property to such as are not of its Communion; whose growth and increase the
State has (...) (...) ^^^nicious a Doctrine, which notwithstanding (...)
useless and ineffectual for our security, when (...) James, a protest Papist,
was admitted to (...), who with one breath suspended and annulled (...) the
Laws of the Reformation. And tho we have been ^uilty of great oversight and
failure, and been wanting to the security and support of the true Protestant
Religion, when he was but Heir apparent, and (as I said before) a Spouse
betrothed only, and not married to the Commonwealth; yet (to pursue the
Allegory) we have made as good reparation, as such an oversight could permit,
by divorcing him, and taking a new Husband of our Persuasion.

Now S. Paul to the Corinthians determines plainly, That if two Gentiles married
together in their Gentility (which none can deny to be a true Marriage for so
much as concerns the Civil Contract) and after one is made a Christian, the
other will not live with him or her; or if he do, nor without blaspheming God
and temptation to Sin: In this case (I say) the Apostle teaches and out of him
the Canon Law decrees, that this is sufficient to break and dissolve utterly
this Heathen Marriage, and that the Christian may marry again, and this only
for want of Religion in the other party, which being so in an actual Marriage,
which is so much favored by Christ, when he said, Whom God has joined, let no
man separate; it is much cleaver in this Metaphorical Marriage of a King to the
Commonwealth, which may be dissolved for many more Reasons, and with infinite
less danger of incurring Gods Anger than the former: So that I hope all
ingenuous Readers who peruse this Treatise, and thoroughly weigh and consider
the Examples and Arguments herein mentioned, will think themselves free from
all obligations of Duty or Allegiance to the late King James, being his
Authority is expired, to which Allegiance, was inseparably incident, and seated
in the Royal Persons of Willian and Mary our most renowned King and Queen, whom
we are bound to obey without the least scruple.

FINIS.

