A brief COMPENDIUM OF THE Birth, Education, Heroic Exploits and Victories OF
THE Truly Valorous and Renowned Gentleman, THOMAS EARL of OSSORY Eldest Son to
His GRACE THE Duke of Ormond Who died in the preparation of his Voiag to the
Relief of TANGIERS, on the 30th of July 1680. so much to be lamented by all,
for his great Worth and Loyalty to his Prince and Country, with several other
Observations
THomas Lord Ossory Eldest Son to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, born during the
late intestine Wars, in the midst of Tumults, Armies, and seirce Battails, when
the raging Foe harassed with disolution ruinous this British Empire, the which
to doubt indewed him with a Soul contemning dangers, and despising, sears
Loyalty devoted to the service of his Prince and Country, so samed in Arms, and
Courage great, that Mars himself could not march on with a more undanted
Resolutition, E're have charged his Foe, a Warlike Spirit naturally citing him
to enterprises, haazrdous exen in his tender years before he ere knew Stern
Marses Power, or at the least had ere experienced it by Sea or Land, so
restless was this renowned Hero now famed throughout the world for brave
Archievements, that he continually exclaimed, against inglorious ease, and like
young Casar, smiled at clashing Arms, and took delight to hear the Warlike
Trumpets sound: these were his insant Practices, but when to manly stature
grown, each moment scamed an Age, till he found an opportunity to try his
Force, and curb his proud insulting F^e, which then began to brave at on
British Seas, and by usurpation to hinder and ingross our Traffic abroad in
Foreign parts I mean the haughty Dutch, who had not long beiore for the like
insolences felt our scourge, yet bold in their presumption* proceeded on to
brave the English Arms and put affronts on the Commander of the Seas, for which
they could expect no Iess then War; which by the Royal Power was thought sit to
be denounced, in which our sar renowned Hero, was no ways wanting to put
forward his Heroic order, but in the well riged Fleet, which ploughed in
Triumph the Surface of the Auzi or deep, whilse the North-Winds, were out of
Breath, in filling the wide swelling fails and streamers like Comeres reflected
the Sunbeams back into the Clouds) he set out his Royal Highness, then being
Admiral, long they had not sailed ere Fortune was so favorable as with a
forewind to bring them in sight of the Enemy, which much rejoiced the Noble
Earl as well hoping now he should Face Battle in its dreadfullest shape, and
try the temper of his Warlike Soul, still thrusting ofter Glory, noe fearing
what the danger was, so for his King and Country undertaken imitating in that
his Noble Ancestors, who long have been sustainers of the British Monarchy, and
for their eminent Loyalty, deserved to be remembered to after Ages, etc.

The Wind being favorable at South-West, the English tacked about, and
Courageously bore down upon the Enemy; the Earl being in a Circle or half point
of the Spuadron, in a first rate Vessel: after the signal was given to engage,
in the height of Englesh Gallantry, and to his immortal Fame, he turned
destruction on the shrinking Foe, and with Terrestrial Thunder loud charged
through and through their broaken Fleet; whilst nothing but Ruins, Death and
flaming Bulks surrounded him, against which he let Volleys that sent them
smoking into the Murmering deep, which bubled up the long confused Noise: nor
was he slack to succor and relieve all parts, that were any ways destressed,
hazarding himself to all the Advantages the Enemy could wish, to whom at last
he proved so Terrible, that being known they dreaded him like Death, and from
his Engine Belching sire, and Iron Globes on either hand withdrew, not daring
for to stand the fatal stroke, for the meanest Sailor Animated by his Lordships
Example laughed at Death, and then contemned his utmost Rage; being more feirce
and daring in the month of slaughter, not declining till the Dutch infinitely
worsted, broken on all sides, Burnt and disordered hoisted up their Sails, and
fled all that were able to make Sail, but such as were disabled in the Fight
they left behind.

Not dareing longer to defend them they thus beaten and routed: the Heroic
Earl as the true Insignia of true Nobleness, Modestly, excused the well
deserved Praises that were heaped upon him: the which mildness begot more
Applause, nor was same her self neglectful to Trumpet forth Vallorous
Exploites, and into the utmost Corner of this British Isle and farther: so
prospered his Youthful undertakings that Fortune durst not frown upon his
blooming greatness, but was obleiged to comply.

He having thus experienced War, grew still more eager for his Princes and
Countries sake to prosecute the same: And like to Caesar looking on great
Alexanders Statue, Cried I have done nothing yet that's worthy of my Birth: so
mild was the great Warrior dread in Arms, and and free from that Vainglory
that success does raise: In the Ignoble Breast, that he hated slatery not
suffering his Praises to be repeated in his presence, the which denoted him to
be Worthy of so Renowned and Virtuous a Father, to which his Filial Obedience
and Love had made him Dear.

Not long after in a second Engagement, as disdaining sloth, he resolving for
to try the utmost Force of War, or so to quell the daring Foe, that they should
presume no more to Lord it on the Briny Seas, he slood much like a Bulwork, and
himself ^esisted Derutters Force, and with Fire and Smoke that darkeneed the
(...) of day, drove his whole Squadron back; whilst himself upon the Deck (...)
glittering Sword, whilst Shot like Hail sung round his Head, and (...) each
hand barrocaded up his way. There by him such wonders were (...) admired his
noble Resolutich, so that it was greatly thought (...) day to us through his
brave resistance and courageous Animating the (...) on to force Enemies
out-str^rched line, and with Vollies leand, and (...) make them scatter over
the wide Oceae, glad to escape under the sheltring Coverture of sable night,
but notwithour great hazard and loss, fifteen of their Ships being fired sunk
and taken, and about five thousand of their ablest Seamen slain and made
Prisoners, so Fortune and Victory conspired to raise the noble Warrior to the
pitch of greathess and Renown, that wherel^ere he fought they still were
emelous for his preservation, and s^rove to confer their favors upon him,
wreathing his Warlike Brow with Laurel or triumphant Bays. After the heat of
these Wars were passified, by the submissions of the Conquered Fo^s; and Peace
was mutually concluded his Honor. Returning from on B^ard his hearing Castle
in which he had taken so much Delight, for some time resided at Court with a
universal applause; but could not content himself with the glittering Pleasures
and Delights that are still attendants there; his Soul was Still intent on
Arms, and desire of military Discipline; no Music sounded more pleasant in his
Ear than to hear Heroic Actions told; for like thy Carthagenian Prince, he was
in all parts formed for brave Designs, and from his Infancy promised all the
noble Virtues that adorn mankind to make him most accomplished: But to the
purpose. long had not he rested before another War broke out more cruel than
the former our Navy joining with the power of France against the yet testy
Dutch; which both by land and Sea he behaved himself with the like bravery of
Spirit and Gallantry as in the former to the purchasing immortal Fame, but here
behold a sudden alteration changed the Face of grand Affairs, for the
persidious French breaking Articles of League Offensive and defensive, they had
made with us upon the second submission of the Dutch, his Majesty in pity to
their distress, the French having besieged as it were in most of their
Provinces and taken several of their chief Towns, granted many English, Scotch,
and Irish Forces to bear Arms there under his own Commission, whereupon many of
our Nobility was pleased to favor them with thoir Heroic Conducts against
that Sword which before like a Disease did Rage, of which his Lordship being
one, who commanded a Regiment of well Disciplined Soldiers, with whom he so
bravely behaved himself in all his Conducts as gained him an esteem most
honorable, so courteous and benign kind, that he won each heart, the darling
Delight of his Friends, and terror of his Foes, who dreaded him even to death,
as knowing where his Arms engaged, he stood not dallying, but like a Whirlwind
roaled Destruction round him, crying press on to Victory. So gallantly did he
behave himself in the succor and Relief of several destressed Towns and Cities
that the French Armies then were firing, And when great Luxemburgh besieged the
famous Town of Mons the pride of all the Netherlands, the Dutch and Spanish
Armies under the Command of his Highness the Prince of Orange, not daring to
venture the attempt of its Relief till animated by his Lordship and several
others of the noble English Commanders, who Charging the main Battalions of the
French routed them on every side, mowing as it were with a Whirlwind swiftness
so that they made way no longer daring to resist, his Lordship at the head of
his Regiment undanted standing, received the first Charge of the enemies Right
Wing, and with such Courage repelled their Force, that the Horse were
disordered, and immediately gave ground he pursuing them till they sinding no
place to retire, broke into the Ranks of the Walloons, and so put them into
Confusion, nor did he desist, though the Shot slew thick on every side, and
dreadful Mars raged throughout the Field, and the slain on every hand beshrewed
the place, whilst Victory turning her blood-shot eyes upon the dreadful Battle,
great and perilous, and clapped her joyful Wings, whilst the pursuing English
through the bloody Field drove the Fugitives, sole Victory remaining on their
side Uere the Heroic Ossory won such praise, as will immortalize his Fame,
till time shall be no more. War here ceasing and mild Peace ensuing, his
Lordship lest those Foreign Climes, and laying down his dreadful Arms so
feared and so renowned in Europe, he returned to honor this thrice happy Isle;
where, and with his Father of ever worthy remembrance, now Lord Lieutenant of
the Kingdom of Ireland, there not being any business of Wa to employ his Honor
in, till of late, the barbarous Moors invading that Famous Garrison of
Tangiers, which advances the English Ensigns into the main Land of Afric, and
in spite of those innumerable Foes has desended so long our Honors, and
Commanding far into the Ocean, and on Land curbed their insolences, till of
late having increased in Force and Policies, they had made great advances on
the Forts and Outworks, but having the preparations, that were made from
England, and the terror of great Ossories renowned Name, he being to Command
the Warlike Forces, the Alcade, Captain General of the Moors Horse and Foot
sent to offer Peace, but his Lordship having all things on Board in Order to
his Voyage, on an unhappy day fell sick of a Feavour, and after eight or nine
days Languishing died, which was on the 30th of July last, to the great Grief
of all true loyal English Men, who cannot but be sensible of the fall of such a
Pillar, whose Arm has wrought such wonders for his Country, and his Heroic
Virtues promising greater, had not Death bereaved us of him in the prime of all
his Blooming Glories.

FINIS.

