A BRIEF Historical Account Of several of the most remarkable Years of ^ar,
Drought, Famine, and Pestilence IN ENGLAND, And the time when they happened.

^^gether, with an Additional discourse of God's Judg^ents, and the procuring
cause of them. As also of the Prediction of the late excellent Mathematician
and ^odest Astrologer Mr. Vincent Wing, as to this present Year 1699.

By a Gent.

^ute justitiam moniti non temnere Dives.

Virg. Aen. 6. -- ubi non est pudor,
(...) cura juris, Sanctitas, Pietas, Fides
^bile Regnum est --
(...) is to many men much dearer than their Faith and ^esty, Clemens
Alexandrinus. (...) long shall the Land mourn, and the herbs of every ^er, for
the iniquity of them that dwell therein? (...) are consumed, etc.

Jer. 12.4. Printed for John Wells in London-(...)-yard, near St. Paul's, 1699.

EXcellent is that Discourse of Monsieur Charron in his Tract of Wisdom. That
the greatest part of Mankind has always been led to serve God by fear of
Vengeance which he Inflicts on the Contemners of his Majesty, his Justice
strikes Men with dread, when they survey the Strokes and Examples of it on
Mankind, as by Pestilence, War, Famine, Tempests, and Inundations, by
Lightnings discharged from Heaven and other like demonstrations of his
Vengeance. It is (says he) a terrible Thing to fall into the hands of God, who
though he is very merciful, yet is terrible in Execution of his Vengeance upon
those who Contemn him: And he further tells us, that all the World would be
extinguished and would perish and be lost, if it were not changed and renewed
by those great accidents before mentioned, which season perfect and purify it,
giving Liberty and ease to the whole.

And accordingly it is the Judgment and Opinion of that learned and judicious
French Protestant Divine Amiraldus, in his Treatise of Religions, who says,
that when Men are grown to a great height of Wickedness and will not be
reformed, God then strikes Men with dread, that when they survey the Strokes
and Example of his displeasure upon Mankind by Pestilences Wars, Famines,
Tempests, and Inundations and by Lightnings discharged from Heaven and other
demonstrations of his Vengeance: From that (says he) the greatest part of
Mankind has always been led to serve God, even by fear of his Vengeance which
he inflicts on the Contemners of his Majesty.

With which also agrees the Judgment and Opinion of that eminent Divine Dr.
Will. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's and Master of the Temple, in a printed
Sermon of his, who therein tells us, that when Mankind is grown incurably and
universally Wicked, it does not become God to permit and suffer the Earth to be
an eternal nursery of Atheists and Rebels against the Majesty of Heaven.

Now as all Sins provoke God to send down his Judgments upon a Nation and
People, but especially Pride, fullness of Bread, (i. e.) Luxury, and Idleness,
the Sins of Sodom; as also Dr. Tillotson when Dean of Canterbury has informed
us, that great Sin next to Idolatry, viz. Perjury, is one of the greatest
affronts that can be to the Divine Majesty, for this is one of the Sins that
cry aloud to Heaven, and quicken the pace of Gods Judgments. This Sin by the
secret Judgment of God undermines Estates, and Families, to the utter Ruin of
them: And among the Heathens it was always reck'ned one of the greatest Crimes,
and which they did believe God did not only punish upon the guilty Person
himself, but upon the Family and Posterity, and many times upon whole Nations,
(as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 23.10. for because of swearing the Land mourns. It
is (says he further) certainly a Sin of the highest Nature, deliberate
Perjury, being directly against a Man's knowledge, so that no Man can commit it,
without staring his Conscience in the Face, which is one of the greatest
aggravations of a Crime, and it is a Sin equally against both Tables, and being
the highest affront to God, and of most injurious consequence to Men, a wrong
not only to this or that Man particularly that suffers by it, but also is
Treason against humane Society, subverting at once the foundation of public
Peace and Justice, and the private security of every Man's Life and Fortune. So
when ever Religion fails and Oaths are nothing set by, human Society must
disband, and all things run into disorder, which (says he) made David cry out
Ps. 12. Help Lord, for the godly Man cease, etc. Intimating, that when faith,
that is fidelity, fails from among Men, nothing then but an immediate
Interposition of Heaven can preserve the World from falling into confusion and
ruin.

This state of things, when Faith and Truth shall hardly be found among Men (as
is mentioned, Luke 18.8. When the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith, that
is, Fidelity on the Earth,) does loudly call for Christ's coming to destroy the
World, which is even ready to dissolve and fall in pieces of it self, when
these bands and Pillars of Human Society do break and fail. And surely (says
he) never in any Age was this sign of the coming of the Son of Man more glaring
and terrible, than in this degenerate Age wherein we live, when almost all
sorts of Men seem to have broke loose from all ^ligations to Faith and Truth.

And further to evince the truth of our Guilt of this crying Sin; let us see
what was that ^genious, free, and open acknowledgment in Print of our London
Divines, in their public Declaration Anno 1660. wherein they complain of the
odious scandal of those that then profes^d themselves the People of God,
particularly ^^eir self seeking under the pretense of public ^ood, and their
unparalleled breach of all civil (...) sacred Oaths and Covenants both to God
of Man.

As also our Guilt herein appears, by what (...) Divine Dr. Richard Sherlock of
Lanca^^^r, incerts in his excellent Tract, called ^^e Practical Christian,
Printed Anno 1677. ^^erein he thought fit to give us in this Nation (...) pious
and devout Confession of Sin, viz. I (...) seen the Reverend Name and Oath of
^^d imposed on the Consciences of Men out (...) Tyranny and Covert of
Oppression and Inju^^^^, and I also partly for fear, and partly for ^^ur and
affection to unjust Designs, have ^^^^edly taken the same Oaths and
Engage^^^ts; and though because of such Oaths the (...) sadly mourns, yet have
I not been hum^^^^ for the Sins and Perjuries of this sinful Na^^^^ Besides
also, that Reverend Divine Dr. Pa^^^^ (when Dean of Peterborough) in his pious
(...) excellent Tract of Repentance and Fasting, ^^^^ced Anno 1686. there
exhorts us in this Na^^^e to beseech God to deliver us from all blindness of
heart -- so most especially, from all Sedition and privy Conspiracy and
Rebellion, from all false Doctrine, Heresy, and Schism, from hardness of heart
and contempt of God's Word and Commandments; which (says he) was never more
necessary than in these days. And he there further says, that it is a sad
melancholy sight to behold the Spirit of Blindness and Giddiness, of Faction
and Rebellion, that has seized on a great part of the Nation; our senseless
Contentions and Oppositions, the wide Breaches and Divisions, for which we can
see no healing. And (says he) it may justly challenge (if there were nothing
else to trouble us) great thoughts and searchings of heart, more especially if
we consider, not only how insensible most People are of all such matters (which
in bodily Distempers is accounted the worst symptom in the whole World?) For
how few have been amended by the public Judgments, which have either threatened
us, or fallen upon us, (for which stubborn Impiety and impudent Wickedness
(which every where has too much abounded among us) every good Man ought to be
very much afflicted, and not only content himself with this, that he does not
follow them in their ungodly Practices; but to bewail also as many as have
sinned, and have not repented (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 12. last) of the
uncleanness -- and other abominable Sins which they have committed.

For this is really (says he) the saddest spectacle of all others; to behold
such numbers a have not been at all touched with any remors^ for their own
Sins, nor any grief for public Calamities, nor any fear of future danger, but
have encouraged one another to think only, of eating and drinking, and rising
up to play, which all sober Men cannot but look upon, to be as unseemly a
sight, as if Men should go dance about their Parents or nearest Relations, when
they saw them a dying; and here by the by, may (...) not omit to inform you,
what a monstrous piece of Hypocrisy I once saw, viz. (a Gent. in a Scarlet
Cloak, as I esteemed him to be) set in the Stocks (...) the Old Jury, London,
for some immorality, by order of (...) Pennington then L. Mayor (as I remember)
who before (...) headed the Rabble, and presented a Petition to the Parliament
against Bishops, and afterward was one of the High Court of Justice for the
Trial of King Charles I.

Now, besides our former Guilt in our Hypocrisy, Rebellion, and abominable
Sacrilege, when ^e not only overturned the Government of the Church, and
alienated and sold the Church lands, altering the fundamental Constitution of
the Civil Government, and selling all the Crown lands, and after turning our
selves into a Com^onwealth, Dethroning and Murdering our lawful Prince (and he
one of the best Princes (...) the World, in his time) etc. How vastly have
(...) improved in our horrid guilt of Perjury, is ^o evident to be denied? Also
may we not (...) thought to be fallen into the Times that (...) Prophet Jer.
complains of? Chap. 9. ver. 4. (...) 5. Take ye heed every one of his
Neighbor, ^^ed trust ye not in any Brother, for every Brother (...) utterly
supplant, etc. And they will every one ^^ceive his Neighbor, and will not
speak the truth, (...). 8.9. Their Tongue is as an Arrow shot out, it speaks
deceit, one speaks peaceably to his Neighbor with his Mouth, but in heart he
lays his wait. All which being seriously considered; may it not be truly
said? was ever this Nation, or any other Nation in the World, so horridly
Wicked before? so that we may justly expect that God should expostulate with us
and say, (as once he did to the People of Israel, Jerm. 5.9.) before mentioned,
shall I not visit for these things? says the Lord? and shall not my Soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this. And what was this for? even because their
transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased, v. 6.

And may we not expect that dismal Doom, pronounced by God, by his Prophet
Isaiah. Chap. 6.9.10.11.12. And he said, Go tell this People, hear ye indeed,
but understand not, and see indeed, but perceive not, make the Heart of this
People Fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they see with
their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and
convert and be healed. Then said I, Lord how long? and he answered, until the
Citys be wasted without inhabitants, and the Houses without Man, and the Land
be utterly desolate, etc.

For we should wisely consider, that there are in this World, certain Periods
of Gods Patience, and Forbearance of Nations, and Kingdoms, in their
Wickedness: As the Scriptures inform us, when God Visits their Iniquities and
pours down Vengeance upon them, as upon the old World, Genesis 6.5. And God saw
that the Wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination
of the thought of his heart was Evil continually, -- v. 7. I will destroy Man
whom I have created, from the face of the Earth, whereupon God brought upon
them that great desolation of the universal Deluge.

And again Genesis 18.20. The Lord said because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
great; and because their Sin is very grievous. Therefore the Lord ^hought
speedily upon them desolation and destruction, and by fire from Heaven totally
destroyed them.

Further as to the Rebellion of Korah, and ^is Companions Genesis 16.32. And
whereupon God brought that amazing Desolation, and Ruin upon them (the Earth
opening her Mouth and swallowing them up, and all that belonged to them) they
went down alive into the Pit, and the Earth closed upon them and they perished
from among the Congregation.

Afterward great was the divine Vengeance poured down upon the Rebellion of the
ten Tribes, and their defection from their lawful Prince Rehoboam, and the
House of David, God severely plagued them by degrees. First by their ^oss of
the true Religion and Worship of God, ^gain by their wicked Kings and
Governors, ^aving not one good King ever after) and after Gods long Patience
during (it is said of about 250 Years) they were at last carried way Captive,
and were wholly extirpated from (...) the face of the Earth, none knowing to
this ^ay what became of them, so that they paid dear (...) the long forbearance
of the Divine Vengeance, in the Conclusion.

And how transcendently great and terrible, was the Divine Vengeance upon
Jerusalem, (greater than the World ever saw before,) within about 40 Years
after our blessed Savior had given them warning, saying Luke 17.26. And as it
was written in the Days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the son of
Man, v. 27. they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they were given in
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark: And the flood came and
destroyed them all: v. 28. Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot, they did
eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded, ver. 19.
But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from
heaven, and destroyed them all ver. 30. even thus shall it be in the day when
the son of Man is revealed, Luke 21.22. for these be the days of vengeance.
ver. 23.24. -- for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon
this people, and they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led
away captive into all nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the
Gentiles. etc.

And now may I present to our view, and serious consideration, some few of the
many, most Dreadful and Remarkable strokes of the Divine Vengeance, which have
in several Ages fallen upon our own Nation of England.

To begin with that Relation I meet with in an Author called Britanniae
speculum printed 1683 who tells us, that about Anno 438. In the 8th Year of
the Reign of King Vortigern, King of the Britains after the horrible
devastation, made among them by the Picts breaking in upon them, and of Famine,
yet after their pinching hunger was past, and their Enemies were retreated from
them, being partly repelled by force. That yet their Piety vanished, and Luxury
succeeded, accompanied with all sorts of vice which infected not only the
Layety, but the Clergy also, and that although God sent to reclaim them by his
Scourge the Pestilence, that raged so horribly among them, that the living were
scarce able to bury their dead, yet with this severity they were nothing at all
amended, Gods Patience being spent toward a People that grew worse by
Prosperity and Adversity, God so infatuated them that they called in a foreign
Nation worse and more cruel than the Picts, to their own Confusion and Ruin, in
Conclusion.

Also in the Reign of King Edward the II. King of England: Anno. 1307. In the
beginning of his Reign, who having a vast Army of 100000 Men and incountring
Robert Bruce the King of Scots, his army was totally overthrown at
Ban^ocksburrow, by a small contemptible Army of Scots, by stratagem, the
consequent thereof was, the Englishmen became so faint hearted and so
contemptible, that three Scots durst venture upon a 100 Englishmen, when 100
Englishmen durst scarce encounter with three Scots, (a grievous and sore
Calamity indeed) and that the Scots possessed all the north Part of the Kingdom
as ^ar as York.

And in the 18th of the said King Edward the I. King of England 7 years after
the Battle of Bannocksburrow Anno 1314. there was so great a Famine, that
Horses and Dogs were eaten, and Thieves in Prison plucked in pieces, those
which were newly brought in among them, and eat them half alive, which Famine
continuing three Years, brought in the end such a Pestilence, that the living
scarce sufficed to bury the dead.

And in the Reign of King Richard the I. King of England, who began his Reign
Anno 1189. There was such a drought for three or four Years together, which
caused so great a scarcity, upon which followed so great a Mortality, that
scarcely the living sufficed to bury the dead.

And in the reign of King Henry the 3d King of England Anno 1232, there
appearing three Suns at once, there presently followed so great a Famine that
people were constrained to eat horses Flesh, and the bark of Trees, and that
then there died twenty thousand people in London starved for want of food.

In the 22 Year of King Edward the third Anno 1348. A contagious Pestilence
there was in the East and South parts of the World, and spread it self over all
Christendom, and at last coming into England, continuing many Years, it so
wasted the People, that scarce the tenth person of all sorts was left alive.

In the third Year of King Richard the second King of England Anno 1379. There
was so great a Mortality which afflicted the north Parts of England that the
Country became almost desolate.

In the sevententh Year of the Reign of King Edward IV. King of England 1476.
so great a Pestilence Reigned in England that it swept away more People in four
Months time, than the Wars had done in fifteen Years then past. And two Years
after the same Anno 1478. In his 19 Year there was another Pestilence, which
beginning at the latter end of Sept. continued to the beginning of November
come twelve Month after, in which Time innumerable People died.

In the 19th Year of King Henry the 8 King of England Anno 1527. by Reason of
Extremity of Rain in seed Time there followed a great famine, Dearth, and
Scarcity of Corn, which would have caused a great Calamity, but it was
prevented by the Merchants of the still-yard bringing it out of Germany, and a
thousand Quarters being issued out of the Kings own Provision.

And in his three and thirtieth Year Anno 1541. there was so great a Mortality
by Reason of hot Agues, and Fluxes, and withal so great a Drought, that small
Rivers were Clean dried up, and much Cattle dyed for lack of Water.

And in the fifth Year of the Reign of Queen Mary, Queen of England Anno 1559.
In harvest Time, there was so great a Mortality, especially of Priests, so as
many Churches were unserved, and much Corn was lost for want of Workmen to get
it in, whereupon ensued a great Famine.

And in the thirty fifth Year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth Queen of England
Anno 1592. There was so great a Drought, that not only the Fields, but the
springs themselves were dry ed up, and many Cattle every where dyed for want of
Water, so that the River Thames did so fail, that a Horseman might ride over
the faid River at London Bridge. And the Year following Anno 1593. There
followed a great Plague in London, so as there dyed that Year in London and the
Suburbs, seventeen thousand Eight hundred and ninety, besides the Lord Mayor
and three Aldermen.

To draw toward a Conclusion, Capt. John Grant, in his Natural, and
Political, observations made upon the bills of Mortality. Printed 1676. Informs
us, that there has been within our Age, four Times of great Mortality, viz.
1592. 1593. 1603. 1625. unto which may now be added that of 1669. and that the
plague of 1636 lasted 12 Years, in 8 whereof there dyed 20000. per An. one with
another, and never under 300.

Now from the serious Consideration of the premises, may we not rationally
conclude what Calamities from the strokes of divine Vengeance we in this Nation
are liable to, when ever Gods Patience, and Forbearance, is tired and worn out,
and come to an end, by means of our provoking Sins, and Iniquitys, and that it
is highly rational not to be secure or put far from us the evilday, but
seriously consider that great Guilt, which it is much to be feared, lies upon
this Nation at this Day, for if it shall be found that although we have enjoyed
the best reformed Christianity in the World, yet at last that it should appear
we have been the worst of Christians, what can we expect?

Does not the innocent Blood of our Martyred Sovereign King Charles the First.
of blessed Memory now cry afresh to Heaven against us, when there are so many
among us, who now again Murder him in his Reputation, and Ho^our, (now as one
says, Innocence is the near^^t resemblance of God, therefore to injure
In^^cence is to in jure God himself, and this doubtess if it be in the Person
of a Prince whether Old or Young is a provoking Sin) and here to give you a
short historical account of things, in our times of Rebellion.

Did not we in this Nation after a cruel civil War and Rebellion, against our
Lawful Sovereign at last trying and condemning him and murdering him at his
own palace Gate, and after our seeming Repentance (which lies upon Record
against us) have we not returned greedily with the Dog to his Vomit again, etc.
yea justifying and applauding those cursed Doctrins and Principles, that were
made use of by Bradshaw and the rest of the Regicides to cut off the Head of
that Pious Prince. And certainly till we can find out such an other piece of
horrid Villainy to match it in all the most barbarous Nations of the World at
this Day. It will be a difficult business to wipe of the Imputation that we are
the worst Christians that ever were produced in the World before. And then what
a Terrible amazing Judgment may we not justly expect ere it belong which the
longer it is a coming is like to fall the heavier upon us, even such as will
Startle and Amaze the bold and confident Atheists and Deists of our Times. The
Sinners in Zion then will be afraid, fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites
as the Prophet Isaiah speaks Chap. 33.14. who among us shall dwell with the
devouring Fire and who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? and
considering (as our Divines inform us) that Kingdoms and Nations as such are
not capable of being punished in the other World, therefore must be punished in
this; as als^ what a late eminent Mathematician and modest Astrolog^^ Mr.
Vincent Wing in his Almanac for the Year 1669 ha^^ told us, viz. that about
the Year 1692 or a little before 1700 many expect great Alterations and Changes
in this World, if not the dissolution of this earthly Fabric. The Lord fit us
to embrace his Mercy and patiently to wait for his second coming Amen. And the
same Mr. Wing predicted the Restoration of King Charles the ll. (as I have
been credibly informed being his Neighbor in the Country of Rutland, after the
Restoration.) And also in his Almanac for the Year 1672 he thus far predicted
the Rise of the King of France to his grandeur, in these Words, viz. if there
be any Verity in Astrology some great Person will very shortly appear upon the
public Stage with more then ordinary luster, and further intimates that Paris
and Fr. to be concerned herein I need not tell you what followed thereupon. But
although God has his Council in Heaven by himself yet he is pleased sometimes to
give intimation of approaching Judgments upon Nations and Kingdoms; but had we
no other intimations of Judgments but those of our Sin and Guilt before
mentioned, and more especially if we take in that wife saying of that heathen
Philosopher Antisthenes, that common wealths were then destroyed when they have
lost once their distinction betwixt Good and Evil; it is much to be feared that
the wanting the Honesty of Heathens will be the ruin of us Christians, although
we are in Profession the best sort of Christians at this day in the World. I
humbly conceive we should not therefore be too presumptious and to put the evil
Day far from us; but to think of timely preventive Repentance with Nineveh,
that so our Iniquities may not be our ruin. I shall conclude with Psalm. 76.7.
Thou even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy Sight when once thou
art angry. From all thy Wrath and from all our Sins.

Good Lord deliver us. Amen.
FINIS

