A Brief and True Account OF THE SUFFERINGS OF THE Church of Scotland,
Occasioned by the Episcopalians Since the Year 1660.

Being a Vindication of their Majesty's Government in that Kingdom, relating to
the Proceedings against the Bishops and Clergy there.

With some Animadversions upon a Libel Entitled, The present State and
Condition of the Clergy and Church of Scotland.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1690.

A Brief and True Account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland, since
the Year 1660, etc.
SEEING it has always been justly called intolerable Arrogance in the Church of
Rome to usurp the Epithet of Universal, when the far greater Number of
Christians decline her Communion; It may very well be called a Superlative
Impudence in the late Prelates of Scotland, and their Clergy, to arrogate as
theirs the Name of that National Church, when by the Convention they were
voted, the great and insupportable Grievance of the Nation. By their Majesty's
and Parliament, the Hierarchy has been demolished, as contrary to the
Inclinations of the Generality of the People. And by the Laws of God the
Majority of their Adherents are incapable of the distinguishing Privileges of
Church Members, because of their vicious Lives.

Which leads me to consider, how unbecoming it is for them to reflect upon the
Nation as supine and indevote; Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes. If
it were not known, that it is ordinary for the greatest Whore to call Whore
first, one would take them to be very devout Men who thus exclaim against
Indevotion: but O Hellish Dissimulation and Malice! herein they imitate the
Devil himself, who first tempts, and then accuses; though it is too visible that
their Consciences are past feeling, being seared as with a hot Iron. There are
Thousands in the Nation who remember, That when their Hierarchy was restored
there, the Devil, who seemed to be bound for some time before, was let loose,
the Floodgates of all Impiety and Wickedness were set open, and Hell did
triumph in its Conquests over that Nation, and displayed its Banner not only
against Religion, but even Morality: which the Prelates and their Adherents
were so far from opposing, that they indulged ^he People, but especially, the
Gentry, in their Wickedness, as knowing That to be the only Method to secure
them on their Side; insomuch, that Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, etc. became
as infallible Characteristicks to distinguish a Prelatist from a Presbyterian,
as Shibboleth was to discern the Gileadites from those of Ephraim: which the
following Instances, amongst the many hundred more that might be given, do
sufficiently evince.

When the booted Apostles, as Dragoons, etc. were employed to convert the
Nation, (wherein once at least we were in fashion before France,) sometimes
they apprehended Persons by Mistake, but as soon as they heard them pronounce
the Shibboleth of Cursing and Swearing, they were presently set at liberty,
with the Character of an Honest-man, and no Whigg; the name then for the
Presbyterians of that Nation.

And in the West of Scotland, where so great a Reformation was wrought, that in
several Parishes there was not the least minced Oath to be heard; when those
Miscreants were sent amongst them, to force a Compliance with the Prelatical
Curates, thrust upon them as Ministers, without their consents; the poor
Children hearing their execrable Oaths, and not knowing what they meant;
(having never heard such before) asked their-Parents in the greatest simplicity
imaginable, the meaning of such and such Words: a hopeful Church, that uses
such as Reformers; but it is too well known there that such kind of Men were the
greatest Abettors of Them, and their Cause. And on the other hand, when ever it
could be said of a Man, Behold, he Prays; it might be said with equal
certainty, Behold, he loatheth the Curates and their Ministry; excepting a very
few Presbyterians who always held it lawful to hear them, but never could own
that they were the Instruments of their Conversion. Yea, the Miscreants
themselves were so sensible of it, that as soon as ever any of their
Parishioners begun to set their face Heavenward, and worship God in, and with
their Families, they were presently the Objects of their Hatred and
Persecution. One remarkable Instance, amongst thousands, there was in
East-Lothian: A considerable Yeoman, called Sherrift, or Sherwood, having a
Son, who by hearing some of the Presbyterian Ministers, was convinced of his
sinful State by Nature, and the necessity of a Savior; and accordingly,
retired Morning and Evening to bewail, himself and seek God. His Father was so
much alarmed at it, that his Son should turn Whig, and howl and whine by
himself, (as mourning for Sin, and seeking of God by Secret Prayer, was then
called in the Episcopal Dialect) that he complained of it to his Parish Priest,
lamenting that he had lost one of the hopefullest young Men in Lothain. -- The
Godless Miscreant, that he might discover himself to be of the true Egyptian
Brood, who reflected upon the Children of Israel as idle, when they sought
leave to serve God, advised the Father to raise his Son betimes in a Morning,
and work him hard all Day, and he would undertake he should forget to say his
Prayers er'e he went to bed at night. Adding further, That to convince him what
kind of villainous Preachers they were whom his Son heard, and see the wicked
Practices of these Conventiclers (whom the Prelatists charged with uncleanness
then, as their Predecessors the Pagans did the Primitive Christians of old) he
would lend him his Horse to ride to a Conventicle. Hereupon the Father took an
opportunity to follow his Son to a Meeting, where it pleased God to touch his
Heart by the Word preached, so that he found himself under a Necessity of
practicing what he had formerly condemned in his Son; and a little while after
they were both of them exposed to Sufferings for Nonconformity.

And that the World may have a further taste of the Prelatical Church of
Scotland, and of their way of Converting, I shall give you another very
remarkable Instance, which may sufficiently discover what their Design was to
convert the Nation to, if we consider the Means and Instruments made use of in
so good a Work.

When the Magistrates exacting the Mulcts enacted by Law upon such as absented
from hearing the Curates, did not prevail upon the Western People to own those
as their Ministers who were not ordained according to the Word, and intruded
upon people by Violence; They sent Soldiers upon free Quarter to drive or drag
them to Church, who usually staid till they had consumed the substance of their
Landlords; and many times would force them to drive their own Cattle to Market,
and sell them at an under-rate, and then rob them of the Money: and, moreover,
behaved themselves in so beastial a manner, that no Marriageable-Woman could
with safety stay at home, by which (the Men being alsofled for Nonconformity)
it came to pass that many poor Infants were left in the House, as not able to
endure the fatigue of traveling, and lying by night in the cold Mountains, who
were so barbarously used by the prelatical Apostles, that they could not
satisfy their hunger with the brother wherein their Parents Cattle had been
boiled, till the Soldiers Dogs had first lapped and left it. -- And their
usual saying was, We came to destroy, and we will destroy, and all this before
the People could be charged with any Insurrection, but merely upon the Account
of not hearing. -- And to testify what respect those infernal Furies had for
Religion, instead of going to Church themselves, whither they were sent to
drive others, a Party of them assembled at a Mercat Cross, and one of their
Number read some verses of an old amorous Scottish Poem, called the Cherry and
the Sloe, instead of a Sermon, and they sung another part of it instead of a
Psalm, without any Animadversion from their devote Church or Pious State for
such tremendous Atheism. -- And to consummate the Misery of the poor People,
Sir Ja. Turner, the Commander in chief of those hellish Episcopal Missionaries,
being conscious that he had exceeded the bounds of his Ungodly Commission,
extorted a Certificate from the distressed Country, that he had behaved himself
according to Law: which horrible Oppression, together with their Barbarous
Usage of some honest Men (against whom they had nothing but the Matters of
their God) whom they tied Neck and heels together, and cast two of them, one to
balance another, on Horseback, (as Butchers do Sheep designed for the
Slaughter) occasioned a small Number to take Arms in 1666 (because they could
not otherwise be safe from the insults of the Soldiers and Prelatists) that
they might present a Petition to the Council for Redress of those Grievances.
-- The Prelatical Party having got it made Treason to Petition the King
otherwise than by his Counsel, which being composed of the wicked Bishops, and
their debauched Adherents, they would be sure to stifle all Remonstrances
against their Barbarity, that they should not see Light.

But to return to our Author: He tells us, That the Scots Episcopal Clergy pray
heartily that the Discipline, Order, and Constitution of the English Church
might be settled amongst them, to prevent Supineness and Indevotgion -- which
is a Mass of Ignorance and Nonsense. Have they not had the Episcopal Discipline
almost these thirty Years? and is not that the discipline of the Church of
England? -- How come they then to pray so heartily to have that which they
enjoyed? -- Had not the King the naming, or, if you will, the making of the
Bishops, they and the Patrons the making of the Priests, and Laws to compel the
People to own them as such? And was not that the Constitution of the Church of
England? Then what needed they desire that which they had? And notwithstanding
of all this, Is not that Supineness and Indevotion amongst their own hearers? I
appeal to their Consciences if it be not: Then how does it appear that the
Discipline of the English Church is so excellent a Mean to prevent it? -- But
you will say, they wanted the Common Prayer and Ceremonies. -- True, but that is
neither the Constitution nor Discipline, but the Worship of the Church of
England: and whether that be so excellent a Mean to prevent Supineness and
Indevotion, any Man may judge who will but cast his Eyes about him, and see
whether Supineness and Indevotion, and their Concomitants, Swearing, Drinking,
etc. be more the Character of those of that Church, or of Dissenters from it.
-- I am sure they who observed the Practice of the D. of York's Family, where
that worship was zealously maintained when he was in Scotland, had no Reason to
admire the Effects of that Devotion, for they and their Master together turned
the Palace into a Baudy-house, and endeavored to make the whole City a Stews;
wherein that Episcopal Concurrence to so good a Work might not be wanting, the
Bishop of Edinburgh lent a helping-hand, and was taken in the very Act of
filthiness with one of his Ladies of Honor, by a Lady of greatest Quality in
that Nation; and this very Bishop was the most zealous of any for the English
Liturgy and Ceremonies, and I understand since one of those who our Pamphleteer
says, refreshed their Souls with that kind of Worship now in their Distress.
But if they had consulted their own Honor, they would never have bragged of
such a Proselyte, who is fitter for a Stallion; or, if now superannuated for
that Work, to be a Pimp to a Baudy-house, than owned as a Member of any Church,
and much less as a Right Reverend Father in God, he having been always better
at kissing his Band-strings in the middle of his Sermon, to give Assurance to a
Whore that he could think of her in the middle of his Devotion, than to govern
in the Church.

Neither do I think that the Reformedness of those of the Church Communion in
the Borders whence our Pamphleteer pretends to write, can be any Tentation to
our Episcopal Clergy, to desire the aforesaid Worship, for I my self not many
Years ago have seen Piping, Dancing, and playing amongst such on the Sabbath,
where many times the Priest was Spectator, if not Partner: And until the Scots
Presbyterian Ministers by their Preaching, reformed that Country, such
Practices were very ordinary. And Malice it self must needs own that the
Sermons of such have repressed Theft, etc. more on the Borders, than either the
Laws of the State, or the Preaching and Discipline of the Church of England;
yea many of those who were infamous Thieves, were never molested for that while
they heard their Parish Priests, but upon turning from these evil ways, have on
the Account of their Nonconformity been exposed by those Hirelings to great
Sufferings, who belike were of the same Opinion with that infamous Parricide,
Sorcerer, and incestuous Apostate, Sharp, Archbishop of St. Andrews, who having
sent for that gallant and religious Gentleman Sir Will. Douglas, late of
Cavers, instead of civil Behavior to a Person of his Honor, Descent, and
Quality, who has better to hold his Stirrup than the chief of the Bishop's
Family, the infamous Varlot upbraided him thus, -- Sir William, I understand
you are a good Countryman, and suppress theft in the Borders, but you entertain
that which is worse at your House, viz. Presbyterian Ministers. To which the
worthy Gentleman, with a Greatness of Soul suitable to the Grandeur of his
Family, disdained to return any Answer, but immediately turned his back upon
and left the infamous Villain to corrode his own viperous Bowels with his
inhumane Fury.

Yea the Scots Episcopalians themselves were so sensible of the remiss
Discipline of the Church of England, that when any of their Daughters had been
impregnated in Fornication or Adultery, it was usual amongst such as were
willing to avoid the Disgrace of it, to send them over the Borders to be
delivered, which in that Country is called the spinning of a blue Web: And the
honest Priests for a little Spell of Money, never refuse Baptism to such Brats;
or to couple Whores and Rogues together, which are there called
half-Mark-Marriages, when by their previous Dalliances the Belly begins to
swell, so that for Shame they cannot in that Condition go to be married in
their own Country: and I have heard it as the Encomium of a deceased Parson,
God be with him, he never refused to make a Christened Soul, or a married
Couple. But lest any should say that these are malicious Reflections upon the
Church of England, I answer, that a Poet of their own, viz. Mr. Hickeringil in
his Ceremony-Mongers Character and other Books, says a great deal worse, and in
express Terms, That it is the worst constituted Church in the World. But that
which is enough to confound the Impudence of Gainsayers; The most part of the
Abuses which Dissenters accuse the Church of England of are named, and a
Reformation of them commanded by his Majesty in his late gracious Letter to the
Bishop of London, which as it has heightened and confirmed the good opinion
which all honest Men had of him, it has also incensed the Debauchees and
high-flown Prelatists, who upbraid him, as now beginning to discover himself,
and say that it were not best for him to meddle too much. Which verifies the
Observation that Dissenters have always entertained of those Tantivies, that
let their Hyperbolical Pretensions of Zeal for Religion and Loyalty be what
they will, if the King put but forth his Hand and touch them, they will curse
him to his Face; and rather than part with an Inch of Superstition or a swinish
Lust, will, as the Party have always done, say a Confederacy with Hell and
Rome, as times past and present do evidence beyond Contradiction; of which, if
my designed Brevity would permit, I could give Authentic Instances out of
their own Authors, from the Reformation to this very Day. But to conclude this
Point, and manifest to the World that the Presbyterian Discipline is infinitely
beyond that so much idolized Discipline of the Church of England, let them give
such an Instance as this, of the now Presbyterian Ministers of Edinburgh, who
charged their Elders, at their Election, to visit the Parish two by two, and
see that the Master of every Family prayed in his Family; and if he were not
able to do it, that they should instruct him, and pray with the Family
themselves. Neither is this a Novelty to capital Applanse, but the old Practice
of the Presbyterians both at home and abroad, where the Government did not
obstruct it, and which God has many times blessed with Success. Those being
Helps of his own Appointment to assist his faithful Ministers in the Discharge
of their Pastoral Duties. And we should be very glad to see the Church of
England as conscientiously discharge what Discipline their own Canons enjoin,
and his Majesty has now commanded, as the aforesaid Ministers are to put
theirs in practice out of mere Principle, and without any such Command: but
this is more than we can hope, or their Church bear, as now constitute, which
time will verify. -- Nor do we want Testimony from Officers of their own
Communion, of the good Discipline of Presbyterian Families in Ireland, where
they quartered, and as a thing extraordinary to them, gave an Account by Letter
to their Friends, that they were quartered in Scots Presbyterian House, who
read, prayed, and sung Psalms in their Families twice a Day: -- And yet those
are the Men whom the Church of England will not admit into Command, though they
have sufficiently evidenced their Courage, Christianity, and Loyalty in the
Desence of Dery, etc. whereof others basely and maliciously have robbed them of
the Honor.

What our Author means by the Orthodox Principles the Scots University were so
careful to infuse into their Students, or by the great and distinguishing
Doctrines of the Church of England defended in Print by an eminent Professor at
Glasgow, I know not: When I was at the University of Edinburgh about 9 Years
ago, the Assemblies Confession of Faith was taught there, and generally by the
Episcopalians through the Kingdom, though their Practice and the same were as
much opposite as black is to white. -- And I cannot think our Author will allow
that Confession as Orthodox, lest he should thwart a Church-of- England-Jury
who brought it in as a Libel not many Years ago; it being also formerly damned
by the University of Oxon: And that the Church of England (though different in
Government and Ceremonies) held any Doctrine which distinguished her from other
Reformed Churches, none ever averred, except it were that new up-start slavish
Doctrine of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience, in the sense of the present
disloyal Recusant Clergy, whereof as she had the Dishonor to be the Mother,
she has also the Ignominy to be the Murderer, having basely cut its Throat, as
Harlots use to do sometimes with their spurious Brood, whereof if their darling
K. James had had timely Notice, a thousand to one if ever the Nation had seen
the blessed Day of an Abdication and Vacancy of his Throne, and the same filled
with the best of Kings, as it is now, to the Terror of Papists and their
Adherents. -- But if, as there is all the Reason in the World to believe, they
are the Apostles of Passive Obedience, whose Cause this Man advocates, we know
what Friend he is to the Government: -- For if they believe their own Doctrine,
they must needs look upon resisting and dethroning the greatest Tyrant as
unlawful, and consequently disapprove of what the Nation has done against the
late King, and look upon their present Majesty's as Usurpers, whom they may
lawfully resist and depose when they have sufficient Force, which that they may
attain we need not doubt of their Zeal to buz about their venomous Principles,
and intoxicate the Minds of those, who that they may without Control enslave
themselves and others, by their Profanity, to the Devil (which his present
Majesty by his Letter aforesaid has showed himself an Enemy to) they will
freely render Themselves and the Nations, Slaves to the Tyranny of France and
Rome.

What was the Behavior of the Episcopal Clergy at the Insurrection of
Bothwel-Bridg, our Author says every one knows: but I believe if all the Truth
were told, he himself knows little of it, and I am confident helooks upon
himself as some Body, and would be very angry if his Neighbors did not so too.
-- However, seeing he has put me in Mind of it, I Will let some know what I am
sure he is not willing they should; -- which is thus, -- When the extraordinary
Hazard of those in whose Houses they met, the frequent Surprises and barbarous
Usage of those who did meet, and the Blessing of God upon the Endeavors of the
Preachers did so much increase the Number of Meeters, that they could not with
Convenience and Safety be accommodated with Houses, they betook themselves to
the Field, where it pleased God by the Foolishness of Preaching, (or in the
Episcopal Dialect) Fanatical Preachers to convert so many Souls, that the more
they were oppressed, the more they grew; and notwithstanding the Cannibal Laws
against them, and the Malice of the Episcopalians which carried them beyond the
Extent of those Laws, the Churches were more and more emptied, and Meetings
more and more crowded; where a Frame so far from supineness or indevotion was
so vifible, that the sighs and groans of those who were pricked at the Heart
for Sin, were very discernable; and betwixt Sermons, Godly Conferences, etc.
very audible: whereat the Devil was so much enraged, that he forthwith stirred
up his Instruments, the Episcopal-hireling-Preachers, who with Infernal
bawlings, cried like the Jews of old, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, help, the
whole Nation goes after them. At which, their Ungodly Diocesans were soon
alarmed, and by the Intercession of their wicked Privy Council, they procured a
Tax to be laid upon the Nation for raising an Army to suppress those Meetings,
which they maliciously called Rendevouzes of Rebellion. And that the
Instruments might be adapted to the Work, the Troops when raised, consisted of
the Scum and Refuse of the Nation: They bore the Characters of Wickedness on
their Foreheads, and their Mouths were filled with Blasphemy and Obscenity.
Their Officers would sometimes curse them, if they had apprehended any Women
coming from Meetings, and not ravished them; yea, instances can be given, that
they made the Houses of the Episcopal Preachers, whose Cause they were raised
to defend, their Stews, and their Wives and Daughters became their Prostitutes:
and yet those Miscreants were so well pleased with those Pillars of their
Church, and Defenders of their Faith, that their sullen Countenances were
visibly cheared upon their being Levied; and when they came to any Town, or
Village, the Prelatists would insult over the Presbyterians, and ask them, What
they thought now?

Those Bloodhounds were at last employed to search out, fire upon, and disperse
the Field-Meetings, which in many places they did, killed several upon the
Spot, and filled the Jails of the Nation full; after which, the Council
Banished some, and sold others for Slaves; some of which, were set at Liberty
at the Thames-Mouth afterward. The Landlords were made to give Bond, that
their Tenants should not go to Meetings, and many times Fined upon that
account. The Gentry were Fined, Confined, and Imprisoned, because of their
Ladies and Children going to Meetings. It was declared Treason, so much as to
exchange a Word with many of the Meeters. At last, it came to that Crisis, That
the People were forced to venture their Lives, and resolve to defend themselves
and their Ministers, or have no Ordinances at all; Whence happened diverse
Skirmishes, with various success, but many times the Soldiers were baffled, and
therefore they harrassed the Country in the Night time, that no Person of any
Morality could be quiet, but were disturbed by their frequent, and rude
Searches; in which they behaved themselves with so much Barbarity, Blasphemy,
and Obscenity, that they looked liker Pagans, than Professors of Christianity;
which confirmed the People in their dissent, who readily argued, That it could
not be the Cause of Christ, which such Children of Hell were so zealous to
maintain; nor, they his Ministers, who must employ such Miscreants to procure
them Hearers: And if at any time they apprehended such as had been present at a
Meeting, where Resistance was made; or if they could but be proved, to have had
a walking Sword at any Meeting, whether there had been Resistance or not; they
were in hazard of their Lives, by their Ungodly Laws. James Learmont being
Beheaded, for being at a Meeting where a Party of Soldiers were baffled, though
it was proved, That he had nothing but a Horserod in his hand. And the Lord of
Knoll, a Teviotdale Gentleman, narrowly escaped the like Fate, for being at a
Meeting where there was no Resistance, with a Sword about him, because a
Neighboring Gentleman, who was brought as a Witness against him, would swear
no further, Than that he had a Staff, or a Scabbard under his Cloak, which the
Jury could not find within reach of the Law. And by a continued Series of
Tyrannical Proceedings, many of the most considerable, and substantial Yeomen,
many considerable Citizens, some formerly Magistrates of Corporations, and
diverse of the Gentry, became liable to lose their Lives by their wicked Laws:
which occasioned their meeting together, sometimes in pretty good posture of
Defense to hear the Gospel; and at such a Meeting it was, where the Great
Papa-Prelatical Champion Dundee, with a considerable Force of Foot and
Dragoons, was routed by the Conduct of William Cleland, then a Boy; but
afterward, the immortaly famous Lieut. Colonel, who at Dunkel, with about
Eight hundred Presbyterian Soldiers, routed the whole Tyranno-Papa-Prelatical
Host, which consisted of near six thousand Men; or if you will, Savage Beasts
in Human Shape. After the Defeat of Claverhouse, at the said Meeting, the
Gentlemen concerned in the Resistance, knowing they were destined to the
Slaughter, if ever apprehended; and that the whole Country would be ruined for
their sakes, resolved to keep together in their own Defense, to whom a great
many others in like Circumstances gathered in a little time, and if the Gentry
had acted their parts as the People did theirs, or would but have vouchsafed
them Conduct, in Probability Scotland had not at this Day been vexed with a
graceless untoward Generation of Prelatisis; from whom, as to the Differences
betwixt us and them, we could never from first to last have any thing but
Hectoring for Reason, Damning and Cursing for Argument: And it is the King's
Will to satisfy our Objections from the Light of Nature, Word of God, and
Conscience enlightened by the same. Thus you have an Account of the Prelatical
Hireling Curates, and of their Carriage before, and how the same occasioned the
Insurrection at Bothwel-Bridg, and now follow some Instances of their Carriage
after that was over.

The D. of Monmouth having carried on that Affair with the Clemency and
Generosity natural to him, was maligned by our Prelatists, because he did not
sacrifice the Prisoners to the Revenge of those Episcopal Furies, which they
did themselves afterward in the most inhumane manner imaginable: for having
sent several Hundreds of them to Sea, the Ship was cast away, (and that
probably with Design) on the Coast of Orkney, and the ungodly Episcopal Brute
the Captain, locked down the Hatches when the Ship was a sinking, that they
might be destroyed; so that none escaped but such as were above Deck, which
they were allowed to be in Parcels, lest they should have been smothered when
altogether in the Hold; nor did the poor Remnant that were saved escape the
bitter Taunts and Malice of the Episcopalians of that Place.

And how intolerable the least Favor showed to the Presbyterians was to that
reprobate Faction, is evident from the following Instances; When a great many
of the Prisoners taken at the Insurrection in 1666, formerly mentioned, were
executed to satisfy the Fury of the ungodly Prelatists, the Court became a
little exorable, and sent down a Pardon to the rest, but that Limb of
Antichrist and infernal Locust, the Apostate Archbishop Sharp, being a
Revolter, and consequently profound to make Slaughter, with a Malice like his
Father the Devil, kept up the same till several more were executed; a Demon
stration that the most implacable enraged Tyrant has more Bowels of Mercy than
a waspish formal Prelate.

In like manner when an Indulgence was granted to settle the, Minds of the
People after the Insurrection at Bothwel-Bridg the Generation of Vipers, the
Episcopalian Seed of the Serpent, did most bitterly revile the D. of Monmouth,
whom they looked upon as the Procurer of it, and flew in the Face of Majesty it
self, expressing themselves in the Lady Hatton's Dialect, What the Devil shall
the K's Bastard-Son govern us? And the unconstant turn-coat Clergy, (some of
whom while the Presbyterians kept in Arms, declared their Dissatisfaction with
Prelacy, and after their Defeat recanted again) by their Muse Ninian Paterson
Curate of Liberton, published an obscene scurrilous Lampoon, reflecting upon
the Government for that Indulgence, which made some of the Episcopal Party
themselves wonder that ever such a Fellow should have been suffered to pollute
a Pulpit afterward: That you may taste a little of their Poets Modesty, I
shall give you some of his Lines which occur to my Memory; In his Proaemium he
addresses the King thus; We are like Jobs this 19 Years perplexed,
Betwixt Destruction and Distraction vexed;
And that, dread Sir, though not so strange as true,
By Scabs and Devils, now indulged by you.


And Abundance more, a great deal worse, which I have forgot. But that you may
know that their Penmen and Swordmen, or if you will, Hectors and Buffoons, are
near akin in Morals, you must understand this Clergy-Poet was famous and well
known by the Name of Knaggs, a Scotch Word for a Pin to hang any thing one. The
Occasion of his being called so was thus: Coming on a time into a GEntlewoman's
Chamber before she was fully dressed, he took up her Neck-lace, which when she
enquired after, he told her he had hung it upon a Knag, and when she asked
where, he showed it her hanging on his.... etc. a very modest Episcopal
Preacher.

Our Author says, the Episcopal Clergy generally complained of Violation of
Justice under the late Administration; and though some were too accessory,
others suffered for their Opposition, and that the whole are not culpable for
the Miscarriages of a few; which take it in the Complex, is a hateful
Prevarication, and great Untruth: The Nation too well felt it, and smarts yet
for it: That they generally in their Sermons, and otherwise, abetted the
Tyranny of the Court, and thundered Anathema's against those that maintained
the lawfulness of resisting Tyrants; and though, it is true, the honestest
amongst them were turned out by the Test, that says nothing in defense of those
at present ejected. The Anti-Testers being thrown out in the Time of Charles
the Second, and consequently are too honest to have any share in his Apology;
and it is well known, the generality of those who continued in afterward, went
along with the Court in every thing, till such time as Liberty was given to the
Presbyterians (which was always more intolerable to the Prelatists, than
Liberty to the Papists) and then htey snuffed, not that they were angry with
the Tyranny of the Manner, for it was according to their own Doctrine, that the
King was emboldened to issue his Proclamation in such a tyrannical Style; but
that, like Cain, being conscious to themselves of their Brethrens Blood, they
were afraid to see them any way countenaced by those in Power, (and for Cain's
Reason too) lest every one that found them, should kill them; for they knew
well enough that the inhumane Laws, in their darling King James's Time, which
made it Death for any Nonconformists to preach, or People to hear them, were
contrived by their Abettors, and passed by consent of the Bishops. They knew
also that the brutish, impotent, revengeful Tortures of Boots and Thumikins had
been inflicted on the Presbyterians, by Advice of the Privy Council, where
their Bishops were the most obdurate Spectators, and impertinent spiteful
movers of Questions to the poor tortured Prisoners. They knew further, that
they had procured, and given consent to the Antichristian-like Execution of
Gentlemen within an hour after their Sentence, as Jerriswood and others; like
the practice of that Italian, who threatened to stab his Neighbor if he would
not deny God; and when he had done it, stabbed him notwithstanding, that he
might kill his Soul too, by allowing him no time to repent. They knew further,
that their Prelates had sat in Council, where Men were examined and threatened
with Torture, to declare their Thoughts on such an such Points; and after
having declared them, were hanged for the same, as James Skein and others;
which was an invasion on the Right of Mankind. Nay, Tyranny was come to such an
height, that their meanest scoundrel Officers would take upon them to examine
as Judges, Persons whom they had apprehended, and torture them with burnt
Matches betwixt their Fingers, to tell the Ministers Names who they had heard
preach; and who of their Acquaintance were there besides. And the base impudent
Priests, whose Fathers were not good enough to eat with the Dogs of their
Flocks, were hence encouraged to vomit out scurrilous Reflections upon their
own Patrons Families, and those of the greatest Quality, because favorers of
Presbytery; they were so far from complaining of the Violation of Justice, as
our lying Pamphleteer would insinuate.

In the next place, the Scribler mentions an Address of the Scottish Bishops,
which he says very much incensed the common inferior People against them, and
pleads for some charitable Allowance to that Action, because of the Laws then
in force; and seeing (as he says) they are willing to submit to the Government,
the Power of those in Authority might be pleased to cover them from the Rage
and Insolence of the Rabble.

Wherein he shows himself plainly an Enemy to the Government. He passes over
the Address very smoothly, though it was that scandalous Libel against his
present Majesty when attempting our Deliverance: They who will, may read it in
Gazette, Numb. 2398. November. 12. 1688. and I shall only animadvert upon two or
three Passages in it: And first, they reckon the long and illustrious Race of
our Kings, the greatest Glory of the Kingdom: Diametrically opposite to the
Sentiments of all sober Men, who (allowing that its due place) constantly
affirm the greatest Glory of that Nation to be their early and long profession
of the Christian Religion, being among the first Fruits of the Gentiles, gifted
unto Christ, Psalm 2. amongst the utmost Ends of the Earth; and in the Opinion
of good Historians, blessed with the first Christian King. But this Expression
of the Antichristian-Prelats, agrees very well with their Religion, an
essential Part whereof, as they say themselves, was, their steadfast Allegiance
to the late King: which verifies from their own Mouths our Observation of them,
that they and their Hirelings, instead of preaching Sinners into Christ, have
made it their Work to convert the Nation into a stupid slavish subjection to
Tyranny, by them falsely called Loyalty, and their greatest Argument, instead of
Thus says the Lord, was, Thus says the King: And indeed this is not to be
wondered at, it being just with God to discover they were none of his
Ministers, but to fill them, as Backsliders, with their own Ways, and make it
evident they were the Ministers of the King to whom they swore as Head of their
Church, and had no other Ministerial Power, but what they derived from him; and
all who know them, must needs say they preached more against such as opposed
the Tyranny of their King, than against the most avowed Rebels to God and his
Word: But their Brethren who possess the Pulpits now, are resolved to avoid
that Extreme, and many of then choose rather to wrest the Fifth Commandment to
reach a Blow at their present Majesty's, than to insist upon the Theme of
Loyalty to their King, though they bellowed it from the Pulpits, to procure
submission to the hateful Tyranny of the two last Reigns: But their profound
and universal silence on that Subject now, and forbearing to declare their
abhorrence of the present Rebellion by the Prelatists, in conjunction with
their Brethren the Papists, does sufficiently demonstrate what Friends they are
to his present Majesty, their Zeal for him bearing no proportion to their Zeal
for the last two, they being eagerly forward then, to abhor Associations,
Petitions for Parliaments, and Insurrections, yea, to degrade, as unworthy to
be Members of their Church, Mr. Johnson, etc. who maintained the lawfulness of
resisting Tyranny; but we see no such public Declarations against the
Mutineers and Rebels now.

But to return to the Prelates address, they conclude with a presumptuous
Assurance, that God would give King James the Necks of his Enemies, for which
his present Majesty is very much obliged to them, who as they did then, they
look upon him still as his principal Enemy: but their Prayers, Faith and
Undertakings were all of a Piece, and failed them most abominably; and they
were thereby sufficiently discovered to have no Interest with God, who rejected
their presumptuous Faith; nor with the People, for whose Assegiance they
undertook, who did by their representatives unanimously choose the Prince of
Orange their King, and at the same time rejected the Prelates as an
insupportable Grievance, and gave a Demonstration to the World, that the
Prelatical Maxim, No Bishop, no King, is as false as the Devil the Author of it.

And whereas the Scribler pleads for a charitable Allowance to them, because of
the Laws then in Force: he forgot sure that these very Laws were made by the
Instigation of the Prelates and their Party, and consequently can be no Excuse:
And that the late K. was so well assured of their Adherence to him, that he
expressly commands the Viscount Dundee to summon the Prelates and such others as
he confided in, to frame a Convention of States in Opposition to the other:
Neither has his Confidence failed him, for as they all owned him while they sat
in the Convention, their Party has actually joined the Popish High-landers,
Irish and French, who fight for him since; and such of them as were entertained
in our present King's Pay, betrayed his Forces twice to the Rebels: and this is
all the Service he can ever expect from the Scots Prelatists.

Next he tells you the said Address very much incensed the Common People
against them; as if his present Majesty had no other Friends there but such,
and that none of the Nobility and Gentry were incensed at that rascally Affront
put on him by the Prelates: Sure he forgot that the Convention had not sat long
till it sent the Prelates a going, and I hope they are not the common inferior
sort; and if his Majesty's great (but by them ill deserved) Clemency had not
prevented, it is not improbable that those Rabshakeh and Shimei-like-Prelates
had felt the Resentments of others heavier than those of the inferior sort,
for that scandalous Libel. And now I cannot but observe the Harmony betwixt the
Papists and Scots Prelatists, the saying of this Pamphleteer agreeing so
exactly with what the D. of Gordon's Gentleman, lately come up, a violent known
Papist, said in a certain Company, That King William had none to own his Cause
in Scotland but the inferior Sort the Presbyterians: and tells a great many of
the same impudent Lies concerning the severe Usage of the Episcopal Clergy
there, which are in this Pamphlet: whereby they design to render his Majesty's
Government to the Church of England odious, that he should suffer the Scots
Episcopal-men to be so illegally abused; which our Pamphleteer does also in a
sly manner insinuate by saying, -- The government might be pleased to protect
them from the Insolence of the Rabble, which is as much as to say (but a
hollish Lie) they do not.

But granting them charitable Allowances for that Address, because of the Laws
then in Force: What can he say to justify their opposing his Majesty's
Accossion to the Crown, when they were not under the dread of those Laws, as it
is known every Man of them did in the Convention, and that Arch Pimp of
Glasgow, Paterson, had the Impudence in their Face to maintain the unlawfulness
of deposing the late King. Sure this says their Opposition was of Choice and
not Fear; and tho they may be forced to submit, yet how they can be dsteemed
Loyal Subjects to a Government whose Being they opposed, I cannot understand.

Our Author discovers no little Malice and Ignorance in his enumerating the
sorts of Presbyterians in Mountaineers, Cameronians, and Indulged: All
Scots-men know the first two to be but one, and for his reckoning all the rest
Indulged, because Accepters of the Liberty under King James, thinking thereby
to bring an Odium upon them as Countenancers of the dispensing Power, nothing
can be more malicious, as may be seen by their Address, wherein they plainly
tell him, their Principles are contained in the Assemblies Confession of Faith;
which is far from owning any other Power in the Magistrate, than to encourage
the Good, and punish the Wicked, and consequently the Bounds of our Obedience.
This was not a cheating him with a pretended principle of Passive Obedience,
and yet to dethrone him notwithstanding, when he touched their Mitres; which
gives us a new explanation of the Prelatical Maxim, No Bishop, no King.

Another of his Reflections is, that they do not check nor restrain those
Cameronians, whom he charges with Anabaptistical Principles, etc. Which is a
gross Untruth, it being known, that several of those Cameronians have been
reclaimed by their Admonitions; and if the Malice of Hell did not induce the
Prelatists and Papists to obstruct the settlement of Presbytery, there is no
doubt of the reclaiming of the rest, their difference not being so much in
Principle, as in mistaken Matters of Fact; and there are very few, if any of
them, chargeable with those German Anabaptist Principles he talks of; though
some, by the Tyranny of the late Government, abetted by the Prelatists, and for
want of a free Exercise of Presbyterian Discipline (which informs Men's Heads,
but does not, according to that of the Prelates, knock out their Brains) run
into unwarrantable Excesses; and by mistake concluded, because the late
Government acted so like the Devil, that it was thereby dissolved, and every
one left to his Primitive Liberty; not considering, that the People had not
then, though they have since, casheer'd it by their Representatives.

And whereas he aggravates the turning out of some of the Prelatical Hirelings,
before any thing was done in Parliament against them: There are none who
thoroughly understand that Matter, will think it so culpable as he would render
it, especially when it is considered that the Government was dissolved, and the
People in possession of their Native Right, it will appear no Wonder that they
should discharge such to preach, as their Ministers, who were obtruded upon
them by Force, and into the Labors of Faithful Ministers, extruded by
Violence; but especially they being void of all Piety, having entered upon the
Ministry with no other Design, but as Men do upon an ordinary Calling, to get a
Livelihood, having no other Ordination, but the Collation of a profane Bishop,
who arrogates to himself the sole Power of Ordaining; and declares all the
Ordination of the Reformed Churches abroad to be void, while he holds that of
the Church of Rome to be valid; and it being a known Practice amongst them to
chop and change Benefices for Advantages and Convenience, as Men do Horses and
Cows. But whosoever considers that these Hirelings had been the occasion of so
much Rapine, Profanity, Blod, and Devastation in the West of Scotland, where,
by their means, Sir Ja. Turner, with a Body of Hellish, Prelatical, Lowland
Soldiers, was brought to waste the Country upon the account of Nonconformity,
as formerly hinted; and twice afterward an Host of Popish Savage Highlanders,
(then the Episcopal Converters, and now their Champions) were brought upon them
with a design to depopulate the Country in a time of great Peace and Quiet; by
which means a Famine was brought on those Parts, whereof many died, though the
most industrious People in the Kingdom.

If it be further considered, what they suffered afterward on the account of
the Insurrections at Bothwel-Bridg, and that by the Earl of Argyle, both
occasioned by the Prelatists, insomuch that there was scarcely a Family in the
West which had not suffered, either by Free Quarter, Fining, Confining, Rape,
Exile, Murder, Famine; yea, even many of the Prelatists themselves, either in
their Families or Relations, it being very well known that the Highlanders
spoiled all without distinction, where they could with convenience; and were so
brutish and inhumane, as to tear the Mort-cloaths, (or Pall,) from Corpse going
to be buried, which they afterward converted into Caps. Now, I say, all these
Barbarities considered, which that poor Country suffered upon the account of
those Hirelings, it may rather seem Matter of Wonder, that they should have
been so moderate as to content themselves with turning them out, and not have
vented their Resentments in the utter destruction of them, who had occasioned
the destruction of so many; and certainly if Grace had not subdued Humane
Passion, they would have done so: And I appeal to the Prelatists own
Consciences, whether they could have carried it with so much moderation to
those who had but half so much injured them.

And as for the Contempt the People showed of them, after the abolition of
Episcopacy, it denotes how they had behaved themselves when in Power; for,
setting aside some profane Atheistical Wretches, it was never known that the
generality of the People did so much vilify the Nonconformist Ministers, when
under the severest Laws: And it demonstrates clearly, that they were under the
Effects of the Threatening, because they made the Sacrifice of the Lord Vile, he
made them contemptible before the people; who if they had profited by them,
would never have trampled upon them. And the true Reason of the Peoples
disregard, our Author by chance ingenuously acknowledges, though he did not
intend so much, when he says in express Terms, The Ejected complained not so
much of their being deprived, as that all the Profits of the Year were denied
them. It being just the vulgar and true observation of them, That they cared
more for the Fleece, than for the Flock. And though as to Preaching
successfully and faithfully they were dumb Dogs, yet they could call for their
Gain from their Quarter. And their complaining 2o much of their Danger from the
People, puts me in mind of a Gentleman's Saying in the West of Scotland, whose
Protection they demanded, for fear of the People, at their first being obtruded
upon them; which was thus: If you be God's Ministers, let God protect you;
those who were here before you, never needed nor sought, our Protection: And it
is a 2hrewd ground of suspicion to the People, that you are not God's
Ministers, when you must have such wicked Means and Instruments to preserve
you. The poor man being conscious of his own Wickedness, and knowing all their
Abetters to be such.

Then he complains, that those who would not pray as commanded, were ejected;
wherein he hatefully prevaricates, and designedly passes over what they were
commanded to pray, viz. for their present Majesty's; which may be seen in the
printed Journals of the Scotch Parliament; wherein all modest Men cannot but
justify their Conduct; for though there might have been other Grounds enough to
have deprived most of them, as Scandal, Insufficiency, etc. yet that they
should have no reason to complain of prejudicated Judges, and that their
Knavery might be evidenced to the World, the Parliament, with a consummate
prudence, chused to make their Loyalty to the government their Test; and not
one was authoritatively turned out, but upon the account of refusing to pray
for their Majesty's, and read the Declaration; and those who were (deservedly
enough) turned out by the People, were by Act of Council restored again, till
such time as they underwent a legal Trial. But supposing it hard measure, if
they had any Conscience, they might herein acknowledge the Justice of God, if
they consider that the Presbyterian Ministers were turned out, merely because
they would not acknowledge the Prelates, though willing enough to own the Civil
Government: And Malice it self must needs own the Moderation of our present
Sovereign, when compared with their Darlings of Heaven, Charles and James, that
hanged those, who upon better (though mistaken) Principles, refused to pray for
them. And if his present Majesty exceed any way, it is in Mercy to those who
professedly disown his Title; for never was any Government known so mild
toward those who refuse to own it; and the least Punishment that can be, is to
turn such from their Employments. And what kind of Friend to the Government
this Pampheleteer is, who complains of Injustice in depriving of such Men, may
be casily guessed.

As for his hearsay Violences used to their Clergy, whereof the most atrocious
Instances are the killing of one, and daubing his Face with Excrements, and
abusing the Wife of another though in Childbed; they are Hellish Prelatical
Lies, and we challenge him to make good his Assertions, that any Presbyterians
were concerned in those Inhumanities, which if any such happened, look liker
the brutish impudent Fury of 2ome Episcopalians, whose Relations have perhaps
suffered by the Information or Rage of those Curates, whose malicious Carriage
has several times drawn upon them the Resentments of those of their own
communion, to revenge the Injuries offered to their Wives, Children, and
remoter Relations, of which we can give many Instances if needful: but that we
may be assured they are impudent atrocious Lies, he neither gives Time, nor
Place, nor Name of those Persons so abused, which to be sure he would if he
could: only he tells you, he has been told so, and he cannot certainly tell you
who did it, though their Neighbors threatened thom: Just like the Instance of
Papaprelatical Veracity used by the D. or York, and his Episcopal Council of
Scotland against the University of Edinburgh, when they had affronted him by
burning the Pope in December 1680. they first alleged that the Students
threatened to burn the Provost's House, because he like a Blockhead had suffered
the King's Soldiers to enter the City (contrary to his own Oath, and the Towns
Privileges) to prevent the burning of the Pope, and when they had buzzed about
this supposed Threatening, then they burned it themselves, and charged the
Students with it no make them odious, and find Occasion of dissolving the
University, which they did for some time, and though the said Students offered
to come to any legal Trial for their Vindication, it was never accepted,
because the Council knew it could be proved that some of the Duke's Livery were
seen come from the House, just as it took fire, and that a Barrel of Powder
having the Castle-Mark on it, which it was not possible for any to come at, but
from the King's Ammunition, was found in the Park near the said House: The most
violent Prosecutors of the said Students, were the Bishops of St. Andrews,
Edinburgh, and the profane Russian Sir William Ratherson, then Clerk to the
council, and as great a Whore-master as his Brother the Bishop, who both of
them particularly, when the Students were examined by the Council about the
Pope-burning, took care to have that Question asked at them, if they went to
Church, knowing the Prelatists had not such a Hatred at Popery as the others;
which as it was discovered then, appears above board now, when they join
actually with the Papists in Arms against the present Government in that
Kingdom, and according to our last Advices from Ireland, the Robels build their
great Hopes upon an Association of the Scots Prelatists, who have sworn
Allegiance to their present Majesty's, that they may have the greater
Opportunity of undermining them.

Our Author in the next place resolves to give us a touch of his Hyperbolical
(or rather hellish because lying) Oratory, That it is beyond the Power of Words
to express their Misery to that Degree as they suffer it. But I would have him
to remember that there are Episcopal Inhumanities which we have felt of a far
higher Nature than those he falsely alleges they suffer, viz. Rapes, Rapine,
Murder, Hanging, Drowning, Beheading, Famine, torturing with Boots, Thumikins,
etc. which we have Words to express, and pray if he can let him give us
Instances of their Sufferings to the Degree.

This next Reflection is upon the want of Divine Service in many Churches for
some Months: to which he may readily be answered, That most of them have wanted
it ever since the Restitution of Prelacy, for what Service has been in them
since, it has by its Effects proved far enough from being Divine, as may be
seen by their want of Converts, of which we challenge the whole Party to
produce any if they can; Perverts we are sure they may: and therefore we give
them the like Choice, as Elijah gave to Baal's Priests; The God that answers
by Fire, let him be God. Let those whose Ministry God has owned by the Seal of
Conversion, be his Ministers, and the others not; and we are sure to find the
Scots Prelatical Curates to be excluded, and that Threatening exactly fulfilled
on them, Because you ran, and I have not sent you; therefore you shall not
profit my People: whereby God has owned our Cause, and maintained the Truth of
our Arguments against their Mission and Ordination. Not that I would accuse all
who cannot perhaps give Proof of their Ministry by Conversion as no Ministers,
knowing that God is Sovereign, and may use in that Work whom he pleases, but I
say that considering their way of Ordination, and coming in upon Flocks which
they have maintained after so much Light to the contrary, in Opposition to that
Way which is clearly exhibited in the Word, their Universal want of Success,
while God has blessed their Opposites with it, is to me as visible a
Demonstration that God owns our Cause, and disowns theirs, as his burning up of
Elijah's Sacrifice, while that of the Baalicolites remained untouched, was,
that he owned him as his Prophet, and disowned them.

And that some Churches are unprovided, and others not so well as they should
be, is no Reflection upon us, but on themselves, who have by their Inhumanity
diminished the Number of our Ministers, prevented the breeding up of others,
and at present obstruct the Settlement of our Church, by their horrid Lies, and
sly malicious Insinuations. But when their Party was predominant, I have seen
several Churches, nay I am sure the most part of the Churches in some Counties,
where there was little or no Divine Service, as they call it, because the
People could not be prevailed upon to come and hear them, and in that case let
any Man judge whether it be fit to impose such a Minister whom the People would
not hear? or where have they a Precedent in the Scripture for such Practices?

Next he tell us that the Nobility, Gentry, and better sort of the Commonalty
respect the Persons and Functions, and extremely commiserate the Condition of
their Clergy, etc. -- A Mass of malicious Impudence! Was it not the Nobility
and Gentry, and the Representatives of the Commonalty, that made those Laws
which turned them out, and decalred the Function of their Bishops an
insupportable Grievance to the Nation? Where were their Advocates then, why did
they not appear in Parliament, or wherefore did not their Nobility and Gentry,
if there were so many of them, enter their Protestation against those Laws? We
hear but of very few of their Advocates there, and those who did plead for
them, were such as had been imbrued in Presbyterian Blood, and consequently
under Cain's Dread, and have been actually questioned since by the Parliament,
as dissaffected to the present Government: and the Truth is, they have few
Friends but such as if they had Power would molest it, as the late Viscount
Dundee, who was the first that made any Appearance for them, and did at the
same time declare against the Government: And that the better sort of the
Commonalty are their Friends, is a hellish Lie, except the Ignorant, Prosane,
Swearing, Cursing, Drunken, Whoring Rabble, and such as have no Worship of God
in their Families (as not one in a thousand of the Prelatists have so much as
the Form of it) be the best, and those who walk in the contrary steps be the
worst: I appeal to their own Consciences if they do not know this to be true,
and to all Men of any Morality, who make Conscience of speaking Truth to say to
the contrary if they can, and whether this Assertion of his be not an impudent
Lie in the Face of God and Man, it being very well known that debauched Persons
were always their greatest Friends, and that the Generality of those who had
any Piety were their professed Opposers.

And as for their Clergy's Inclinations to the English Liturgy, and comforting
their Souls with it in their Distress. Whatever Influence it may have upon many
of the English Clergy to assist them, who will a thousand to one be readier to
do that, than swear Allegiance to their Sovereigns, it will be found but an
inauspicious Argument with their own Countrymen, and perhaps may arm the
Good-women with their Folding-stools once more against them, as it did formerly
in Charles the first's time, when one of the Bishops begun to read the
Common Prayer (which she called Papery) in her Ears. And indeed it verifies
what the Dissenters have always said of them, that they were strangers to the
Power of Godliness, and not knowing how to pray without, must now have Recourse
to a Form, of which whatever need may be pretended for the Weak, they are as
unreasonable and unnatural an Imposition upon the Strong, but especially on
Ministers in the Exercise of all their Ministerial Duties, as would be the
imposing of Crutches upon the Adult and able part of Mankind, who can walk
better without them; and use them who will, if they have any Experience of
Christianity on their Souls, they will quickly find the best of their Forms as
defective and ill suited to their various Needs, as the poor Man did, who came
to the Parson for a Prayer to quench his burning House. -- The Priest turning
over his Book, and finding none for the purpose, at last bethought himself of
that for Rain, which being only for moderate Showers; the poor Man finding that
not to reach his case, cried, Nay, Good Lord, whole Buckets full, for moderate
Showers will not do my turn.

His topping Reflection comes next, that the Scots Presbyterians pray that God
will put down the Antichristian Hierarchy also in England. But he supposes
that to proceed from Zeal, rather than Encouragement of Authority, though he
wishes there were no Features in the present Face of things that encourages
such sad Prognostications; -- Hinc illae lacrymae.

Pray good Sir, Is it not as lawful for the Scots Presbyterians to pray against
the Hierarchy as Antichristian, as it was for a Metropolitan of England in the
last Parliament to declare the Dissenters were not Christians? and be it known
to his Lordship, I Will undertake to prove the former, as soon as he shall have
made good the latter. Or, farther, why may not the Scots Presbyterians as well
pray against the English Hierarchy, as the English Clergy, and Prelates too,
Plot, Drink, and Plead (we know where) against the Scots Presbytery? and I
believe they would pray against it also, but that they have not a Form for it,
whih they may easily provide for now, that they are about mending the Liturgy,
and then there will be quid pro quo --. And whereas he supposes they are not
herein encouraged by Authority: If he means the Authority of England, it is
Nonsense, for they have nothing to do with it: but if he mean the Authority of
Scotland, he discovers his Ignorance and Sauciness; for it is plain they have
done what was proper for a Civil Government (as such) to do, viz. they have
declared the Hierarchy (as to their own part) Antihumane, that is, contrary to
the Peoples Inclinations, and an insupportable Grievance to the Nation; and I
suppose are so good natured to wish their Neighbors were rid of it too; and so
much the rather that they have so often found, and do still find their imposing
saucy Intrigues against the Kingdom of Scotland, where they have nothing to do;
wherein if they persist, it may perhaps (and let them blame themselves for it)
prove as fatal to them as it did in the Days of Laud.

But seeing our Author is so good a Physiognomist, as to discover Features in
the present Face of Affairs, encouraging such sad Prognostications as the Fall
of the Church of England's Hierarchy, he would have done well to have
discovered them, that if possible the Effects might be prevented; but this I
suppose is reserved to the next Session at the Devil, where the Pillars of the
Hierarchy, it is possible, may find some new Props, or Butteresses, if his
Majesty's Oath, repeated Assurances, and Acts of Parliament, be not Security
enough. But though the Scribler would by this Instance, according to the usual
practices of the Papists, (whereof the Church of England will never learn to be
aware) incense them against his Majesty, as endeavoring to bring in
Presbytery, because he has in some part gratified the Inclinations of his
Majesty's Subjects in Scotland: they may assure themselves, that so long as
they can secure to their Hierarchy the Inclinations of the generality of the
People of England, they need not fear that his Majesty, who abolished it, to
satisfy the Inclinations of his People in Scotland, will do the like here,
contrary to the Inclinations of his People in England; having drawn his first
Breath in a Country where the People are suffered to follow their Inclinations
in Matters of Religion, and not cudgelled (according to the manner of some)
into a Ceremonial Uniformity, where there is a substantial Multiformity. And
there would be so much the less hazard of their losing the Inclinations of the
People, if the People perceived his Majesty had more of theirs; for they cannot
suppose the People ignorant, that almost all of the Hierarchy (Bishops at
least) opposed his coming to the Crown of England; which in a great measure
obstructed the Relief, and consequently occasioned the Ruin of Ireland; nor
that they do not observe how the Metropolitan of all England, and too many of
the rest, disown him still: Nor have they forgot, that upon the Opposition the
Abdication and Vacancy of the Throne met with from the Mitred Lords; that when
the Matter came to the Lower House again, they were followed by about 150 of
the Commons; and consequently the Nation at the very brink of Destruction, by
the morosity of the Mitres, which occasioned severe Reflections upon them by
some of their own Coronets, viz. That they generally found the Bishops to be
against that which was for the Nation's Good, etc. And howsoever the late
Opposition which they made to the late King may be magnified; they seem quickly
to have repented of it, when so many of the same Men are at this Day opposite
to his present Majesty's Title. But supposing they had continued steadfast to
the Nation's Interest; whatever good Nature might have done, I am sure Justice
would not have awarded them any Thanks, but such as are due to Him, who after
he has broke my Head, allows me a Plaster: Which will appear undeniably true,
if we consider that they threw out the Bill of Exclusion, which makes them
chargeable with all the Mischiefs past, present, and to come, from that unhappy
Reign. And if they persist in such Courses, it cannot but be thought that,
early or late, the Nation may come to enquire what sort of Men they were who
preached up Dispensing Power, Passive Obedience, Non-resistance, etc. And who
were the most zealous in promoting Abhorrences of Petitions for a Parliament,
reading Charles the Second's Declaration for dissolving that of Oxford,
promising to assist and stand by him and the Duke of York; publishing the
Protestant Plots from their Pulpits; whence they ridiculed that of the Papists;
which the Mitres are still so unwilling to have believed, that most of them
opposed the reversing of the Judgment of Perjury given against Dr. Oats, who
(though little regarded) did the Nation more Service than the Seven idolized
Stars, so many of whom are now turned dark Lanthorns. Nor can it ever be forgot
how many of the Inferior Clergy, following the conduct of their Triple-headed
Guide, advanced the Interest of the Triple Crown, and some of them topping Ones
too, at the Hour of Death, grated with their slavish Non-sensical Doctrine of
Non-resistance, upon the Consciences of the Noble Hero's and Darlings of the
People, the Lord Russel, and Duke of Monmouth, upon the very Scaffolds: and if
the contrary Doctrine be damnable, as they alleged then, I am sure their
Church has been guilty of damnable Practices since.

As for his malicious Insinuation, That it is not the want of Affection to the
present Establishment that incenses the People of Scotland against the
Episcopal Party, he may remember that he contradicts himself in the first Page,
where he says, That the Address of the Bishops against the Prince of Orange,
incensed the inferior People against them: So we see the Proverb verified, that
Liars had need of good Memories.

And whereas he says, That some of the Clergy expelled Scotland, conform in all
Points when they came to England, it needs better proof than his Assertion to
give it credit: For what Reason can there be to own his Majesty's Authority in
England, that might not have prevailed with them to do it in Scotland? Let any
reasonable Answer be given to this; and if there be any who do that here,
pretending they were turned out by Authority upon anyother Account there, or
that they may not have the Protection of Authority to stay there; he would do
well to give us their Names, and we doubt not to prove them Infamous,
Scandalous, Lying Runnagates, of which we know there are too many who make it
their Work to incense the Church of England against, and make them jealous of
his Majesty: Of which Number this Pamphleteer seems to be, by his malicious
Insinuation, That Cesar's Ear is not open to hear their Complaints; a seditious
Reflection, as if his Majesty denied Common Justice to any of his Subjects;
which Authority is obliged to enquire into and punish.

And whereas he alleges, That the Sufferings of these infamous Hirelings, are
not unlike those of the Primitive Christians. To which of the Saints will he
turn him? or where will he find an Instance in the Primitive Church, That the
Ministers adhered to a persecuting Pagan Prince, brought to the Crown by Force
and Fraud, against a Christian King duly elected by the People? Let him give me
such an one, Et erit mihi Magnus Apollo.

But to conclude, with a true Character of these Scottish Prelatists, They are
not such as out of Conscience decline to own the present Government; but
knowing themselves either to have been wicked Persecutors, of scandalous Lives,
or Insufficient, so as that they could not be continued in the Pastoral Charge
under any good Government; They thought it best to come off with a little
Credit, and pretend Loyalty to the Abdicated Prince.

I conclude, with an obtestation to all sober Men, not to regard the
Gain-sayings of Hectors, Ruffians, profane Fellows, Cursers Jacobites,
Swearers, etc. to any thing here delivered, though they should confirm their
Attestations with execrable Oaths, for they may be sure that such as make no
Conscience to swear, will make none to lie.

FINIS.

