A BRIEF SURVEY (HISTORICAL and POLITICAL) OF THE Life and Reign OF Henry the
III. KING OF ENGLAND.

Dedicated to his most Sacred MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for James Vade, at the Cock and Sugar Loaf, near St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street. 1680.

SACRO-SANCTAE MAJESTATI CAROLI SECUNDI, DEI GRATIA, MAGNAE BRITANNIAE,
FRANCIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, REGIS; FIDEI PROPUGNATORIS CHRISTIANAE; PACIS PERPETUAE
INSTAURATORIS; PUBLICAE AUCTORIS AUGUSTI SECURITATIS; ET NATI BRITANNICI AD
AETERNITATEM NOMINIS ET IMPERII; QUAM HUMILLIME D. D. CONSECRATURQUE HOC
OPUSCULUM.

A BRIEF SURVEY, OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF Henry the III, etc.
Oppressed with the insupportable Calamities of Civil Arms, and affrighted at
the sudden fall of a Licentious Sovereign, who was reported to have been
Poisoned by a Monk; all men stood at gaze, expecting Peace, (the Event of their
long Desires) and Benefit, as the Issue of their new Hopes: Experience telling
us that, in every Shift of Princes, there are very few either so Mean, or so
Inopinionative, as not to please themselves with some probable Object of
Preferment. To content all, ( October 19. 1216.) a Child ascends the Throne,
Mild and Gracious, but Easy of Nature, whose Innocence, and natural Goodness
protected him throughout the various Perils of his Father's Reign. Happy was he
in his Uncle William Earl of Pembroke (the Guide of his Infancy;) and no less
fortunate, for thirty years after, whilst Hubert de Burgh (Earl of Kent) that
Fast Servant of King John's against the French, both in Normandy, and England,
together with Bygot Earl of Norfolk, and others of like Gravity, and Abilities,
had the management of Affairs. Public Distempers were then very few, and such
only as are incident to all States, the Commons greedy and tenacious of
Liberty, and the Nobility of Rule: One violent Storm, it is true, was raised, by
some old, constant Followers of his Father; as Foulk de Brent who, (though a
Forreigner, yet) held at one time the Earldoms of Nottingham, Oxford, Bedford
and Buckingham; Brian de Lisle, and some others. These being men of turbulent
Spirits, and that could only Thrive by the Wars, were very ill at ease in those
days of Sloth; (as they termed that Calm of King Henry's Government) Beside
that, the Justice of Peaceable Times urged from them, to the lawful owners,
such Lands and Castles, as the fury of War had unjustly given them. Now
perceiving by the Uprightness of the King, that Power of Protection should not
be made a wrong-doer; they broke forth into such a Rebellion as ended not but
with their Lives; declaring that those their Swords which had set the Crown
upon their Sovereign's Head when neither Law nor Majesty could, should now
secure those Acquests to their Masters, when Majesty or Law would not. Thus we
see how dangerous are too great Benefits of Subjects to their Princes; as
rendering the Mind incapable of any other sense than that of Merit. This Blast
being over, the Government felt no other affliction than the Common and
Invidious Malevolence to Authority: Good and Great Men may preserve themselves
from Guilt, but not from Envy; being still shot at, by the Aspiring of those
that look upon themselves as less in Employment than they are in Desert. These
Vapors, however, did ever vanish, without much trouble, so long as the Helm
was steered by Temperate Spirits, and the King squared his Actions by the Rule
of Good Counsel, and not of Young, Passionate, or single Advice.

Thirty years being now past and gone, and none of the old Guides of the Kings
Youth left alive, but de Burgh; (a man in whom nothing of Worth was wanting,
save Moderation) his length of days gave him the advantage of Sole Power, his
Ambition furnishing Desire and Art, to keep out others. This drew upon him the
implacable malice of a great many, which was yet further augmented by the fresh
Honors, and Offices, that the King was then pleased to confer upon him. Time
had now wrought a Revolution, as in it self, so in the Hearts of the People,
who had forgotten the late Sufferings of their Fathers, and labored under the
surfeit of a long Peace; which having, probably, let in some Abuses, the
Commons (to whom the Present seems ever worst) take the Alarm, fall to
commending the past Ages they never remembered, and condemning the Present;
though equally ignorant of the Disease of it, and of the Remedy. With these
idle and usual Humors, struck in some of the young Nobility, that were warm
and over weening, though altogether as unskilful as the rest: these fall to
sullying the Wisdom and Integrity of the Court-Officers, by magnifying each
casual mishap into a Crime, and exposing every Blemish in Government; and then
having their Heads filled with certain Ideas and Fantastic Forms of
Commonwealths, they flatter themselves that they are able to mold any State
according to these general Rules, which in particular Application do still
appear to be but idle and gross Absurdities. Being thus puffed up in Opinion of
their own worth, they begin to cast about how to get into Employment, a thing
they had long desired* and now do sue for; and probable it is that the farthest
of their Aim, as yet, was to be quiet Instruments in serving the Crown, had
they then been looked upon as fit, and well deserving. But the King, having
been tutored into a just veneration for the Counsels of the Aged Statesmen,
and reflecting that such Green Heads were fitter for disordering than settling
Affairs; either denied, or delayed their Requests: for Princes will ever choose
their Ministers, Equal to, not above their Business, Creatures that are only
theirs, out of mere Election; otherwise, without Friends or Power. Amongst this
unequal Medly, there were, of the Nobility, the Earls of Pembroke, Gloucester
and Hertford, darlings of the Rabble; some of them upon the score of their
Fathers Merits, whose memories were held Sacred, as pretended Pillars of
Public Liberty, and opposers of encroaching Monarchy. Of the Gentry were
Fitz-Geoffrey, Bardolph, Grisley and Fitz-John; Spirits of as much Arrogance,
and A^^imony, as Camp, Court, Country, (the places from whence they were
Elected) could afford any: These were for attempting by open Force, what the
other sought to effect by Artifice; but yet they were all of them equally
Impatient to behold their Ends thus frustrated; and that so long as the King
followed the Advice of the Earl of Kent, there would be no hopes of obtaining
their desires. Wherefore they became frequent in their Consults and Cabals, day
and night; and at last Sommery; and Spencer, two that were far in Opinion with
the rest, as being Gentlemen of Foreign Education, and b^ qualified than was
usual for men of those times; gave it as their Advice, that the surest way to
remove de Burgh (that great, and good Obstacle) out of the way of their
Advancement, would be, to pry narrowly into his Actions, and side with his
Opposite, Peter Bishop of Winchester; (an ill man, but in favor with the King)
backing the Motion with this suggestion, that the worthiest being driven out by
the worst, they should be able either to mate him with his own Vice, (which the
higher he advanced would still be the more visible) and so remove him at
pleasure; or else, by suffering the King to deliver himself up to such bad
Ministers, as would lose him the Hearts, and Affections, of his People; they
might thus plain the way to their own Preferment: Thus they projected the
compassing of that by troubling the State, which, so long as it was at quiet,
they despaired of obtaining; and so far did the success answer Expectation,
that Spencer died in actual Rebellion, Justiciarius Angliae, against his
Master. This advice now being approved, and put in Practice; the corrupt and
ambitious Bishop is by money and address easily brought over to the Party; and
Articles are in all have forged, and presented against the Earl; charging him
with wasting the Royal Treasure, the sale of Crown Lands, and (what these
doubtful times held Capital) his allowing any thing that might create a Rupture
between King and People; as his prevailing upon the King to revoke all Patents
granted in his Nonage, and enforcing the People not to pay according to their
Ability or the merit of the Grant, but whatever the Minister himself should
think fit to extort.

De Burgh cleared himself of all the Branches of this Accusation, save only the
Last; under which he worthily perished; for such Acts as fill the Princes
Coffers, are still the destruction of their first Inventers; Bad times, we see,
corrupt good Counsels, and prevail upon the best Ministers to truckle to the
Lusts of their Masters: Therefore this King is not wholly to be excused, that
could so easily give way to the blasting the former Services of so faithful an
Officer, for that wherein himself was chief in fault. But Princes are naturally
more variable, and sooner cloyed, than other men; their favors are more
transitory, and as their minds are Large, so they without much difficulty
overlook their first Choice, limiting their Affections to their Satisfactions.

Winchester is now mounted into the Saddle, and Governs all; taking for his
Prime Instrument Peter de Rivallis; (such another as himself) displaces the
Natives, and advances (his Countrymen) Poictovins and Britains, into Offices
of the greatest Trust and Benefit; and draws the King into an ill Opinion of
his People: Nothing touching the English so much to the Quick, as to be
domineered over by Foreigners. Here it was that Injustice became the Arbiter
of Common Equity, the Law lay gasping at the foot of Faction, Peace at the
mercy of the Seditious, and Oppression stepped into the Bench to pronounce upon
points of Right and Honesty, so that the Plot of the tumultuous Barons, by this
means, advanced it self without so much as a Rub: And had not the Loyal Part of
the Bishops calmed all, by humble and dutiful Persuasions, and by representing
to his Majesty, that his supporting the Power of a Person whose insolent
Carriage had but lately lost to King John his Father, Normandy, the Love of his
People, and in that his Crown; and who at that very season was no less
industrious in tempting himself to reject in Passion, the just Petitions of his
faithful Subjects; the Case (amongst many others) of Pembroke the Earl Marshal,
the Common Rights of whose Office were unjustly withheld from him; would
inevitably provoke Discontents, and endanger the Weal of the Kingdom; the
Rebellious Lords had, questionless, gained their End, by exasperating, and
emproving this Distemper into a Civil War. Denials of Princes are ever to be
supplied with gracious Usage, thereby, if not to cure the sore, yet, at least,
to mitigate the Sense of it: But it is best of all, that all Favors proceed
directly from themselves; and only Refusals, and things of Bitterness, from
their Ministers.

Thus now are the Strangers all removed and banished; Rivallis's Extortions
examined, by many strict Commissions of Enquiry; the proud Bishop of Winchester
(turned off in disgrace) is brought to experiment that Power founded upon
Injustice is but short-lived, and that in the Favor of Princes there is no
Medium or Subsistence betwixt the Highest of all, and Precipitation. But the
Lords finding themselves still (by this Reformation) frustrated of their evil
Designs, began again to cherish the late grounds of the Peoples Disgusts, by
scattering querulous and ambiguous Speeches against his Majesty, depraving and
questioning his Discretion, and Government; and seeking by all the means, and
arts imaginable, to ingratiate and glorify themselves with the sordid Rabble:
Insomuch that the King (whose Nature was too mild for such turbulent Spirits)
was obliged afresh, to cast himself upon the Advice and Love of Foreigners,
since no condescentions could purchase it at Home, where many demeaned
themselves like Tutors and Controllers; few like Subjects and Counselors.

God, we know, governs the Hearts of Princes, and sends them such Ministers, as
the quality of the Subject meriteth: for Montford (a Frenchman) became the
next Object of the Kings Delight; being a Gentleman of choice Blood, Education
and Feature: And to so fond a degree did the heady affection of the Sovereign
dote upon him, that, in his very Entrance into Grace, he made him Earl of
Leicester, to the general dissatisfaction of the Nobility; and gave him (to the
no less offense of the Clergy, by violating the Rights of the Church) his
Vowed, Veiled Sister, to Wife. Some have denied this Act of the Kings to be
more than common Policy, as making the Tie of his Favorites Dependency the
strength of his Assurance, so Both at his will. But Montford growing wanton,
upon this dallyance of his Master; forgets Moderation; Discretion, in Youth,
seldom attending great and sudden Fortunes. He takes the manage of all Public
Affairs into his own hand, and engrosseth the disposal of all Favors and
Preferments; so that all suites are addressed to him, and the King becomes (in
effect) but as a Cipher set to add to this Figure the more of Number. Great is
the Error of a Prince when the Hope of the Subject comes to recognize it self
beholden to the Servant, for that, which ought to be acknowledged as the
immediate Bounty and Goodness of himself: And though they are not to be denied
the privilege of advancing above the rest, some trusty Friend, to whom they may
communicate their nearest Passions, yet ought they so to temper the Current of
Favor, as not to darken the Luster of their Regalities.

The Great and Gravest Men beholding the unworthy thus to deal alone, in that
which ought of Right, to have passed through their hands; and to step over all
their heads, to the greatest Honors and Offices; began to repine; but upon
second thoughts, they ran along with the rising Grace of the Kings
Half-Brethren, though Strangers, hoping, by this way of proceeding, to divide
that Power which, otherwise, they saw it impossible to Break. Yet Leicester,
being confident of his Masters Love, and impatient of bearing either Rival in
Favor, or Partner in Rule, opposes them all: But he found, at length, in his
Ebb of kindness, the fortune of others; and that the King could with as much
ease transfer his Fancy, as he had settled his Affections. And in truth,
extraordinary must needs be the Artifice and Address of that man, that is able
to keep himself aflote in the stream of a Monarchs good Opinion; in regard that
the change of his Will, (which for the most part is strongly influenced by
Fancy, and soon cloyed) is hardly to be arrested. To effect this, the
Favorite must solely attend the Honor and Service of his Master; and
(abandoning all other Considerations) insinuate himself into his inward
Inclinations; winding into a necessity of Employment, by discharging the
Offices of most Secrecy, in reference either to public Service, or the Princes
peculiar Pleasures: He must also be careful to suppress Competitors, by the
hands of others, conceal in Public, his own Greatness, by counterfeit
Affectations of Humility; and in his persute of Authority, he is to cast a show
as if his Promotions were the work of others, or of Convenience, rather than of
any great Ambition of his own.

But now, upon this Advantage, the Reins of Rule were possessed by the
ambitious Lords and entrusted (as Henry Knighton says) in the hands of the
Kings Half-Brethren, Adam, Guido, Godfrey, and William; the King contenting
himself (being left to act his own part, as before) with the Shadow only, and
License of a great Fortune. And to say the truth, he was ever Wyer-drawn, when
he was so happy as to have about him such worthy Servants as would urge and
suggest things that were for his Honor. But these Masters, on the contrary,
being puffed up with the conceit of having no Superior; made it their business
by gentle Words and Flatteries, to seduce the unsteady mind of the King from
the Path of Reason; thereby to gain to themselves the privilege of doing what
they list. So that they fell immediately to filling the Courts of Justice, and
Places of Trust, with their own Countrymen; exacting of whom, how, and what
they would; wasting the Public Treasure, and Crown Lands, to the enriching of
themselves, and dependents; setting Prices upon all Offenses; and squaring the
Law according to the Rul^ of their own Breasts: And upon any Complaint of the
Subject the usual Reply of their Servants was, How'le ye help your self; for
the Kings Pleasure's in my Masters Pocket? Nay to so insupportable a degree of
Licentiousness did these Strangers proceed; that they seemed rather to have
entr'd the Land by Conquest, ^han upon Invitation: they enforced upon the great
men not Obedience only, but Servitude and reduced the meaner sort to so
wretched a degree of Poverty, that they might justly say they had nothing. Yet
lest the Groans of his People, and the wickedness of his Ministers, should
come to the King's Ear, by the means of good and able Men; they deny all such
the least Access: Suspicion (being the best preserver of her own Deserts) still
keeps a strict eye upon those that have a due sense of Honor and Virtue; as
fearing them most. Thus by the Inhability of the Prince, the Government becomes
a Prey to these Lawless Minions; which occasions infinite Corruptions and
Disorders in all the Members of the State; all presuming upon his weakness, do
endeavor to grasp at an Arbitrary Authority, that they may make Profit of it,
and easily permit the increasing of Ill, as the ready way to make their own
Fortunes.

These Confusions were ushered in by a Famine, and that so violent an one, that
the king is forced to direct Writs to the several Counties, to bury their Dead,
they were so Numerous: The Dearth continues, and then fell the Sword to raging
so terribly, that no man durst walk abroad without Arms; all the Villages being
left as a Prey to the tumultuous Rabble; who raving up and down, by the
Connivance of such as ought to have suppressed them; it plainly appeared, that
the Factious Lords, whom the King suspected, had fomented and given Life to the
Commotion; Seditious Peers ever bringing Fuel to such Popular Fires.

Neither was the Church it self without a busy Part in this Tragical Scene:
For the Bishops of Worcester and Lincoln (being well-wishers to Montford and
his Faction) were far engaged. In such Designs Churchmen are never wanting;
and the distaste of the established Government as well Ecclesiastical as Civil,
will ever be a Knot of Strength for such unquiet Spirits, who are as greedy
after Innovations in the Church, as in the State; and ever crying up some new
Model of Policy or other; such as is most relishing to the giddy Multitude, who
(at this time) were mightily offended (and not without reason neither) at the
new Courts of the Clergy, their Pomp, Rapaciousness, and the Extortions of the
Pope. This was a fair pretext for the factious part of the Clergy so far to
pursue the Orders, Ceremonies and Constitutions of the Church with bitter
Speeches and Invectives; that some of them incurred the sentence of
Excommunication at Rome, and of Treason at Home: they enjoining the Earl of
Leicester, as he tendered his Salvation, to maintain the Cause (meaning his
Rebellion) to the very Death; and asserting, that the Peace of the English
Church was never to be established but by the Material Sword. But that could
never (surely) be the soundest Doctrine (what ever might be pretended) which
was only to be propagated by War and License; seeing the first Church
(contrariwise) grew up, by Fasting and Prayer. True Piety obliges the Subject
to desire a Good Sovereign, but to bear with a Bad one; and take the Burden of
Princes with a bended Knee; so, in time, to deserve Abatement; rather than
resist Authority. Churchmen ought not always, therefore, to be our Oracles, as
to matters of Loyalty and Allegiance, they may safely inform us of our Duty in
difficult Points of Religion; and where an humble ignorance is a secure
knowledge, we may rely upon them; but they are not to be harken'd to in their
clamorous Harangues against Authority.

Now to remedy all these Confusions, and supply the Kings necessities, a
Parliament was called at last; much to the liking of those Lords, who as little
meant to Relieve the King, as they did to Heal the State; their End, at that
time, being only to lay open, at Home, the Poverty of their Master; lessen his
Reputation, Abroad; and in those times of Privilege, to breath out their
Passions freely. Here they began to twit him with the Wrong he had done to the
Public, in engrossing the choice of the Chief Justice, Chancellor, and
Treasurer; who ought not (they said) to have been Elected, but by the Common
Counsel of the Realm; highly applauding the Resolution of the Bishop of
Chichester, in refusing to surrender the Great Seal, but in Parliament, where
he received it. Then they charge him with having conferred all the places of
Trust and Profit, in his disposal, upon Foreigners; and leaving his English
Subjects unrewarded; with having ruined the Merchants Trade by the introducing
of Maletolts, and imposing of Heavy Customs; with having violated the Common
Liberty, by Non obstantes in his Patents, thereby to secure Monopolies for his
private Favorites; with having taken the Bread out of the Peoples mouths, and
forced away their Horses from the very Plow; with sending his Justices into the
Country, to oppress and fleece the People, by fob'd Actions, and false
Accusations; telling him that Sr. Robert de Pursloe had extorted great Sums of
money from the Borderers of his Forests, upon pretense of Encroachments. So
that they were amazed (they said) to hear, that he should now demand Relief of
them; since the Commonalty was so miserably pill'd, pol'd, and empoverish'd, by
the multitude of former Contributions, that they were incapable of making any
sort of supply. And therefore they suggested to him, that, they being able to
prove his needless Expenses, since the Kingdom began to be oppressed, to have
amounted to above eight hundred thousand pound; it was but fitting that he
should call to account, and pluck from his Favorites; who had gleaned the
Treasure of the Kingdom, and shared the old Crown Lands amongst themselves:
Several of them having, in a short space, from the Inheritance of an Acre
advanced into the Possession of an Earldom; instancing in the Case of one
Mansel (an inferior Clerk) who rose from Nothing, to spend at the rate of four
thousand Marks (beside fifty Promotions that he had engrossed, in the Church)
in annual Revenue; they being of Opinion, that more moderate Fees ought to have
contented a Penman that was no better qualified than with the ordinary fruits
of a Writing-School. Yet they assured his Majesty after all, that if a
Reasonable Supply would suit with his Occasions; they were ready so far to
testify their Obedience in that particular, as his Behavior should fairly
merit: setting a day (says Matt. Paris) by which the King was to redress the
Abuses and Corruptions of his Court, and work into the good Opinion of the
Nobles.

The time being come, and he having ratified afresh the Great Charter, admitted
into his Council some persons of the Commons Election, and promised for the
future to apply himself for Counsel to Natives, not Foreigners; they at length
granted him such an Allowance as left him at their Devotion for a further
Supply. Thus Parliaments, that ( Before) were ever a Medicine to heal up any
Rupture in the Princes Fortunes, grew ( now) to be worse than the Disease;
malignant Humors being more predominant in them than well-composed Tempers.

The King having by this, fully discovered the Drift of his rebellious Lords;
and finding that they took advantage of his Necessities, to enslave him; begins
now to act the good Husband, closes his hand of Waste, and resolves (though
too late) to bear himself upon his own Legs. But this Experience is still
pernicious to the Private, and dangerous to the Public Weal of a State; as not
being able to do, but by undoing, nor to discern Order, till Disorder shows it.
And yet still Alas! such was his easiness and flexibility, when he came to be
pressed hard by his French Minions; that he was not capable of witholding his
hand from their insatiable Desires, and endless squanderings: Insomuch that it
then became a Byword, Our Inheritance is possessed by Aliens, and our Houses
by Strangers. Dependents upon a King that is excessive in Largesses, become
exorbitant in their Demands; measuring them not by Reason, but example: Past
favors are never reckoned upon, nor any Bounty valued but what is purely
Future; and look how much a Prince disables himself by Giving, so much the
poorer he is of True Friends: such Prodigality, in a Sovereign, ever concluding
in the Spoil and Plunder of his Subjects.

But before the King would again submit himself to so many bold and strict
Inquiries of his Disloyal Subjects, as he had endured the last Parliament; he
resolves to try and undergo all shifts, and extremities, that necessity and a
great mind, could impose upon him. First therefore, he exposes the Crown Lands,
then his Jewels, to sale; pawns Gascoyn; and after That, his Imperial Crown:
And when his Credit would serve him no longer, (having so often failed of his
word) nor any thing of his own left to raise money upon; he then pawns the
Jewels and Ornaments of St. Edwards Shrine; and at the long run, (being
destitute of means to defray the Charge of his Court) was forced to break up
house, and with his Queen and Children to press upon the Charity of his
Subjects for his Daily Bread.

Having thus, by Improvidence, again reduced himself to this low Ebb; the
Rebellious Lords grew more and more intractable, in Confidence that the
Sovereign Power would, now at last, inevitably fall a prey to their ambitious
Machinations; which, that it might the sooner come to pass, they coveted
nothing more passionately, than to drive the King into Want, that so they might
constrain him to call a Parliament; as phansying to themselves that Subjects,
at such times, seem more than they should be, Princes, less. In order hereunto,
they take a great deal of pains to propagate false and seditious Rumors of the
Kings intention to repair his broken Fortunes by the Ruin of those of his
Subjects; and that having nothing left of his own, he might and intended to
force from others; further insinuating, that Princes will never Want, so long
as the people has the means of supplying them. This scandalous Aspersion had
the wished for Effect; for it troubled the State; and the flame would
questionless have advanced Higher, had not the King asswag'd it, by
Proclamations; wherein he declared, that he was not insensible of the evil Arts
that had been made use of to seduce his Liege People into an ill Opinion of his
Person and Government, by false and groundless Suggestions and Surmises, of his
designing to oppress them in their just Liberties and Proprieties; by such
undue practices (he said) they labored to withdraw them from their Duty and
Allegiance: He cautioned them to give no heed to, and beware of such malicious
Disturbers of the Public Peace; and assured them, that he had made his Letters
Patent purely to the end that they might be satisfied as to his readiness and
resolution to defend them from the oppression of the Great Lords, and
inviolably to maintain to them their lawful Customs, Privileges and Immunities,
in every Branch of them. But for all this yet, he found that Majesty and Right
were not to be kept aslote, without Purse and Power; and that himself wanted so
much of Both, as was requisite for stopping the Breach in his own Revenue, and
his Subjects Loyalty: Wherefore lie betakes himself, at length to the Bosom of
his People for Relief and Counsel.

He called a Parliament at Oxford; where his necessities encountered so many
undutiful Demands, that he was forced to surrender to their rebellious Will his
Royal Power. For the Commons, looking upon themselves as the Patrons of the
peoples Liberties, pressed the King to give way to the entrusting the Manage of
the State in the hands of four and twenty; twelve of them to be of their own
Election, and the rest to be chosen by himself; who, in all things else, was
left a mere Cipher: Nay, and even in this Case, either through Fear or
Negligence he filled up his number with Montford, Gloucester and Spencer; which
error, over and above the weakening of his own Party, won to those his late
Opposites an Opinion of having got a great Interest in his Favor. This
Parliament it should seem, never dreamt of a Perpetuation; for otherwise, they
might, probably, have had it for the asking. But yet they got what served their
Turn; for by this one Act he parted with his Right of Electing either public
Officer or private Servant; and brought himself under a necessity of dispoyling
his Half-Brethren and their Followers, banishing them the Realm by an
Instrument under his own hand; and of commanding his Writ pro Transportatione
Fratrum suorum to be directed to the Earls of Hartford and Surry, to prohibit
their carrying on Board with them either Money, Arms, or Ornaments, other than
in the manner prescribed. After their departure, he ordered the men of Bristol
not to suffer any Strangers, or Kinsmen of his, to land in their Port, but so
to demean themselves in this particular, as they would answer it to his Lords
and him. Thus we may see how easily men's Estates do change in an Instant; and
how difficult a thing it is to enjoy quietly what was gotten unjustly. And now
Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of the Romans, (King Henrie's own Brother)
being at this time beyond the Seas, is by Letter tampered with underhand, to
make a show of Ratifying, by Oath, and voluntary Consent, those former
Restrictions of Regal Power: which, though he submitted to, yet would not the
Lords suffer either the King, or him to enter Dover Castle; (the Key of the
Kingdom) they having furnished it and most of the other Forts of Reputation and
Strength in the Nation with Governors of their own Election, and Sworn
respectively to the State. The like assurance did they also exact of all
Sheriffs, Coroners, Bailiffs, and other Public Ministers; examining the
Behavior of many, by strict Commission upon Oath; hereby to curry Favor with
the Vulgar, who groaned under their late Extortions. But their Chief end in all
this, was no other, (as it afterward appeared) than by displacing the faithful
Servants of the King; upon pretense of their being teinted with Malignancy, to
open a way for the introducing of their own Dependents.

Having thus changed the Sole Power into the Rule of many, and those by popular
Election too; they persuaded themselves, that by establishing this Form of
limited Monarchy, they had wholly suppressed all thoughts of hankering afresh
after the whimsical humors of licentious Sovereignty. But it fell out quite
otherwise; for now every man began to value himself upon his own Abilities, and
to crack his Skull upon any Design that might probably enlarge the Boundarys of
his Authority and Command. The Grandees also fell to rending and lopping off
from the Revenues and Segniories of the Crown, all such Lands and Manours as
bordered upon any of their own Seats; pressing upon the Kings Subjects, and
Tenants, to a most insupportable degree of Servitude. Insomuch that by raising
petite Annuities into great Honors, and tearing asunder the Royal Prerogative;
they made themselves, (of Subjects, whilst they kept within the bounds of
Duty,) so many Tyrants, upon the loss of their Loyalty; involving the people in
an extremity of Slavery and Oppression: And yet they bore all with Patience;
for Custom being the only case of Excess of Misery, men were contented to lay
the foundation of Servitude by the length of Sufferance; which found neither
End nor Abatement, until the quiet part of the Kings Reign.

Now Montford, Gloucester, and Spencer (the Heads of this Conspiracy) having, by
the late Provisions, drawn into the hands of the twenty four Tribunes of the
People, the entire management of all Affairs; and finding this Power to be yet
too much dispersed, to answer their Expectations; compelled the King to call
another Parliament; where they got the authority of the Twenty four assigned
over to themselves, and erected a Triumvirate for their own ends only, and not
for reforming Abuses, and settling the Nation, as they at first gave out. And
thus by the Gratification of these Private Interests, the Public was staid,
for a time: But yet all this Juggle and Artifice, was only to make the way the
smoother for one of them to become perpetual Dictator. Ambition is never so
high, but that it still labors to advance a step further; and that Station
which lately seemed Inaccessible, is now looked upon but as a Cocks-Stride; that
which was Great, in the Persute, seeming Inconsiderable, in the Possession.
These Three Elect nine Counselors (Three of them at least to make a Quorum)
who were to dispose of and fortify Castles, and transact other Affairs of the
Realm. But the Chief Justice, Chancellor, Treasurer, and all other Officers,
greater or less, they reserve the Choice of to themselves: binding the King so
very strictly to this hard Bargain, that he submits to pass an Instrument to
them under the Great Seal, and Oath, whereby he actually discharged them from
their Allegiance when ever he should attempt to assume to himself the Royal
Dignity; declaring it to be lawful (in such Case) for the whole Nation to rise
up as one man, and, (having no Obligation to him) by force to reduce him into
Order.

And yet not long after; this Prodigy of Fortune (whom she had made a wretched
Example of her Inconstancy) finding no part of his Sovereignty left him, but
the bare Title; and even that precarious too; craves Aid of Pope Urbane, the
fourth, against his disloyal Subjects; who armed him with Excommunications
against all that should not forthwith return to their Duty; and Cancelled his
Oath, and Contract; in regard that it was made when he could not properly say
that he was at Liberty; Force having no power to create a just Interest.

But the Lords, having now imp'd their wings with Eagles Feathers, and liking
no Game but what was raked out of the Ashes of Monarchy; boldly make head
against their Sovereign: And that they might be the better able to cope with
him, call in the French to their Assistance. Thus again did the Commonwealth
turn her Sword against her own Breast; and invite her ancient Enemy to the
Funeral of her Liberty; so that it was a great Providence that she fell not, at
this time, under a Foreign Yoke. Now though these men were much more
apprehensive of their own Disgrace than of others Miseries; yet could they find
no better Pretext for private Interest, than that of the Public. Wherefore at
the entry of this Rebellion they cried out for Liberty; though when it drew
near an end, they never spoke word of it. Well! at Lewis the Armies met, and
the King endeavors a Reconciliation, but in vain; for Arguments are ever
unprofitable, when Justice is inferior to Force. Wherefore the Sword decides
the Controversy, and makes the two Kings and their eldest Sons, Prisoners.

The Person and the Power being now both of them in the hands of Montford and
Gloucester; found no other means of Security, or expectation of Liberty, than
what the emulous Competition of Greatness (which began to break forth between
these two mighty Rivals) gave hope of: For Leicester designing, (by engrossing
from his Partner the Person of the King, and securing to his Followers the best
part of the Spoil) to draw more fruit from this Advantage, than, in Fellowship,
it could yield, dissolved the Knot of all their Amity. Thus we may observe that
equal Authority, with the same Power, is ever fatal to all great Actions; for
to reduce minds to so even a pitch that they should not have some strings of
Disagreement, is absolutely impossible. Montford having thus broken all faith
with his Confederates, as well as Duty to his Sovereign; left the Path of
Moderation and Wisdom, to approach the King by that of Haughtiness and
Distrust; plying him with pretenses that his Arms and Ends were evermore
directed to the good of the Public, and the ease of the People; that in all
this he entertained no private Passion, in opposition to the sense of his
Allegiance; but was capable of regulating his Desires according to his just
Power, and consequently to his Majesty's Satisfaction, in case he would be
ruled; that is to say, (as he explained himself) command the Forts and Castles
of his now Opposite, Gloucester, and the rest, to be delivered up into his
hands. It was no easy matter, we may well imagine, for the King thus to be
tutored by his inferior, and Vassal: But Necessity, in such Cases, commonly
bears down before it all Formalities: And therefore this poor Prince who (lying
at the Victors Discretion) seemed to have been raised, only to show the
Inconstancy of Fortune, and the Vanity of man; suited himself with incomparable
Wisdom according to the Exigences of the Times: Neither could Humility injure
Majesty, when the only means to contein Spirits so insolent within due bounds,
was Dissimulation. Wherefore he summons, in Person, the Forts of his
faithfullest Friends to yield to his greatest Enemies; entering them, in show,
as his Lodging, but, in effect, as his Prison; and sees himself forced to take
Law from him, to whom he lately thought to have given it. Leicester is now
become the Darling of the Rabble, who easily crouch and change to every new
Master; but yet the Sober and considering part of the Nation durst not venture
to sail along with his Fortune, by the Light of his Glory; as knowing well that
Crystal, though it fairly glitters, yet is soon broken; and that as the Ascent
of Usurpation is slippery, so the Top is tottering, and the Fall dreadful. To
account this man therefore at the very height of his false Felicity to be truly
Happy, was but to give the name of the Image to the Mettle that was not yet
molten: For by this time the imprisoned Prince had made an Escape, and was fast
assured of Gloucester upon the ty of his great Mind, and Discontent. Wherefore
they both of them united with the shattered Remnant of the Loyal Army, and, by
a speedy march, arrived unlookt for, upon the banks of the unarmed Troops of
the secure Rebels quartering about Evesham; whom they instantly assayl'd; as
knowing it to be no fit season to give time, when no time could assure so much
as Expedition promised. Spencer, and other Lords of that Faction, made toward
the King for Mercy; but could not get clear of the Press, being hurried along
the Stream, and perished in the Confusion. We are to consider that Public
Motion depends in a great measure upon the Conduct of Fortune, Private on our
own Carriage: And we must take heed how we run down steep Hills with heavy
Bodies, which being once in motion, are hurried on by their own weight, and
Stops are then no longer Voluntary. Now Leicester being at that instant with
the King, and out of the Storm, might have got away; if his Hope, and Courage
had not increased his Resolution with his Misfortune: He could neither abandon
his Followers, nor his Ambition; so that improving Adversity into an exercise
of Virtue, he came, and fell.

The King being by this succesful Turn freed and obeyed; began to enquire into
the ground of his former Miscarriages; and why that Virtue and Providence which
had so long settled and supported the English Empire in the greatest Luster and
Reputation, throughout the Reign of his Glorious Ancestors; should now turn
tail upon Him, and Confederate with his Enemies; to the almost absolute
destruction of the State, and as if her Genius had quite forsook her: Upon due
search, he finds his squandering hand to have made too bold with the Substance
and Estates of his People; and that the rapacious Exorbitances of his Civil
Ministers, the Licentiousness of his Martial Followers, his own harsh Demeanor
and Inaccessibleness, and his neglect of keeping his Word, had lost him his
Nobility at home: And that his Necessities, which forced him to make
Merchandise of Peace and War, as his last Refuge; and to put himself into the
power of Persons doubtful or injured; together with his giving himself up to a
sensual Security, and entrusting with the management of the State, base,
griping and unworthy Officers, whose Counsels were ever more subtle than
Substantial, had wounded his Reputation abroad, and thrown down those Pillars
of Sovereignty, Credit and Veneration. Wherefore he enters upon his regained
Authority with Gentleness and Clemency; wholly passing over the faults of most
of the Rebels: (A gracious kind of pardoning, not so much as to take notice of
the Offense!) and so forgot the Rest, that they might live, but to the Glory of
his Goodness; for the fewer killed, the more remain to adorn the Trophy.
Tyrants indeed shed Blood for Pleasure, but Kings, out of Necessity; And yet
lest his Justice and Power might suffer too much, by his Grace and Mercy, some
few he punished with easy Fines, others, by Exile; as the two Guiltless, yet
unpitied Sons of the Arch-Traytor Leicester. So odious (we see) is Treason in
the Head, that it involveth the innocent Children in an everlasting Distrust;
and that which in others is but Suspicion, in them is Guilt. Then he proceeds
to confer upon the constant adherers to his broken Fortunes, the Forfeitures of
his Enemies; but with much more Wariness than before: as having found (by
Experience) immoderate Liberality to be but a weak means to win Love; because
it lost more in the Gathering than it gained in the Giving. A Bounty placed
without Respect, is taken without Gratitude; discredits the Receiver, and
detracts from the judgment of the Bestower; blunting the Appetites of such as
draw their Hopes of Preferment from measures of Fidelity and Service. Thus at
last he learned that Reward and Reprehension discreetly tempered, do Balance
Government; and that it much imports a Prince to keep that Hand steady and
equal, that holds the Scale.

In the next place he applied himself to the correcting of his own natural
Infirmities: Wisely judging, that though the Princes Manners are only a mute
Law, yet have they more of Life and Vigor in them, than those of Letters. So
that though he might now and then touch upon the skirts of Vice, yet was he
ever after cautious of entering the Circle. And whereas the Crimes and
Enormities of the great Men of his Court were, at this this time, become so
extravagantly numerous, that they were drawn into Example and Imitation: He
purged this likewise with singular exactitude of Judgment and Severity; knowing
full well that it was it that gave life to the Moderation or Intemperance of
the Commonwealth.

He reduced the Expenses of his House to the just Rule of his proper Revenue;
and was often heard to say that his former excessive squanderings had torn open
an Issue of his Subjects Blood. The Fury and Insolence of the Soldiery (now
become Licentious, by means of the Civil Wars) he spent and corrected by
foreign Expeditions: which he was the rather induced to do, upon finding that
the peaceable (only) bore the Burden of all the late Calamities; and that the
other were never satisfied, but in the miseries of the Innocent; being as ready
as ever, if they should find no Enemies abroad, to seek out some at Home.
Neither did he forget to examine or redress, by strict Commission, the Rigor
and Corruption of his Judicial Officers; as apprehending, that the sense of
their Severity would raise a murmur of his own Cruelty.

He filled up the seats of Judgment and Council with men of Noble Extraction.
For such do with less offense attract generous Spirits to respect and
Veneration. He no longer measures their Abilities by Favor, or private
Recommendation, as before; but by public Vogue: For though every man in
particular may deceive and be deceived, yet is not possible for one man to
deceive all; or all, one.

And the better to set off his own Capacity, and to discover to the World what
part he intended, hereafter, to bear in all deliberate Expeditions; he sits
himself in Council daily, disposing Affairs of most weight, in his own Person:
for Councellers be they never so wise, or worthy, are only Accessaries, yet,
not Principals, in the support of the Government; their business is Subjection,
not Fellowship, in debates of moment; and they must be allowed a Privilege to
advise, but not authority to resolve. For as a particular Soul is essentially
requisite to the Life of a Prince; so is a supreme and unaccountable Power, of
like necessity: Without the one he cannot be truly a Man, and without the other
he can never be securely a Prince. It does also disturb both the Minister, and
the People, to be forced to pay obedience to one that is Incompetent of his own
Greatness, and unworthy of his Royal Fortunes.

This wonderful Change in the General State, which so far dispair'd (erewhile)
of recovering her former Liberty, that she sought for nothing but the easiest
kind of Servitude; brought over the People again (with admiration) to the Kings
Devotion, and their own Duty. So that whoever designs to lay a Foundation of
Greatness upon popular Love, must be careful of securing to them Ease and
Justice; because they are ever prone to measure the band of their Obedience by
the benefit that they daily receive.

Now this Calm attended (ever after) this Kings Age and Hearse; and he lived to
train up his Successor, and make him a Participant of his own Experience and
Authority: His hard Education weaned him from those Intemperances which makes
Men Inferior to Beasts, and prompted him to affect Glory and Virtue, which
gave him a Superiority over Men. Insomuch that all the Actions of his Future
Reign were Exact Rules of Discipline, and Policy, and worthy the Imitation of
his best of Successors; who, as he was the first of his Name ( Edward) after
the Conquest; so was he also the first that thoroughly reformed the Abuses
crept into the Law, and settled the Commonwealth; (justly meriting the Title of
Englands Justinian) delivering the Nation out of the Thraldom of the Peers; and
by all his Actions (afterward) approving himself capable himself of Governing
not this Single Realm only* but the whole World.

Thus by the Injustice of our Enemies, more than by our own Discretions, do we
many times become both Wise and Fortunate.

FINIS.

