A Brief Account of many memorable Passages of the LIFE and DEATH OF THE EARL
OF SHAFTSBURY. Sometime Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND, Who Departed this life
the 21st. day of (...) 1683.

GIVING An impartial Relation of his Loyalty to His Majesty in the late times,
and the great endeavors he used, to bring in the King into England, unto his
just rights, in peace and safety; with His Majesty's grateful acknowledgment
of these his kindnesses to him, in preferring him to several Eminent Places of
Honor, and Trust. Together, with his great patience under the loss of the
same. Also his twice Imprisonment in the Tower, and his witty answer to one of
the Popish Lords upon his Imprisonment; his Releasement, and several Plotts,
and Sham-Plotts of the Papists, used to take away his Life for his vigalancy,
and care for the Protestant Religion, and their disappointments. Of his
arrival in Holland, and his kind entertainment there. Together, with his
Sickness, and worthy Speeches a little before his death. Concluded with a
Prayer, worthy of the perusal of all persons.

Printed for J. Coniers in Duck-Lane.

A brief Account of some Remarkable passages of The LIFE and DEATH OF THE EARL
of SHAFTSBURY.
IT is not my presumption, in this Sheet to write the Life of this great
Statesman, but to give the Reader a brief Account of some remarkable passages
in the same, for the satisfaction of the meaner sort, that cannot purchase
large volumes.

Anthony Earl of Shafisbicry, Baron Ashley of Wimbourn, and Lord Cooper of
(...) as descended from the honorable and ancient Family of (...) ^^imbourn,
St. Giles's, in the County of Dorset.

We (...) first place, (laying aside all his other virtues) treat of the
Loyalty of this noble Peer, in the words of the late Author, says he, Could we
have taken a view of the inside of this noble Peer, we might have seen his
heart full of Loyalty to his Prince, love to his Country, zeal for the
Protestant Rellgion; the festlement of which can only secure us from the
attempts of His Majesty's, and his people Enemies. With what admirable policy
did influence and manage the Councils in the late times, in what he was
concerned in? during the Inter Regnum, toward His Majesty's interest, and with
what admirable subtilty did he turn the stream of their Counsels? and with
un^^ wearied diligence did he tugg at the helm of State, till he had brought in
his great Master the King into his Kingdoms again, in prosperity and safety,
to the joy of all good Subjects.

His House was a Sanctuary for distressed Loyallists, and his correct pondency
with the King: Friends, though closely managed, as the necessity of those times
required, are not unknown to those that we^ the principle managers of his
Majesty affairs at that time; this man the late Usurper O. Cromwell so jealous
of him, whose arbratary Government he withstood to the utmost of his power. And
we find that Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper was accused before the RVMP Parliament,
in the Year 1659. for keeping intelligence with the King, and having provided
Forces in Dorset-shire, to join with Sir George Booth, in attempting to bring
in our noble King, that now is to his rightful Throne; and also his
concurrence with General Monk, in that importunant juncture, if we remember
that his Regiment was one of the first that declared for a Free Parliament, and
General Monk in March, 1659. so zealous was he in putting all his strength to
turn the great Wheel of State.

And at the time of his Majesty's Restoration, as most signal testimony of His
Majesty's good opinion of his former actions, he was advanced to be one of the
first rank in His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, and was placed above
his Royal Brother the Duke of Gloucester, even General Monk himself, whom the
King used to call his political father: And three days after His Majesty's
Coronation, he was created Baron Ashley of Wimbourn St. Giles's, and also Lord
Cooper of Paulet, and at last another mark of Royal favor in the Year 1672. He
was made Earl of Shaftsbury, for his wise administration in his Majesty's
affairs, he was made Chancellor of the Exchequer, and some time after that,
made Lord High Chancellor of England, about the beginning of the year 1672.
which place he executed with the greatest Judgment and Equity imaginable.

Thus having briefly traced this great Minister of State in these mighty
employments under his great and good master the King; I shall take some notice
of his relinquishment of that high employment, and what happened to him since:

About November, 1673. His Majesty was pleased to send for the Lord Chancellor
to Whitehall, where he resigned the great Seal of England to his Majesty, and
was dismissed from being Treasurer of the Exchecquer; In the Afternoon of the
same day the Earl of Shaftsbury was visited by Prince Rupert, with other great
Lords, at Exeter house, whore they gave his Lordship thanks for his faithful
and honorable discharge of that great employment. Thus this great Minister of
State, to the universal satisfaction of all good men, being raised to that
high degree of interest in his Masters favor, without a murmur, laid all his
honor at his Majesty's feet, and was observed not to abate of the cheerfulness
of his temper, upon the loss of all these temporal, honorable, employment: I
shall conclude this part of his life with a Chanacter that a late Author gave
of him.

His choice sagacity, Strait solved the knot that subtle Lawyers tied,
And through all foggs discerned the oppressed side,
Banished delays, and so this noble Peer
Became a Star of honor in our Sphere:
Aneedfull Atlas of our State.


On the 16th. of February, 1676. this Earl was sent Prisoner to the Tower, by
the order of the House of Lords; there were at the same time committed several
other Lords, for maintaining, That the then Parliament was dissolved, and ought
not to sit any longer; where he continued Prisoner about a years time, and
after his submitting himself to His Majesty and the Parliament, he was
discharged by acknowledging his fault. A little after his releasement this
parliament was preroged and after dissolved. Now was the wicked Plot of the
Jesuits, and Papists, discovered by the great fidelity of Dr. Oats, which
convineed both King, Lords, and Commons, and all the Nation in general, of a
damnable, treasonable, Popish design to murder our King, with the rest of the
Nobility, and Gentry, and to reduce the Protestant Church to Komish Idolatry,
and the State to a Catholic slavery.

On the 7th. of march, 1678. Another Parliament met at Westminster; This
Parliament did, like noble Patriots, endeavor to give check to the bloody
Popish designs a foot, and passed many excellent Votes for that purpose, many
Members acquitted themselves in their Speeches like men of high sense of the
miseries the nation was like to be involved in; this House carried up their
impeachments to the House of Lords, against the Lord Pouis, Stafford, Arundel,
Lord Peter's, Lord Bellasis, for high Treason, and other high Crimes: But I
shall forbear mentioning any farther, only instance how this noble Peer was
struck at in the Hellish design; I shall referr the Reader to what has been
already published in Print, only note two or three things of some persons,
that made attempts on the life of this noble Peer, first, by Dangerfield, who
had a great sum offered him to have murdered the Earl of Shaftsbury, on whom
the rage of the bloody Romish party was now so great, that they left no base
and unwarrantable action unattempted, To robb him of his life; some were hired
to stab or Pistol him; others to swear Treason against him; or any other way
the Devil put in their heads. Another design against this noble Peer was to
have been acted by a woman, called, Madam C^llier, a Popish Midwife, which she
attempted that cursed design under the pretense of a visit to the Earl, and
under pretense of her paying her thanks for favors received through his
means; but she had a consecrated Dagger under the skirt of her gown, ready to
have expressed her gratitude, by opening the veins of this Protestant Peers heart.

Is then loyal innocence, and Protestant integrity, Armor of proof against
Poisons, Pistolls, and Poniards? no; the Catholic Gallantry stops not here,
but pursues this noble Peer with forgery of his hand, and other little
sham-plotts; what base and villainous acts the bloody Papists used, to destroy
the Earl of Shaftsbury, by many endeavors to have stabbed him, as has been
deposed by many persons, to whom the Parliament, as well as the nation, have
given belief. I shall instance one more of their mischeifous practices in this
kind: There was a Gentleman who was a Commander of a Regiment of Horse, in the
late King's Army, and lost all for his sake, and his present Majesty's, writ to
this noble Peer about a remedy against the Gout, which he used to be afflicted
with very much; this Letter was intercepted, and (the person then living in the
French King's Dominions) after adding to it an account, that the Writer was
able to furnish the Earl with forty thousand Soldiers from France, to oppose
the D. of Yorks Interest; it was then conveyed to some of the French King's
Ministers, who, they suppose, would send a Copy hither: but by a strange
providence, the original was returned into the Gentleman's own hands.

Nor were they yet wanting in throwing dirt and slandring this Noble Peer, in
his Reputation, which faculty they are famous at, for now a Packet of base
Libels and treasonable reflections were by the Penny post sent to a Printer,
and Copies of the same dispersed about the parts of Westminster, All of venomous
and malicious slanders and imputations, tending to the taking away the Life of
the Earl of Shaftsbury and diverse other Peers of Honorable account; but the
Printer detesting such a design, published an invitation to any person that
would discover the Author or publisher of that infamous Libel. And now we are
got into such a bog of Plots, shamplots, Perjurers, subornations, as the
histories of no Age can parallel: In October, during the Sessions of the last
Parliament, its remarkable, that Francisco de Faria Interpreter to the Portugal
Ambassador, amongst other matters relating to the Plot, gave Information to
the Bar of the house that he was tempted to kill the Earl of Shaftsbury by
throwing a hand Granado into his Coach as he passed the rode into the Country.
But to sum up all, several methods that were invented to be Executed against
the Life of this Peer were innumerable by these Jesuited Crew, who set all her
inventions and engines on work to make away the Earl of Shaftsbury, he was the
Beam in their eye, and that clog that hindered the motion of their cursed
designs; what have they not attempted to make him distasteful to the King
through the foulness of their treasons on him as was made appear before the
King and Council in October 1681. that Fitzgerard told Mr. Haines that he the
said Fitzgerard possessed his Majesty, and had given it under his hand and
Seal, that the late Plot was a Presbyterian Plot, and invented by the Earl of
Shaftsbury on purpose to exterpate the Royal Family, and to dethrone his
present Majesty, and turn England into a Commonweal, or else to set the Crown
upon the Earls own head, with more such wicked treasonable matter, a further
Account you may have in his Trial.

But a new Parliament was summoned to appear at Oxford, where things of as high
nature was Agitated, as ever came before the consideration of a Parliament, no
less then preservation of the Kings Majesty's person, the Protestant Religion,
and the good of the people of England, All which now was invaded by the bloody
dsigns of the Papists, but being very hot about the business of Fitzharris and
things of the like nature, it pleased his Majesty to dissolve them.

Sometime after Fiezharris was tried and Executed, The Earl of Shaftsbury was
again committed to the Tower of London, the circumstance of his Examination and
Aquital would take too much room here to be recited. To finish this tragical
story, only I cannot omit that on the 15. August 1681. Mrs, Fitzharris gave a
deposition on Oath, that her husband a little before his Execution, not only
told her what great offers he had made him if he would have charged that
treasonable and infamous Libel (for which he was executed afterward for,) on
this Noble Peer, and the Lord Howard, and that he advised her to do it to save
his life, though he protested at the same time that they were wholly innocent;
she likewise deposed that a certain Gentleman assured her that she should have
what money she pleased, if she would accuse the Earl and the Lord Howard as the
Authors of the said Libel, but they having tampered with so many on the account
of this basted design, but that it was impossible but their consult must take
wind, especially when we consider they were a people, that either to supply
their necessities, or to feed their ambition, or more probable thought
inresistable fatility had blab'd and discovered the secrets of holy mother, and
had spoke so unseasonably in her tip that they had spoyld her game, what
security could these Romish Sophisters have, but that their cork'd vessel would
prove leaky again? I shall give one memorable passage, said to have passed
between the Earl and one of the Popish Lords, soon after his Commitment; the
story is this, meeting accidently with one of the Popish Lords, he was asked by
him what his Lordship did there, and that he little thought to have his good
company? to which the Earl of Shaftsbury replied, that he had lately been sick
of an Ague, and was come there to take some Jesuits powder. It was said, during
the whole time of his Lordship being in the Tower, he remained very cheerful
beyond what could have been expected from a person laboring under such extreme
pains and diseases; during the Earls imprisonment, many made it their business
to detract and villify him and it was their mode to drink his health at an
hepenstring, and call him Tony Tapskin and King of Poland. After the Earls
Trial, it is reported he Arrested one Baines, one of the witnesses for a
Conspiracy, also several others, but being not suffered to have his Trial
against them in London, and Midlesex, he remitted the same till another
opportunity. Thus have we given a brief account of the most remarkable things
relating this great Peer, to this time, after which he lived very private at
his house in Aldersgate street, till the beginning of the month of November,
when it is reported he left England and landed at Brill in Holland, where he was
nobly entertained by the States, and as some say, has put into their stock a
considerable sum of money.

But amongst the rest, let us take cognizance of his deportment in the time of
his seeming affliction, he was little or nothing dismayed at the contrary
current which opposed the stream of his aspiring mind, which was a generous and
magnanimous spirit in him, for indeed he was as much befriended by unexpected
favors abroad, as afflicted by domestic troubles in his own native soil, his
reception in Holland was unquestionably very kind, as doubtless was appertinent
to a person of his parts. It is not to be doubted but the many transactions
happening in his time had recorded him there as well as in other Countries for
a Politician, and so was he received by them. His deportment there was such,
that he obliged all that came near him, indulged all that knew him, and at this
death, left no man without an obligation of a memento. It was much to be taken
notice of, that during the time of his ilness, he rather seemed to be of better
composure in mind than ordinary, as seeming to embrace his malady, with a kind
of welcome, that might transmute his soul into that endless happiness which he
had been so long laboring for, he seemed to covet after that continual
blessing which alone makes happy, and rejoiced at his approaching change; Oh
happy is that man, who like an undaunted Champion, can boldly look upon the
pale messenger of grim death without terror, when no astonishment comes to
amaze the drooping senses, but on the contrary, if silled with comfort, at the
perfect assurance of a better state, by the help and assistance of a blessed
change, no peace like a quiet mind, no comfort like the peace of conscience,
nor no conquest like the victory over sin, thrice happy is that man whom the
thoughts of death cannot terrify; then let us all labor so to live here, that
we may assure our selves of an inheritance hereafter that shall furnish our
souls with joys everlasting that have no end. But when he perceived that his
fatal hour was most certainly appreaching, with a most heavenly frame he
prepared himself to meet with that unwelcome messenger, taking great and
particular care of his Menial servants, that will imprint a memorial in their
(now bleeding) hearts; so having settled affairs in his house according to his
own mind and Will, he recommended his soul to him that gave it, in these
following words and manner.

O Most gracious and merciful Lord God, who out of thy infinite mercy and
goodness have preserved and protected me through an Ocean of trouble and
perplexity, yea, and brought me out of a labarinth of danger, which without
thine assistance I could never have waded through, and now since by thy mercy I
am made sensible of thy unspeakable Love so me in this my last hour; I beseech
thee with an unfeigned desire to have mercy upon my immortal soul, and let
thine Angel conduct it to the Throne of thine everlasting happiness. Lord
preserve and keep my Severaign Liege Charles the II. King of the Land of my
Nativity, protect that poor Nation, now in a tottering condition, from the yoke
and burden of Popish tyranny, that the Gospel may flourish in the dominions
thereof, Lord strengthen me in this hour of tribulation, that I may cheerfully
pass through the dark passage, which leads to thy never fading light; Amen.

FINIS.

