A Brief ACCOUNT Of the PROCEEDINGS OF THE French Clergy, In taking away the
POPE's Usurped SUPREMACY, Showing by what Steps or Degrees the same was
Effected.

By way of Introduction to the Pope's Letter, written to the Clergy of France
11th of Apr. 1682. and their Protestarion thereupon, 6th of May following; the
Letter Condemning, and the Protestation Justifying and Ratifying the said
Proceedings.

Both which are here Published in Latin, to gratify the Curiosity of
Scholars, and in English for the Satisfaction of other Readers.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Prince's Amrs in Ludgate Street. 1682.

A Brief Account of the Proceedings of the French Clergy, in taking away the
Pope 's Supremacy, etc. By way of Introduction to the following Letter, and
Protestation.
FOR the better understanding of some Passages in the Letter, and Protestation,
it will be necessary to acquaint you with the Original and Progress of that
contest, which has so long continued between the Pope, and the French King, and
Clergy, of which if you desire to be informed fully, and at large, I must Refer
you to a Book, Published last Year, Entitled. The verbal Process, or
Proceedings of the Extraordinary Assembly of the Archbishops and Bishops held
at Paris in March 1680/1, and May 1681, Translated out of the Original French
Papers. The substance of which take as follows.

The late Pope's having denied the King's Right, called in French Regale, and
in Latin Regalia, (which consists in his receiving the Profits of vacant
Bishoprics in France, and in the Collation of Dignities, and Prehends, during
a vocancy) and Claiming the same as their Right, especially in four Provinces
of that Kingdom; the present French King in the Year 1673, caused a Declaration
to be Published, and another in 1675, in which he asserts his Right of Regalia,
as well in the four Provinces, as in all other parts of France, and Commands
his Officers, appointed to Collect the Profits of vacant Benefices, to execute
their Office in all Places, without distinction, as Occasions should offer,
which was done accordingly, and the Declarations were obeyed by all the
Prelates, except the Bishop of Pomiez, who continued a Zealous Stickler for the
Pope, against, the King in this Point, to the time of his Death.

This difference between the Pope, and the King, and Clergy (who opposed the
Pope, as well upon their own Account, as the King's, as well shall see anon)
still increasing, at last the Clergy, by their Agents General, begged leave of
the King in 1680/1. That such Prelates as were then at Paris, about the affairs
of their Dioceses, might meet and consult, for the putting a speedy stop to some
sinister practices of the Court of Rome, repugnant to the tenor of the Canons,
the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the Laws of the Kingdom; which
Request being granted, an Assembly consisting of six Archbishops, and 35.
Bishops was held at Paris in the months of March 1680/1. and May. 1681.

To this Assembly the said Agents of the Clergy presented a Memorial in which
they Complain that diverse Letters (or Briefs) had been dispersed, in the name
of Pope Innocent XI. containing many things very Prejudicial to the Regalia,
and to the Gallican Church, viz. The Letter of the 18th of October 1680, which
comdemns to the flames, the Sentence of the Parliament of Paris, past the 24th
of September 1680, wherein are explained the Laws of the Kingdom, in defense of
the Authority of the Bishops.

The Letters to the King, to hinder the Execution of the 2, last declarations,
about the Regalia.

Also several other Letters, about the business of Pomiez, either to the late
Bishop of Pomiez, or to the Archbishop of Toulouse, but especially the 2.
last, one of which dated the 23. of September, confirms the Election of the
Grand Vicars, chosen by the Chapter, in the vacancy of that See, likewise an
Injunction to acknowledge them, upon pain of incurring the Severest penalties
of the Church. The other, delivered the first of January, Excommunicates the
Archbishop of Toulouse, without using any of the forms observed in France;
which was Injurious to the Episcopal Dignity, and equally mischievous both to
Church and State.

The letter about the business of Charonne, etc. That the design of these
Letters was to beget a misunderstanding, and to create a difference between the
Pope, and the King, to ruin the Canons, received, and observed in that
Kingdom, to engage the Pope, upon bare Informations, without any Appeal, and
omisso medio, to Judge, and in his Tribunal at Rome (of his own mere motion,
and by the sole motive of the plenitude of his power) to confirm several
Elections, which were null, and void; thereby depriving the Bishops of their
ordinary Authority, Archbishops, and Primates of their Jurisdiction, and
Interrupting the Order of Ecclesiastical Proceedings.

This Memorial having been read, the Assembly desired the Arch Bishop of Paris,
their President, to name six Commissioners, who, together with himself, might
consider what was to be done in these affairs, and to make their Report to the
Assembly which, after Consultation, was made accordingly by the Archbishop of
Reims, one of the Commissioners, in a long and elegant Speech, the effect of
which was as follows, viz.

That the Right of the Regalia, which had caused the aforesaid Letters, had
been, a very long time, possessed by their Kings; Alexander the 3d. Innocent
the 3d. Clement the 4th. Gregory the 10th. The second Council of Lion, and
Gregory the 11th. Yea their own Council of Bourges, had acknowledged and
approved it. That no Assembly of the French Clergy ever pretended, that
businesses, relating to the Regalia, ought to be brought before an
Ecclesiastical Tribunal, but to be Debated, and decided by the Jurisdiction of
the King's Council only. For confirmation of this, he said that Philip of
Valois, by his Order of October 1334. decided all differences of this Nature,
which happened in his Reign. That Lewis 11. by his declaration of the 24th. of
May 1463, prohibits all his Subjects to have any Process, concerning the
Regalia, before an Ecclesiastical Judge (no, not in the Court of Rome it self)
and yet that it did not Appear that either John, 22. or Pious, 2. complained of
it, That the Province of Britany, which was not reunited to the Crown of France
till the Year 1532, was Subjected to the Regalia, by a Degree of Parliament, in
1598, in the Popedom of Clement, 8. who complained not of it, no, not to the
Cardinal of Ossat, who, then attending the Pope, confesses that the King might
Extend the Regalia upon all the Bishoprics of his Kingdom, That the Principles
of the Pope, and of the King ^^^^cers about the Regalia, were very different
(viz.) The Pope believes that the Regalia is a Right derived from the Church;
the King looks on it as a Regal, Temporal, and Inseparable Right of the Crown.
The Pope relyes on the 2d. Council of Lion, as a sacred boundary, beyond which
we may not pass, but the King (who, not without Reason, Pretends that he is not
Subject to a Council for a Right merely Temporal) does not own that Authority
of the Council, alleged against him, but on the contrary His Magisty maintains
that his Predecessors could not prejudice his Rights; and that if they had
reason to suspend the Execution of the Regalia in the four Provinces, he had
much more reason to revive it there; that the Bishops had acknowledged him for
their Judge, and that having pronounced Judgment, he is obliged to give an
account of it to God only.

Then the Bishop of Troyes (another of the Commissioners.) commended to their
Favor, and Protection, a certain Doctor of the Sorbonne, for a Book written by
him, wherein (said he) he justifies the Right, which we have to decide matters
of Faith, and Discipline, and to oppose the Authority, which we have
immediately received from Jesus Christ, against the novelties, which might
arise in our Dioceses, and Provinces. Secondly he demonstrator that the
Gallican Church is not departed from the Discipline of the Council of Sardica,
the Execution of which the Councils, and Ancient Popes have so often
recommended, and according to which, the Bishops ought to be tried first by
their Brethren in their Provinces. And these two Maxims are Canonical, and
conformable to the Spirit of the Church, and to the Sacred Rules, Established
by ancient Councils and Authorized by the Holy See.

When he had ended, the Archbishop of Reims continued his Speech, and said
that the Commissioners had examined the Pope's Letters, and first, that the
occasion of those two, written to the Nuns of Charonne was thus. Their Monstery
was founded 1643. By the Duchess of Orleans, who desired the Pope that the
first Abbess might be continued daring life, and it was granted. After her
decease the King nominates one to succeed her, but she dying before she was
confirmed, he nominates another, who was Established Abbess by the Archbishop
of Paris in 1679. That the first Letter of 7th of August 1680. forbids the Nuns
to obey this Abbess, and commands them to choose another, which they did,
without observing the Rules of Elections; which as soon as the Pope was
informed of, he wrote another Letter to them, dated 15th October following, by
which the defect of Formalities is supplied, and this irregular Election of the
new Abbess confirmed. That the several Letters, which the Pope had written to
the Archbishop of Toulouse, to the, since deceased, Bishop of Pomiez, and to
the Chapter of that Church, since its vacancy, having been caused by the
dispute about the Regalia, are to be taken as one ahd the same, and that the
Dispute happened as follows, viz. The said Bishop refusing to submit to the
Declarations of 1673, and 1675. formed several Processes against such
Clergymen, who, by virtue of the Regalia, possessed some of the Prebends of his
Church, which the Archbishop of Toulouse, upon the Appeals brought before him,
made void. That on 7th August last, the Bishop dyed, and the old Canons Regular
of his Church Elected, after his decease, some Officers to govern it. That
these new Officers continued the Process against the Regalists, which the
Bishop had begun, and the Archbishop of Toulouse made them void; complaint
whereof being made to the Pope, he wrote two Letters, one to the Archbishop,
and the other to the Chapter of Pamiez, which are of no moment. But by a Letter
of 2d. October following, to the Chapter and Conons Regular of Pamiez, the Pope
confirms the Officers, nominated by the Chapter, and engages to confirm such
as shall be chosen; he forbids them to own any others; he declares null
whatever shall be done by Vicars General, which shall not be chosen by the old
Canons, and orders this Letter to be read in the Diocese of Pomiez. That a
Letter of Newyears-day last confirms, a second time the Officers, Elected by
the Chapter, and declares that the Pope will confirm such as this Chapter shall
Elect; that it Excommunicates with the greater Excommunication (which is
immediately incurred, without any other Declaration) all such as shall favor
the Grand Vicars, chosen by the Archbishop, and the Canons, that are Regalists,
or shall favor the said Metropolitan; and in fine, that it Excommunicates the
Metropolitan himself. In the next place he tells them that the first Parliament
of the Kingdom having passed a Decree 24th Sept. against the Pope's Letter of
7 Aug. to the Nuns of Charonne, the Commissioners were of opinion, that it was
their Interest to join with the Parliament therein; tho the said Decree was
Condemned by a Letter of 18th December following, which forbids the reading of
it, upon pain of Excommunication, and Commands the Bishops, or Inquisitors to
burn all the Copies of it that can be found, etc.

Then he mentions the reflections of the Commissioners upon these matters; some
of which are that by the Pope's two Letters to the Nuns of Charonne, granted
upon their bare Relation, and in their own Cause, all is vacated that their
Archbishop had done, without hearing, or so much as summoning him. That by
reason of a Clause Inserted in the second Letter, viz. that the Pope has power
to supply all forms, that may be omitted, even such as are Essential; it is
pretended that he can supply the want of that very knowledge of a matter, which,
by the Law of Nature, is absolutely necessary, before a judgment can be given
of it. That the Proceedings against the Archbishop of Toulouse, were contrary
to Equity, and the Rules of their Profession, and also to the Treaty, called
the Concordat, which was made between Leo 10. and the Holy See, on the one
part, and Francis 1. and his Kingdom, on the other part, and being Authorized
by both Parties, is become a Law both in Church and State, and consequently
cannot in the least be debilitated by any pretended Power from the Pope. And
having proved these things excellently, and at large, he proeeeds to acquaint
the Assembly with the Resolutions which their Commissioners had judged fit to
be taken in that conjuncture, viz. That a Letter be written to the Pope to
represent to him that the business of the Regalia deserved not so much heat as
is expressed in his Letters, it being looked upon by the King's Officers as a
Temporality, and that it is in itself, a thing of no great consequence to the
Church. That by the Letters to the Nuns of Charonne, and Chapter of Pamiez, the
Order of Jurisdictions had been disturbed, and the Right of Ordinaries, and
Metrapolitans violated; that he had been exalted above the Canonical
Constitutions, and that these Designs against Rules the most Sacred might
weaken that Union, which the Churches of France ought inviolably to keep with
the holy See. And lastly, that the King be desired to permit the Prelates of
his Kingdom to meet in a National Council, or to call a General Assembly of
the Clergy, to consist of two Deputies of the first Order, and two of the
second, in every Province, and that their President, and six Commissioners be
desired to attend his Majesty upon this occasion, which being done accordingly,
the King was pleased to Order a General Assembly of the Clergy, who having
duly considered the entolerable encroachments and usurpations of the Sea of
Rome, did, 19. March 1602. S.N. Unanimously Resolve as follows, viz.

That a General Council is above the Pope.

That he has no power, in Temporals, in any Prince's Dominions.

That he has no power to Depose Princes.

That he has no power to Absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity.

That he is not Infallible.

The first of these Resolutions destroys the Pope's Supremacy in Temporals; and
the last destroys his Infallibility.

The next day the Assembly, by their President, and Commissioners, presented to
His Majesty these Resolutions, signed by the whole Assembly, and he, at their
request, caused an Edict to be Published, thereby Ordering that the same be
Registered in all the Courts of Parliament, in all Courts of Judicature
Ecclesiastical, and Civil, and in all Universities, and Colliges in his
Dominions. That all Professors in Divinity, and Canon Law, do teach the Doctrine
therein contained (being the ancient Doctrine of that Kingdom) and do
subscribe the same. That no Person Secular, or Regular shall be received as
Doctor, or Licentiate in Divinity, or Canon Law, till he has maintained this
Doctrine by public Disputation. And that no person, either Subject, or
Stranger, shall presume to teach any thing, contrary to this Doctrine, within
his Dominions. The said Resolutions were the 23d of March Ratified, and passed
in the Parliament of Paris, and a Copy of them sent to the Pope, together with
a particular Account of all their Proceedings, and their Reasons for what they
had done. But the Pope, instead of acknowledging his Usurpations, which had
been the cause of these Proceedings of the Assembly, vindicates himself, and by
the following Letter, damns and makes utterly null, and void, all that had been
done, or should be done in this Assembly, and they in requital make, and send
him the Protestation, which damns his damnatory Letter, and justifies their
said Proceedings.

Literae Pontificiales ad Clerum Gallicanum. Venerabilibus Fratribus Archi
Episcopis, Episcopis, etc.
PAternae Charitati, qua Charissimum in Christo Filium nostrum Ludovicum Regem
Christianissi mum, Ecclesias vestras, Vos Ipsos, and universum istud Regnum
amplectimur, permolestum accidit ac plane acerbum cognoscere, ex Vestris
literis die Tertia Februarii ad Nos datis, Episcopos, Clerumque Galliae, qui
Corona olim and gaudium erant Apostolicae sedis, ita se erga illum in praesens
gerere, ut cogamur (multis cum lachrimis) usurpare Propheticum illud, Filii
Matris meae pugnaverunt adversus me. quanquam adversus vos ipsos potius
pugnatis, dum Nobis in ea Causa resistitis, in qua Vestrarum Ecclesiarum salus
ac libertas agitur, and in qua Nos, pro Juribus, and dignitate Episcopali in
isto Regnotuenda, ab aliquibus Ordinis Vestri piis and fortibus Viris
appellati, absque mora insurreximus, and jampridem in gradu stamus; nullas
privatas nostras rations secuti sed debitae Ecclesiis omnibus solicitudini,
and intimo amori erga vos satisfacturi.

Nihil sane laetum, and Vestris nominibus dignum eas Literas continere, in ipso
earum limine intelleximus; Nam, praeter ea, quae de Norma in Comitiis
convocandis, peragendisque servata afferebantur, animadversimus ea ordiri a
metu Vestro, quo suasore nunquam sacerdotes DEI esse solent, in arduis and
excelsis pro Religione and Ecclesiastica Liberate, vel aggrediendo fortes, vel
perficiendo constantes; quem quidem metum falso judicavistis, posse Vos in
sinum Nostrum effundere. In sinu enim nostro hospitari perpetuo debet charitas
Christi, quae for as mittit, and long arcet a se Timorem; qua charitate erga
vos, Regnumque Galliae, Paternum Cor Nostrum flagrare, multis jam ac magnis
experimentis cognosci potuit, quae huic refer non est necesse. Si quid est
autem in quo been merita de vobis sit Charitas nostra, esse inprimis putamus,
hoc ipsum Regaliae Negocium, ex quo, si serio res perpendatur, omnis Ordinis
vestri Dignitas, atque Authoritas pendet. Timuistis ergo, ubi non erat timor;
Id unum timendum Vobis erat, ne apud Deum, hominesque redargui jure possetis
loco, atque honori vestro and Pastorali Officio debito defuisse; Memoriae
vobis, repetenda erant quae Antiqui illi Sanctissimi Praesules, quos
quamplurimi postea qualibet aetate sunt imitati Episcopalis Constantiae and
Fortitudinis exempla. In hujusmodi casibus, ad vestram eruditionem ediderunt,
intuendae Imagines Praedecessorum Vestrorum, non solum, qui patrum, sed qui
nostra quoque memoria floruerunt. Et qui Ivonis Carnotensis dicta laudatis,
debuistis facta etiam, cum res posceret, imitari. Nostis quae is fecerit,
passusque sit in turbulenta illa and periculosa contentione inter Urbanum
Pontificem, and Philippum Regem, muneris sui esse arbitratus contra Regiam
indignationem stare, Donis spoliari, carceres and exilia perferre, deserentibus
aliis Causam meliorem. Officii vestri erat sedis Apostolicae authoritati studia
vestra adjungere, and pastorali pectore, humilitate sacerdotali, Causam
Ecclesiarum vestrarum apud Regem agere; Ejus conscientiam de tota re
instruendo, etiam cum periculo, Regium in vos animum Irritandi, ut possetis in
posterum sine Rubore quotidiana Psalmodia DEUM alloquentes Davidica verba
proferre; Loquebar de Testimon is in conspectu Regum and non confundebar.
Quanto magis id vobis faciendum fuit, tam perspecta atque explorata optimi
Principis Justitia and Pietate, quem singulari benignitate, Episcopos audire,
Ecclesiis favere, and Episcopalem potestatem intemeratam velle, Vos ipsi
scribitis, and Nos magna cum voluptate legimus in literis vestris. Non
dubitamus si stetissetis ante Regem, pro causae tam justae defensione, neque de
futura vobis verba, quae loqueremini, neque Regi Cor docile, quo vestris
annueret postulatis. Nunc cum muneris vestri and Regiae aequitatis quodammodo
obliti' in tanti momenti negotio, silentium tenueritis, non videmus quo
probabili fundamento fignificetis vos ad ita agendum aductos; Quod in
controversia victi sitis, quod causa cecideritis; quomodo cecidit qui non
stetis? Ecquis Vestrum tam gravem, tam justam causam, tam sacrosancta moravit
apud Regem? Cum tamen Praedecessores vestri cum in simili periculo constituti,
non semel apud superiores Galliae Reges, imo apud hunc ipsum libera voce
defenderint victoresque a Regio conspectu'discesserint, Relatis etiam ab
aequissimo Rege praemiis Pastoralis Officii strenue impleti. Quii vestrum in
arenam descendit, ut opponeret murum pro Domo Israel? Quis ausus est invidiae
se offerre? Quis vel vocem unam emisit memorem pristinae libertatis? Clamarunt
interim, sicuti scribitis, and quidem in mala causa; pro Regio jure clamarunt
Regis Administri, cum vos in optima pro Christi honor sileritis; neque illa
solidiora, quod redituri nobis rationem, seu verius Excusationem allaturi,
Rerum in hujusmodi Comitiis per Vos actarum, exaggeratis periculum, ne
sacerdotium and Imperium inter se collidantur, and mala quae exinde in
Ecclesiam and Rempublicam consequi possent; proinde existimasse Vos ad officium
vestrum pertinere, aliquam inire rationem tollendi de medio Gliscentis
Dissidii, nullam vero apparuisse Commodiorem, remedio ab Ecclesiae Patribus
indicato, utili condescentione Canones temperandi, pro temporum necessitate;
ubi neque Fidei veritas neque morum honestas periclitentur debere, ab ordine
vestro deberi a Gallicana, imo ab universa Ecclesia, Plurimum Regi tam praeclar
de Catholica Religione merito and indies Magis mereri cupienti: Propterea vos
jure vestro decedentes, illud in Regem contulisse. Omittimus hic commemorare,
quoe significatis de appellato a vobis Seculari Magistratu, a quo victi
discesseritis. Cupimus enim hujus facti memoriam aboleri, and volumus ea vos
verba e literis vestris expungere, ne in Actis Cleri Gallicani resideant ad
dedecus vestri nominis sempiternum. Quae de Innocentio tertio, Benedicto
duodecimo, Bonifacio octavo in vestram defensionem adducitis, non defuere, qui
vestris lucubrationibus ostenderint, quam frivola atque extranea sint huic
Causae. Et magis notum est quam ut opus sit commemorare quo Zelo qua
Constantia, eximii illi Pontifices Ecclesiae Libertatem defenderint adversus
Seculares potestates, tantum abest, ut eorum Exempla Possint errori vestro
suffragari. Caeterum altro admittimus, and Laudamus concilium relaxandi Canonum
disciplinam pro Temporum necessitate, ubi id fieri Possit, Sine fidei and morum
dispendio; Imo addimus cum Augustino, toler andi aliquando pro Bono Unitatis,
qua pro Bono Aquitatis odio habenda sunt; Neque eradicanda Zizania, ubi
periculum sit, ni simul etiam Triticum eridicetur. Id ita tamen accipi oportet,
ut in aliquo tdntum peculiari casu and ad tempus, and ubi necessitas urget
licitum sit, Siouti Factum est ab Ecclesia cum Arrianos, and Donitistas
Episcopos ejurato errore, suis Ecclesiis restituit, ut populos, qui secuti eos
fuerant, in Officio contineret. Aliud est, ubi disciplina Ecclesiae, per
universum Amplissimi Regni ambitum sine Temporis termino, and cum manifesto
periculo, ne Exemplum latius manet labefactetur, imo evertitur ipsius
Disciplinae and Hierarchae Ecclesiasticae fundamentum, sicuti evenire necesse
esset, si quae a Rege Christianissimo in negocio Regaliae nuper acta sunt,
conniventibus, imo consentientibus Vobis contra Sacrorum Canonum and praesertim
Generalis Consilii Ludgdunensis Authoritatem, contra notam jampridem Vobis in
ea re mentem nostram, and contra ipsam Jurisjurandi Religionem, qua vos Deo,
Romanae vestrisque Ecclesiis obligastis, cum Episcopali Caractere imbueremini;
Haec sancta seeds Executioni mandari and malum invalescere diutius deferendo
permitteret, ac non ea nos protradita Divinitus humilitati nostrae suprema in
universam Ecclesiam potestate, solenni more praedecessorum nostrorum vestigiis
inherentes improbaremus? Cum praesertim per abusum Regalioe non solum everti
disciplinam Ecclesiae res ipsa doceat; sed etiam Fidei ipsius integritatem in
discrimen vocari, facile intelligatur ex ipsis Regiorum Decretorum verbis, quae
jus conferenda Beneficia Regi vindicant; non tanquam prosluens ex aliqua
Ecclesiae concessone, sed tanquam Ingenitum and C^aevum Regiae Coronae. Illam
vero partem literarum vestrarum non sine Animi horrore legere potuimus, in qua
dicitis, vos jure vestro decedentes illud in Regem contulisse; quasi
Ecclesiarum, quae curae vestrae cerditae fuere, essetis arbitri non custodes,
and quasi Ecclesiae ipsae and Spiritualia earum jura possent sub potestatis
secularis jugum mitti ab Episcopis, qui se pro earum liberate in servitutem
dare deberent. Vos sane ipsi hanc veritatem agnovistis and confessi estis, dum
alibi pronunciastis Jus Regaliae Servitutem quandam esse, quae in eo praesertim
quod spectat Beneficiorum Collationem imponi non potest; nisi Ecclesia
concedente vel saltem consentiente. Suo jure vos ergo jus illud in Regem
contulistis? Cum Sacri Canones distrahi vetent jura Ecclesiarum quo modo ea vos
distrahere, in Animum induxistis, quasi eorundem Canonum Authoritati derogare
liceat vobis? Revocate in Memoriam, quoe inclitus ille Conteraneus vester
Clarevalensis Abbas non Gallicanae modo, sed etiam universalis Ecclesiae lumen
a vobis merito nuncupatus, Eugenium Pontificem officii sui admonens reliquit
Scripta praeclare meminisset, si esset cui claves creditae cui oves creditae
sunt. Esse quidem et alios coeli Janitores and Gregum Pastores, sed cum habeant
illi Assignatos Greges, singuli singulos, ipsi universos creditos, uni unum nec
modo ovium sed et Pastorum Eugenium esse pastorem. Ideoque juxta Canounum
statuta alies Episcopos vocatos fuisse in partem solicitudinis ipsum in
plenitudinem potestatis. Ex quibus verbis quantum vos admoneri par est de
obsequio et obedientia, quam debetis huic Sanctae sedi, cui nos Deo Authore
quamquam immeriti praesidemus, tantundem pastoralis nostra solicitudo excitatur
ad inchoandum tandum aliquando in hoc negocio, quam nimia fortasse longanimitas
nostra, dum poenetentia spatium damas, hactenus distulit Apostolici muneris
Executionem. Quamobrem per praesentes literas tradita nobis ab Omnipotenti Deo
Autoritate, improbamus, rescindimus, and Cassamus quae in vestris commitiis
acta sunt in negotio Regalliae, cum omnibus inde secutis, and quae in posterum
attentari contingent, eaque perpetuo inita, and inania declaramus, quamvis cum
sint ipsa per se manifesto nulla Cassatione aut declaratione hujusmodi non
egerent. Speramus tamen vos ipsasque ipsos re melius considerata caeteri
retractione consulturos conscientiae vestrae, and Cleri Gallicani existimationi
ex quo Clero, Sicuti huc usque non defuere, ita in posterum non defuturos
considimus, qui Boni Pastoris Exemplo libenter animam parati sint pro Ovibus,
and pro Testemento Patrum suorum. Nos quidem, pro Officii nostri debito, parati
sumus Dei adjutrice gratia sacrificari sacrificium justiciae, and Ecclesia Dei
jura ac libertatem, and hujus sedis sanctae Authoritatem Dignitatemque
defendere, nihil de nobis, sed omnia de eo presumentes; qui nos confortat, and
operatur in nobis, and qui jussit Petrum super aquas ad se venire. Praeterit
enim figura hujus Mundi, and Dies Domini appropinquat. Sic ergo agamus,
venerabiles Fratres ac dilecti Filii, ut cum summus Pater familias, and
Princeps Pastorum rationem ponere voluerit, cum servis suis sanguinem
pessundatae, and Laceratae Ecclesiae quam suo acquisivit de nostris manibus non
requirat. Vobis interim omnibus Apostolicam Benedictionem cui Caelestem
accedere optamus intimo Paterni amoris affectu impartimur. Datum Romae etc.

The Popes Letter to the Clergy of France, To the Reverend Brethren, the
Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
IT has been an extreme grief and disturbance to that Paternal affection,
which we have for our dear Son Lewis, the Most Christian King, your Churches,
your selves, and the whole Kingdom, to understand, by your Letter to us, dated
Feb. 3. that the Bishops, and Clergy of France, which heretofore were the
Crown, and joy of the Apostolic See, should now so demean themselves as to
compel us with many tears, to use the saying of the Prophet, The Sons of my
Mother have fought against me: though indeed you rather fight against your
selves, while you oppose us in that Cause, in which the Welfares and Liberties
of your Churches are involved, and in which being called upon, by some pious
and courageous men of your Order, we immediately appeared, for the defense of
the Episcopal Rights and Dignity, in that Kingdom, and we have already begun to
act; not regarding our own private Interests, but shall give due satisfaction
to all the Churches, and also to our own care of, and Affection toward you.

That your said Letter contains nothing in it, either pleasing to us, or worthy
of your selves, the very beginning of it discovers; for, besides what it
mentions of a Rule, observed in calling, and holding Assemblies, we take notice
that it proceeds from Fear, which Gods Priests were never wont to choose for
their Counselor, in matters of Difficulty, and importance, relating to
Religion, and Ecclesiastical Liberty, either in attacking the valiant, or
completing the constant; which fear you falsely supposed you could have infused
into our breast. For the love of Christ, which casts out, and drives away fear,
ought always to dwell there; and with what affection our fatherly bowels have
yearned toward you, and the Kingdom of France, has been manifested by many
Signal instances, which it will be needless here to insert. But if our love
merits well of you in any thing, we think it does particularly in the business
of the Regalia, on which if you seriously consider it, the whole Dignity, and
Authority of your order depends. So that you have seared where no fear was;
whereas you should only have feared the just censure both of God, and Men, for
having been wanting to your Duty, Honor, and Pastoral Office: you should often
have called to mind the holy Prelates of old, whose examples of Episcopal
constancy and courage, were followed by many in after ages. In such cases the
lives of your Predecessors are proposed for your Imitation, not only those who
flourished in your Fathers days, but even within your own Memory. And you, who
commend the sayings of Ivon Carnocensis, should also have imitated his actions,
where occasion required it; you know what he did, and suffered in that
turbulent and dangerous Contention, between Pope Urban, and King Philip,
thinking it his Duty to incur the Kings displeasure, to be deprived of his
goods, and endure imprisonment, and exile, while others deserted that Righteous
cause. It is your Duty to join your Endeavors with the Authority of the
Apostolic See, and with a Pastoral heart, and Priestly humility, to plead the
cause of your Churches before the King, by informing his Conscience of the
whole matter, though it be with the danger of Provoking his indignation against
you; that so you may, hereafter, be able, without blushing, to sing daily the
words of David, I have declared thy Testimonies before Kings and was not
ashamed. How much rather then ought you to have done the like, having had large
experience of the Justice and Piety of the best of Kings, who (as your selves
have written, and we with great delight, have read in your letter of his
singular goodness,) hearkens to the Bishops, favors the Churches, and
preserves the Episcopal Power inviolate; so that had you pleaded with the King
in the defense of so just a Cause, we doubt not, either that you would have
wanted words to express your desires, or he inclinations to grant them: But
having, as it were, forgot your own duty, and the Kings equity, you have been
silent in a business of so great moment, and we cannot imagine upon what
probable ground you say you were induced to it, that you were overuled in the
controversy; and that you fell in the cause; for how can he fall who never
stood? Did any of you ever plead in so just, so weighty, and so sacred a Cause
before the King? And yet your Predecessors, when they were in the like danger,
have many times, with great freedom, defended this Cause, in the presence of
former Kings of France, yea, before this very King too, and have returned
victorious, bringing with them the reward of a Pastoral Office from that just
Prince. Who among you enters the Lists to fight for the House of Israel? who
dares expose himself to envy? who has spoken so much as one word in memory of
the Ancient Liberty? They have indeed (as you write) spoken loud enough, but it
was in a bad Cause; and when the Kings Ministers cried aloud for the Kings
Right; you in the best of Causes ( viz. for the Honor of Christ) were silent.
Nor is it of any more validity that when you give us an account of (or more
truly make your excuse for) what you had done in such Assemblies, you aggravate
the jealousy that the Ecclesiastical, and Secular Powers were like to clash,
and that great mischeifs might follow thereupon, both to Church and State, and
therefore you thought it your Duty to consider, how a stop might be put, to the
growing differences; and that none seemed more Proper to you, than that which
was prescribed by the Fathers of the Church, viz. a wholesome Condescension for
moderating the Canons, according to the necessity of the time, when neither the
verity of the Faith or honesty of manners will be endangered thereby. Then you
declare that your Order, the Gallican Church, yea, the Universal Church, owes
very much to your renowned King, who, you say, has already merrited highly of
the Catholic Religion, and strives daily to merit more; by which Act you have
relinquished your right, and have given it to the King. We forbear here to
mention what you tell us of the Secular Magistrate you appealed to, and were
overcome by him, for we desire that the memory of that action may be
oblitterated, and would have you expunge those words out of your Letter, that
they may not remain among the Acts of the Gallican Clergy, to the perpetual
infamy of your Names. As for what you allege in your defense, concerning
Innocent, 3. Benedicti, 12. and Boniface 8. Some have not been wanting, who
have showed you how frivolous, and foreign it is to this Cause. And it is so
well known that it needs not to be mentioned with what Zeal and constancy,
those famous Popes defended the Liberty of the Church against the Secular
Power, so far are their examples from favoring your error. But we freely
allow, and commend the advice of moderating the discipline of the Canons,
according to the necessity of the times, when it may be done without any injury
to Faith, and Manners; yea, I add with St. Augustine, That may sometimes be
allowed for the sake of Unity, which for the sake of equity ought to be
abhorred. Nor are the tares to be plucked up when there is danger of plucking
up the Corn with them. Yet this ought so to be understood as that it is Lawful
in some purticular cases only, and for a time, and when necessity requires; as
the Church did when she restored the Arrians and Donatist Bishops to their
Churches, as soon as they had renounced their errors, that she might keep the
people, which had followed them, in their due obedience to her. But it is
otherwise when the Discipline of the Church is destroyed, throughout so great a
kingdom, without any limitation of time, and when there is manifest danger that
the infection will spread farther, yea, the very foundation of Discipline, and
of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy it self is subverted; and this must needs be, if
you connive at, yea consent to those things, which the most Christian King has
lately Ordered in the business of the Regalia, contrary to the Authority of the
Sacred Canons, and particularly those of the General Counsel of Lions, contrary
to our mind in that affair, long since signified to you, and contrary to the
very obligation of that Oath with which you bound your selves to God, and to
the Roman, and your own Churches, when you received the Episcopal Character.
Should the Holy See, suffer this mischief to be put in execution, and to get
ground by farther Delays? or shall we not, according to the supreme Power over
the Church Universal, given by God to our humility and treading in the steps of
our Predecessors solemnly damn it? and the rather, since it plainly appears,
that not only the Discipline of the Church is subverted, by the abuse of the
Regalia; but that the soundness of the Faith is also called in Question, may
easily be discovered by the very words of the King's Decrees, which claim for
him that Right of conferring Benefices, not as being derived from any
concession of the Church but as connote, and coeval with the Regal Crown; but I
could not, without extreme horror of mind, read that part of your Letter, which
tells us, that you have quitted your Right, and have transferred it to the
King, as if you had the absolute disposal, not the Gaurdianship of the Churches
committed to your charge, and as if the Churches themselves, and their
Spiritual Rights might be subjected, to the yoke of Seeular Power by the
Bishops, who for the Liberty thereof, ought to undergo the greatest Servitude.
And indeed you your selves confess this truth, by saying elsewhere, That the
Right of the Regalia is a kind of Servitude, which (especially as it relates to
the collation of Benefices) cannot be imposed, but by the Grant; or at least by
the consent of the Church. By what Right then have you transferred that Right
to the King? And since the sacred Canons prohibit the alienation of the Rights
of your Churches, how could you bring your minds to alienate them, as if you
could lawfully derogate from the authority of those Canons? Remember what is
what is written by your famous Countryman, Clarevalensis Abbas (by you
deservedly called the Light, not only of the Gallican, but of the Universal
Church) who admonishing Pope Eugenius of his duty, tells him that, If he was
the person, to whom the Keys and to whom the Sheep were committed, though there
were other keepers of Heaven Gates, and Pastors of Flocks, yet, while they had
each their particular Flocks designed them, all of them, and they themselves
also, were committed to him alone; and that Eugenius was the sole Shepherd,
not only of the Sheep but of the Shepherds too; and therefore according to the
Decrees of the Canons, whereas other Bishops were called to take part of the
care, and charge, he was called to the full power. By which words, as you are
admonished of that duty and obedidience, which you owe to the holy See, (of
which by the divine Authority we, though unworthy, are President) so is our
Pastoral care excited, to begin at length to execute our Apostolic duty in
this affair, which, perhaps, our too much patience, in giving space for
repentance, has hitherto deferred; wherefore according to the Authority, given
unto us by Almighty God, we do, by these Presents, damn, abolish, and utterly
make void, all that has been done by your Assembly in the business of the
Regalia, and all that has since ensued thereupon; together with whatsoever
shall hereafter be done: And we do declare the same to be forever null and
void, though, being manifestly null of it self, it needed no such damnation, or
declaration. But we hope that, upon better consideration, you your selves will
by a voluntary recantarion, consult the quiet of your own Consciences, and the
reputation of the Gallican Clergy; among whom, as there never has been, so I
trust, there never will be wanting, some, who, after the Example of the good
Shepherd, will readily lay down their lives for the Sheep and for the Testament
of their Fathers. And as for our own part we are ready, according to the duty
of our Office, to offer up the Sacrifice of Righteousness (by the assistance of
the Divine Grace) and to defend the Rights and Liberties of God's Church, and
the Authority, and Dignity of this Holy See; not presuming on our own strength,
but expecting all from him, who strengthens us, and works in us, and commanded
Peter to come to him upon the water. For the fashion of this world passes
away, and the Day of the Lord is at Hand. Wherefore, Reverend Brethren, and
dear Sons, let us so demean our selves that when the great Master of the
Househould, and Prince of Pastors shall call his Servants to an account, he may
not require at at our hands the Blood of his afflicted and dismembered Church,
which he has purchased with his own. In the mean time with our dearest
affection, and Paternal Love we send Apostolic benediction to you all, to
which we pray that Gods Blessing may be added.

Dated at Rome 11th. April 1682.
Protestatio Cleri Gallicani.
ECclesia Gallicana suis se regit Legibus, propriasque consuetudines inviolate
custodit, quibus Gallicani Pontifices, majores nostri, nulla definitione,
nullaque autoritate derogatum esse voluerunt, and quas ipsi summi Pontifices
agnoscere, and laudare dignati sunt: Prope tamen est, ut perfringantur leges
justae, quas prisca Galliarum Religio, reverendaque vetustas inconcassas
fecerunt Ecce etenim (quod sine acerbissimo animi Sensu dici non potest) hisce
annis superioribus, per provincias, and Galliarum civitates Literae Apostolicae
seminatae sunt, quibus antiqua Gallicanae Ecclesiae jura, and patriae Instituta
aperte violantur; ex iis scilicet intelligimus de Regni Ecclesiarumque
nostrarum negotiis, contra mores nostros usurpatam esse cognitionem inauditis
partibus, pronuntiata Judicia; jurisdictionem Episco porum concultatam, denique
contra Canones Ecclesiasticos, and contra consuetudines illustrissimae
Gallicanae Ecclesiae Metropolitanae gladium excommunicationis intentatum Esse.

Dolet Clerus Gallicanus, queriturque ex his and aliis quae exinde facta sunt,
oppressas Libertates Ecclesiarum, pertarbatam Ecclesiae pacem, illatum dedecus
Pontificali Ordini, Terminosque perruptos, quos patres sui constituerunt: and
ne officium, and causam suam deserere, aut praevaricari suae Dignitati,
Ecclesiarumque suarum cummodis videantur Publica contestatione obliqui contra,
and inertis silentii a se movere culpam, decrevit; ut exemplo patrum suorum, in
posterum provisum sit, ne quid nocere possit, juribus, and Libertatibus
Ecclesiae Gallicanae, eoque magis inclinat in eam sententiam quod summus
Pontifex Innocentius xi. morum antiquorum, and Cannonicae Disciplinae severus
actor, non patietur fieri injuriam Decretis suorum Praedecessorum and Canonibus
promulgatis, qui rescindebant quidquid subreptum contra privata Provinciarum
jura, nolebant si quidem Ecclesiarum privilegia, quae semper conservanda sunt,
confundi Propterea Clerus idem Gallicanus, professus, antea omnem reverentiam,
obedientiamque quam semper exhibuit, perpetuoque exhibiturus est Cathedrae
Petri, in qua potentiorem agnoscit principatum coram C. D. Joanne Baptista
Lauro, protonotario Apostolico, and nuntiaturae Apostolicae Galliarum Auditore,
protestari constituit sicut de facto protestatur per praesentes, ne literis
Pontificiis datis ad Episcopum Aepamiensem, die Secunda Octobris 1680. ad
Ecclesiae Aepamiensis Capitulim, eadem 2d a die Octobris ad Archiepiscopum
Tolosanum die Prima Januarii 1681. ad Moniales, seu Canonicas Regulares
Congregationis, B. M. V. Monastterii de Charonna die 7. Augusti, and 15.
Octobris, vel aliis exinda, and illiarum virtute actis, and secutis
quibuscunque damnum aliquod, seu praejudicium juribus Ecclesiae Gallicanae
fieri possit, neve ejus in aliis locis, and Temporibus hoc in exemplum, and
Authoritatem trahat, ut antiquos Ecclesiae Canones avitas Regni consuetudines
receptosque mores Ecclesiae Gallicanae oppugnare audeat, aut propterea quidquam
sibi licere existimet; Immo vero nemo nesciat hoc nihil obstare quo minus
Canones, consuetudines Jura, and Libertates ejusdem Ecclesiae pristimam vim,
and Authoritatem retineant, and custodiant. Hoc clerus Gallicanus sibi, suisque
privilegiis cautum, consultumque volens, and omnibus notum esse, ne quis
ignorantiae causam praetexat. Datum Comitiis Generalibus Cleri Gallicani
Lutetiae habitis, Anno Domini, 1682. Die vero Sexta mensis Maii.

The Protestation of the Gallican Clergy.
THE Gallican Church is Governed by her own Laws, and keeps inviolate her own
Customs, which the Gallican Prelates, our Ancestors, would not in the least
suffer to be infringed by any Decree, or Authority whatsoever, and which the
Popes themselves have vouchsafed to acknowledge and commend: Yet now those just
Laws, which the Old Gallican Religion, and venerable Antiquity had made
unalterable, are like to be destroyed; for (which cannot be mentioned without
great trouble of mind) these last preceding years, Apostolic Letters have been
dispersed through the several Provinces, and Cities of France, by which the
Ancient Rights of the Gallican Church, and statutes of our Country are openly
violated; for by them we find, that, contrary to our usages, cognizance of the
affairs both of our Kingdom, and Churches, has been usurped, sentence
pronounced, without hearing the parties concerned, the Jurisdiction of the
Bishops trampled on, and in fine the Sword of Excomunication drawn, contrary to
the Ecclesiastical Canons, and Customs of the famous Galican Metropolitan
Church.

Now the Gallican Clergy are troubled, and complain that by reason of these,
and other things done since, the Liberties of their Churches are oppressed the
peace of the Church disturbed the pontifical Order disgraced, and the bounds
fixed by their Ancestors, Transgres'd: And that they may not be thought to
abandon their Cause, and Duty, or betray their Dignity, and the profits of
their Churches, they have determined openly to declare against these things by
a public Protestation, and thereby to remove from themselves the scandal of a
base and cowardly silence, that so, according to the example of their Fathers,
they may provide that hereafter nothing may be able to injure the Rights, and
Liberties of the Gallican Church; and they do the rather incline to this
opinion, because Pope Innocent xi. being a strict executor of ancient Customs,
and Canonical Discipline will not suffer any injury to be done to the Decrees
of his Predecessors, and those public Canons which made void whatsoever had
crept in, contrary to the private Rights of the Provinces; for they would not
permit the privileges of the Churches to be confounded which ought always to
be preserved. Wherefore the said Gallican Clergy having first professed all due
Reverence and Obedience, which they ever have paid, and ever will pay, to St.
Peter's See where they acknowledge a greater Power resides) have determined to
Declare and protest and by these Presents do Declare and Protest, in the
presence of the most Noble Lord Joannes Baptista Laurus, Apostolic
Protonotary, and Auditor of the Apostolic Legation in France, that, neither
the Popes Letters to the Bishop of Pamiez Dated October the 2d. 1680. to the
Chapter of the Church of Pamiez the same day, to the Arch Bishop of Toulouse,
January the 1. 1681, to the Nuns, or Female Canonical Regulars, of the
Congregation of the Blessed Virgin Mary in the Monastery of Charonne August the
7th, and 15. October, or by any others since, or by any things acted, or done
by Virtue of the same, the least Damage, or prejudice whatsoever can accrue to
the Rights of the Gallican Church; nor can he, at other places, and times, draw
this into Precedent, and Authority, that he should thereby presume to oppose
the Ancient Canons of the Church, Customs of the Kingdom, and the received
usages of the Gallican Church, or that therefore he should think that he may do
what he lists. On the contrary, let all Men know that this does not at all
hinder the Canons, Customs, Rights, and Liberties of the said Church, from
retaining and keeping their Ancient force, and Authority, the Gallican Clergy
having thus provided for, and secured themselves, and their Priveledges, do
Will, and Require that these Presents be made public that so no Man may
pretend Ignorance.

Dated in the General Assembly of the Gallican Clergy at Paris, May the 6th.
1682.
FINIS.

