A Brief Account of the PROVINCE OF EAST: NEW: JARSEY IN AMERICA: Published by
the SCOTS PROPRIETORS Having INTEREST there. For the Information of such, as
may have a Desire to Transport themselves, or their Families thither. WHEREIN
The Nature and Advantage of, and Interest in a Foreign Plantation to this
Country is Demonstrated.

EDINBURGH, Printed by JOHN REID, Anno DOM. 1683

A Brief Account of the Province of EAST: NEW: JARSEY IN AMERICA, etc.
IT is a Matter beyond all Question, that Plantations in America, is a thing of
a great Advantage to the Nations of Europe, which has made each of them, since
the discovery of it, seek so earnestly to have Interest there. And since there
is hardly any but has some footing, except SCOTLAND (the project of Nova Scotia
having proved unsuccesful) yet not any to whose advantage it would so much
Contribute, without the hazard of those Difficulties, that may befall others by
such Colonies.

The chief Reason against Foreign Plantations being the drawing too many
Inhabitants out of the Nation, and so leaving the Countries at Home unfurnished
of People: This is that which makes some say that Spain is rather a losser
then a Gainer by their Foreign Plantations: But (besides the bareness of the
Spainish Nation; the extreme heat of their Plantations; The Unhealthful
Employment of Working in their Mines; add thereunto the just Displeasure of the
Almighty at their barbarous and cruel Usage of the Natives, which justly takes
away a Blessing from them, without which all Endeavors are vain and
fruitless.) Our Country is in no danger of Hurt that way, for we could spare
several thousands every year, without the least prejudice of such as stay at
Home, and to the great Advantadge of those going Abroad; Yea, were there but a
way opened (as by the Providence of GOD, there seems one now in a good measure)
that such, who however do daily go out of SCOTLAND, upon a certain sort of
Necessity to seek their Fortune, might find an Opportunity of a Foreign
Plantation, there might in an Age, as large and plentiful a Colony of
Scots-Men, be abroad as Scotland is at home, not inferior to Scotland in
number, and far exceeding it in Riches, and all other Conveniences. Which; as
it would be an Honor to our Nation, so would it give great satisfaction to
most of People here, to understand their Friends and Relations were living so
plentifully, and it would be a comfortable Receptacle for any here, whose
Circumstances made them uneasy at Home.

To make this more manifestly appear, let it be considered what number of
People have gone out of Scotland since the year 1618, That the Wars began in
Germany, since in the Swedish Army, at one time there was said to be 27 Scots
Collonells: And into France, to Douglas Regiment, from time to time, We believe
it will be granted but a modest Calculation to affirm there has been many
thousands, and yet of that Vast Number few have ever returned, or had
Succession; scarce any Family has remained Abroad in any Comfortable
Setlement. And to be sure, not the 10th part has ever returned, that their
Equipping them abroad coast; they all, either dyed, or been killed there,
without any benefit to our Country but an empty Fame; Which is now in those
parts little or nothing considered.

Yea, it may be well affirmed, that the charge of James, Marquess of
Hamiltonne his Expedition in the year 1631. coast four times more then ever all
our Soldiers of Fortune brought home to Scotland. Now, if these People had
gone over to some Foreign Plantation, and had but a Proportionable number of
Women with them, which this Country could easily have spared, what a brave and
large Collonie would there have been by this time, and very advantageous to
Scotland, as shall after be made appear.

Both the Gentry and Commonalitie of our Country being very fruitful, and the
Law giving to the Elder Brothers, all their Fathers Estates, and that of the
younger being but small, It is known, how they are for most part put upon the
Rack for a comfortable Livelihood, the Session-house is not able to contain
the hundred part of them; Where sometimes also the elder Brothers will have
their share, and six or seven Advocats make, for most part the Lives of all the
rest, but a miserable and tedious Drudgery, so that they are either forced to
go abroad upon their Shifts, whence few or none of them ever return; or
otherwise, if they stay at home, hang upon the Lord in a most slavish and
sordide manner, which is a great Debasement to the Spirits of many, and a
defeating of good Improvements they might make in the Creation, for by Birth
and Education being Equal till they come to be Men, then their Spirits are
spoilled by so great inequality afterward.

Now these Younger Brothers having but an 1000. or 500. Acres of Ground in a
Foreign Plantation, with a 100. lib. starling to stock it, which the most
ordinary of their Portions might reach to, might, by a very moderate Industry,
live as comfortably as their Elder Brothers at home, and provide their Children
better; and each of those would not want enough of the Commonality to go
along with them, upon the Encouragements they might receive to be their
Servants.

And the Voyage to a Plantation here proposed, is become so easy, and the
Intercourse so frequent, that a Correspondence would be as ordinar as is
betwixt the South and North parts of this Nation: Yea, a great daall more than
is usual betwixt the West and Northern-Islands, and the other more frequented
parts of the Country.

It is also generally known, how hardly the Husbandmen here do live, and with
how much Toil and Difficulty, they are able to pay their Rents, and have any
comfortable Livelihood; The Reason whereof is, That, especially near the
Seaside, and most inhabited places, they are be far overthrong, and one might
Manure what two or three have: For by seeking to have so much Corn-Land, they
eat out the Substance of it, weary themselves, and wrongs their Landlords; So
that, if there were fewer of them, and each of them had more Land, and less in
Corn, and more upon Grass for Bestial, they would have a greater ease, and
their Masters would be better paid; But they not knowing how to dispose of
themselves otherwise, makes them thus throng one upon another, and render one
another miserable.

Now there would be a notable Remedy for this in a Foreign Plantation, for a
Husbandman that has two or three thousand Merks in Stock (as most of them
have) might transport himself, his Wife, and his Family, and get a little
Plantation at so easy terms, in a short time so stocked, that he might live
more Comfortably, plentifully, and at less Labor than many of the Masters do
here,

It is also known, that ordinar Servants here, after they have served 6. or 7.
years in the pryme of their youth, can hardly, the most Thrifty of them (over
what serves them in Clothes) gather so much together, as when they Marry, and
come to have Children, will be the beginning of any Comfortable Livelihood:
But there, after 4 years, they may be in a far better Condition, as shall
hereafter be demonstrated.

There needs no other, nor more evident proof for this, then the example of
most of these, who, being taken at the fights of Dumbar, and Worcester in the
years 1650 and 51, being sent over as Servants to Barbados, and other places,
after they served out their time, have most of them purchased notable
Plantations for themselves, both in Barbados and Maryland, and els-where, and
live very plentifully, accounting themselves happy in that providence that
brought them there, and extremely regrating the Condition of many of their
friends at home, and wishing them sharers of their prosperity.

But some, who will readily acknowledge what hes been here said, do think it
impracticable for our Contrymen to have this advantage. Because there is no
foreign plantation in America belongs to the Crown of Scotland, and all of
such, where we could settle, are a part of the English Dominions.

It shall not be contended, but it were well there were some belonging to
Scotland, for that it is not proper to Contradict what might be esteemed
honorable to this Crown. But those, who Judge all the advantages above
mentioned might not arise to us, from having an interest in a plantation under
the protection of the Crown of England, are under great mistakes; yea as things
now stands, it is more advantageous to us, if it be Considered.

1. That, tho it be under a different respect, Yet we are still under the same
Monarch, as if the Plantation belonged to the Crown of Scotland. 2. The
protection is much more sure and considerable from England, whose interest
oblidge them, because of the great advantage yearly comes in to them from
thence, to see to the Protection of the foreign plantations, and all of these
lying upon the main Continent being contiguous, no encroatchment can be made
upon part without endangering of the rest: And for the capacity of defense,
there is no need of Comparison; Scotland having no ships of war upon the
public account, and it is policy not lying in that Method. If the scruple be,
that any think there are things uneasy in the Laws of England, that are better
with us. There is thence no occasion of being straightened, for, as will after
appear, the Plantation here proposed, hes that Latitude in the Patent, that
they are not tied to the Laws of England so particularly, but they may let fall
what they think inconvenient, and take of Ours what seems to contribute more to
their advantage.

There would this visible disadvantage besides fall out, if the Plantation were
disjoined from the English Dominions, that by the act of Navigation we would be
debarred from trade with the other English Plantations, which would be a very
great prejudice. But no disadvantage on the other part does come, for we can be
allowed to carry over as many people as we please, with their Clothing, and
necessarys, which is the chief thing whereby advantage would come to Scotland,
in the accomodating of people of several sorts, as We observed before. And the
goods which are of most Value, and most necessar there, are such things as our
Country affoords most plentifully, such as all sorts of Woollen and
Linnen-Cloath, and the like; so that there is occasion for Export of our
Commodities, and the trade of Scotland consists much more in that, then in
Import; there being not that occasion here for Consumption of foreign
Commodities, and the product of the Plantations there not being Suggar or any
Store of Tobacco, is not fit to be imported in Scotland: So that the product of
the Plantation coming to England, according to Law, if the money be from thence
remitted to us for the transport of People and our Commodities, it will make a
Circulation of Trade as advantageous for us; Yea, more then if returns come
straight home, which would not so soon afford money in Scotland.

It is true if trade were absolutely as free 'twixt Scotland and there, as in
England, it might be an encouragment to Scots Shipping and Seamen. But for
that, it may be answered, that Ships built in the Plantations (where there is
great convenience for building of Vessels) will be free to come to Scotland, as
well as any other English Ships; and 2. part of the Seamen being Inhabitants
of the Plantation who by dwelling there are Denizons of England, satisfies the
Law; So that, tho the Ship be not a Scots Ship, yet it may belong to Scots-men
dwelling in the Collonie, and sailled with Seamen belonging thereto.

It is time now to show how some of our Countrymen, in order to so
advantageous a Project, have already purchased an considerable Interest in a
Plantation, which is justly esteemed not Inferior, if not beyond any place,
upon the whole continent of America, belonging to the English Dominions, called
East-New-Jarsey. The deduction of the right of it is thus,

The KING by Patent to the Duke of York, granted a great tract of Land lying
betwixt Virginia and New England, It was formerly in the hand of the Dutch, and
Considerably improved by them, and called New-Netherlands, And by treaty after
the first Dutch Wars, Surrendered to the King that part of it, lying betwixt the
39 and 41 Degree of Northern Latitude: Was by the Duke of York granted to John,
Lord Barkly, and Sir George Cartwright. That part, which belonged to the Lord
Barkley, being assigned to Edward Billings: Afterward by a Deed of Partition
betwixt the said Edward Billings and Sir George Cartwright, The West Part,
lying upon Delaware River, was alloted to Edward Billings for his share, and
the East part, lying upon Hudsons River, nearest to the Province of New York,
was appointed to Sir George Cartwright for his share. Which part, now called
East-New-Jarsey, is from Sir George Cartwright conveyed to twelve Persons in
and about London, who have since conveyed an half to other twelve, so that as
well the Right of Government as the Soil, stands now in 24 Proprietors, in
favors of some of whom, the Duke of York has been lately pleased to make a new
grant of Confirmation, both of Soil and Government to the 24 Proprietors, with
the same Powers and Privileges, he has in his Patent from the King, which are
as large as any other Plantation has, for the Words of the Dukes Patent are as
follows;

The Patent from the KING, to JAMES Duke of York, etc.
CHARLES the Second, By the Grace of GOD, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc,
To all Men to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting,
Know ye that WE, for diverse good Causes and Considerations, Us hereunto
moving, have of Our special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, Given
and Granted, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Do give
and grant unto Our dearest Brother JAMES Duke of York, his Heirs and Assigns,
All that part of the Maine Land of New England, beginning at a certain place,
called or known by the name of Saint Croix, next adjoining to New-Scotland in
America, and from thence extending along the Coast, unto a certain place called
Pemaquin, or Pemaquid, and so up the River thereof, to the farthest Head of the
same as it tends Northward, and extends from the River Kenbequin, and so
upwards by the shortest course, to the River of Canada Northward; and all that
Islandor Islands commonly called by the several name or names of Mattawaxor
Long Island, situate and being toward the West of Cape-cod, and the narrow
Heggansets, abutting upon the main Land between the two Rivers,there called or
known by the several or names of Conectecute and Hudsons River, together also
with the said River called Hudsons River, and all the land from the West Side
of Conectecute River to the East Side of Delawar Bay; And also all those
several Islands, called or known by the name of Martins-Vineyard, and
Hantuckes, alias, Hantuckett; together with all the Lands, Islands, Soyls,
Rivers, Harbors, Mines, Mineralls, Quarreys, Woods, Marshes, Waters, Lakes,
Fishing, Haukings, Huntings, and Fowlings, and all other Royallities, Profits,
Commodities, and Hereditaments to the said several Islands, Lands and Premises
belonging and appertaining, with their and every of their Appurtenances; and
all Our Estate, Right, Title, and Interest, Benefit and Advantage, Claim and
Demand of, in, or to the said Islands or Premises, or any Part or Parcel
thereof, and the Reversionand Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, together
with the Yearly and other Rents, Revenues and Profits of the Premises, and
every Part and Parcel thereof; To Have and to Hold all and singular the Lands
and Premises,with their, and every of their Appurtenances thereby given and
granted,or herein before mentioned to be given or granted, unto Oursaid Dearest
Brother, JAMES Duke of York, his Heirs and Assignesfor Ever. To be Holden of
Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, as of Our Manor of East-Greenwich in the
County of Kent, in free and common Soccage,and not in Capite, or by Knights
Service, Yiedling and Rendering. And the same JAMES Duke of York, for himself,
his Heirs and Assigns, DOES Covenant and Promise to yield and render unto Us,
Our Heirs, and Successors, of, and for the same yearly, and every year, Forty
Beaver-skins, when the same shall be demanded, or within ninety days after
such Demand made. And WE do further of Ourspecial Grace, certain Knowledge, and
mere Motion, for US, Our Heirs, and Successors, give and grant unto Our said
Dearest Brother, JAMES Duke of York, his Heirs, Deputes, Agents, Commissioners
and Assignies, by these Presents full and absolute Power and Authority, to
Correct, Punish, Pardon, Govern and Rule all such the Subjects of US, Our Heirs
and Successors,or any other Person or Persons, as shall to time adventure
themselves into any the Parts or Places aforesaid; Or that shall or do at any
time hereafter Inhabit within the same, according to such Laws, Orders,
Ordinances, Directions, and Instructions, as by Our said Dearest Brother, or
his Assigns shall be Established, and in defect thereof in cases of necessity
according to the good Directions of his Deputy Commissioners, Officers, or
Assigns respectively, as well in cases and matters Capital, and Criminal, as
Civil, and others; so always as the said Satutes, Ordinances, and Proceedings
be not contrary to, but as near as may be agreeable to the Laws, Statutes, and
Government of this Our Realmof England; AND Saving and Reserving to Us, Our
Heirs, and Successors, the Receiving, Hearing, and Determining the Appeal,and
Appeals of any Person or Persons, of, in, or belonging to the Territories or
Islands aforesaid, or touching any Judgment or Sentence to be there made, or
given: And further, that it shall and may be Lawful to and for our said Dearest
Brother, his Heirs, and Assigns by these Presents, from time to time, to
Nominate, Make, Constitute, Ordain, and Confirm such Laws, as aforesaid, by
such Name, or Names, Style or Styles, as to him or them shall seem good: and
likewise to Revoke, Discharge, Change, and Alter, as well all and singular
Governors; Officers, and Ministers, which hereafter shall be by him or them
thought fit and needful to be in, or used within the aforesaid Islands and
Parts: and also to Make, Ordain; and Establish all manner of Laws, Orders,
Directions, Instructions, Forms, and Ceremonies of Government and Magistracy
fit and necessary for, and concerning the Government of Territories, and
Islandsaforesaid. So always as the same be not contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of this Our Realm of England, but as near as may be conformable
thereunto,and the same at all times hereafter to put in Execution or Abrogate,
Revoke, or Change, not only within the precincts of the said Territories or
Islands, but also upon the Seas in going and coming to and from the same, as he
or they in their good Discretion shall think fittest for the good of the
Adventurers and Inhabitants. AND We do further of Our special Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere Motion, Grant, Ordain, and Declare, that such Governors,
Deputies, Officers, and Ministers, as from time, to time, shall be Authorized,
and appointed in manner and formaforesaid, shall and may have full power, and
Authority within the Territoriesaforesaid, to use and exercise Martial Law, in
cases of Rebellion, Insurrections, and Mutiny, in as large and ample a manner
as our Lieutenentsin our Countries within Our Realm of England, have, or ought
to have, by force of their Commissions of Lieutenancy, or any Law,or Statute,
of this our Realm. AND We do further, by these presents for us our Heirs and
Successors, grant unto our Dearest Brother JAMES Duke of York, his Heirs and
Assigns, that it shall and may be Lawful to and for the said James Duke of
York, his Heirs and Assigns, in his or their Discretions, from time to time,
to admit such and so many person or persons, to Trade and Traffic into and
within the Territoriesand Islands aforesaid, and to every and any part and
parcel thereof, and to have, possess, and enjoy any Lands, and Hereditaments in
the part and places aforesaid, as they shall think fit, according to the Laws,
Orders, Constitutions,and Ordinances, by our said Brother, his Heirs, Deputies,
Commissioners, and Assigns, from time to time, to be made and established, by
virtue of, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, and
under such Conditions, Reservations, and Agreements, as our said Dearest
Brother, his Heirs and Assigns, shall set down Order, Direct, and Appoint; and
not otherwise, as aforesaid. AND We do further, of Our special Grace, certain
Knowledge, and mere motion, for US, Our Heirs, and Successors, Give and Grant,
unto Our said Dearest Brother, his Heirs and Assigns, by these presents, that
it shall and may be Lawful to, and for him, them, or any of them, at all and
every time or times hereafter, out of any of Our Realms, or Dominions
whatsoever, to take, load, carry, and transport, in, and unto their Voyages,for
and toward the Plantations, of our Territories and Islandsaforesaid, all such,
and so many of our loving Subjects, or any other Strangers, being not
Prohibited or under restraint, that will become our loving subjects, and live
under our Allegiance, and shall willingly accompany them in the said Voyages,
together with all such Clothing, Implements, Fruniture, or other things
usually Transported, and not Prohibited, as shall be necessary for the
Inhabitants of the said Islands, and Territories, and for the use and defense
thereof, and Mannaging, and carrying on the Trade, with the People there.
Yielding and paying unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, the Customs and
Dutiesthereof, due and payable, according to Laws and Customs of this Our
Realm. And We do also for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto Our said
Dearest Brother JAMES Duke of York, his Heirs and Assigns, and to all and
every such Governor or Governors, or Deputies, their Officers, or Ministers,
as by our said Brother,his Heirs or Assigns shall be appointed, to have
Powerand Authority of Government, and Command in, and over the Inhabitants of
the said Territories, and Islands, that they and every of them, shall, and may
lawfully, from time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter, For their
several Defense and safty, Encounter, Repulse, Expel, and Resist,by force of
Arms, as well by Sea, as by Land, and all ways,and means whatsoever, all such
Person and Persons, as without the special License of our Dearest Brother, his
Heirsand Assigns, shall attempt to Inhabit within the several Precincts, and
Limits, of our said Territories and Islands; and also all, and every such
Person, and Persons whatsoever, as shall Enterprise, and Attempt, at any time
hereafter, the Destruction, Invasion, Detriment, or Annoyance, to the parts,
places, or Islands aforesaid, or any parts thereof. And Lastly, Our will and
pleasure is, And We do hereby declare, and grant, that these our Letters
Patents, or the Inrollment thereof, shall be good and effectual, in the Law, to
all intents, and purposes whatsoever, notwithstanding the not well, and true
Receiting, or mentioning of the premises, or any part thereof, or the Limits,
or Bounds thereof: or of any form, or other Letters Patents, or Grants
whatsoever made, or Granted of the premises, or of any part thereof, or the
Limits or bounds thereof, or of any former, or other Letters Patents, or
Grants, whatsoever made, or granted, of the premises, or of any part thereof,
by US, or any of Our Progenitors, unto any Person, or Persons, whatsoever
bodies, Politic, or Corporate, any other Law or other restraint, in
certainty, or imperfection, whatsoever, to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding, Although, express mention of the true yearly Value, or
certainty of the premises, or any of them, or of any other Gifts or Grants by
Us, or by any of our Progenitors heretofore made to the said James Duke of
York, in these presents, is not made, or any Statute, Act, Ordinance,
Provision, Proclamation, or Restriction heretofore had, made, enacted, or
provided, or any other matter, cause, or thing whatsoever to the contrary, in
any wise notwithstanding:

In Witness whereof, We caused these Letters, to be made Patents, Witness Our
Self, at Westminster, the 29. day of June, in the 16 Year of Our Reign.


The SCOTS Proprietors are, James, Earl of Pearth, John Drummond of Lundy, Lord
Theasurer Depute, Sir George Mackenzie, Lord Register, Robert Gordon of Cluny,
Arent Sonmans (a Dutchman, but interested with the SCOTS Proprietors) Robert
Barkley of Vnie, Robert Burnet of Lethenty, Gavine Laurie; Seven parts of the
24. belongs to these Persons, which, by the most modest Calculation, is
thought, will be near Five hundred thousand Acres.

This Province or Collony lies betwixt 39 and 41 Degrees of Latitude, being
about 12 Degrees more to the South, then the City of London. It is in the same
Climate with the Kingdom of Naples, and Montpelier in France. The Summer is
hotter, and longer then in England, and the Winter colder and shorter, the days
about an hour longer in Winter, and as much shorter in Summer. Is bounded
South-East with the Maine Sea, East by that vast Navigable Stream, called
Hudsons River, which divides this from the Province of Now-York, West by a Line
of Division, which separates this Province from West-Jarsey, and North upon the
Main Land. And Extends it self in length upon the Sea Coast and along Hudsons
River, one hundred English Mylls and upward.

The Situation of this Country is just, as it were, in the Center of the
English Plantations in America, betwixt the South parts of Carolina, which is
over hot; and the North parts of Pemaquitte, next New Scotland, which are
coldest; so that its Convenience of situation, temperature of the Air, and
fertility of the soil is such, that there is no less then seven towns
considerable already, (viz.) Shreutsburry, Midletown, Berghen, New-vvark,
Elizabeth-town, Woobridge, and Piscataway, which are well inhabited, by a sober
and industrious People, who have necessary Provisions for themselves, and
families, and for the comforable entertainment of Travelers, and Strangers.

And the Quittrents, or Fewes (as they are here called) of these Towns and
other Plantations, already in the Country, yields to the 24 Proprietors above
500. lib. starling, yearly Revenue, and the Air of this Collony, is
experimentally found generally to agree well with English Constitutions, and
Consequently with Ours.

For Navigation, it has these advantages, not only to be situate along the
Navigable parts of Hudsons River, but lies also fifty Milles along the Maine
Sea* and near the Midest of this Province is that notted Bay for Ships within
Sandy-Hook, very well known, not to be inferriour to any Harbor in America,
where Ships not only harbor in greatest storms, but there Ride safe with all
Winds, and Sail in and out thence as well in Winter as Summer. For Fishery, the
Sea-banks are very well Stored with variety of Fishes, not only such as are
profitable for Exportation, but such as are fit for Food there; There are
Whales, Coad-fish, Col. and Hake-fish, and Large Mackeril, and also, many other
sorts of Small and Flate-fish; The Bay, also, and Hudsons River, are plentifully
stored with Strugeon, and other Scal-fish, Eills, and Shel-fish, as Oysters, in
abundance.

This Country is also plentifully supplied with Lively-springs, Rivolets,
Inland-Rivers, and Creeks, which fall into the Sea, and Hadsons-River, in which
also there is variety of Fresh-fish, and water Fowl.

There are little hills from Rariton-River, which is about the middle of this
Province, that go to the very North-West-bounds of it, in which are abundance
of good Mill-Stons to be had, and there is many, both Corn, and Saw-milnes
set, and setting up already, also, on the other Side of these Mountains, there
is brave fresh Rivolets, fit for setting of In-Land-Towns, and a great deal of
Meadow-ground upon the banks thereof, So that there is abundance of Hay to be
had for Fodering of Catle in the Winter time, and these Meadows shows the
Country is not altogether covered with timber.

Its true, the first difficulty, meets people in Planting there, is the cutting
down Wood (Tho having some Meadow intermixed already well covered with Hay, is a
great ease) yet the trouble is compensed by the advantage, which the timber
being cut down, yields, being good Oak, fit for Shipping, and Masts; and also,
Chesnute, Walnut, Poplar, Cedar, Ash, Firr; And also, by the fertility of the
Soil, being cleared, which yields a vast increase, not only of Indian Corn,
which is a very wholesome Food, but of English grain, as Wheat, and Barley,
whereof it usually yields betwixt the 20. and 30th. fold, and with fare less
labor (the Timber being once removed) then in Britain. And to show the labor
of cutting down the Trees, and clearing the ground, is not so great as some may
Imagine, It is known by experience, that two men ariving there in September, or
October, may clear as much ground, as usually brings by Harvest following
twenty Quarters, that is about 40 Scots Bolls of grain.

This Country also, produces good Flax, and Hemp, which they now spine, and
Manufacture into Linen Cloth, and the very Barrans there (as they are called)
are not like most in Britain, but produces Grass fit for Grazing Cattle in
Summer time; There is also upon Ground (already cleared) store of good English
Claver-Grass growing, the Country is well stored with wild Deir, Connies, and
wild Fowl of several sorts; As Turkeys, Pigeons, Partridges, Plevers,
Quaills, wild Swans, and Greese, Ducks, in great plenty; It produces variety
of good and delicious Fruits, as Grapes, Plumes, Mulberries, and also;
Appricocks, Peaches, Pears, Apples, Quinches, Water-Millons, which are in
England planted in Orchards, and Gardens; but grew there with fare less labor,
and many more Fruits, which come not to perfection in England, are the more
natural product of this Country. It is thought Olives would grow well there,
and being store of Mulberrie-Trees, Silkworms would do well there; for they
were tried in Virginia, and proved very well, if the laziness of the People,
and there being wholly set upon Tobacco, and the Interest of Merchants, who
were afraid it might spoil there Silk-Trade from the Straits, had not hindered.

To show how Fruit Trees do advance in that Country, it is credibly reported,
that about Burlingtown, in West-Jarsey, which is more Northernly then the
greatest part of this Province, from an Apple-tree-Seed in four years, (without
grafting) there sprung a tree, that in the fourth year bore such a quaintitie
of Apples, as yielded a barrel of Syder.

There is there also, great store of Horses, Cowes, Hoges, and some Sheep,
which may be bought at reasonable pryces with English money, or English
Commodities, or man's labor; where goods and money are wanting.

For Minerals, It is thought there are not wanting of several sorts, For there
is an Iron work already set up, where there is good Iron made; And also, there
is discovered already abundance of Black-Load.

It is exceeding well furnished with safe, convenint Harbors, for Shipping,
which is of great Advantage, and afords already for exportation, great plenty
of Horses, and also Beef, Pork, Pipstaves, Bread, Flower, White, Barley, Rye,
Indian Corn, Butter, and Cheese, which they export for Barbados, Jamaica,
Mevis, and other adjacent Islands; As also to Portugal, Spain, and the
Canarys, their Whale-Oyl, and Whale-Fines, Beaver, Mink, Racon, and
Martine-skins (which this Country produces) they transport for England.

The Indian Natives in this Country are but few, Comparative to the
Neighboring Collony, And these that are there, are so far from being
formidable, and injurious to the Planters, and Inhabitants, that they are
really serviceable, and advantageous to them, not only in hunting, and taking
the Deer, and all other wild Creatures, and catching of Fish, and Fowl fit for
food, in their seasons; but in the killing and destroying of Bears, Wolves,
Foxes, and other Vermin; whose skins and furrs they bring the English, and
sell at less price, then the value of time that people must spend to take them.
Like as, that this Collony may be founded in Justice, and without any thing of
Oppression, as all that is already Planted, is truly Purchassed from the
Indians, so there is a great deal more of the Province cleared by their
consent, and all is intended by paction with them to be obtained, so that
whoever Purchase, or Plant under the Proprietors, shall be fred of that
encumbrance; and if there were any hazard from the Indians, as really there is
none, yet this Province could hardly be in any danger, In respect that to the
North, upon the Main-Land, from whence the hazard, if any must come, the
Province of New York comes betwixt it and them, and 20. miles and more, above
upon Hudsons River, there is a Fort called New-Albany.

There were Constitutions of Government made by the Lord Barkley, and Sir
George Cartwright, in which such provision was made, both for Liberty of
Religion, and Property, that the Province has been considerably Peopled, and
many resorted there from the Neighboring Collonies, so that the Planters are
able already to Muster 500. well armed Men.

There are already 3. of the 24. Proprietors, gone upon the place, and 2. goes
this Summer from Ireland, these already arryved, have been cheerfully received
by the Inhabitants, and submitted to, the Houses belonging to the Proprietors,
put in their possession, and the public Records delivered them, and have
received address from the Inhabitants, wherein they promise to stand to, and
defend the Proprietors, with their Lives and Fortunes: One of these Proprietors
Bears the Character of Depute Governor, and another of Surveyor General, and
Receiver of the Quittrents.

There is Order given that in the several most convenient places, Ten thousand
Acres be set out to each of the 24. Proprietors to them to sell, set out, or
dispose of, as they please; and when that shall be any ways Peopled or brought
in, then the Proprietors will either jointly sell out the rest, or make a new
Divident, as they find most convenient, for it is probably believed, according
to the most equal Cojecture, that every 24. part will contain 80000. Acres.

The Proprietors have framed a new Schem of Government, which is not yet fully
concluded one, but is intended rather to be an enlarging, than an abbreviating
of the former, and making it more easy, and advantageous for the Inhabitants,
the chief parts of it are;

That the 24. Proprietors shall choose a Governor, 16. of them has a Conclusive
Vote in it, after the death of him now chosen, he shall continue but for 3.
years, and be liable to the Censure of the Proprietors, and great Counsel, and
punishable if he transgress. There is a great Counsel to meet once a year (and
sit, if they see meet, for 3. Months) consisting of the 24. Proprietors, and
48. chosen by the Planters, and Inhabitants, two thirds Conclude, the one half
of the Proprietors assenting; and no money can be raised, or Law made, to touch
any man's Liberty or Property, but by this Counsel. There is a Common Counsel
to sit constantly, Consisting of the 24. Proprietors, or their Proxies, and
nine chosen out of the Representatives of the Planters, in all 33. to be
divided into three Commities; 11. to each, one for the Public Policy: One for
the Treasury and Trade, and one for Plantations.

To aviod Lording over one another, No Man can purchase above the 24th. part of
the Country; And on the other hand, least any should squander away their
Interest, and yet retain the Character of the Government, that belongs to
Property, and thence be capable to betray it, as not being bound by Interest,
there must be a suitable quantity retained, otherwise the Title in the
Government extinguishes in him, and passes to another, to be Elected by the
Proprietors, that Dominion may follow Property, and the inconveniency of a
beggarly Nobility, and Gentry may be avoided.

No man can be judged in any cause, either Civil, or Criminal, but by a Jury of
his Peers, and to avoyid in that all Caballin, the names of all the County or
or Neighborhood, capable to be Chosen, are to be write in Little pieces of
Parchement, and the number of the Jury to be taken out by a Child under 10.
years of age, And the proprietors as well as others are to be Liable to the
like trial, and not under any Exception.

Liberty in matters of Religion is established in the fullest manner. To be a
Planter or Inhabitant, nothing is more required but the acknowledging of one
Almighty GOD, and to have a Share in the Government, A simple profession of
faith of Jesus Christ, without descending into any other of the differences
among Christians, only that Religion may not be a cloak for disturbance,
whoever comes into the Magistrature, must declare, they hold not themselves in
Conscience obliged, for Religions sake, to make an alteration, or to endeavor
to turn out their partners, in the Government, Because they differ in Opinion
from them, and this is no more then to follow that great Rule, To do as they
would be done by.

These are the fundamentals, which are not alterable by any act of the great
Council, as other things, by these voices of 2. thirds, but only by an
universal agreement; so it is hoped, that this hint will satisfy all sober and
understanding people, what Encouragement such a Government may give.

For the matter of Purchase, It may be by purchaseing a whole propriety, or a
half, in which several persons may join, and tho the number be already filled
up, yet if any persons here, offer to the proprietors, of whose Integrity and
Industry they are satisfied, they might use means to make room for them, and
albeit the pryces be much advanced within this year, yet, it may be made
appear, that a purchase of a Propriety may be had here more easily, then any of
the Neighboring Plantations.

These that are not disposed, or have not Stock for such a purchase, may buy a
certain number of Acres from any of the Proprietors, as a part of the 10000. to
be set out to each of them this Summer; and, tho the price of that may seem
higher, then what is usually talked of in some other Plantations, yet,
considering he choice of the Land, and the advantages of Situation for Trade,
with the consideration of its being so well Peopled already, which is the chief
thing makes Land valuable, (for in a Wilderness a great dail of Land signifies
little) It will be found a good Bargain, and a very modest price, to give a
100. lib. starling for 500. Acres, at which Price it may be afforded any time
before the first of October next, and not afterward.

The Proprietors have also Ordered to be set out upon a place, called Ambo
point, (which has a good and convenient Harbor, and a pleasant and wholesome
place,) 1500. Acres for to build a Town, this is to be divided into 150. Lots,
and every Lot is to consist of ten Acres, and is to be sold at 20. lib.
starling, provyding it be done before the first of July next, before the Ship
go from SCOTLAND; For, after that time we cannot promise to accommodate any,
least all be taken up, for many are offering upon the place; and the
Proprietors intend to have a each a house built there, upon their own Account
this Summer; now this will be found a very good Bargain, considering there is
300 of the 1500. Meadow ground, so that each lot is like to have 2. Acres of
Meadow ground belonging to it, which is of great value.

For Husbandmen that hes a Stock, able to transport themselves and Families,
with a few Servants, and to have but a 1000. pound Scots, or a 1000. Merks
more, to carry over in Commodities, they shall have upon their arrival 100
Acres of good ground, measured out to them, or above, not exceeding 500. Acres;
And for their encouragement, shall for the first 7. years pay nothing, and then
have what they please, not under 100, nor exceeding 500. Acres, confirmed to
them, and their heirs for ever, paying half a Crown an Acre, never to be raised
upon them; And for the Charge of the first year, they may easily Calculate it,
by carrying over as much Oat-meal, as will serve them Bread, and the fraught
will be inconsiderable, and they will get flesh enough in the Country for
killing, without charge, and will be able to clear more ground the first
winter, then will double serve their Families after the first harvest, so that
they will only have to buy with the Commodities they carry over with them,
Seed, and Beasts.

The Charge of transportation, is, for every Man or Woman 5. lib. starling,
passadge and intertainment, for Children under 10. years of age, 50. shillings
and Sucking Children nothing, 40. shillings for the tun of goods, and often
under.

The Voyage is Judged less Sea hazard then either to Holland, or London, and
if there be any tolerable winds, it is easily made in 6. weeks, There went a
ship last harvest to West Jarsey, from the Road of Aberdeen: and they came to
Delaware-River-mouth in 8. weeks, though they had great Calmes, and of betwixt
30. and 40. passengers that went out of Aberdeen several women, and Children,
not above 4. of them had been at Sea before, not one dyed, nor was sick by the
way.

For ordinary servants, who are willing to go over, after 4. Years service from
the time of their arryvall there, (during which time they shall be well
entertained in meat and Clothing) they shall have Set out to each 25. Acres to
them and theirs for ever, paying 2. pence an Acre, as much Corn as will sow an
Acre, and a Suit of now Clothes; Now, Consider that there is 5. pound Sterling
paid for their passage, this is good terms; and that after the term of their
Service is expired, they will gain more in one year there, then they can do in
two at home, toward the gaining of a Stock to their land, and it may be easily
conceived that they will be well treated by their Masters, since it is their
Interest to do so there more then here, for that they would be Considerable
Losers, either by their Death, or sickness, being out so great an advance for
them, if, by any hardship, they should be disabled to serve out their times.

All Sorts of Tradesmen may make a brave Livelihood there, such as Carpenters,
Ship-wrights, Rope-makers, Smiths, Brick-makers, Tailors, Tanners, Cowpers,
Mill-wrights, Joyners, Shooe-makers, etc. and any such like, who are willing to
go serve the four years, not having to transport themselves, shall in
Consideration of their Trade, have (after the expiring of their Service) 30.
Acres, at 2. pence the Acre, as much Corn as well sow 2. Acres, a Cow and a
Sow: And for the encouragement of any such Tradsmen, who are willing to go over
and transport themselves, they shall have the like quantity of Land, at the
same rent, and the Proprietors will oblidge themselves to find them work for a
year, after their arryval, at as good Rates as they can have here, until they
furnish themselves with some Stock to make better advantage upon the place.

We will not encourage any to go there in expectation of Gold and Silver Mines;
yea, tho there were such in the Country, We should not be curious nor
industrous to seek them out: being, besides the Toil, and Labor, but occasions
of envy, and Emulation: Nor, yet is there Suggar or Indigo there, or Cotton,
nor any store of Tobacco, tho it grows there very well. But We consider it not
our interest to imploymuch ground on it; The Riches of this Country Consists
in that which is most Substantial and necessar for the use of man, to wit,
plenty of Corn and Cattle (and they have besides Vines, and Fruits in
abundance, as before has been said) so that who dwell here, need not to be
oblidged to any other Plantation, for any thing necessary, for life; and all
the other Plantations are beholden to them for necessarys, without which, their
other Curiosities would little avail them: This, with the Province of New York,
being the Granary or Storehouse of the West Indies, without which Barbados
and the Lee-wards-Islands. could not subsist; Yea, New England is forced to
come there every year for Corn, this, with the advantage of Fishery, being
Considered, will easily induce sober and industrious People, to prefer a
Plantation here to most other places.

There will a Ship go from Leith about Mid-Summer next, which will also call at
Aberdeen: such as desire to be more fully informed, or to treat with any of the
Proprietors, may address themselves to Androw Hamiltouns, at the sign of the
Ship, over against the Court of Guard, in Edinburgh; or at David Falkconers,
Merchant there, who will either give them satisfaction, or find them occasion
to treat with some of the Proprietors. Also, at Aberdeen, information may be
had from George Pyper, and Thomas Mercer, who will be heard of at Robert
Gerards, or John Leitch, their Shops in the Broad-Gate.

FINIS.

