Licensed and Entered.

A BRIEF NARRATIVE Of that Stupendous Tragedy Late intended to be Acted by
the Satanical SAINTS of these Reforming Times. Humbly presented to the KING'S
most EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

ALSO, An Impartial Account of the Indictment, Arraignment, Trial and
Condemnation of Thomas Tongue, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, James Hind, John
Sallers, and Nathaniel Gibbs, At Iustice-Hall in the Old Bailey, London, December.
11. 1662.

Together with the Confessions, Speeches, and Prayers of George Phillips,
Thomas Tongue, Nathaniel Gibbs, Francis Stubbs, at the Place of Execution, on
Monday December. 22. 1662.

Exactly taken in Shorthand Characters, by the same Person that wrote the late
Kings Judges Trials.

London, Printed for Charles Adams, at the Talbot in Fleet Street, near S.
Dunstans Church. 1662.

THE NARRATIVE Presented to the KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it Please Your Majesty,
ON Sunday October the 12th 1662. I came to London for dispatch of my own
private Affairs: On Thursday following, the 16th of the same month, walking
through Cheapside, I met one commonly called by the name of Captain Baker, then
living in East-Smithfield, formerly of New England; but more lately promoted by
Hugh Peter's (not long since Hanged and Quartered for many Treasons) to be one
of Cromwels Yeomen of his Guard; we remained not long in the Street, but he
gave me an invitation to bestow upon me my welcome to Town, which I accepted;
and by that means I had the opportunity of Discourse. After we had saluted each
other, he proceeded to ask me what News from the Country; I told him we heard
l^ttle; In the Town, he replied, there was some stirring and that he had
Matters of Concernment in hand to follow, with several others, who did hope ere
long to be delivered from that Trumpery of Rome that did daily incroach upon
the Nation. Some more words to this effect passed from him; I considering and
knowing what a desperate Enemy to the King, and all the Ministry of the Land,
this man had been; and though he was but an illiterate and roughhewn fellow,
yet in New England he might be sufficiently possessed with villainous
Principles; and I knowing also, that the chiefest Designers against the Kings
Majesty had confidence enough to entrust him with matters of moment: upon this,
I modestly put my self upon the sifting of him. He being not suspicious in the
least of my fidelity, and knowing how forward my Father had been to promote
that Devil, that Geneva Good-old-Cause; and supposing that I was a
Nonconformist, because I was not in a Canonical Habit, he at last told me,
That before a few Weeks were expired, he did not doubt but that both of us
should see the slaughter and confusion of those Rogues at Whitehall; And that
it did grieve his heart, to see that Villain (meaning the King) and Prince
Rupert to ride not long since through the City, with a few men with them (which
was when (as Baker said) He rode a Hunting,) when the said Baker, would have
been one of the Twenty that should have murdered Him, and have delivered this
Nation from the Tyranny of an Outlandish Dog. I perceiving the temper of the
man to be so high, thought he would not be so bold, unless he had some
persuasions that the GODLY PARTY should Once more reign over this Kingdom:
Whereupon I began to under-value his Assertion of Confounding the Rogues at
Whitehall; and certified him, there was no such Expectation in the Country,
but the Parliament Party there were heartless; only this, that our Eyes were
upon the City; and if any hopes of Recovery were here amongst the HONEST
PEOPLE, we should gladly set our Hearts and Hands to their assistance; with
many words to this purpose.

His Reply was, that if I would come along with him, the said Baker, at that
present time, he did not doubt, but he should meet with some friends, that in
these matters would give me better satisfaction; I answered him I had not
leisure then, but on the morrow, or any other time, I would gladly accompany
them, and understand somewhat of those Negotiations; because it concerned us
all to yield our best Council and assistance to that work; whereupon he
promised to bring some persons with him suddenly to my Lodging for that purpose.

October, 17. Upon the Friday following toward night, the said Baker came to
my Lodging in Smithfield, and brought three other persons with him enquiring
for me; but it being late before I came home, they departed: and Baker with two
of the aforesaid three promised to come early on the Saturday morning, which
two persons accordingly came; but Baker failing, and they being not acquainted
with me, they let me depart the House after I came out of my chamber without
the least Greeting.

Upon the Monday following being the 20th of October, early in the morning the
said Baker visited me excusing his neglect on the Saturday before, telling me
that he had brought 3 persons of Eminency the last Friday night, to give me
some intelligence of matters in hand, but they having not the happiness to see
me then, had engaged him to come this morning to me, desiring I would come with
him to the Exchange; and in the New England walk he should find those three
persons waiting for us.

I consented, asking their quality and their names. He Answered that one of
them was a choice person, Zealous and active in the Cause, which was Mr. Edward
Riggs, formerly Chaplain to Blake; the other was Bradely, formerly a faithful
Messenger to Cromwells Council of State, the other was one Hill a Drawer of
Cloth in Colemanstreet and a Church Member.

All which persons betwixt twelve and one I met on the Exchange; as soon as I
beheld their Aspect, I presently adjudged them of that party. After Baker had
informed them that I was as good as themselves, and my Father a public Person
that may Advance the Cause in the Country, we saluted, and all of us Resolved
to have some Godly Communication, at the Sign of the Ship by the East India
House in Leaden Hall Street.

The man of the house, as the said Hill the Drawer of Cloth informed, though he
was a Trained Soldier, yet was truly honest to the Godly Party.

And our Conference there was all of Gods Glory; in Ze^l we were up to the
Eyes; and I began exactly to speak their Language; and especially to fit Riggs
with expressions suitable to his Tone, because I found him the most intelligent
person amongst them, and the Darling of the Churches. After much circumlocution
I had insinuated into Riggs a good opinion of me, that our Souls were as David
and Ionathans; Then downright we came to the business; and Riggs assured me; (I
having certified him of our ignorance of it in the Country; yet we were
unwilling not to be numbered among the Repairers of Zion, to look on and not
help our Brethren.) Then he was sick until he had satisfied me of the happy
reconciliation of all the Sects and Churches; and that Six most excellent
Persons, wishing well to all Parties, and tender of every little fry of
Locusts, were elected by general consent to manage and contrive the Design of
reducing us to a Free State, and to Surprise the King in White Hall, my Lord
Chancellor, my Lord Duke of Albemarle, and Major General Sir Richard Brown. And
that they had protested secrecy by lifting up their hands to Almighty God; and
they were resolved to expedite the work.

And to that end several Messengers, being Church Members, were directed into
the Country; and all persons of that Interest were resolved to acquiess in what
they should Act, and prepare as those Six should direct.

To insist much on particulars, Riggs with the rest, were somewhat shy that
afternoon; but we appointed to meet on the morrow at the same place of the
Exchange.

Tuesday I met Riggs, Bradley, Baker, James Hill, and to our godly society came
one Capt. Brown a Sea Captain dwelling in Wapping, and James Hind a Gunner to
a Ship. It was long, because so much company was there, before our good
Discourse of the Work of God begun; yet at last Riggs could no longer detain it
from his new Brother: but taking me aside, assured me that this Work was long
intended, that Intelligence came in agreeable to expectation from the Counties,
that he the said Riggs was intendded once to be one of those six; but he had
engaged himself in business in a Brew House in town that he could not defer;
but he was very instrumental in encouraging honest men to the Work, and in
satisfying the Fifth-monarchy men, who would have undertaken the Work
themselves; and then 'twas his work with several others, to put a stop to it,
until all parties were agreed; and though the Presbyter would not be active,
yet he doubted not, but many of them were consenting to the Work. But if I
would meet him, the said Riggs, on the Wednesday night late, I should have
better information; for the six persons in Council sat so obscure, not twice
in a place, all disguized, and were resolved to act it so secret, that no
person, Friend or Foe, except two persons, should know where or when they met,
or whom they were. But Lieutenant Strange would come to town that Wednesday,
and he, the said Riggs, should meet him, and give me full information. For the
meeting I gave him my faithful promise, and this time I had understanding of
somewhat formidable; then I began to consider with my self the consequence of
this Design, and how desperate the Rogues were in their Attempts, that here was
a full Combination, and I believed the zeal of these Rogues was such, that they
had no Design of Trepanning me* I consulted my self, how I should proceed
wisely and timely enough for their Discovery. I presently meditated, that this
was to be acted in the City, and that the King's Majesty had entrusted Major
General Brown with the care of the City, and that he was of an active spirit,
and quick in counsel, I immediately attended him, and had suitable Instructions
from him, where by the next day, being Thursday, I was as full of matter for
them as they were of villainy to their Prince and Country.

But Wednesday night I attended Riggs for the News that Strange should impart,
and then I was informed by him, that some Months since there was a Southampton
man that had offered his service to the Churches in London, with a new Model of
Government for their Saintships, when they had rooted out the Amorites from
amongst them; and also a Plot for them to act, whereby they should ease
themselves from the Government of that Antichristian thing called Monarchy. But
his counsel was rejected, as the Committee of Safety rejected Sir Henry Vane's;
whereupon he sold his Estate and took ship for Holland, but now Mr. Rogers the
Minister was sent to reinvite him, and several Army Officers resident there,
for their assistance here in this blessed Work: exceeding earnest I was to know
those six persons in Council, Riggs could not fully resolve, but he was sure
(though he had heard others nominated) yet Philip Nigh, Lockier the Minister,
and Anthony Palmer the Minister, with Colonel Danvers, and Lieutenant Strange,
were very active in it; he did believe he had pitched upon some of them, and
that they had sat lately at the Wheat-sheaf in Thames Street concerning the
business.

Thursday being October the 23 d. their Brother failed not to mee^ them at the
Ship in Leadenhall-street.

Then in short, from Riggs and Hind I was confidently assured Windsor Castle
was their own, five hundred men were fixed in and about Windsor, the Sergeants
and head Gunner were Right Boys, and Captain Tongue had been with the Sergeants
there, and brought a Letter to be communicated to the Council from the
Sergeants of their fidelity. That all the Churches in London were concerned in
it, that now their Money did fly, and the Churches were able to raise twelve
thousand, if not twenty thousand, to pay their grand Adversaries in Whitehal,
at Somerset House, and Worcester-house; and to be sure, never a Lawn Sleeve or
Circingle-man should have a hole to hide their heads in this Nation.

Four hundred Assistants, Riggs affirmed, in Dorsetshire, they were ascertained
of, and that several Cases of Pistols were sent down by a Carrier into that
Country.

Riggs acquainted us then, that in a Warehouse in Crutchet-friers, Arms were
lodged, and there five hundred had been dispersed to those that were not able
to buy them; that they intended to make a desperate Assault in Whitehall, and
one party should attempt it by coming in at the Gate into St. James's Park, to
assault my Lord Duke of Albemarle, whom they must presently dispatch; because
when the King was destroyed he had power as Lord General to raise Forces by his
Commission in any part of the Nation.

Also when I put the question concerning the King, what we should do with him?
Riggs answered, That then they were resolved to give no quarter to any body.

Likewise, and it shall please Your Majesty, that Ludlow was to be General, and
the same Law he should have had; the same, the best, or highest of their
enemies should have. Many Friends in Kent looked for the blessed hour; and when
I asked who should command them there, Riggs answered, Col. Kenrick, for he was
su^e the Council had sent him Instructions yesterday by a Messenger, that he
had sent to them for the same. Also, that there lodged a Lieutenant at the
Wheat-sheaf in Thames Street, that had five hundred men at command for this
work, he being formerly a Sea Commander, and was safe in that Lodging, because
it was Lamberts man's house, who was their trusty and welbeloved friend.

The same night, Baker, formerly mentioned, brought into my comp^ny, one
Hayward, a pitiful young Porter, that plieth about Bowlane end, in Cheapside,
that was formerly of Okeys Regiment, and that affi^med to me, three or four and
twenty of their Cheapside Porters, would knock it soundly, when the day of
rising was.

Likewise Riggs asserted, that one Ward a Chandler in East-Smithfield, did
furnish the Magazines with much Powder, and sent it by honest Porters in
Baskets in white Sheets.

Likewise that that day Mr. Brooks the Minister was numbering out the
faithful-fighting Brethren in his Congregation, and those that could not help
with their holy hands, must with their purse: And also, that Riggs was
positive, that if they could have gotten Kiffing and the Churches to have
expended their money, the work had proceeded last year.

Friday the twentieth fou^th instant, at our Meeting at the Feathers Tavern in
Fish-street, there being Riggs, Bradley, Baker, and my self, I pressed hard
according to the counsel of Sir Richard Brown for Arms, for thirty men I had
made sure of; which Arms were p^omised me, because I would know where their
Magazine was. Answer was given by Riggs, That he had proposed it to Captain
Tongue, Strong-water-seller in Tower-Ditch. And Tongue replied, That no Arms
would be delivered me, unless I was a Church member. But Riggs and my self,
meeting one Sellers on the Exchange, Riggs presently acquaints him with my
desire. Sellers rep^ied, that all which were five or six hundred, were
delivered out last night, and that forty of their friends departed last night
u^furnished; but in three or four days some more would be brought to the
Mazagine at Crutchet-Friers, and then I should have them.

Some persons, who are Citizens, were discovered this day; but at night, Riggs,
Ward the Chandler, Lt. Stubbs, Bradley, Baker, and James Hind, we all
associated at Captain Tongues house in Tower-Ditch; Ward being a cunning St.
Rogue, was reserved as I heard after, because I was a stranger to him: But
Tongue couraged us, that one Captain Elton told him, that Lieutenant Strange
came out of the Country last night, from lodging the Horses in several
by-places, and corresponding with several Agents there; and the work proceeded
gallantly in City and Country; and that for fourteen miles round the City, all
their friends were ready, waited but for the knowledge of the day. And for the
surprizal of the Tower, Tongue said, he had fixed many of the Red Coats to open
a back Gate, and with Blunderbushes to enter. Also that Captain Leigh had also
been with Tongue last night, and assured him, that those that sat in counsel,
intended speedy action.

Saturday, October. 25. Bradley and my self, visited Riggs at his house, and
there he had this comfort for us, That the Commanders were all nominated;
Ludlow certainly to be their General: That Captain Spencer and Taverner,
formerly Governors of the Castles in Kent, commanding the Sea, had assured the
Council of the surprizal of those Castles by their interest there. Then was
several Copies of the Letter given forth by the direction of the Council, to be
noised through the City; the Contents of which Letter was, that the Forces and
Papists at Whitehal, did intend a massacre in the City of all the Protestant
party: The copy whereof I have.

Riggs then assured us, A man that he knew was to be assistant at the assault
at Whitehal, that would bring the party to the Treasuries at Whitehal, and
elsewhere. But for money, large sums were in Bank of their own, notwithstanding
that, all Treasuries must be seized; and at Whitehal, with my Lord Chancellor
and his Attendance, at Worcester-house; also St. James, Somerset House, no
quarter should be given: But their indignation swelled highly against my Lord
General Monk, and Sir Richard Brown; they should die (who ever escaped) without
mercy; and then when Sir Richard was slain, the City was their own.

Captain Tongue this day certified us, that Strange was again gone into the
Country, but his return was this night, then more particular news we should
have: But to morrow being Sunday, at the several Meetings they intended to
whisper the appointed time of Insurrection to each other.

Riggs then affirmed with Tongue, that many new Blunderbushes were made for the
Design; and that they had Head-peeces, Back, and Breast, for Two thousand
Horsemen; and that Captain Leigh told him, the said Riggs, that they were not
to seek as to the work in Ireland; that special care was taken by the Reverend
Council for that affair.

Helmes the Minister, formerly of Winchcomb in Gloucester-shire, was discovered
by Riggs to be Active in this desi^n.

This night Tongue boasted to me, that he was to go to a Cane man, who had
bought Arms for six men for this design, at his own cost and charge.

Sunday and Monday last, our Information from them was, That all the Horse that
formerly departed the Town, were to return by Monday night; That their
Declaration was ready founded on Righteous Principles, to the complete
satisfaction as much as the Holy Sisters.

And on the Monday, Riggs and my self saluted Sergeant Phillips, Sergeant to
Colonel Whales Company of the Militia Bands, for his good service on the Sunday
morning, in sending Intimation to several places where the Godly had their
Meetings of their intended surprisal, by the Major General; which Seargeant, as
Tongue and Riggs informed me, was to furnish the Party with the Word that were
to secure the City; and upon the Sunday, when he was on the Guard, he wished
their Party were up; for he thought a few would do the work. The Arms that
Tongue and Hind has provided for this design, as they say, I have seen.

And one Captain Brown, a Sea Captain, must needs discover himself also; that
he had sold his Ship, on purpose, that he may fight stoutly in this work on
Land.

Tuesday October 28. Our Intelligence from Riggs, and one Beazley by Fleetbridg
a Chandler, that the Council was dissolved, 2000 Horse came into the Town
yesterday, that Wednesday night was originally intended to be the fatal night,
although they had now fixed another time.

On Tuesday night late, I was carried by Riggs and Beazley, with Lt. Stubbs
into Blackfriars, into a House, the Sign thereof I know not, but the House I
know, where we had Intelligence from one Gibbs, and other persons, their Names
I could not learn, that the Council were to meet again Wednesday morning. Some
intelligence the Council had of Arms and Ammunition, the City had provided in
the several Halls; and because it was commonly reported about the Town, the
Lord Mayors day at night would be the time, whereupon they all supposed
Alhallows Even; and those persons that were with us, were somewhat assured
would be the time; and we were all desired to prepare against that time. There
and then Gibbs, Riggs, Captain Thomas in Shoe lane, Lt. Stubbs, and three other
persons, assured us, that that Even, or near, would be the time we should cut
off Root and Branch, rid our selves, as their expression was, of Kings, Queens,
Dukes, Bishops; all should go one way, there should be no running beyond Sea,
or Parleys there; but a total destruction of King, Lords, Bishops and G^ntry,
was the determination of them there, and as they affirmed, of all the rest
engaged in the work.

The several days Intelligence, I committed to faithful Sir Richard Brown; from
whom I received full instruction every night.

On Tuesday, Sir Richard Brown, and Sir John Robinson, ordered me to go along
with the Soldiers to take Riggs, Hind, Tongue, Stubbs, etc. White the Cane man,
who were all apprehended accordingly.

William Hill.
An Impartial Narrative of the Indictment, Arraignment, Trial, and Sentence of
Thomas Tongue, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, James Hind, John Sallers, and
Nathaniel Gibbs, at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, London, December. 11. 1662.
THe Commission of Oyer and Terminer being read, and Proclamation made, the
Grand Jury were sworn, whose Names are, Arthur Iourdan John Freestone Thomas
Fawson Thomas Coney George Compere Isaac Rutter Chr. Rigby Rowland Steed
William Standen John Worth John Rigby Leonard Staples.


And several Witnesses being called, there appeared William Hill, Edward Riggs,
Tyler; Godolphin, Bonfoy, and several others; who being all sworn, were
directed up to the Grand Jury.

After some hours examination of the Witnesses, and consultation, the Grand
Jury returned the Indictment Billa vera.

Clerk of the Peace. You good men of the City of London, summoned to appear
here this day, to enquire between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoners
that are and shall be at the Bar, answer to your Names as you shall be called,
every one at their first Call, upon pain and peril that shall fall thereon;
Good men of the Ward of, etc.


Sergeant Glyn, Sergeant Maynard, His Majesty's Sergeants at Law, Sir Ieoffry
Palmer Attorney General, Sir Heneage Finch His Majesty's Solicitor, Sergeant
Keeling His Majesty's Sergeant, Sir Edward Turnor, taking their places in
Court, The Prisoners were commanded to be set to the Bar. Clerk of the Peace.
Thomas Tongue, hold up thy hand; George Phillips, hold up thy hand; Francis
Stubbs, hold up thy hand; James Hind, hold up thy hand; John Sallers, hold up
thy hand; and Nathaniel Gibbs, hold up thy hand* Which they severally doing,
their Indictment was read, the substance whereof is as follows* Viz.

YOu the Prisoners that were last called to the Bar, stand indicted in London
by the names of Thomas Tongue late of London Distiller, George Phillips late of
London Yeoman, Francis Stubbs late of London Cheese-monger, James Hind late of
London Gunner, John Sallers late of London Compass-maker, and Nathaniel Gibbs
late of London Felt-maker; for that you six, together with diverse others,
particularly in the Indictment mentioned, and others not yet taken, as false
Traitors to the Illustrious, Serene, and most Excellent Prince Charles the
Second by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defendor of the Faith, etc. minding, and with all their force intending the
Pea^^ and Tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to disturb, and our said
Sovereign Lord the King to death and final destruction to bring and put, the 31
th day of October in the Fourteenth year of the Reign of our said Sovereign
Lord King Charles the Second, traitorously did compass, imagine and intend the
killing of our said Sovereign Lord the King, and the ancient Government of this
Kingdom of England to change [as in the Indictment more particularly was
mentioned.]

What say thou Thomas Tongue, art thou guilty of this High Treason in manner
and form as thou stand iudicted, or not guilty?


Tongue. Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Tongue, By God and my Country.


Clerk. What say thou George Phillips, art thou guilty, etc?


Phill. I am guilty in hearing and not discovering of it.


Clerk. Art thou guilty of this High Treason whereof thou stand indicted?


Phill. I am guilty, but not in manner and form as I stand indicted; I have
heard the words, as I formerly confessed to Sir Richard Brown: not guilty, as
to the manner and form.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Phill. By God and my Country


Clerk. How say thou Francis Stubbs, art thou guilty, etc?


Stub, Not guilty.


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Stub. By God and my Country.


Clerk. What say thou James Hind, art thou guilty, etc*


Hind kneeling down, and discovering much penitency, answered, I am guilty, and
humbly beg Mercy of His Majesty. Court. Record his Confession.


Clerk. How say thou John Sallers, art thou guilty, etc?


Sall. Not guilty,


Clerk. How will thou be tried?


Sall. By God and the Country.


Clerk. How say thou Nathaniel Gibbs, art thou guilty, etc?


Gibbs. Not guilty.


Cler. How will thou be tried?


Gibbs. By God and the Country.


Court. Carry up Hind to the Jail.
And the rest standing at the Bar, silence was commanded.

Cler. Thomas Tongue, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, John Sallers, and
Nathaniel Gibbs; You the Prisoners that were last called to the Bar, those men
that you shall hear called are to pass upon trial for your several lives and
deaths; if you or any of you will challenge them or any of them, you must
challenge them when they come to the Book to be sworn, before they be sworn.

Edmund Butler.


Tongue. I challenge him, but afterward admitted him.


Clerk. Edmond Butler, Clement Punge, George Dixon, Samuel Pain, John Bagnal,
John Gourney, William Gayler, Ralph Silverton, William Dudley, Joseph Drake,
John Peake and Robert Morris were severally sworn in this manner; Lay your
hand on the Book, look upon the Prisoner: You shall well and truly try, and
true deliverance make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoners at
the Bar, whom you shall have in charge according to your Evidence, So help you
God.


Clerk, Count these Crier. Edmund Butler; Crier, one. Clement Punge, two, etc.
Twelve good men and true, stand together and hear your Evidence.


Clerk, Crier, make Proclamation.


Crier, O Yes, If any one can inform my Lords the Kings Justices, the Kings
Sergeants, or the Kings Attorney, before this Inquest be taken, let them come
forth and they shall be heard; for now the Prisoners stand at the Bar upon
their Deliverance; and all others that are bound by Recognizance to give
Evidence against any of the Prisoners at the Bar, come forth and give Evidence,
or else you forfeit your Recognizance; and all manner of persons that were
summoned upon the Jury, and have not yet been sworn, they are discharged, and
may depart the Court.


Clerk, Tho. Tongue, Hold up thy hand, and so to the rest of them at the Bar:
You of the Jury, Look upon the Prisoners, and hearken to their Cause, you shall
understand that they stand indicted in London by the names of Tho. Tongue, late
of etc. and so as in the Indictment aforementioned, who together with James
Hind who stands convicted by his own confession, and the rest also
aforementioned, and so reads the Indictment again.

Upon which Indictment they have been Arraigned, and thereunto have severally
pleaded, Not Guilty; and for their Trial have put themselves upon God and the
Country, which Country you are; Your charge is to enquire whether they be
guilty of the High Treason in manner and form as they stand Indicted, or not
guilty; If you find that they, or any of them are guilty, you shall enquire
what Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements they or any of them had at the
time of committing the said Treasons, or at any time sithence: If you find
that they are not guilty, you shall enquire whether they or any of them did
flee for it; if you find that they fled for it, you shall enquire of their
Goods and Chattels, etc. as if you had found them guilty; if you find that
they are not guilty, nor that they did flee; Say so, and no more, and hear your
Evidence.


Sir Edward Turner. MAy it please your Lordships, and you Gentlemen that are
sworn of this Jury, The 5. Prisoners at the Bar by the name of T. Tongue, G.
Phillips, F. Stubbs, I. Sallers, and N. Gibbs, do stand indicted for that they
as false Traitors, together with several other persons mentioned in the
Indictment, the 31. of October last, did, in the Parish of St. Michaels in the
Ward of Cornhill London, assemble and meet together, consult, contrive, and
design to levy War against the King, to subvert and change the Government as it
is now established, to depose and kill the King; and in order to effect this,
they did likewise then and there agree and design to seize and take in their
hands the Kings royal Palace called Whitehall, where the King resides, for this
they have be indicted, arraigned, and all these five have severally pleaded
Not guilty: if we prove them guilty you must find them so.


Sergeant Maynard. GEntlemen of the Jury, you have heard the Indictment read,
you have heard the substance of it opened, it is short in words, but of as high
consequence as any thing can be; I shall open the particulars of that Evidence,
that we conceive will be made good by the Oaths of Witnesses to be produced to
you: You see here what the Indictment is, I shall insist upon these
particulars, which I shall open and make good to you; first, what was their
Design, next what was their means of accomplishment, what encouragements they
used one to another, and what colors they put upon this wicked action; For the
first, Gentlemen, I shall begin at the highest, higher no man can go in this
world, that is, to design and compass, to contrive to put the King himself to
death, to seize his person; some of them called it Securing, you know the
English of that, A King secured; We will go further, for we shall prove to you
the person that with his own wicked Hand undertook the Slaughter and Murder of
the King; he did contrive how he might do it, sometimes when the King was
performing an office of piety to visit his Mother, other times when he should
recreate himself by Hunting; higher than this they could not go, and this they
colored over with Religion; this merciful King that had pardoned his People
beyond their own desires, and contended to do it; this King they would murder.
Had there been no more, it had been exceeding heinous; but they went further,
their malice rested not upon His person, but the Family, the noble and
excellent Duke of York is designed to be secured likewise, and used like his
Brother; not they only, they went further, the whole Nobility was in design;
not (Gentlemen) that every one of these before you used these Expressions, but
they and their Accomplices, some one and some another Expression; but all joined
in this, to destroy the King and his Family root and branch, that was their
Expression: King, his Family, Nobility, nay, go down to the Gentry, and it
ceased not there, they go to the Clergy, as one of the Prisoners at the Bar (as
you will hear) did express himself, I think it was Stubbs, that there should be
never a Lawn-Sleeve, never a Sursingler should have a hole to hide his head in.


Stubbs. I never opened my mouth to that purpose.


Serj. Maynard. That will be left to proof, I undertake not of my self to prove
this, but to open it, let the Witnesses speak. In discourse some went further
than that, whosoever would not join with them in their Design (it was one
Strange) was an Enemy; and thereupon one Cole, who is gone, deserted them,
though he was contented to have the King murdered, the Nation ruined, yet would
not agree in that Principle. To accomplish this, we shall prove to you they did
treat of levying a War, that among themselves it was given out that Arms were
provided, some delivered; and their Designs to raise Money, seizing all the
Treasury at Whitehall, Worcester-house, and the Chamber of London; to seize the
person of the noble Duke of Albemarle, and all about him, and Quarter to be
given to none, that was their Expression. They did give out among themselves
(for a while there was some difference among these Foxes, whose Tails were tied
together, and had fire in them) and Tongue told them (as we shall prove) that
all parties were now agreed and would join; they had framed Declarations to
justify their proceedings, framed Papers to raise a Mutiny among the
Mariners, and encouraged them to join with them, this will be proved: for
their means, Phillips at the Bar undertakes to procure the Word that the Guard
in the City had, so to betray them. There was a Design made for seizing the
Tower, several men appointed for that purpose, they and their Accomplices were to
come there with Papers in their hands as if they were Mariners and had Accounts
to make up, these were to go up to those that sat there to finish Accounts. To
encourage themselves they gave out that they had dealt with the Soldiers at
Windsor, and secured that Castle; if this be proved to you there can nothing be
higher; There was this one pretense, it was given out (and perchance the
rumors of the City are come to your ears) that they had designed a Day for the
Execution of this Mischief; several days were appointed; one on the Lord
Majors Day, another on Alhallows Eve: They gave out by a feigned Letter that
there would be a Massacre by the French, and Papists of the Protestants; this
was to raise a fear and discontent among the Nation, to induce them to join
when this Design should be attempted. Gentlemen of the Jury, had they gone on
in this wicked purpose, having possessed the people with these fears, who could
have told how to behave himself? And it seems strange and wonderful,
especially looking upon the persons, men of little consideration, despicable
men, and who live under the Mercies of so good a Sovereign, that they should
take such a Design in their hearts, and undertake the performance: Though the
Spear has not entered into the Sides of our Sovereign, yet it must needs crown
his Head with abundance of Thorns, that such people should be desperately
wicked. But we shall call our Witnesses, and when you have heard this proved,
we cannot be so uncharitable to think you shall need any further Aggravation,
or doubt of your giving a Verdict against such Miscreants as these are.


Sir Ieoffry Palmer. THese few Prisoners at the Bar were not all in this
Contrivance, though we have not all their names; but in the Evidence you will
hear, there was a Council of 40. and then of 6. but none discovered. These 6.
acted and infused into these and diverse others what they intended, and then
broke up, and gave out all was ready, and would be done on such a day. We shall
not trouble the Jury with giving evidence particularly against these men, they
are joined and knit together in one Cause. But hear the Evidence.


William Hill, Edward Riggs, and one Bradley, were Sworn. Council. Mr. Hill,
Speak your knowledge in this business, to my Lords and the Jury.


Mr. Hill. May it please your Lordships, about the middle of October last, I
met John Baker, one that is now indicted, he was a Captain formerly called; I
met him in Cheapside; he meeting me (after a Salutation) invites me to drink
with him; I went into a house with him. When I was with him he began to ask me
what News there was in the Country, I told him I had little to inform him. He
told me, if I would stay a while he would tell me some. I asked him of what
nature; says he, Not long ago the King went a Hunting, sent some Stags to Sir
John Robinson, now the Lord Major, and went but with a small Guard, and I could
have been one of the twenty that would have slain that Outlandish Dog: then
said I, Mr. Baker, that is nothing to me; but what other news have you? says
he, I know thou art right, and I know your Father; there is something on foot
in the City, and if you wilt meet to morrow, I will bring some persons to you
that will give you information, Sir, said I, understanding it of dangerous
consequence, and willing to get it out, I will meet you, and we agreed to meet
the next morning; that morning 3 Persons came early to my quarters, Hill the
Clothdrawer, Mr. Bradley, and this Mr Riggs, he appointed them to meet him
there, but failing himself, they being strangers said nothing to me then, and
so I departed and left them a drinking; the morrow after he himself came to my
Lodgings, fetches me out of my Bed, and tells me he had appointed some persons
on the Exchange to give me an account; I went with him thither, and there we
met with some persons that were his acquaintance, and from thence we went to
the Ship in Leadenhall-street; and among us was Hind, that confessed himself
Guilty; and there the business was fully discoursed of, what their intention
was, that all interests were agreed, Fifth Monarchy-men, Anabaptists,
Independents, and Fighting Quakers, and the Congregational Churches were
consenting, and were resolved to endeavor their deliverance from adversaries
at Whitehall, Many passages more; On the morrow after we met again, and there
met with us Hind and Brown and Baker; there we were acquainted of their
Magazine and Arms provided, and about their correspondence in the several
Gounties, that they were sure of Windsoor Castle, that the head-Gunner and
Sergeant there were privy; we had information concerning this Tongue; as an
active person in this design, I studied to know this Tongue, and I was brought
to him at his house; and there I met one Ward, Stubbs, and Hind, and some
others, and there we had discourse concerning the business, Tongue told us
something of the business of Windsor Castle, and proposed something in
reference to the taking of the Tower, what Arms and men they had for this
design; We met many times at the Ship, that Gibbs we met at Bridewell-Dock,
and there was Stubbs and one Bearley, with me; there we waited for a Brother of
this Gibbs's to give us intelligence when the day of the Insurrection would be,
we waited not long but in came his Brother and two persons more, one Thomas a
Bridler or Bit-maker in Shoo-lane, and another person in a handsome Garb came
along with him; his Brother was somewhat shy (because I was a stranger) to
speak any thing, but calls for this Gibbs and Stubbs, and had some private
discourse with them, and away departed; after they were gone, we desired to
know the Intelligence, they told us that the Council of 6. was broken up, all
business was settled, Ludlow was commander in chief, and Alhallows Eve was the
time, that Horse and Arms were provided. For Phillips; that day that the
meetings were intercepted, that the Trained bands did surprise them, that day
this Gentleman and I (pointing to Riggs) came to the Main Guard at the
Exchange; where Sergeant Phillips was with a Buff Coat and a Halbert, and this
Gentleman (meaning Riggs) saluted him, and thanked him for his service in
sending down notice to the Meeting to be gone, for he was coming with the
Trained bands to surprise them; he asked him what was the occasion of the
Bustle, says he, they say --


Sir Robert Foster. Who is that he?


Hill. That Phillips said, they say they were up in the West, and if they were
not, I would they were, and here too, for a few would do the work; upon the
Monday after, we met him near the Exchange, and so likewise Riggs thanked him
for his service, and then he ( Phillips) promised his further service when the
time of the Insurrection would be.

For Sallers, I was by agreement to have 30 Arms delivered me, and I was very
pressing to have the Arms out of the Magazine; Sallers met with this Gentleman
( Riggs) and he urging Sallers about the Arms, Sallers told him that they were
all delivered out the night before, about 5 or 600; and that 40 of their
friends went away without Arms, but that within 2 or 3 days there would be
more laid in.


Sir Heneage Finch. Mr. Hill, I will ask you one question (with my Lords
favor;) as you have given a general Account, I will keep you to one particular
person, Tongue: Did Tongue, in any discourse with you, tell you of one Strange
that was gone into the Country?


Hill. One night he told us he had spoke with Strange; that he was gone into
the Country, and would come back the morrow, and then we should have more
intelligence.


Sir Heneage Finch. What concerning the Tower, and Windsor Castle?


Hill. He talked of the good service that he had done in being at Windsor
Castle, with the Sergeant and Gunner, for the securing of that Castle; That
near five hundred of their Friends were in and about Windsor, ready to assist
for surprising that Castle.


Court. Who told you this?


Hill. Tongue told me himself, That he was instrumental in it.


Finch. Did he tell you any thing of the Tower?

Hill. Only he said, it was fit some care should be taken to surprise the Tower
at the time.


Finch. Any thing of Alhallows-Eve?

Hill. He did not fix the very instant time, but said, he looked for
intelligence from Strange.


Sir Ieoffery Palmer. What day of the month was that?


Hill. I cannot remember the very day.


Sergeant Maynard. What did he say concerning Declarations?


Hill. The Declaration was ready, Stubbs acquainted us, against Popery, and
Monopolies, for Liberty of Conscience, and a Free Commonwealth.


Finch, Any thing of the Popish Massacre?


Hill. Yes, I had this Paper of them, a Copy of a Letter.


Sir R. Foster, How many Copies of that Letter were to be dispersed in the City?


Hill. About Five thousand.


Sir Ieoffry Palmer. These things were to be dispersed to possess the people,
that the Papists about that time would Massacre the Protestants, that so they
might draw all against that Party to join with them; a brave color, when in
truth there was no such thing, but only to carry on their design of killing
the King, and altering the Government.


The Letter was read by the Clerk, and follows, in his verbis. SIR,
OUt of the respect which I bear to you in particular, and to the Protestant
Party in General, I give you notice of this Passage; About a fortnight since, a
woman, which you must be ignorant where, who had it from a Correspondent of the
Papists, that they intend to make use of their Army (which all the World sees
they have provided) against Al-hallows Eve next; It was thought good therefore,
in as prudent way as may be, to give notice to our Friends in remote Parts,
that they may do what piety to God, Loyalty to their Prince, Love to their
Country, and self-preservation should direct them: Sir, I call the Eternal God
to witness, that this is not to Trepan, to put a Trick upon you, but a sober
Truth; And also Communicated to a Justice of the Peace, and by him to the Privy
Council; and what the issue of it is I have not heard, I hope you will inquire,
and tell us.

From Yexford in Suffolk, October. 31. 1662.
Serj. Keeling. Do you (Mr. Hill) remember any discourse of the way of taking
Whitehall? Name who were there, and who spoke


Hill. There was Hind, and one Captain Brown a Shoemaker in the Strand, and
some other persons.


Counc. Was Stubbs there?


Hill. Not at this discourse; but we talked of taking Whitehall at Stubbs's
house, when a Sea-Captain was there that was to go to Saranam, and Stubbs
invited him to stay at home to assist them; who was to come down with a Party
by Charing Cross, and another. Party to come up by the Cockpit, and to kill my
Lord Duke of Albemarle, and to slay ^ir Richard Brown in the City, and the
Party in the City to keep a Drum beating, etc. And Tongue said, That their main
care must be to keep down Sir Richard Brown, and the Trained Bands, or else
they should never be able to stand.


Council. What concerning the Privy Garden way?


Hill. They discoursed concerning the getting down the Door and the Wall, and
so get the sooner to Whitehall.


Council. What was Stubbs's opinion at that communication?


Hill. His was at Black-friars, the last Tuesday night before they were taken,
this Stubbs, Thomas, and Gibbs.


Court. Which Gibbs?


Hill. This black Gibbs at the Bar, they discoursed that they would be sure to
make an end of Kings, Princes and Dukes, that they might have a Free State, and
troubled no more with any such kind of persons, neither Lawn Sleeves, nor
Circinglers.


Council. Do you remember that Stubbs proposed any other way to Whitehall?


Hill. No, Sir.


Maynard. Did they say what Number was provided, ten, or twenty thousand?


Hill. Stubbs assured us that there was a great party in East-smithfield right
for the work, and had their Arms.


Couucil. What employment had Sallers about delivering the Arms?


Hill. He said, the Arms were delivered out at Cruched-friers, about six
hundred, and that forty of their Friends went away last night for lack of Arms,
that within two or three days there would be more.


Council. Did he name a Magazine?


Hill. Yes, the Magazine in Crutched-friers.


Council. Did you know any thing touching the discovery of the Word, and by
whom?


Hill. No, Sir: but I understood that Tongue was assured by Phillips, that
Phillips would get him the Word that very night that they intended the
Insurrection.


Council. What was propounded, if they had taken the King, what would they do?


Hill. He should have the same Quarter as Ludlow was to have.


Court. Who said that?


Hill. Stubbs, and Gibbs, and Tongue.


Council. That Is three of the Prisoners at the Bar, Lord have mercy upon us.


Council. Were you not acquainted of a Council of Six?


Hill. Yes, they named some at a venture, but they believed some of them were
of the Six. That they met not twice in a place, sometimes here, and sometimes
in another place.


Council. Who did they name?


Hill. Colonel Danvers, Phillips, Nigh the Minister, Lockyer, and one Cole of
Southhampton, that these Four were part of the Six.


Council. What discourse touching the distance of place where they engaged any?


Hill. Forty miles about the Town.


Council. Did Tongue tell you that Strange had lodged any Horse?


Hill. He said, he had taken out the Horse that were provided for a time, but
Gibbs and Stubbs at Blackfriars assured us of the Horse coming into the Town
the night before.


Council. Did Tongue tell you of any Back, Breasts, Blunderbusses?


Hill. Not he, Sir. It was talked of that night at the Blackfriars.


Council. What did you hear concerning sending into Dorsetshire, to spread
Rumors there?


Hill. That they had four hundred of their Friends there that they were sure
of, and several Cases of Pistols sent down by the Carrier.


Court. Who said that?


Hill. I know not what particular person, but at that Meeting, and in that
company.


Council. Who was present?


Hill. Gibbs and Stubbs.


Council. None of the rest, Was Tongue or Phillips there?


Hill. No, Sir.


Council. Did you hear of any other Country, either Kent, or Worcestershire,
or Derby, or Leicestershire?


Hill. Tongue informed us of the faithfulness of Col. Kendrick in Kent, to bring
him some Arms.


Court. If the Prisoners will ask him any Questions, they may.


Sallers. Friends, all that here are present, I did ever abhor such an action:
Ask him whether he did hear me speak those words, that I should say, that there
was Arms delivered out, and that forty went away lacking, and in one or two
days there would be more; which words I never did speak in my life, or any such
thing, only what I heard from Wapshot, as Wapshot declared to my Lord Mayor,
he told me, to whom I appeal: It Is true, meeting with that Wapshot, says he, we
hear there will be a Rising, and there are some Arms delivered out; said I, I
would advise you to have a care of such a business.


Sir Orl. Bridgeman. I would not interrupt you, you will be admitted to make
your defense afterward; but if you will, ask him any Question.


Sallers. My Lord, I shall come to that, Wapshot told me there were Arms
delivered, but further told me, he knew not of the certainty of these things,
that at night he should go to a house where he should know, I bid him have a
care; At night, as I was passing along, I met Riggs at Stubbs door, he asked me
what news at London? I said, I was told there would be a Rising, and that Arms
were delivered. Is there, says he? said I, I do not believe it, but I shall
know certainly to morrow. I did call the next morning, and asked, Is the story
true? No, says he, I was there, and there was no Arms, that was all that I know
of the business. Friend, did I tell you any such thing?


Council. Tell him, and upon what occasion.


Hill. Upon occasion of Riggs asking him for thirty Arms for me (this upon the
Exchange) Sallers took him a little aside and told him, They were all delivered
out, that forty went away lacking, that more would be there within two or three
days.


Sallers. That which I said to Riggs, was the Message I received from Wapshot;
but that I inquired, and there was no Arms there; so that it was but a fallacy:
For I advised him not to meddle with any such thing. Mr. Hill never saw my
face, till I was apprehended upon the Exchange, and brought before Sir Richard
Brown.


Hill. I saw him upon the Exchange with this man ( Riggs).


Council. Did he say that any Arms were delivered before, and what number?


Hill. About five or six hundred.


Sallers. He never heard me speak a word.


Council. How long before he was apprehended?


Hill. Never but that time with Riggs upon the Exchange, about nine days before
his apprehension; and he confessed upon his examination, That he did see me
with Riggs.


Court. Have you, or any other the prisoners any questions more?


Sallers. I have more; Whether he will positively affirm that he spoke with me
upon the Exchange?


Hill. No Sir, you answered the question to Riggs.


Council. You heard the answer?


Hill. Yes Sir.


Sallers. May be at the second hand.


Council. Did you hear the prisoner answer it, or had you it at the second hand?


Hill. I heard it from Sallers himself, answering Riggs.


Sallers. Did you hear me?


Hill. Yes, to Mr. Riggs.


Sir Hen. Finch. He swears it, and you wonder at it, and so we do all.


Sallers. Who was there then?


Hill. It was upon the Exchange, when almost full.


Sallers. What day of the month?


Hill. I cannot remember the day.


Sallers. I do declare before this Honorable Bench, Gentlemen of the Jury, and
this great Auditory, That I never saw this man's face till I was apprehended:
That which I told Mr. Riggs, was, what I heard Wapshot say. I never till then
saw this man's face, nor exchanged one word with him; whereas he says, he heard
me. I do not believe Mr. Riggs saw him near me, when I gave him the answer.


Hill. Seeing he does invalidate my Testimony, Mr. Adjutant Carent took him
upon the Exchange, I showed him the person; and therefore, certainly I must see
him before.


Sallers. It was not he, but the other in the white clothes, that came and took
me, that knew me.


Court. Will any of the rest ask him any question?


Sallers. Here is that, that I am accused of, That I delivered Arms, which is
altogether false; my Lord Major can bear witness, Wapshot confessed, he told me
such a thing. I did ever abhor any such thing; I was always serviceable to His
Majesty upon all occasions, and all times: my neighbors can witness my civil
conversation.


Court. Have you any thing more to ask him?


Sallers. I would fain know, whether the Bench and Jury are satisfied with this
Evidence.


Court. That you will hear anon: What else will you ask him?


Stubbs. What he accuses me, you have all heard: I do in the presence of God,
and this Honorable Bench, and the Jury, deny it; for it is very false, and
believe none will verify the same upon Oath.


Court. Have you any questions?


Gibbs. We all stand in the presence of God; and I am very conscientious of
what I say and do, I must give account of all things before the Lord. This
Gentleman, Mr. Hill, has asserted concerning me, That I should deliver diverse
Cases of Pistols, or knowing the delivery of them: if Mr. Hill, who stands
likewise in the presence of God, can produce any man to prove, That I delivered
to any man any Pistols, or that any were so delivered by my order, or that I
conveyed or sent them away into the Country: Do this in the sight of the Lord
and his own conscience, I expect not mercy. But I would have him speak no more
of me, but what he knows of me, or by me; whether he knows, I ever received any
Pistols, or delivered any at any time, for such an end as he is pleased to
speak, Which my Soul abhors, and God can witness!


Stubbs. This Mr. Hill was the man that mentioned this, and that he had four
Horses and Arm^ himself, and had Two hundred pound in order to it. I was never
any plotter, nor contrived any thing, but am as innocent as the child unborn,
but being by an accident at Tongues house, a Strong-water-man; ask the other
witnesses, whether he speaks truth --


Sir O. Bridgman. I would put you in a right way, you shall be all heard at
large, when you make your defense: But will you ask him any questions?


Gibbs. I propounded one, I desire an answer: Whether I received or delivered
any Pistols to such a use?


Hill. I did not say he did; but at that meeting at Blackfriars it was
discoursed among them, That several Arms were sent to Dorsetshire to several
friends there, and he was there then; I believe he cannot deny it.


Stubbs. There was Arms spoken of, but that man (Mr. Hill) spoke of them, and
upon this consideration, That there were Arms delivered to every Hall,
Ammunition and Powder; Riggs knows he spoke it at that time.


Hill. Sir, that was spoken after the question was put, What was the occasion
of sending the Powder and Ammunition to the Halls? These Arms were spoken of,
in reference to the design. I do acknowledge, I told them I had some Arms my
self, and said, I had Two hundred pound for carrying it on; and I know the
grounds of my speaking, and so do some of this Honorable Bench.


Stubbs. Hill advised, that they fall upon Sir Richard Brown as an enemy to all
honest-men.


Gibbs. This Hill says, that I should say these things, There was more there,
and had ears as well as he, let them speak.


Hill. There was Riggs, Stubbs, my self, and I know not the other names.


Gibbs. This Hill and Mr. Riggs, whose face I never saw, came to my
neighbors-house, where I was alone, found me plotting with no man.


Hill. We were brought into his company by one Beazley, he had been at
Tower Hill about two or three a clock, to give some intelligence to some
persons there, about the design. Riggs and I took a Coach and went after him,
and Stubbs told us we might meet him at a Bakers house near the Tower. We found
Beazley, and he said he could not signify any thing to us, but would carry us
to Blackfriars, to one Gibbs; and there he brought us to this very man, first
enquiring at a house for him, Beazley was told, he was at a Tavern at
Bridewel-stairs: We went there, and found him; he told us, he could tell us
little himself, till his Brother came; and accordingly he presently after came,
that was the occasion that I came into his company.


Gibbs. He says that I spoke of Pistols delivered, and a number, but now many
he knows not; and that I should talk of the death of the King; which is as
false as God is true. Again, I knew not of his coming* never appointed him,
never was privy to any such Plot, I abhor it in my Soul, I never engaged in any
such design with any man at any time --


Court. You do your self much wrong, and take away that time, which you may
happily spend better.


Stubbs. I desire to know of Mr. Hill, who was present at that meeting, that I
should say, the King should have such quarter as Ludlow.


Hill. It was spoken at that meeting at Blackfriars, after his brother and the
other persons were gone, it was there spoken, That the Council was brook up,
and all ready; Alhallows Eve the time, and then the same quarter to be given as
Ludlow should have if taken.


Stubbs. You do not answer the Question, who was there besides your self?


Hill. There was Riggs, and that Gibbs there.


Stubbs. You have only his evidence,


Tongue. Who was in company when I talked of 300. men at Windsor.


Hill. It was at your own house, and there was Ward, Stubbs, Riggs, Hind, and
my self.


Phillips. Whether did he ever see my face at any meeting?


Hill. I never saw you before that time in Cornhill.


Phillips. Upon what account did I speak to Riggs then?


Hill. When you came off the Exchange, you told him you could not stay, your
Captain was coming; Riggs thanked you for your favor in sending word to the
Meeting to be gone, to a certain Quaker.


Phillips. I never sent to any Quaker to that purpose; I did not see this man
upon the Sabbath day: But Riggs came down to me, and thought I had sent notice
to Anchor-Alley, but I did not.


Sallers. He affirmed that there was several meetings of 40. and then of six,
ask Mr. Hill whether I was in either of those numbers at any time,


Council. He did not charge you with any such thing of being in that number:
he asks a question about things not laid to his charge.


Council. Let Mr. Riggs speak*


Edward Riggs. About 23. weeks since I came acquainted with Mr. Tongue upon this
occasion, Captain Baker did say, that he was a man of Intelligence; but Mr.
Tongue did not care for him; and told me, that I might be acquainted with him; a
while after I came acquainted with him, accidentally, when I came to his House.


Court. Whose House?


Riggs. Tongues house; Mr. Stubbs was there; he said, That he had been at
Windsor, spoken with the Gunner and Sergeant, and that they promised it should
be ready upon some certain notice given; that night he had received a Letter of
some business concerning a suit at Law, he said, in which there was a mystical
meaning, which he did not tell me of; but this he said, That he had made sure
of Windsor, by the Gunner and Sergeants promises: This is that I know of him.


Council. Is this all of Tongue?


Riggs. This likewise he has told me, That he had sometimes met with a certain
company: he did not say thirty or forty, but a pretty many there was: he named
Mr. Cole, Captain Elton, Captain Leigh, that they had often met, but could not
well agree; but at last Mr. Strange did meet with them, give them one meeting,
they could not agree neither; they went away, and said these words to the best
of my remembrance, Mr. Strange did refuse to join with them, but when God did
bid him go, he would go; whether this day, or next week, or next year, matters
not; but when God bids him go, he would go. Mr. Cole was somewhat troubled to
hear it; but says Mr. Cole, if you will go, give me but notice, If I cannot go
so fast as you ride, I will hold by your Horse-tail: A little while after he
told me, they had not met again; that Mr. Cole, because they could not agree
about this business, was gone beyond Sea; but before he was gone, he did tell
me of some Considerations that were drawn, as he judged about a Government by
Master Cole, and gave me in a Paper some certain Propositions, three or four
concerning Seamen; the substance was this, what great benefits they had by a
Commonwealth.


Court. Who gave you them?


Riggs. Tongue, but it came from M. Cole, as he said; In general they were to
declare against the misgovernment of Church and State, in particular to
Seamen, what great advantages there would be to them; and three or four things
propounded in order to them. 1. That no Seamen should pay custom for any
commodity that he did bring under the value of Ten pounds, upwards they must:
And likewise there should be care taken upon our own Coasts, and beyond Sea,
That where any of our English Ships should be cast away, there should be care
taken out of the Customs, that might keep them in their traveling homewards,
either from begging or starving: Put Mr. Cole when they met as Tongue said,
would not agree, and therefore went beyond Sea; after he was gone, within a
week or fortnight they had another meeting.


Court. They, which they, name them?


Riggs. I did not hear him name many, unless Leigh and Captain Elton, I
remember no more; and there, he said, they had under consideration, the
Government of a Commonwealth; and so to declare against the misgovernment of
the Church and State; and that there was to be a meeting at London-Wall, in a
little time after, and he was there: He afterward told me, he mist that
meeting, but had intelligence brought him, that the time that he missed, thirty
or forty, I know not the certain number, had referred it to six men; they
called it, The Council of Six, but the names of them, I never heard from him;
and indeed, he said he knew them not, by reason of his absence from that
meeting: But what I gathered from him, was this, That he judged Captain Elton
was one of them.


Council. He told you, there was a Council of six.


Riggs. Yes, that he heard there was, but knew them not.


Sir Hen. Finch. To make things short; were you ever at any meeting where there
was a discourse touching surprising the King, altering the Government; and who
was there upon your oath?


Riggs. That Friday immediately before we were taken, I think, October 24.
there was some discourse, in general, concerning Whitehal; what might be done,
as to the procuring of that, and likewise concerning the Tower.


Council. Who was present that Friday?


Riggs. My self, Hill, Tongue, Stubbs, Ward, Hind, and John Baker; and then to
the best of my knowledge, there was this discourse in general. Concerning the
taking of the Tower, there was some Propositions on all hands concerning the
taking of that; Mr. Hind, he only mentioned, but did not say he would
undertake it, the righting of Gunners Accounts. Mr. Tongue, he said, that the
way that he thought convenient, might be this, When Sir John Robinson, now Lord
Major, did late in the evening go into the Tower, there should be a party
following his Coach in, and so might do it. And John Baker at that present
instant of time did say, That it was necessary the King should be surprised;
and likewise said then, that there should be no quarter, he would give, nor
take none.


Council. Who was present?


Riggs. Mr. Hill, my self, Bradley, Hind, Captain Brown, and Baker, and another
Hill, the Drawer I think.


Council. Was not Tongue and Stubbs there then at that time?


Riggs. Yes, they were there.


Sir Hen. Finch. I ask you this, I do not desire large stories, but firm and
close answers; Were you present at any meeting, when the securing the King,
Tower, or Whitehal, was discoursed of, or no?


Riggs. Sir, that Friday October 24. immediately before we were taken, there
was this discourse, Tongue did propound such a way for surprising the Tower, by
following Sir John Robinsons Coach in at night; and Baker did say, that it was
necessary to undertake the securing of the Kings person, and assaulting of
Whitehal, and that if there were Five hundred horse and foot, they would
undertake it by going into the Privy-Garden and Backstairs.


Council. Were you present when Stubbs did advise the assaulting of Whitehal,
by the Privy-Garden?


Riggs. No; but Baker did say he would undertake it.


Council. Who was present?


Riggs. Mr. Hill, Bradley, Stubbs, and Hind was there, but that Stubbs
undertook it, I cannot say, but he was there.


Sir Hen. Finch. Did Tongue ever tell you any thing of Phillips, or that he had
hopes of the Word?


Riggs. I came acquainted with Phillips, presently after I was acquainted with
Mr. Tongue* Phillips once met me, and I carried him to Tongues, and then Phillips
freely said, That there was three hundred Arms at the Artillery Garden, he
being one of the Artillery, knew where they lay, and could tell them how they
might come by those Arms; and that for the Word, it was necessary to be got;
and if in case, that it so fell out that the White Regiment was then out, or he
then in office, he would endeavor to procure it: But afterward meeting him
several times, he declared, he would not meddle any more with it.


Sir H. Finch. Were you upon the Exchange with Sallers, when there was a
discourse about delivering out of Arms; and what did Sallers say?


Riggs. Mr. Hill saying, That he had Two hundred pound to buy Horses, and that
he had four already, and wanted Swords, and had friends in Town wanted Arms;
asked me, if I knew if any were given out. I told him, that one Mr. Sallers
told me, That he had heard some Arms were given, and to be given out that day.
Upon the Exchange, Mr. Hill, and Bradley and I being together, Mr. Hill said, I
there is the person that told me of the Arms; I will go and ask him, if there
be any such thing. Whether Mr. Hill heard the discourse, I cannot tell, but he
said, says he, I have enquired, and some Arms are delivered, and forty went
without; but within two or three days, there would be more.


Sir Hen. Finch. Did Hill see Sallers upon the Exchange at that time.


Riggs. Yes, but whether he heard him, I cannot tell.


Sir R. Foster. What induces you to believe he did see him?


Riggs. We were close together.


Foster. What about Nathaniel Gibbs?


Riggs. For Gibbs, I brought Mr. Hill acquainted with Mr. Stubbs; and he said
he knew one at Fleet-bridg that sells Plums, and such things; and if we would
go along with him, he would tell us news: Hill, Stubbs, and I, that day I was
taken, went to Beazley; Stubbs asked him what news; says he, I hear the
business goes on, but if you will go to one Gibbs, meaning him that is fled, he
has intelligence; so we went to an Alehouse near him, but he was not at home,
and we were told, if we would go to Bridewell, they said they would send for
his Brother, meaning him at the Bar, and so should have an account: Gibbs at
the Bar, being with us, he told us he knew little himself, but when his Brother
came, we should hear. Three quarters of an hour after came Gibbs that is gone,
Thomas, and another man, I knew him not, and Gibbs called this Brother;
Beazley, Stubbs, and Hill, and I, set still: when this Gibbs came, he said his
brother knew little, hoped we were honest men. The news was this, that he heard
that Ludlow was in Town, and that now the Council was broken up.


Court. What Council?


Riggs. The Council of six was broken up, and that they had sent Messengers
into the Country, to give notice, and to make their interests good abroad: this
is that he said there, or as much as I remember.


Finch. Now I will ask you in general; Did you ever hear of any discourse at
any time of these Meetings, touching a Rising by the Papists, and a Massacre of
the Protestants?


Riggs. Being upon the Exchange, Hill, Bradley, and I, there was a Lieutenant
came to me, and asked me whether I heard of the Massacre to be; I said no:
says he, I can let you see a Copy of a Letter to that purpose, and gave it me:
Hill going to the Ship, I told him of this, and he was desirous of having a
Copy; and this was the Copy that was this day read in Court.


Sir Ieff. Palmer. What did you hear concerning the surprising of the King at
Camberwell, when he cam^ from his Mother, and what did Phillips say?


Riggs. Phillips, Tongue, Stubbs, and my self, being together, they were
discoursing concerning the Kings going abroad; and at that Phillips said, the
King was to come to Hampton Court, to see the Queen Mother at Greenwich, and
hinted that he might be supprized; Tongue said, it need not, there might be such
an opportunity twice every week.


Court. Prisoners, will you ask the witnesses any Question?


Phillips. Did you not meet me on a Sabbath day? you may remember I met you in
Cheapside, we walked to Birchin-lane end; you asked me of a rising that should
be? I said, what rising? says you, to surprise the King, coming from
Hampton Court to Greenwich: and I came and spoke it openly in my Family, as
news that I heard. This Gentleman had me to Tongues house, and there grew the
discourse: Riggs told me, Tongue could tell further; and Riggs told me, that the
reason why the time for it was not appointed, was because the Fift-Monarchy men
and Anabaptists were not agreed: Riggs, did not I disclaim this business, and
declared, I would have nothing to do with it.


Riggs. This is certain, that afterward he did say he would not have any thing
to do with it, and I did not see him a great while after that: Concerning
Bakers surprising the King, it is true, he did say before Hill and I, and
Bradley, that the King was a hunting, and came through the City; and said, he
would have been one of the Fifty that would have surprised him, and pulled him
out of the Coach.


Court. Who said that?


Riggs. Baker.


Court. Who present?


Riggs. Bradley, M. Hill, and the other Hill, Brown, and others.


Finch. Do you remember no discourse concerning the coming in at the
Privy-Garden.


Riggs. I have under my hand to the Grand Jury declared, that Baker said he
knew the way to the Back-stairs through the Privy-garden, better than any; and
Bradley did once, and but once, say, That he knew it as well as any, and would
undertake to do the same, in the presence of Stubbs, Tongue, Hill, and the rest
of them that were there that Friday night.


Court. Who were the rest?


Riggs. Hill, my self, Ward, Stubbs, Hind, and John Baker, at Tongues house.


Sir John Maynard. We do conceive, that these two witnesses have given evidence
against all of them; if any thing stick with the Jury, let them speak.


Council. Hear Bradley; this witness that we call, he was no Conspirator; but
when there was notice of the design, he was employed to find it out, and to
give us an account of it.


Sir Heneage Finch. Mr. Bradley, were you present at any debate?


Gibbs. Whether did Riggs hear me say, that Ludlow was in Town, or that the
Council was broke up, and the business went forward?


Riggs. This I said, That Hill, Stubbs, and Beazley, were present; and he said,
he knew nothing himself, but from his Brother, this was the news, That he heard
that Ludlow was in Town, Council broke up, and that there was sent out
Messengers to give notice to prepare for the business; that it would be on
Alhallows-Eve, or the latter end of the week, being Saturday the next day.


Gibbs. I never spoke these words, and do desire that the Honorable Bench will
enquire of the persons, then present, Whether they will avouch the same;
whether I said it from my Brother? These words I did not speak, and others
being present, had ears as well as he.


Tongue. Mr. Riggs told me Ludlow was in Town, and told me he would enquire
after him.


Riggs. I confess, I did so.


Tongue. And that he was like to be taken in Cheapside; he was continually at my
shop, and would not let me alone, prompting and inducing me to these things.


Council. Mr. Bradley were you at any meeting, touching discourse of surprising
Whitehal?


Bradley. I was one Friday night at Tongues house, a Strong-water man on Tower
Ditch, where there was these two Gentlemen with me (pointing to Mr. Hill, and
Mr. Riggs,) and there was Mr. Stubbs, and John Baker, and another Gentleman,
one Ward, and we had some discourse about surprising of Whitehal, which way it
might be done. Some said, that a party might go through the Guard, and so
surprise General Monks Guard: Others said, they might come down by
Charing Cross; but Tongue said, there was no coming down by Charing Cross,
because there was two great Guns planted at the bottom, and commanded all that
way; but said, the only way he conceived, was to bring a party through
Kings-street, and if it were possible to get into the Privy-Garden, and so into
the Lodgings that way. This is all that I remember.


Sergeant Keeling. Do you know any thing about the Ship at the East India house.


Bradley. I went to this Ship sometimes; and with Riggs, Hill, Brown, Hind, and
one Hill a Cloth-Drawer, we had diverse discourses concerning the design, and
the news on foot.


Court. What design, express it?


Bradley. To alter the Government, the surprising the King, the Duke, and the
General, and as many more of the Council they could lay hands on.


Council. What about the Guards, surprising Whitehal?


Bradley. At another meeting, they discoursed about the bringing down forces to
Whitehal.


Council. Who were present then; which of the prisoners at the Bar?


Bradley. None, unless Hind be there.


Council. At what other meetings were you?


Bradley. I was never at any other, but twice at Tongues house. The Friday night
we had a discourse about taking Whitehal; and the day before we were taken, I
met this Mr. Riggs upon the Exchange; he asked me to go home and dine with him,
and we intended to go and see a Ship: His Dinner being not ready, we went over
to Tongues shop, and had a quartern of Strong Water, and I took a Pipe of
Tobacco. Riggs went away, and said he would not stay; Hind staid with me the
whilst. After we had taken a Pipe of Tobacco, he came again, and said he heard
the business was near at hand, and that there would be speedy action. Hill was
at the shop, and after dinner, Riggs and I, Mr. Hill and Hind, went all out
together to Stubbs his house. Riggs and Hill went in, Hind and I staid.
Standing there a little, said I to Hind, What mean these Gentlemen to stay so
long? Riggs said he staid for a friend; but I will go and meet him: Said I,
will you not go on board a Ship with Master Hind and I; says Riggs, no, I will
go to meet my friend. Do you go on board the Ship, and come to my house; if I
am not there pray stay a little. We asked Mr. Hill, if he would go with us, but
he went with Riggs; and they told me coming back, that Gibbs had informed them,
the design was ready, Council broke up, and Messengers sent to give notice, and
Ludlow in Town, and to be General.


Court. Who told you this?


Bradley. Riggs did, when he returned from Bridewel.


Tyler Sworn. Sir H Finch. Mr. Tyler, do you know Tongue?


Tyler. I know him very well.


Sir H. Finch. Have you ever been in his company, and spoke of any design about
securing the King.


Tyler. Often.


Council. Tell what you have heard.


Tyler. I have met Mr. Tongue, and others, in three or four several places; at
the Wheat-sheaf at Lions, once, if not twice; at the Half Moon, Widow Iordans
within Bishopsgate, twice at the least; near Dukes place at the Shears, I have
heard several things, and have noted it down, to be sure to deliver the truth.
I have heard them speak about Whitehal, and securing of it, and of the two Guns
there. Elton and he said, that they might come with a party backwards breaking
through a Barbers shop in Kings-street, and dismount the two Guns. But as
touching the King, the Duke, and the Noble Duke of Albemarle: They proposed,
what excellent service it would be, to secure these persons; he said, it was
not a thing that would admit of much debate, inasmuch as he had a friend a
Courtier, (I know not his title) that would give him notice at any time when
the King was gone a Hunting, or His Progress; and that it was easy to take it.
Tongue said, he served the Tower-Sutlers, and was acquainted there; and said,
there was no way to surprise that, but this, either about ten or eleven a
clock: I will undertake we may do it with forty persons, thus, says he, Some to
go in dropping, one by one, or two together; and others to be at several
Alehouses near, to be ready, and they within seizing on the Guard by a private
sign, we would secure those without; and the Soldiers being of the old Army,
will readily comply: And said, there was a person that lived nigh him, wears
Ropes about him, is a Porter, when off the Guard; and believes he can command
the whole Company, and would undertake it. For Windsor Castle, There was an old
Gunner, that he kept a correspondence withal, and he served the Sutlers of that
Castle also with Tobacco, I think he named Strong-water; and that the Soldiers
were many of them his acquaintance, and that he had received Letters from this
Gunner, under some strange title; and said it was easy, and knew, that at any
time, when the Word was given, let him go or send by such a token, and that
place were our own.


Court Who said this?


Tyler. Mr. Tongue. As to the other person Phillips, I can only say this of
him; there is one Lieutenant Chapman, so formerly, now a Prisoner in the
Tower: This Lieutenant was a Carrier of Norwich, I went to his Inn the George
in Lumbard-street, and asked for him, I was told he was at Captain Fosters
House in Leaden-Hall-street, and there I might find him; I went to Captain
Fosters, and Captain Foster told me he was at Supper there with his Master; I
went up, there was this Lieutenant Chapman, and Phillips, which was the first
time I laid my eyes on Phillips: My business was to speak with Mr. Chapman the
Carrier; but I perceived by some discourse of Mr. Phillips, there was something
driving on; but I must say, that Caprain Foster walked about the Room, as if he
minded not the discourse; there was Chapman, Phillips, Elton, and a man looking
a squint, I heard Phillips call him Muster-Master, but I know not the man; I
heard them discourse very promiscuously about ships, and something wildly; I
tarried while I spent my two pence, and came away with M. Chapman, and asked
him what that young Blade was that talked so promiscuously? Chapman told me he
was a Sergeant belonging to the Trained-Bands: Tell me his Name, his Name is
Phillips: Do you know his Trade or Dwelling? He is a Gilder I think: Then this
is the same person I have heard of at a Coffee-house, which was thus; A
Perfumer in Southwark, he heard of great rumors about a new Commonwealth; and
pressing this Perfumer how he came to be thus informed, says he, there is one
Phillips that lives in Abchurch-lane, this man knows of it: for says he, he
has said himself, that he has gone from Committee to Committee, where Officers
met about these things, and he named Captain Foster for one that was engaged in
the business: said I, this is strange; I hastened back again in the morning to
Captain Fosters; Sir, said I, Do you know that Phillips that was here last
night? Yes, says he: What is he, said I; he answered, a Sergeant. The thing is
this, this man does talk abroad, That there is a meeting of the old Officers,
and that you are engaged. At which, Captain Foster seeming to be troubled that
he should be so aspersed; answered, I know nothing, not one word of this. I do
declare an abhorrence thereto, or of any action against His Majesty; and
thereupon presently went to Phillips, and charged him wi^h this Report; and
soon after, this Perfumer comes to my house, and desired me to go over to the
Cross-Keys, where Phillips was. When I came there, says Phillips, Sir, I saw
you the last night, when we were talking of Ships, I hope you do not mind the
report about Captain Foster, for I am troubled such a thing is mentioned: For
my part, I know not that I said so; I am sure, I knew no such thing. This was
all as to Phillips; But for Tongue, I must needs say, in all the meetings where
I was, the several places that I formerly named, and the Whalebone behind the
Exchange, he still discoursed of this business.


Council. What was done there concerning choosing the Council of Six.


Tyler. He was spoke to be at the Shears, but he sent a note sealed and
directed, in which was enclosed either nine or eleven of the Rump Parliament
names of persons: And says he, see my part I cannot come this day, because the
Hamlets are to go out into the Field; it was when Sir John Robinson marched
with his Regiment; that I may avoid suspicion, I must go with him.


Council. What were those names?


Tyler. I cannot tell; but they were nine or eleven of those in the Tower: And
he promised he would get a note of those men's names in the Tower; for he was
confident of it, that they would sit as Members, and do good service upon the
account of a Commonwealth: And said there were some that had a correspondence
with them in the Tower.


Council. What correspondence had they in the Country?


Tyler. Tongue told me at the Wheat-sheaf, That if a rising should be, it were
necessary, that the old Commanders up and down the Country, should head them:
And therefore says he, What forces can be raised, should go under that Conduct;
or to that effect, he and Elkin did propose several Colonels, I think most that
are now living, both in England and beyond the Seas.


Council. Can you tell any thing of the rumors abroad, expecting this design?


Tyler. Tongue told me this, That there was one that they called the Lord
Lockhart, he, said he, was Governor of Dunkirk; that he had thirty or forty
servants about him; that these persons expected a rising; and that they and
himself, would engage. We heard that Col. Rossiter, not particularly from
Tongue, but there in company, was expected to be at Sturbridge-Fair, to head
Fifteen hundred Horse, to be at London: Also he asked me this question at his
house, Whether I was acquainted with Cap. Leigh, a man with one arm, a stout
honest fellow, and an active fellow of his acquaintance.


Council. Speak your knowledge, both of persons and things.


Tyler. There was one Mr. Cole of Southampton, Swetnam, Gibbs a Hat maker, not
he at the Bar, Tongue, Thomas Elton, Elkin, Pryor, and one Cox a Gardner, and
Ward, now prisoner in the Tower, and one Ward a Southwark man, and D^er a young
Scholar; there was one Rose of Chesterfield, and the Perfumer I spoke of, I
know not his name, he lives in Southwark; and there was a Quaker, I know not
his name; the great business was to unite all interests; Elkin said, there were
several Meetings in St. Martins, and other places.


Tongue. If there be any one of the six in London, I believe this Mr. Tyler is
one.


Tyler. To clear that I am none of them, I will name those whom I said were the
six, Thomas of Shoo-lane the Copper-smith, one Elton in White-chappel, one
Raddon, Captain Spurway of Tiverton, a West-countrey Gentleman, Dr. Ward in
Southwark, and Jones a Minister.


Sir Hen. Finch. Did Tongue tell you that the time was appointed when the Rising
should be?


Tyler. I know nothing of that.


Maynard. What about Leicester?


Riggs. Hill said, he dwelt there, and came from some that dwelt there, and
others in Glocestershire; but there was another person with Stubbs and Tongue,
and said, there was a Report in the Country that there would be some Rising,
and he came to Town to bring his child to put him Apprentice with his Brother,
and would go down again and carry the certainty of the News: he was one of
Lambert's Soldiers.


Phillips. Mr. Tyler, did not you come in with the Carrier of Norwich to
Captain Fosters?


Tyler. No, I did not.


Phillips. I am sure I came accidentally to Captain Fosters, and going I saw
you there.


Gibbs. Did I tell you, Mr. Riggs, that my Brother said Ludlow was in Town, and
there would be a Rising shortly?


Riggs. Mr. Hill, Beasly, Stubbs, and I and you were together, Mr. Thomas and
your Brother came in, your Brother Beasley, Stubbs, and Thomas were private in
discourse; when you came again to us we asked you what news; you said, before
we came you knew not much, but your Brother could tell, but then you said,
Ludlow was in Town, the Council was broke up, and that Messengers were sent to
give notice to the country.


Gibbs. I deny that I or my Brother said so.


Maynard. Know you any thing of surprising the Kings Council, or Whitehall, or
any thing of that, or altering the Government?


Tyler. As for altering the Government, that must needs be designed; for Tongue
said it was debated, and thought convenient, as being the desire of several in
the country, that the old Parliament should be chosen again, that was to say,
that so many of them that had approved themselves faithful from first to last
to a Commonwealths interest, especially in the times of Declension. Secondly,
that none should have power to elect or be elected but such also as have
approved themselves faithful, as aforesaid. Thirdly, this House was to be
filled up within a Month. Fourthly, that it should continue one Year, and no
more. Fifthly, that they should not have power in things of an Ecclesiastical
nature, to impose any thing upon the consciences of the People. Sixthly, that
it should be high Treason amongst them to assert the interest of a King, House
of Lords, or single person. Seventhly, that they should not appoint any salary
Officers. Eighthly, that while they keep to this, it should be high Treason to
disturb them; as touching Arms, and things of that nature, the truth is, the
business which was very much urged is this, that there should be an uniting of
all interests together, Quaker, Fifth-monarchy men, Anabaptist, Independent,
Presbyterian, and Leveller; to which purpose every one was obliged at the
Meeting, to see what interest they could make among the Presbyters, because
they looked upon them as persons that had most money and strength: I think
there was no Presbyterian spoken of except one, who is lately secured in the
Tower; he said, that if so be that Col. Beans was at liberty he believed he
could engage him. There was one man that was there, which was one Prior, I
suppose Tongue knew him, he said, he had very much acquaintance with the
Presbyters, knew many in the country, and that there they did not meet with
any difficulties, as here; for all interests, Quakers, and Presbyterians, and
the rest, are all agreed.


Sir Hen. Finch. Very well, you see Tongue was at all these Meetings, at the
Wheat-sheaf and Shears, and there were the Colonels proposed. Did you hear of
any Orders given out, in any of these consultations, to make the Rising in the
country at the same time as in London?


Tyler. Mr. Gibbs's Brother told us, that he kept a correspondence in the
country, that in Essex he knew there were diverse Horse ready there, and I my
self spoke with one who is lately secured, who said, there were diverse Horse
ready thereabouts. I remember there were several at the Half Moon at
Bishops-gate, one Smith a Northamptonshire man, and one El^se of Chesterfield,
and Tongue, and we heard, that at Mansfield and Nottingham there was a Rising
intended; and it was assured, that the country was very ripe and forward for
action. We were informed, that there were two hundred Horse at Bristow; one
person, not yet secured, did affirm to us, that one Colonel Templar in Essex
had two or three thousand men ready, his name was Thomas; that Templar was now
in Town, if we would we might go and speak with him. Said I, Surely he does but
tell you this; says he, His Lieutenant Colonel gave me this information, and
assures me, that his Colonel had converted his Estate into Money to pay his
Soldiers. Upon this having occasion to go down into Essex, I promised Tongue I
would inquire further there; and understanding that one Thornback a Glover was
one of these Templar's men formerly, I went to his house, and being not at
home, I rode to Holsted Fair, and riding there the man pulled me by the coat,
for he knew me; says he, Mr. Tyler, my servant said you were at my house to
speak with me. Yes, said I, I understand your name is Thornback* That you can
give me some account concerning Colonel Templar, we hear in London that he has
two or three thousand men in readiness, I pray inform me: says he, I do not
believe any such matter, I have served him long, and if occasion were he would
be for you. I asked him the news; says he, We all dread a Massacre, we
understand by a Letter from Ipswi^h, that the Papists intend a Massacre of all
Protestants about All-hallontide, and that that country was in great fear
about it. This Thomas the Copper-smith told us another story about some Roman
Catholics in Southwark, that had a purpose to rise, and take off all
Phanaticks.

After this the Court directed that Phillips Examination should be showed him
at the Bar, and he acknowledged his Hand thereto, and was read as follows,
The Examination of George Phillips, Sergeant and Bringer up to Colonel Sir
William Wales's Company of Trained Bands in the City of London, taken this 29th
of October, 1662. before me, Richard Brown.
Who says,

THat he knows one Parson Riggs, late Chaplain to Blake, who is now Clerk to
one Friend, a Brewer in Catts Hole, near the Iron-gate in St Katherines; which
said Riggs told him, this Examinant, That there would be a Rising of diverse
Godly People in Arms, for preservation of Religion, about the time the Queen
came to Town; and that they intended to seize the Kings Person about Camberwel,
in his passage to see the Queen Mother at Greenwich; but after the Queen was
come to Town, this Examinant asked the said Riggs, why it was not done
according to their intendment, who replied, they were not then ready; because
the Congregational Churches and they were not fully agreed; but now they were
come all to an Agreement, and the work would be done in a short time; that all
things were now near ready both in Country and City; and that a Frigate or more
would revolt from the King to them. Not long after the said Riggs carried him,
the said Phillips, to the house of one Tongue, an old Army Captain, but now a
Seller of Tobacco and Strong-water in Tower-Ditch, where he heard Tongue say
unto Riggs, that he had been at Windsor-Castle, and had made a Captain, two
Sergeants, and a Gunner to be of their Party; and that they had undertaken to
deliver up the said Castle to that Party which were now to Rise; to which Riggs
replied, you have done well; and further said, I am now going to surprise two
Castles in Kent; one of them, as this Deponent remembers, was to be Deal
Castle; and this he would and could do, for that he had some correspondence
therein, and much acquaintance near, where he formerly used to Preach: And
further says, That Tongue asked Riggs, who should lead the men that were to
Rise, and who Commanded in chief; to which Riggs replied, that Ludlow was
appointed for that work.

He further says, That he asked Riggs and Tongue, how this business might be
carried on with safety and secrecy; Riggs told him, that there was a Council of
Six which managed the Design, who sat but one day in a place, and would not be
spoken with, but by the Agitators of each County, who were employed by them to
and fro in this work, to prepare and make ready all Parties in the several
Counties; and that these Six were of several Congregations, and Opinions; to
the end that all Parties might unite: And further says, That one Wade, or some
such name, whom he heard Riggs and Tongue say was a Ship-Chandler in
East-Smithfield, did furnish powder to carry on this Design; in whose Company
he once was, and heard himself say as much; which said person he believes he
knows when he sees him again. He also says, That Riggs told him all the
Congregational Churches were now agreed to join in this Design; And that Riggs
and Tongue desired this Examinant to furnish what Men and Arms he could; which
he says he never intended to do it, though they earnestly requested it of him;
only he says, in some things he was too faulty, which he prays pardon for;
which was, in sending word to the several Meetings on Sunday last, that the
Trained-Bands were coming to seize them; upon which the chiefest of them made
their escape before the Soldiers arrival; and that he being deluded by their
fair Speeches, did promise to give them the Word when the general Rising was to
be: In which Rising all the Churches aforesaid promised to join, and the Fifth
Monarchy-Men to lead the Van: And further says, That Riggs told him, they had
a Declaration ready to fling among the People, against Bishops and
Common Prayer; and that Liberty of Conscience was held forth therein: But first
before this Declaration, they would Seize on the Kings Person; and that then
their Declaration would take with the People; And also says, That one Capt.
Baker, one Bradley and Tongue were privy to all these Transactions which were
debated by them in his presence; and that the said Baker came afterward to
this Examinant, and discoursed all the aforesaid particulars, and incited him
to help on with the work; and told him, their Arms and Powder was distributed,
and that a Porter, which was formerly a Soldier, carried the Powder to several
Places in a Sack. And further says, That Riggs told him, they had diverse
Friends both in London and the Country, who had, and would help them to Money;
and that all their Friends were now ready in all Countries, waiting only for
the day when they were to Act; and that the Treasure in the Guild Hall was
likewise to be seized.

And that the said Riggs also told him, That they intended to Surprise the
Tower, which they could easily do, having some therein that would assist; and
this was to be put in Execution in some Evening, when Sir John Robinson came
home late, by following close after his Coach with a Party of men, which should
lie ready for that purpose.

George Phillips.



Sir William Morice, and Sir Henry Bennet, Principal Secretaries of State
sworn. Sir William Morice. I have had intelligence, and several advertisements
from several parts of the Kingdom, that there was a Design of Rising, and an
Insurrection, that it was the general expectation and common discourse of the
discontented and disaffected party; nay, it was likewise preached about that
the Papists had a Design to rise and cut the throats of the Protestants. I had
four or five Letters to that effect sent and brought me; and these Rumors were
spread to excite others to join with these.


Sir Henry Bennet. Diverse Letters of mine were to the same effect, that there
was an Insurrection intended at that time, and calling upon one another to be
ready at that time.


Sir John Talbot Sworn. Sir John Talbot. I suppose that the Evidence that I can
give in relation to the Prisoners, is only the consequences of this report,
which they had rumoured about the Papists Massacring the Protestants; the
consequence was this, that it made a very great disturbance in Worcestershire
and Warwickshire, insomuch that many Gentlemen that lived in the Country in
very good repute, came under a very great suspicion of all their Neighbors,
and the Lieutenants wrote to one another to secure many, there was Guards set
to satisfy the fears of the Country, Friday night which the rising should have
been on, they would not entrust the Catholics to be in Arms but other
Volunteers.


Mr. Hodges Sworn. Mr. Hodges. In Dorset-shire the 23. of October last, there
was a discovery made by some of the Town, of an intention of a general rising,
and some of the Town were engaged in it, one Mr. Harvey a Justice of the Peace
examined diverse Persons, four that were privy to it were sent to the Goal, and
an express sent to Mr. Secretary Morris. Sir John Weld the younger gave such
an account of Shrewsbury.


Stubbs. My Lord, the occasion of my going that Friday night was by Mr. Hill
and Mr. Riggs suggesting Papists rising, I was never known to be a Plotter, I
had not gone forth that night, but only by their persuasions, I never heard of
any Arms but only the rumors of the people.


Sallers. I would fain know of Mr. Riggs what number of Arms I told him was
delivered.


Riggs. I know not the number.


Major Thomas Bonfoy (at his desire) was Sworn. Major Bonfoy. I do not remember
that I ever saw Phillips face, but I did understand it was his custom to come
to the Exchange to insinuate himself into my Officers, making merry with them,
and endeavoring to get the word, and I believe it was his common practice.


Phillips. He may remember I came on the Exchange, and spoke to him, and was
looking for one of his Sergeants, I asked no man the word, but presently went
to the Black Lion in the new Alley, and from thence I went home, I did not ask
the word of any one; I have confessed before the Council that at the beginning
of August, I met Mr. Riggs in Cheapside, he then came and closed with me, and
walking along, said he, Do not you hear of a rising which should have been on
Friday? no said I, and then I asked him where? he said at Camberwel, and I
thinking nothing of it, came home and spoke of it in my Family, as news from
Mr. Riggs; on Tuesday I met Mr. Riggs on Tower Hill, and he brought me to the
house of Mr. Tongue; Tongue told Riggs he had been at Windsor, and made some party
to secure the Castle; Riggs said he could go down to Kent, and secure Deal and
another Castle, for he had been a Preacher there; As for Mr. Tyler, one night
coming near Captain Fosters door, and having not seen him in three years
before, he asked me if I would not drink, I said yes, then came in the Carryer
of Norwich, I never saw this Carryer till then; then came Mr. Tyler, and there
was talking of a Friggot and the time of the lanching of it, and how it was to
be manned; but a little after Captain Foster came and charged me with a report,
that I should say he was engaged; I told him I knew it not, nor said it not; I
have often declared I would have nothing to do in it, It Is true Mr. Riggs came
and thanked me that I sent notice to the meeting to be gone, and I told him I
would do the people any good I could, but Mr. Riggs knows I told him it was a
dangerous business, and I would not meddle with it, I am sure in the time of
the Fifth monarchy Insurrection, I was faithful to the King, ventured my life
as far as any man, Sir William Wale put trust in me, and I did that service
there that the Colonel himself did not venture to do; but that I was engaged in
this business, it is a trouble to me, and I hope the King will be merciful to
me, I did not think that such a thing would be disclosed in so short a time,
for my part I did not mind it, I knew nothing the night I was taken, I was in
bed and did not offer to escape, I hope the King will look upon me as one drawn
in.


Stubs. I never had any meeting with any of the Council, most of the things I
heard at Mr. Tongs house, meeting with Mr. Riggs by chance; For those Gentlemen
Mr. Tyler speaks of, the Council of 40 and of 6 I never knew them, I am sorry I
should be concerned in such discourse, and hope his Majesty will have mercy on
me.


Gibbs. My Lord, I was at a Neighbors house at that time, and went to Drink a
Cup of beer alone in their kitchen, not kinowing of Hill, Riggs, or Stubbs
coming there, I never appointed them any meeting, they came in and when they
came in, they asked if there was not one Gibbs there, so the People of the
house told them there was, they came and told me there was some Gentlemen would
speak with me, whereupon they being strange faces, I stood up and said,
Gentlemen, what is your business with me? said they, we would Drink a cup of
beer with you, then said I sit down; they had a desire to be private, and to go
up, whereupon not knowing their business, I went up suppossing they meant some
matters of my trade, but we sitting down, Mr. Riggs said to me, Mr. Gibbs, what
is the best news, and Mr. Hill also did urge and ask for news, said I
Gentlemen, I know no news, nor none I can tell you: so they made inquiry then
for my Brother, said I, I cannot tell where my brother is, may be your business
is most with him; I will send for him, and I sent the Maid for him, and
directed her, that if he was not at home, she should leave word for him to
come; Again, they urged for news, and I told them I knew none but only this,
that the meeting was seized upon the last Sunday by armed Soldiers; but to tell
them, there would be any rising, or of any arms delivered, or Pistols, as Mr.
Hill has related it, was a thing I was wholly ignorant of, I speak as in the
presence of God, and I know I must one day give an account before the great
assizes of the world, and I fear that which they have said, is out of some fear
lying upon them, being guilty of some fact, and so to shroud themselves under
false lies. They, nor no other can prove that ever I received, or delivered any
arms, or that any were delivered by my order, these men speak falsely.


Sir O. Bridgman. You mistake your self, they do not charge you with receiving
or delivering Arms, but you related it, your brother speaks such things had
been done, and if you know of this, and do consent and conceal it, you are
equally guilty.


Gibbs. After they had asked me the News, in a short time my Brother came into
the Room, and I rose from the Table, and went toward my Brother, and then my
Brother asked me what those Gentlemen were? I said they were strangers to me,
and knew not what they came for; says he, they are strangers to me also,
immediately we arose, paid our reckoning, and went away: but that ever I said
my Brother told me, The Council of 6 was broke up, all is ready, Ludlow to be
General, and Alhallow-Eve the time, or that things went on well: I deny it, my
Brother said no such thing to me, nor I to any man; when there was an
Insurrection by the Fifth-monarchy men, I was then presently ready at beat of
Drum, went out in my own Person to serve his Majesty at twelve a clock at
night, though I had Servants of my own. My affections were such, that I have
always ever since his Majesty's Restoration been an obedient Subject to all
his lawful Commands. I belonged then to Major Kilby's Company, and did continue
marching in the Company till the whole business was over, and ventured my
Life, and never did contrive any Plot, or knew of any Plot, received or
delivered any Arms: As to the Inhabitants among whom I have lived many years,
they have known my Conversation, I have been a peaceable Neighbor, subjecting
my self under the Government that now is, whom God continue. I desire this
Certificate may be read concerning my Neighbors testimony of my conversation.


Sir O. Bridgeman. If you have any of them here they may speak, but the
Certificate cannot be read.

The Porters man of Bridewel said he knew nothing, but that he lived very
quietly among his Neighbors.


Sir R. Foster. Nor I neither.


Court. Mr. Tongue what have you to say?


Tongue. I have nothing to say, but that the first man that brought me into this
business was Tyler.


Sallers. All that I am charged with is a report of the delivery of some Arms;
seeing that a number of Arms are mentioned, I would ask what was the number?


Mr. Riggs. I cannot well tell the number, but you said there were some Arms
given, and some to be given, and that several had come to that place, and went
away without Arms, and that within two or three days there would be more given,
but as to the number I cannot remember.


Sallers. Now take notice of Mr. Hills Evidence, he has asserted that there
were five or six hundred, how do these agree? I can have sufficient testimony
of my life and conversation.


Court. If you have any thing more to say in this business, speak in the name
of God, no body hinders you, but keep to the business.


Sallers. I entreat the Bench to take notice what I am charged withal, it is
only a report I received from one man, and told to another, and the very
Original was a Lie, there was no such matter, and yet here is audacious
Evidence; he says I named 5 or 600. and yet Riggs to whom I spoke heard me
name no number.


Council. One speaks to the Arms, but does not remember the number; they both
speak to the thing.


Sallers. How can Mr. Hill be a competent Witness against me, when he never saw
my face before, but says Mr. Riggs told him?


Mr. Hill. I said not so, but that I heard it from your own mouth.


Mr. Solicitor. Mr. Riggs why did you go to Mr. Sallers to help Mr. Hill to
Arms?


Mr. Riggs. Because Mr. Sallers told me the day before that he heard there was
some delivered, and more would be, and the next day we went to the Exchange,
and there he told me this story.


Sallers. I cannot hear him.


Sir O. Bridgman. He says you told him the day before there was Arms
delivered, and more would be delivered, and then the next day he and Mr. Hill
came on the Exchange, and then you spoke those words which they both witness
against you.


Sallers. I never spoke such a word; It Is true, what Wapshot told me I told
Riggs, which was, that there were Arms, delivered; but it seems there was none:
and I told him would tell him the truth the next day on the Exchange, and so in
the mean time, speaking with Wapshot, he told me there was no such thing, and I
told Mr. Riggs Wapshot said there was none.


Court. Pray what made you so busily enquire after Arms if you were not
concerned?


Sallers. I did not enquire after it, but accidentally meeting him in
Mark-lane, he told me.


Mr. Tongue. My Lord, as you are my Judge, so I hope you will be my Councellor,
and I pray your advice whether Mr. Tyler and Mr. Riggs be competent witnesses
against me; they being in the same case.


Sir O. Bridgeman. Where is the cause of your exception?


Tongue. Because they are in the same case.


Sir O. Bridgeman. There are four witnesses all against you, your own
confession and examination against you, through the whole business you are a
principal person.


Tongue. I confess I did confess it in the Tower being threatened with the wrack.


Sir O. Bridgeman. There is Mr. Hill, Mr. Riggs, Mr. Bradley, and Mr. Tyler;
there is Hill and Bradly without exception; Bradley he was not at all
concerned, he went along with you to know what you said; and Mr. Hill was not a
person in the design, but made use of only to find out the Plot, they did
nothing unjustifiable, so they are witnesses without exception.


Sergeant Glynn. We desire your Lordship to declare whether Riggs and Tyler be
lawful witnesses.


Sir O. Bridgeman. I would have you know this, whereas you make exception
against those persons that are guilty of the same crime, that is a mistake to
say they are not witnesses; in cases of Treason, where there are works of
darkness, these are things men will not do by daylight but in darkness, and who
can discover these works of darkness better than they that have to do with
them, if God turn their hearts: It Is true, such persons as these are, if they
had been convicted, they are not Witnesses, but though they are in the same
fault, it is frequent they are allowed, besides they are not witnesses alone,
there are diverse circumstances, 1 Edward 6. 5 Edward 6. both statutes say,
there shall be 2 lawful witnesses in cases of high treason, that is such
witnesses as the Law would allow, before those statutes, the meaning of the
statutes was, that men might not be taken upon a bare surmize; therefore the
Law says, there shall be two witnesses, when one is accused of Treason,
another in the same offense unconvicted and untainted his Evidence is made use
of, and though it is not so upright a witness as others, yet he is such a
witness as the Jury is to take notice of: it is plain by several circumstances,
you have been a principal person a Leader on of the business; though a man be
but present when Treason is spoken or designed and acted, if this man be
present, and show any thing of approbation, his concealing of it is as much
Treason as he that did it, they are all principals in Treason.


Sir Heneage Finch. May it please your Lordships and you Gentlemen of the Jury,
you have heard the Evidence of the Prisoners at the bar, five of them have
stood out their Trial, a sixth has confessed the Fact against those persons
that now stand at the bar; under good favor there is a clear and
unquestionable proof of the Crime charged against them, and they have not said
any thing that has either taken away the credit of the Evidence, or excused
the matter if you consider first Tongue, there is against him four Witnesses and
those unquestionable, as you heard the direction of the Court, that he knew of
the design, approved of it, contrived how to surprise Windsor Castle, had
corrupted the head Gunner and Sergeant there, that he did contrive to seize
Whitehall, and if you believe Bradley, advised as the fittest way, to break
into the Privy Garden, all this against Tongue, with a world of other Evidence
how active he has been, his house was the place of consultation, he imparts the
design to Phillips, and Phillips undertakes to get the Word of the Trained
Bands, I think none can prove more than is proved against him: when you come to
hear the proof against Phillips, it is proved that he offered to betray 300
Arms in the Artilery where he had some kind of Trust, and that he was ready to
end^avour the Word when the Insurrection was to be, and but a very little
before, he is the man that discovers to the Congregational meetings, that the
Trained Bands were coming to surprise them, that is in his own confession, as
well as the willingness in him to discover the Word; It is proved that Tongue and
Stubbs were present at those discourses touching surprising the Tower, securing
the King, this is proved expressly against them; Stubbs he thinks he has said
fairly for himself, when he does ask Mr. Hill whether he did not say he had
horses and 200 l. to carry on the work, Mr. Hill says he did say so, then it
seems Stubbs was inquisitive what helps there were to carry it on; Mr. Hill
goes further, that in the presence of Stubbs, it was said there should be no
quarter given but such as Ludlow should have if he were taken. When you come to
Gibbs, he does deny all the whole matter, and indeed so they would all, and
they have nothing to say, but to cry the witnesses have sworn falsely, and God
is a righteous God, and he will require their blood one day; but remember what
a horrid protestation was in that Letter that was sent abroad, to Alarm the
whole Kingdom, as if a Massacre was intended by the Papists, and the watchword
they should all rise by, that Letter says, I call the Eternal God to witness,
this is no Trepan, but a sober Truth: Do you think, that men who are not
ashamed to call the Eternal God to witness to a Lie, when it is to raise
Sedition, will make any scruple of such protestations at the Bar when it is to
save their lives? and if a man may escape by his own protestation, who shall
ever be found guilty? But Gibbs thinks he says a great deal for himself, when
he says his Neighbors can give great testimony of his good conversation. Alas
who will deny to give a good report of any man til he hear evil proved against
him? But do you think a little demure and sober carriage amongst a man's
Neighbors will serve to balance an Evidence of high Treason? Is not the proof
clear, that he did both know the Design and approve it? Mark what Gibbs tells
the company.

My brother, says he, for his part he will not speak before you; but if you be
honest men, this is the News that was spoke, like one that was not consenting
to it; well then, what is the News? he tells them why, the Council of 6 are
broke up, Friday is the day of Action, Ludlow is to be General. Can any man be
privy to these things, and relate them so cheerfully, and yet not be
consenting? believe it, it is a hard matter to find greater evidence of a
knowledge and consent against any Conspirator, until he break out into open
action. Sallers, he says that the Witnesses do not agree; for Mr. Hill speaks
that he said there was 500 Arms delivered, and 40 men went without Arms, but
within two or three days there would be more: and when Riggs comes to speak,
he says, he did say Arms were delivered, and more would be, but he did not
remember what number; and because they agree in the thing, but not in the
number, therefore he thinks they disagree in the matter. Observe what reason
was there that Riggs comes to enquire of Sallers for Arms, because Sallers told
him the day before Arms were delivered, and more would be, he thought,
therefore he came to a very proper Person to tell him: If you mark, Sallers
does deny openly in the Court that ever he saw the face of Hill till he was
apprehended, although Hill was with Riggs when the Arms were spoken of upon the
Exchange: And then he says again, that Hill speaks by hearsay, he is out in
that too; for Mr. Hill swears expressly, he heard the words themselves from
Sallers; Then here are these before you, four witnesses against Tongue, two
against Phillips, and his own confession; here is two against Gibbs, with these
circumstances, if you be honest men this is the news, etc. Here are two
witnesses likewise against Stubbs, who was likewise present at all their
debates, even when the King himself was to have had the same quarter with
Ludlow. Now Gentlemen, that there was a Conspiracy, I think you have a clear
Evidence, we may thank God, and the care of the King and his Ministers, that it
went no further, but it is no thanks to these men, they would have carried it to
the extremity, had they had power, and without question this was formed by
other kind of wits than these poor contemptible Agitators, who are now tried
for it; you see there was a Council of 40, and an under Council of 6, a
Declaration framed to scatter at the time of action, and that action directed
to be both in the City and Country, just in effect at the same pitch of time;
and that it might be so a wicked and an impudent Letter is contrived, and many
thousand Copies dispersed, and it wrought so far that the Couutries, much about
the time appointed, were in great disorder, as you have heard it proved: Is it
not plain that an evil spirit went throughout the whole Nation, and animated
the whole party of Malcontents, most evidently it was a terrible conspiracy;
Gentlemen, it is true, it is a question of blood, but it is royal blood, it is the
blood of Princes and Nobles, and it concerns the peace and security of the
Kingdom, and every man's propriety, and of Religion, for they had left no man of
conscience or reputation behind, if they had prevailed. Consider the Massacre
these men would have committed, had they prospered, and oppose that to the
pretended Massacre which they gave out by their Letter the Papists would have
committed. Consider that you have the life of the King in your hands, and I
doubt not but he and the whole Kingdom shall always be safe in the verdicts of
honest men.


Sir Robert Foster. My Masters of the Jury I cannot speak long to you, you
understand the nature of this business, such as I think you have not had the
like president in your time. My speech will not give me leave to discourse of
it; for the Witnesses, they are none but such as may satisfy all honest men,
it is clear they all agreed to subvert the Government, to destroy his Majesty:
what can you have more? two of the witnesses are without exception, but I do
not see any way but their testimony is good; for the parties, they in
themselves are very inconsiderable; these are but the out-boughs, and if such
fellows are not met withal, these kind of People are the fittest instrument to
set up a Iack-Straw and a Wat-Tyler, therefore you must lop off these, or else
they will encourage others. You see one of their own company has confessed the
Fact out of remorse of his own conscience: But I leave the Evidence to you. Go
together.


Officer was Sworn to keep the Jury. The Jury withdrawed, and after an hours
Consultation, the Jury returned. Silence was commanded, and James Hind fetched
from the Goal to the Bar. Clerk of the Peace. Gentlemen, answer to your names,
Edmund Butler, Clement Pung and the rest of the Jury before mentioned, are you
all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Clerk of the Peace. Who shall say for you?


Jury. The Foreman.


Clerk of the Peace. Set up Thomas Tongue to the Bar, Thomas Tongue hold up thy
hand, look upon him Masters, How say you? is he guilty of the Treason whereof
he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Guilty.


Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper.


Clerk of the Peace. What Goods and Chattels?


Jury. None.


Clerk of the Peace. George Phillips to the Bar, How say you? is he guilty of
the high Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Guilty.


Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper.


Clerk of the Peace. What Goods and Chattels?


Jury. None.


Clerk of the Peace. Francis Stubbs to the Bar, How say you? is he guilty of
the high Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Guilty.


Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper.


Clerk of the Peace. What Goods and Chattels?


Jury. None.


Clerk of the Peace. John Sallers to the Bar, How say you? is he guilty of the
high Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not guilty?


Jury. Guilty.


Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper.


Clerk of the Peace. What Goods and Chattels?


Jury. None.


Clerk of the Peace. Nathaniel Gibbs to the Bar, How say you? is he guilty of
the high Treason whereof he stands indicted, or not Guilty?


Jury. Guilty.


Clerk of Newgate. Look to him Keeper.


Clerk of the Peace. What Goods and Chattels?


Jury. None.


Clerk of the Peace. Hearken to your Verdict as the Court has recorded it. You
say that Thomas Tongue is guilty of the Treason whereof he stands indicted, and
so all the rest. And you say, that they, nor any of them had any Goods or
Chattels, Lands or Tenements at the time of committing the said Treason, or at
any time sithence to your knowledge, and this you say all.


Jury. Yes.


Clerk of the Peace. Thomas Tongue hold up thy hand, thou have been indicted of
high Treason, thou has thereunto pleaded not guilty, and for thy Trial have put
thy self upon God and the Country, and the Country has found thee guilty; what
have thou to say for thy self, why the Court should not proceed to Judgment,
and thereupon award execution of thee according to the Law?


Tongue. I pray mercy from the King, I cry for mercy from the King.


Clerk of Newgate. Tie him up Executioner.


Clerk of the Peace. George Phillips hold up thy hand, thou art in the same
case that Thomas Tongue is, what can thou say? etc.


Phillips kneeled down and said, I pray the mercy of the King and the
Honorable Bench. Clerk of Newgate. Tie him up Executioner.


Clerk of the Peace. Francis Stubs hold up thy hand, thou art in the same case,
the two last Prisoners before thee are, what can thou say? etc.


Stubbs. I beg mercy, I was merely drawn in.


Clerk of Newgate. Tie him up Executioner.


Clerk of the Peace. John Sallers hold up thy hand, Thou art, etc. what can
thou say? etc.


Sallers. I would entreat this Honorable Bench to consider my condition, and
what my charge is; I delivered no arms, if I had known where they had been, I
would have discovered them, I beg mercy from the King and this honorable
Bench.


Clerk of Newgate. Tie him up Executioner.


Clerk of the Peace. Nathaniel Gibbs, hold up thy hand, Thou art, etc. What
can thou say? etc.


Gibbs. And please this honorable Bench, I have something to say, I am
innocent as to my Conscience of acting any thing treasonable against his
Majesty, the Lord forgive the witnesses, I beg the mercy of the King.


Clerk of Newgate. Tie him up Executioner.


Clerk of the Peace. James Hind hold up thy hand, Thou art guilty of the
Treason whereof thou stand indicted by thy own Confession, what can thou
say? etc.


Hind. I have nothing to say, but humbly beg the mercy of the King.


Clerk of Newgate. Tie him up Executioner.


Crier. O yes, my Lords, the Kings Justices command all manner of persons to
keep silence while judgment is in giving upon pain of imprisonment.


Sir Robert Foster. Thomas Tongue, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs, James Hind,
John Saller, and Nathaniel Gibbs, you six Prisoners at the Bar, you have been
here indicted for one of the greatest crimes that can be committed upon earth,
as to this world, against God, our King, and your Country, and against every
good body that is in this land for that capital sin of high Treason which is a
sin inexpiable, and indeed has no equal sin as to this world, upon this you
have severally been arraigned, and have severally (except one) pleaded not
guilty, and put your selves upon God and the Country for your trials, and your
Country have found you guilty; for the five that are found guilty, I must say,
that in you I find little remorse, little sense of your sin, for the little man
there, Hind, he has much showed his penitency; The manner and circumstances of
this, most men here believe, this did not originally arise from your particular
selves, it must be put into you by some others; you speak as if you desired
mercy, where was your mercy, that would have destroyed King and Country, and
massacred many millions of souls, no respect of any person, but your own
Fellows? I speak this, that you may be the more sensible of your own Crime,
that you may truly out of the remorse of conscience, be sorry for your sin; you
know very well the old council, and it is a good one, Fear God, and honor the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. Meddling with them that
are given to change, has brought too much mischief already to this Nation; and
if you will commit the same sin, you must receive the same punishment, for
happy is he that by other men's harms takes heed: I shall not spend long time
with you, but if you will as much as you can, discover the Actors herein, you
will do God, the King, and your Country good service; It remains that the Court
proceed to Judgment, and therefore you six, the one by his own confession, and
other five by conviction of Law: the Judgment of this Court is, That you be
conveyed back to the place from whence you came, and from thence to be drawn
upon an Hurdle to the place of Execution, and there you shall be hanged by the
neck, and being alive shall be cut down, and your privy Members to be cut off,
your Entralls to be taken out of your Body, and (you living) the same to be
burnt before your eyes, and your head to be cut off, your body to be divided
into four quarters, and your head and quarters to be disposed of at the
pleasure of the Kings Majesty, And God have mercy upon your Souls.


FINIS.
THE CONFESSIONS, Speeches, AND PRAYERS OF George Phillips, Thomas Tongue,
Nathaniel Gibbs, Francis Stubbs.

At the Place of Execution, on Monday, December. 22. 1662.

The Manner of Conveying the Prisoners to the Place of Execution; and their
Behavior there before they began to Speak.
THe 22. December. Thomas Tongue, George Phillips, Francis Stubbs and Nathaniel
Gibbs were, according to a late Sentence, drawn on two Hurdles, viz. Tongue and
Phillips in one, and Stubbs and Gibbs in the other, to the common place of
Execution at Tyborn: Where being come, they were received into a Cart under the
Gallows; and the Executioner desiring them severally to forgive him, they all
declared they did freely forgive him and all their enemies, and did severally
salute each other with this Phrase, Welcome, Brother; and to one another said,
We are now lanching into the deep. They being all tied up, Phillips gave the
Executioner a small sum of money, and the rest directed the Executioner to take
out of their pockets a small parcel of money, as their gift to him; and
Phillips afterward bended a Sixpence, and presented it to a friend of his,
Mr. Stroud; and a Shilling likewise bended to one Mr. Clark. Then the
Undersheriff of Middlesex acquainted them, they had all free liberty to speak,
provided they did not reflect upon his Majesty, or the present Government;
which they all promised not to do, and thanked him for his civility; and then
Phillips began in manner following.

Friends and Contrymen,

I Am come this day to pay that great debt that I owe to Nature; it is a work
that had need be well done, for it is but once to be done. My hope is now
above: and for what I now come to suffer, for my own part, I bless God, in
whose presence I now speak as a dying man, I had not any murderous thought
against the King* but I have prayed for him, and wished that he might Live and
Reign, and long Reign in Righteousness; and that God would make his Crown, a
Crown of Righteousness upon his Head, and bless him in his Government, so that
he may not know any of these occasions more: For my part, I have ventured my
life, for his Majesty; it was far from my heart to do any thing of that nature;
The Lord receive my soul. I freely forgive all men, as I hope to be forgiven of
God: I never did act any thing, but only this, which was my ignorance of the
Laws, that I did not discover it; and I was justly found Guilty, for not
discovering. I have done, Mr. Sheriff; but hope, after my Brethren have spoken,
we may have liberty to call upon the Lord.


Vnd. Sher. It will not be denied you.


Then Mr. Tongue began in this manner. Friends and Contrymen,

YOu see me here a dying man: I have sometimes been in some men's company, where
I have heard them contriving the business for which I am condemned to die* and
that which led me to join with them was this, I was, and had been sometimes in
the Army; and I have looked upon this Cause to be good, As for his Majesty, the
Lord bless him, and prosper him, and put it into his heart, that He may be a
Nursing-Father indeed to this Country.


Vnd. Sher. Have you any more to say? you may speak.


Tongue. I have nothing more.


And then Gibbs proceeded, and said: Countrymen and Friends, and I hope
Christians, and the last consideration is that that makes me the more free to
speak to you: we all profess to own God and Jesus Christ to be our Savior, our
Redeemer, our Sanctifier, and giver of, and bestower upon us Eternal Life; this
should excite our Souls to love one another; and upon the account of Gods love,
that God has so loved us as to give Jesus Christ, to reconcile us sinners to
God, we ought to love one another, it is his great command. Truly as to the
Cause for which I am brought here, God the great Judge of Heaven and Earth,
before whom I stand, knows that in the place where I have lived, I behaved my
self as an obedient Subject, and when there was an Insurrection by the
Fifth-Monarchy men, I went out in my own person, though I had Servants as well
as others, purely out of affection to His Majesty, knowing that in the peace of
His Government I should have peace, and so I went out hazarded my Life, and
continued out till all was quiet. I was at a neighbors house drinking of a cup
of Beer on Tuesday night in the Kitching alone, save only the man of the house
and the maid; these men came in, one Hill and Riggs that* are the witnesses
against me, there was Riggs and Hills and this Stubbs, and on Beazeley; and I
being alone in the Kitchen, they asked for one Gibbs; the people of the house
told me there were some Gentlemen would speak with me, I wished them to direct
them to me, and they came to me; and through the ignorance of the Law, which it
seems runs thus, If any words treasonable against his Majesty is spoken, it is
Treason to conceal it, so thus I have given you in part the cause of my being
here

Hereupon information was given to the Kings Majesty, that I should say there
would be a Rising, and that Al-hollows Eve was the time; that there were arms
sent into the Country, and that Ludlow was to be General; and this was charged
upon me by the Kings Majesty when I came before him to be examined: and upon
Hills, and Rigg's Oath, I was sent to the Tower, and kept a long time a
Prisoner, examined three or four times over by the Lords of his Majesty's
Council, I have one word more; As touching my Judgment, I am reputed in the
world to be one of those that is called by the name of Anabaptist, a name of
dirision and scorn, One is an Anabaptist, one an Independent, one a
Presbyterian, one this, and one that, and one the other, who gave these
nicknames to Christians? There is but one God, one Lord Jesus, one Baptism,
one Hope of Glory: How comes the Body of Christ, or the Members of Christ to be
called these nicknames? But now, as I am one that do profess Faith in God
through the Lord Jesus Christ, and do stand before you all, and before the
Lord, I know no other God, but the Eternal and Living God, that has made the
World, and that Rules and Raigns, and disposes all his Creatures; I do believe
in this God, he has been gracious to me a poor sinner, and to all poor sinners,
that when we by reason of sin had forfeited all our mercies, and were under
wrath and everlasting destruction, and must perish for ever; that God did out
of his rich grace and tender mercies give his only begotten Son, according to
his promise, to be the blessing of God to the poor Gentiles according as the
Scripture did declare; the Scriprure foreseeing that God would justify the
heathens through faith, preached before the Gospel to Abraham, saying, In thee
shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed: he spe^ks not of the natural
seed of Abraham, but of Christ, so that all the blessings that God did convey
to the sinful world is by the means of Jesus Christ, whom God in the fullness of
time did send his Son born of a woman, to redeem poor sinners under the Law,
and herein was the great grace and mercy of God to wards all sinners, that he
was so gracious to send his beloved Son out of his own bosom to take our
natures upon him, who was defiled, and cursed, and condemned, and separated
from God. I say, Jesus Christ took our natures upon him, and for this very end
to do the will of his heavenly Father, Lo it is written in the volume of thy
b^ok, I come to do thy will, O God; and it was his meat and drink to do his
will; and what was that, but that we might be sanctified through the offering
up of the body of Jesus Christ for our sins, to tread the winepress of his
Fathers wrath, and to endure the cross, and bear all our sins in his own body,
that made his soul heavy unto death: he was a surety for us and our sins, and
for our s^kes the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us all, and he has born our
grief and endured our punishment, it made his soul cry out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me, or else we must for ever be banished out of the presence
of God, and never have any hopes of glory, of faith, or of salvation, had not
the Son of God become our Mediator and Surety, so there is one God, and one
Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus. He gave himself a ransom for all our sins, to
free us from the wrath to come, everlasting destruction, and from the worm that
never dies. O that we could ever be thankful to God, live to him that has so
loved us, as to send his Son to die for us, and is by the almighty power of God
raised from the dead, and now sits at the right hand of God, and ever lives to
make intercession.

Truly friends, this is not the love of man, but the love of God, and therefore
eternal love. God so loved the world; it is Gods love, he loved sinners,
ungodly ones; he did so love them as to give his only begotten Son to save
them, to reconcile them, to uphold them, to redeem them from wrath to come: it
was to seek and save them that were lost. This is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. We
all like sheep had gone astray, and must perish in our sins, had not the Lord
Jesus been sent of his Father, out of his bosom to declare the good will of
God, and did it, by which we are sanctified through the offering up of the body
of Jesus Christ; and this Lord Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, he is the
Mediator between God and poor sinners. Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, says Christ, and I will give you rest; now this grace is from God,
we are saved by grace, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God,
through faith in Christ we are saved; and all things that do pertain to life
and godliness it is the gift of God; now all things are of God, who has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto him. Would
you know the forgiveness of your sins, your peace with God, and that God is
well pleased with you? God is reconciled by Jesus Christ unto you, and does not
impute your sins unto you, but looks on the righteousness of Christ as
satisfaction, that thereby you might have the remission of your sins through
the blood of Christ. Be it known unto all men, that through this man's
preaching, the forgiveness of sins, Acts 13.38, 39. and by him all that do
believe are justified from all things, from which they could not be by the Law
of Moses; now justification from sin, and redemption from iniquity, is through
the knowledge of Christ's death for your sins, and his resurrection, and now
there is no other name given under heaven whereby we can be saved but by the
name of Jesus, and whosoever believes in his name shall not perish, but have
everlasting life, Ioh. ^.24. It is the doctrine of Jesus Christ, it is his
word, and hope you will search the Scriptures, and look into those things for
your souls good, when Christ says Verily, verily, I say unto you; He that
hears my words and believes them, he has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. The reason why God
does assure poor sinners they shall not pass into everlasting condemnation and
perish, is through his rich grace; through his promise, for he has promised,
he will be merciful to our iniquities, and our sins will remember no more; and
these his promises of grace which are all Yea and Amen in Christ, are ratified
by the blood of Christ; the blood of Christ is this blood of the New Covenant,
and it is that by which we have the forgiveness, remission and cleansing of all
our sins,


Vndersheriff. Mr. Gibbs, let me interrupt you, this is very good and
pertinent, but you have said these things over and over, there is another of
your friends is to speak and the time grows short, pray go on to the matter, or
conclude.


Gibbs. I shall speak a word or two as to the knowledge of forgiveness of sins,
by and through Jesus Christ; and so the knowledge of the Resurrection of the
dead, it is the fruit of Jesus Christ; for by the first man came death, and by
the second man Christ came life, and God that has by his exceeding great and
mighty power, raised up Jesus Christ from the grave and power of sin, he also
shall raise us up by the same power, and when he comes again the second time,
at his appearing and coming, we shall see him, and be made like to him, and he
will receive us to himself; he is gone to prepare a place for us, and in his
Fathers house are many mansions, and if it were not so, he would have told us:
and now God that has given eternal life, and forgiveness of sins unto his poor
servants, he will also, when Jesus Christ shall come to judge the world,
receive him into his everlasting glory, which is my faith, expectation and
hope, in God through Jesus Christ. A man may bear his infirmities, but a
wounded conscience who can bear? when God smites, who can bear? and therefore I
desire, as I believe the forgiveness of all my sins, through the rich Grace of
God, through the bloodshed of Jesus Christ his Son; every one must give account
to God, and as their Works are, so will their Reward be, either accepted by
God, as workers of Christ, or condemned, as workers of iniquity. Last of all,
as to the separated Congregations to whom I belong; I have observed in those
few days that I have lived, there is a great deal of animosity, evil will,
hard censuring, and abusing the precious Saints of Jesus Christ. If they are in
an error, you that are in the truth instruct them, and you may recover them out
of the claws of the Devil: Are you Christians, and have the light of God in
your souls? O then strengthen your brethren, do not give them nicknames, and
abuse them; that is not the way, Christ teaches another lesson, That if thine
enemy hunger you should feed them, and if he be a thirsty give him drink; we
should pray to the Lord that he would turn those that be out of his way, into
the right way.


Vndersheriff. You know we must be all subject to Government, every
Congregation must not have a Ruler, their meetings are prohibited by good
Authority, and because they will not be obedient to good Government.


Gibbs. I do not say, that every Congregation must have a Ruler, and I hope I
speak the words of sobriety, I hope you will put a charitable construction upon
what I say. As to the Magistrates I have a word or two.


Vndersheriff. Speak well of them.


Gibbs. Be not afraid, I will not speak any evil of them, Magistracy is an
ordinance of God, and the end of Magistracy, is for the punishment of
evildoers, and the praise of them that do well, and for this purpose, I do
desire that the Lord would give to the supreme Magistate here on earth, wisdom
and understanding, a wise Council, a Council fearing God, and hating
covetousness, that they may study to exalt the Throne of the King in
righteousness and truth; O that we may all praise the Lord for deliverance out
of condemnation; and I say it is the duty of all the subjects of the Kings
Majesty, in all his Kingdoms and Dominions to live peaceably, and to pray for
the Kings Majesty: Prayers and intercessions ought to be made for all men,
especially for Kings and Governors, for this very end and purpose, that
thereby we may live in all quietness, godliness, honesty and Justice; and to
this very end the Lord bless our Magistracy, give them council and wisdom, that
they may love them that love the Lord, and hate them that hate the Lord.


After Gibbs had done speaking, then Stubs began, who went over all the
particulars of his Trial at large, to which for brevities sake we refer you,
only says he as follows,

Friends and Countrymen,

IT is true, and I must confess my sin in the presence of God, (and did ask
mercy of the King) that I was in the company when I did hear wicked and
treasonable words spoken, and I being ignorant, and not knowing the Law, did
not discover what I did hear.

As to my judgment, truly I desire to own that the Scriptures own; I shall
speak of that place in the Hebrews, which is the command of Christ; I desire
the Churches and the people, every one to live the life of faith and love one
another, I am confident it would be a means of abundance of comfort here in the
Nation; there is a kind of heart-burning and rising one against another, you
are so and so, throw dirt one against the other; it is our and your duty, still
to be studying to live in love and bear one with another, not be angry,
destroy, and fight one with another: O that we might live that life of love
that God had commanded, then we may expect the presence of God to be with us;
surely God has a great judgment against his own people for not loving one
another.


Phillips. Mr. Sheriff, I have only one word to speak before I go to my
Prayers; that is, Here I see some Gentlemen present that are in the capacity
that I was in as a Soldier; I say, be faithful to your trust, and beg of God
that you may stand fast, and not dishonor God nor be disobedient to the King;
when the Fifth-monarchy men were up, I was free and willing to lay down my life
for the interest of the Nation: and did venture it as much as any young man in
London; Therefore good friends, have a care, I am now brought to suffer, it is
true I was guilty of concealing it, I desire your Prayers, that now as we are
going to the state of eternity, from whence there is no redemption, I humbly
beseech you, as Christians and friends, That you would seek earnestly to God
that now he may receive our souls into everlasting rest and happiness, which he
has been pleased to bestow on them that love him and fear him; and the Lord
knows my heart, I speak it in his presence, that had the King been pleased to
show mercy to me, I should have been a faithful and true subject to him all my
days, but seeing it is the righteous hand of God, that now I am come to this
untimely death, I desire you to lift up your hearts and souls to God with me,
that when my soul shall leave this body, that the Lord Jesus Christ may with
his everlasting arms receive me to glory: There is no redemption after death,
we shall either go to eternal woe or eternal happiness, therefore good friends,
I desire you to look up to God, that when my soul departs it may be received to
glory.


Mr. Phillips his Prayer.
O Eternal Lord God, thou that art the great Creator of Mankind, and thou that
formedst him in the womb, hear thy poor and sinful creature now he is coming to
make his last approaches to thy throne. O that thou would be pleased to look
down in mercy upon my Soul: O Lord that thou would be pleased now to take my
soul and wash it, and bathe it in the blood of Jesus Christ, who has died and
risen again for me: O that now I could see the heavens opened, and Jesus Christ
ready to receive my soul; Be pleased O Lord to look upon me in thy ten^er
mercy and compassion: and as thou have said, thou do not delight in the
death of a sinner, therefore good Lord look down upon my poor soul, and receive
me into the everlasting mansions which Jesus Christ is gone before to prepare
for all them that love thee. O Lord, we are now going, I hope, to an estate of
happiness, where we shall sin and sorrow no more, but where we shall ever reign
with Jesus Christ. O Lord had we not some hopes, had we not some sight of the
Lord Jesus Christ made known to our souls, we durst not appear before thee this
day, we durst not stand before thee in thy presence: O that thou would more
and more manifest thy gracious presence with me; that thou would uphold me to
take this bitter cup and drink it freely. O Lord, I desire to come unto thee; I
have been a great sinner before thee, but Jesus Christ has died, is risen, and
is now at the right hand of his Father, making intercession for us. And good
Lord, as thou have commanded us to come unto thee, and to believe in thee, and
have said, thou will in no wise cast off the soul that comes unto thee, in
confidence of that hope, I desire to fix my soul upon thee before I go hence,
and be no more. Bow down the heavens, O Lord, and hear the requests of the poor
soul before thee, and I beseech thee for Christ his sake, as thou would
forgive me, so freely forgive all men that have done evil against me. Be
pleased to let the Kings Majesty reign in righteousness and holiness; put a
spirit of power and might in his soul, and let him see wherein the stability of
his Crown lies, in following Righteousness and Justice and Judgment, and
preserving of that Truth that is made known to him out of the book of the Lord.
Come down, Lord, to his Soul, and let him see wherein is his hope, and O that
he may at last live and reign with Jesus Christ for evermore. Good Lord look
upon me, I am coming unto thee, these are my last words. O that thou would be
pleased to receive us this day, that we may dine with thee in Paradise; make
known thy everlasting kindness to my soul before I go hence and be no more,
that I may receive that comfort and satisfaction which I have longed and looked
for. Lord my hope is in thee, thou will not fail them that put their trust in
thee, in thee is my trust and confidence; if I perish, I will perish at the
feet of Jesus Christ. O that thou would humble me, and seal up the pardon of
my sins before I go hence, and let thy Son Jesus Christ manifest his gracious
presence with me, and cloth me with that wedding garment of his righteousness,
and then take me into his arms, and present me to his Father. O that thou
would be pleased to strengthen and uphold me under this great stroke which
thou have been pleased to inflict upon me; I kiss the rod, and receive it
thankefully from thy hand. I had been undone to all eternity, had thou not
afflicted me, blessed be thy Name, that thou have been pleased to send Jesus
Christ, upon him I depend, upon him I cast my confidence, who is the rock of
ages, and never failed any that came to him. Hear me and answer me, and do for
me and all thy Churches and people abundantly above what I can ask or think,
and all for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with thy self and thy
holy Spirit be all honor, power and praise henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

Mr. Tongue his Prayer.
O Most glorious, and eternal Lord God, thou that have created the heavens and
the earth, and formedst of dust us thy poor creatures, to which we are now
returning. Lord I beseech thee speak peace to my poor soul, lift up the light
of thy countenance upon me, and let me see in thee, and through faith in thy
dear Son Jesus Christ, that I am in covenant with thee, and reconciled to thee.
Holy Lord, I beseech thee let me see thy dear Son Jesus Christ sitting at thy
right hand reconciling of me to thy self. Let me find my soul washed in the
blood of the Covenant of thy dear Son Jesus Christ. Seal a pardon to me thy
poor creature; O Lord, one smile of thy countenance is worth all the world;
blessed be thy name that thou have supported me hitherto. Lord God I beseech
thee finish thy good work thou have begun in me, and go along with me, and
strengthen and uphold me to drink of this bitter cup. Be with me to the end.
Remember the Governors of this Nation. O that thou would shower down upon the
King and Council thy mercies as thou showrest down rain on the ground, that
they may rule for thee, and those that fear thy name may live in happiness and
peace under thee, for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus Christ. O Lord we pray
thee remember all thy People, and be good to them, and deliver them out of all
their troubles, and speak peace to them, and let them know thou will deliver
them. Keep me to the end, and uphold me by thy right hand, and so receive me
with joy for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, to whom be all honor and
power henceforward and for evermore. Amen.

Mr. Gibbs his Prayer.
O Eternal, everliving and everloving God, who art a reconciled and loving
Father, unto thy poor unworthy Creatures before thee; and unto all the
children, whom thou have called to believe in thee. O Lord, this is no small
privilege that sinful dust and ashes, mortal worms, should have to do and to
deal with so holy and infinite a God, as thou art, to make requests unto thee,
considering the vast disproportion that there is between thee, and poor
sinners: Thou art of purer eyes, then to behold any unclean thing in thy
presence, O Lord. We our selves are nothing but polluted rags and fountains of
uncleanness, from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot; all the
faculties of the soul and members of the body, are all members of
unrighteousness. Were it not therefore, that thou have been pleased to give us
good hopes, and found out a way to hold communion with us, which is through the
Lord Jesus; in whom thou art well pleased, in whom thou have spoke forgiveness
of sins to our souls, we durst not now stand before thee; but thou have
promised, that though our sins are as scarlet, thou will make them as white as
snow; and though they be as crimson, thou will make them as wool. Thou have
opened a fountain of free grace, and eternal mercy for poor sinners; that
through the blood of the Lord Jesus, they may receive remission, forgiveness,
cleansing and purging from all their sins. Thou have laid an all-sufficient
help upon him, who is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God by
him. We have nothing of our selves to bring unto God, but sins to pardon, and
unclean souls to purge: Thou have been pleased to give thy Son, and together
with him, freely to give us all things: Thou have given thy poor servant before
thee, faith that has brought salvation to his soul: Thou have saved him by thy
free grace; not of works, but through the mercies and blood of Jesus Christ;
and have sprinkled the virtue of the blood of Christ in his conscience, in the
belief of the truth, as it is in Jesus. O blessed be thy Name, that sent him to
seek, and to save us from condemnation; who is risen with healing in his wings,
and have set Christ before us, that we should behold him, that our sins have
pierced. Certainly, great was that disease that needed such a medicine; that
nothing could expiate and take away our sins, and blot out the handwriting
that was against us, but the precious blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, as of a
Lamb without spot; he is now become our peace, who has made peace for us,
through the blood of that his Cross, and has made twain, one in himself, Jew
and Gentile. He was delivered up for our offenses, and rose again for our
justification: We in the knowledge of him, being justified by faith, we have
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And blessed be thy Name, O
merciful God, that has made such a Covenant of everlasting grace to poor
sinners, and the children that do believe in thee, through Jesus Christ. Thou
have said, thou will be merciful to all our iniquities and sins, and wilt
remember them no more: These are thy promises, and they are all Yea and Amen in
Christ Jesus. Thou have made thy servant to hear thy voice in thy Son: Thou
have been a merciful God to him, and forgiven him all his sins, and justified
him freely through the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall condemn
us, or lay any thing to our charge? It is God that justifies, who gave himself
a ransom for our sins, died for our sins, is risen again, and now sits at the
right hand of God, ever living and making intercession for us; whose blood
speaks better things, then the blood of Abel: His blood cried for vengeance,
but the blood of Christ cries for peace and forgiveness. God is in Christ
reconciling himself unto the world, not imputing their trespasses: He has made
him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. Blessed be thy Name, that thou have sent thy holy Child Jesus,
to be the propitiation, not only for our sins, but for the sins of the whole
world. He has suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto
God. O do thou therefore help thy poor servants before thee, and all thy
children: Give us to see the removal of eternal death, by the death of the Lord
Jesus. Let us see thee at peace with us, and justifying of us, through thy
grace. All have sinned, and come short of thy glory; but being justified
through the redemption of Christ Jesus, whom God has let form to be a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world. Thou have promised, that
whosoever believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, thy grace, thy mercy, thy love
shall not perish, but have everlasting life; and thou have given to thy poor
servant exceeding great and precious promises, and by thy own Spirit, bringing
home these premises, given him to believe the Records thou have given of thy
Son; which bears witness, That God is reconciled to him, and well pleased
with him in Christ Jesus, and given him eternal life. And seeing thou have hid
his soul in Jesus Christ, when he shall appear, then shall we appear with him
in glory, and be made like to our Lord Jesus Christ: By the same power that
thou raisest up Jesus Christ from the dead, by the same power thou art able to
subdue all things. There is nothing impossible with God; what ever thou have
promised, shall be performed; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one title
of thy word shall not fail: And therefore blessed be thy Name, that thou have
revealed these things to thy poor and unworthy Creature; that thou art his God
and Father; that thou will never leave him, nor forsake him; and thou have hid
his life in Christ, and wrote his name in the Book of Jesus Christ; and he
rejoices that he knows he is his, who is the only true God: Knows thou art
well pleased with him, and justified him freely from all his sins, accepted
him, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ. O therefore, dear Father, do thou
receive his soul according to thy promise, that he may be thine, and thou his
God. O blessed Father, do thou be pleased to do good to all thy people: And
now, dear Father, take care of our families, be thou a Husband to our
yoke-fellows, a Father to the fatherless: Do them good abundantly above what we
are able to ask or think; and what is wanting, and lost by our removal, do thou
hand out to them, thy mercy and grace, and move the hearts of the children of
men, to do them good: Be thou their God, help them, and provide for them: Seal
up thy loving kindness to them, not only for this life, but for the life to
come. Do good to our Magistrates; thou who have the hearts of all men, make
such as are about them, men fearing God, and hating covetousness, that may
judge for God, that he may have glory. O be pleased to let His Majesty rule and
reign in righteousness; let His Throne be established in righteousness, and
reveal the choicest of thy blessings to His poor soul: Manifest Christ Jesus,
and him crucified to Him; and give Him to see the most precious blood of
Christ, cleansing Him from all sins. Bind up His soul in the bundle of
everlasting life; crown Him with a crown of righteousness, as well as with an
earthly Crown: Let Him be a Nursing Father, and Nursing Mother, indeed, to this
Nation; that He may hate the evil doer, and be a praise to them that do well.
Do good to every one of us; O help us, that we may first seek the Kingdom of
God. First, believe in God, and then honor our King: First, fear God and serve
him, and then give to Caesar, that which is Cesars. Give unto the King, that
which is the Kings; give Him all obedience to live quietly in all godliness and
honesty. And now, O Lord, do thou take away that spirit of emulation, and
strife, and malice; From whence comes wars? come they not from our lusts? The
Lord remove pride, prejudice, and malice from us, and cause us to love one
another: The Lord teach every one in their places, to walk continually, to the
glory and praise of God; that we professing the name of Christians, may be
enabled to walk humbly and meekly; to do good, to walk uprightly, and to love
mercy, and then certainly we may expect that blessing that God has promised to
them that believe in him, which is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Mr. Stubb's Prayer.
PRecious and Eternal Lord God, in thy presence, O Lord, are we, and in the
presence of thy Son, and of thy Holy Angels, and in the presence of this great
multitude that now is beholding us poor abjects, poor worms, poor dust and
ashes; and truly Lord, we were not able to lift up our heads this day, except
thou did come in by thy mighty Power. O Lord, help us to see the Heavens
opened this day; and that the arms of our Christ may be opened to receive our
poor Souls. O Lord, we are bidding farewell to the world, farewell to the
creature enjoyments; farewell to every thing: and now Lord we are going home
unto thy deer and precious self; draw forth our Souls, and enlarge our hearts
after thee, that we may be in the pursuit of our God; our Souls long for the
Lord, as the Heart longs or pants after the water brooks. Lord appear in this
hour; this is a great Trial, that thy poor creatures are brought to. Now come
and smile upon thy poor worm: O that thou would communicate thy self unto us;
the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon our precious souls, be a
precious God to us, and a dear, and loving Father; thou have not left poor
souls in the dark, in such an hour as this; O that thou would communicate
thy self unto us; we are now departing and dying, good Father, we pray thee,
that we may have the spiritual life communicated to our souls. Look in mercy
upon every heart here in thy presence; O that their Souls may be saved in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ: thou have given Christ, to die for us, whilst
creatures here; thy blood is able to wash and make me clean; O there is no
spot, no dye, but the blood of Jesus is able to take it away. O Lord help us,
that we may die in the love of Jesus Christ: And good Lord, we desire that thou
would look in mercy upon him that is the Officer and Executioner of these poor
worms; and as he is to wash his hands in our blood, O Lord wash his soul in the
blood of the Lamb of God. Father, thou know we desire the good of his soul;
we forgive him; and we desire to forgive every one. And dear Lord, we desire
thee to look upon the King, communicate the riches of thy mercy unto his
Majesty; we desire his soul may be saved; thou have the hearts of all Kings in
thy hand, draw forth his heart, that he may love those things that pleases
thee, and love them which thou love; Let him be established in righteousness,
and let Justice and Judgment run down the streets of England as a mighty
stream. We pray thee to carry forth our souls to pray for every Relation; beget
Love in all sorts of people, that they may live the life of Love, that when
they depart this life, they may enjoy the blessed Comforter, the Lord Jesus
Christ. And, dear Lord, thou art pleased to give us a taste of thy love this
day; Lord thou have given us a pardon blessed be thy Majesty for it; thou have
given us a reprieve for our souls, we are delivered from death to life, we hope
when we depart this world, we shall meet them with Jesus Christ, we shall enjoy
those blessed Mansions to all eternity. And gracious Father, we desire to bless
thee, for that civility we have had from those that have been Officers here;
Lord make it up to them; And we desire to bless thee for it. O the riches, and
the height of the grace of God, and the love of Jesus Christ to poor sinners!
We may see, that thou would be pleased to look in mercy upon this poor
Nation, O that thou would unite their hearts in love together, O that there
might not be any more differences or hatred; Unite their hearts in love and
obedience, that they may fear God, honor the King, that they may desire in all
righteousness and holiness, to do those things that are according to thy mind
and will: And gracious Father, thou can not abide Hypocrites, the Lord cause
souls to love holiness, and the power of godliness that they may not shroud
themselves under the profession, when there is reality. Look in mercy upon all
the Churches of Jesus Christ; communicate thy mercy and love to them: be
pleased to be with us this day, and go along with us. O that we may bless thee
with our souls, and all that is within us. Be with us, and do for us, more then
we are able to ask, or think, upon the account of Jesus Christ, in whom thou
art well pleased, to whom be all praise and glory now and for ever, Amen.

AFterwhich, their Caps being severally pulled over their Faces, and after some
private ejaculations, the Executioner caused the Cart to be drawn away; and
after they had hanged a while, they were severally headed and quartered
according to their Sentence, and their heads and quarters conveyed in a Basket
to Newgate, to be disposed of at the Kings pleasure.

Which he was graciously pleased thus to dispose of;

Their several Quarters to be buried, which was accordingly done on
Saturday-night, December 27.

Their heads to be set up on several Poles, Two on the one Tower Hill, and two
on the other, as near the Tower as may be.

FINIS.

