A Brief Account OF THE Indictment, Trial, Conviction, and Execution OF Mr.
ROBERT BAILZIE OF JERRESSWOOD, Upon the 22th, 23th, and 24th of December 1684.
at His Majesty's Capital City of Edinburgh, in his Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
Where the said Mr. Robert Bailzie was hanged and afterward Quartered for HIGH
TREASON.
ON Monday December the 22th 1684. about nine in the Morning, the said Mr.
Robert Bailzie, of Jerresswood, had his Indictment by sound of Trumpet, and
Heralds in their Formalities, to appear the 23th at two of the Clock in the
Afternoon before the Lords Commissioners of the Judiciary, at which time he did
appear accordingly.

The Assize and Witnesses being called, and silence made, and he in Panel; his
Indictment was read by the Clerk of the Court with an audible Voice, to the
effect following, viz.

That he, the said Robert Bailzie, having casten off the fear of God,
Allegiance to his Sovereign Lord the King; had most treacherously,
notwithstanding of several Laws and Acts, resett, harbored, maintained and
corresponded with Archibald Champbell, late Earl of Argile, and Mr. Veatch, two
desperate and ^ore-faulted Traitors; and that he had joined in Council with the
late Lord Russel, Commissar Monroe, the Lord Melvill, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Sir
John Cochran, the two Cessnocks and diverse others, in that hellish Conspiracy
for taking away the Lives of his Sacred Majesty and Royal Highness, and for
subverting the Government, and for that effect had assisted, voted, and
consulted, for the uplifting of ten thousand Pounds Sterling, for buying of
Arms, to be employed for raising of Forces, etc.

His Majesty's Advocate produced his Warrant from the Lords of the
Privy-Councel, for his Insisting against him, and Sir George Lockhart, and Sir
John Louder, upon their Allegiance to assist the King's Advocate, which they
did.

The Advocates for the Panel (i. e. Prisoner) were Sir Patrick Hoome, Mr.
Walter Pringle, Mr. William Fletcher, Mr. James Grahame, and Mr. William
Bailzie, who protested they might have the liberty of a free Debate, which was
granted, and they insisted, that as to the Corresponding with the Rebels
libelled, it ought not to be sustained as a point of Dittay, it being Res
hactenus Judicata, the Panel being fined in six thousand pound Sterling before
the Council for the said Crime already.

His Majesty's Advocate hereupon restricted his Libel to the other Crimes
libelled.

The Lords found the Libel Relevant, and admitted the same to Probation.

Then the Jury were chosen and sworn, viz. The Right Honorable the Earl of
Strathmoir. The Right Honorable the Earl of Balcarrass. Sir. George Skeene,
Provost of Aberdeene. Sir. James Flemminge, Provost of Edinburgh. Sir. John
Ramsey of Whitehill. Mr. Andrew Hepburne of Humbie. Mr. Andrew Bruce of
Earleshall. Mr. John Stewart Tuttor of Appin. Mr. Alexander Miln of Carrin. Mr.
James Ellies of Stein(...) ^ills. Sir William Drummond of Hauthornden. Major
Andrew White, Lieutenant of Edinburgh Castle. Mr. David Grahame, Sherriffe of
Wigtoun, and David Burnet Merchant in Edinburgh.


The Witnesses were called, and first the Right Honorable the Earl of Tarrass;
who deponed, that Mr. Robert Martin was sent from London by the Panel, and
other Conspirators there, to persuade his Lordship, and several other South
Country Gentlemen to rise in Arms, secure Berwick, the Castles of Edinburgh,
and Striveling, the Officers of State and Army; which being done, they were to
have pressed his Majesty to have permitted the Parliament of England to have
sitten, and to pass the Bill of Exclusion; and many more things his Lordship
very clearly deponed.

The Advocates for the Panel objected against the Earl of Tarras, that the
could be no Witness, for he being Socius Criminis incarceratus and sub metu
Mortis, and being indicted for the said Crimes Regiam Majestatem, the Act of
Robert the Second and Common Law allows no Witnesses to be allowed in such
Cases.

His Majesty's Advocate answered, that in Plots and Conspiracies it was
impossible to have proved the same, except such Persons were sustained as
Witnesses; So the Lords repelled the Objection in respect of the Answer, and
sustained his Lordship a Witness.

The second Witness was Commisser Monroe, who was brought from his Majesty's
Castle of Blackness, by a Party of Horse of the Lord Drumlanricks Troop, and
deponed that the Panel was present at several meetings at London, and that he
did contribute for sending Mr. Martin into Scotland, and that he desired he
might be sent to Holland to the Earl of Argile, with the ten thousand pounds
Sterling; and many more things to this Purpose and Effect.

The third Witness was Murray of Philliphaugh, and Scot of Gallousheilds, who
both deponed Conformes precedentibus in omnibus as to the riseing of Arms, etc.

His Majesty's Advocate produced for further Proof, the judicial Confession of
Mr. William Carstares before the Lords of the Privy Council, etc.

The Probation being closed, the Advocates on both sides made very learned
Speeches to the Assize, (i. e. Jury) who immediately thereafter, viz. at the
hour of twelve at Night, did close themselves in, and having chosen the Earl of
Strathmoir Chancellor, (i. e. Foreman) they rose about three a Clock in the
Morning, and at nine brought in their Verdict, viz.

That they found it proven that he was Art and Part in the Crimes libelled, and
that he had concealed the same.

Which being publicly read, and the Verdict thereafter closed by the said Earl
his Seal, the Sentence of Death was pronounced as follows.

Forsameckle as it is found by an Assize, that Mr. Robert Bailzie of
Jerresswood is guilty of the particular Crimes mentioned in his Dittay,
Therefore the Lords Justice General, Justice Clark, and Remanent Lords
Commissioners of his Majesty's Justiciarie, and I in their Names, decree and
adjudge the said Mr. Robert Bailzie to be taken to the Mercatt Cross of
Edinburgh, this present 24th Instant of December, and there, betwixt two and
four a Clock in the Afternoon, to be hanged on a Gibbet until he be dead, his
Head to be cut off, and affi^ed upon the Netherhow of Edinburgh, his Body to be
quartered, the one Quarter to be put upon the Tolbooth of Jedburgh, the other
on Lanrick, the third on Air, and the fourth on the Tolbooth of Glassgow, and
Ordaines all his Lands and Rents, Goods and Gear, to be forefaulted to his
Majesty's Use, his Arms torn and rent, his Coat Armor all to be razed out of
the Lion Books, so that he, nor none of his Posterity, shall bear Arms in time
to come.

The Sentence being given by sound of Trumpet and Heralds in their Formalities
did tear his Coat of Arms in face of Court, trample the same under foot, and
did cast them in his face, and thereafter went to the Mercatt Cross, and
performed the rest of the Solemnities usual.

Just before the Sentence he professed he was never privy to any Conspiracy
against the Life of his Sacred Majesty, Royal Highness, or any Person in the
World, and that he never did design to subvert the Government, but what he had
done, was for the Redressing of such Grievances he thought were lying upon the
Nation, and that he died Innocently, and with a good Conscience.

After Sentence, all he said was, That he had too short a Time.

At the Place and Time in the Sentence mentioned, he was Executed, saying very
little on the Scaffold.

FINIS.
London, Printed for W. Davies in Amen Corner, 1684.


