A brief Character of the Protector. Oliver Cromwell* with an Account of the
Slavery he left the Nation under, at his Death* Comprehended in a Seasonable
Speech, made by a worthy Member of Parliament, in the House of Commons;
Concerning the other HOUSE. March 1659.
Licensed, Novem. 15th. 1692.

EDM. BOHVN*

Mr. Speaker,
THis days Debate is but too clear a Proof, that we Englishmen are right
Islanders, Variable and Mutable like the Air we live in. For, Sir, if that were
not our Temper, we should not be now Disputing, Whether after all those Hazards
we have run, That Blood we have spilt, That Treasure we have exhausted, we
should not now sit down, just where we did begin; and of our own accords,
submit our selves to that Slavery, which we have not only ventured our Estates
and Lives, but I wish I could not say, our Souls and Consciences, to throw off.
What others, Sir, think of this Levity, I cannot tell; I mean, those that steer
their Consciences by Occasions, and cannot lose the Honor they never had: But
truly, Sir, for my own part, I dare as little not declare it, to be my Opinion,
as others more prudential, dare avow it to be theirs. That we are this day
making good all the Reproaches of our Enemies, owning of our selves Oppressors,
Murderers, Regicides, Subverters of that, which now we do not only acknowledge
to have been a Lawful Government; but by recalling it, confess it now to be the
best. Which, Sir, if it be true, and that now we begin to see aright, I
heartily wish, our Eyes had been sooner open; and for three Nations sake, that
we had purchased our Conviction at a cheaper Rate. We might, Sir, in Forty Two,
have been, what we thus contend to be in Fifty Nine; and our Consciences have
had much less to Answer for to God, and our Reputations to the World.

But, Mr. Speaker, I wish with all my Soul, I did state our Case to you amiss,
and that it were the Question only, Whether we would voluntarily relapse into
the Disease we were formerly possessed with, and of our own accords, take up
our old Yoke, that we with Wearing and Custom, had made Habitual and Easy, and
which (it may be) 'twas more our Wantonness than our Pressure, that made us
throw it off. But this, Sir, is not now the Question: That which we deliberate,
is not, whether we will say, We do not care to be free, we like our old
Masters, and will now be content to have our Ears bored at the Door-post of
their House, and so serve them for ever; But, Sir, as if we were contending for
Shame as well as Servitude, we are carrying our Ears to be bored at the Doors
of another House: A House, Sir, without Name, and therefore it is but congruous
it should consist of Members without Family: A House that inverts the Order of
Slavery, and subjects it to our Servants; and yet, in contradiction to
Scripture, we do not only not think that Subjection intolerable, but are now
pleading for it. In a word, Sir, it is a House of so incongruous and odious a
Composition and Mixture, that certainly the grand Architect, would never have
so framed it, had it not been his Design, as well to show to the World the
Contempt he had of us, as to demonstrate the Power he had over us.

Sir, That it may appear, that I intend not to be so imprudent (as far as my
part is concerned) as to make a voluntary Resignation of my Liberty and Honor,
to this excellent part of his late Highness his last Will and Testament, I
shall crave, Sir, the leave, to declare in a few Particulars, my Opinion of
this Other House; wherein I cannot but promise my self to be favorably heard
by some, but patiently heard by all: For those Englishmen that are against this
House, will certainly with content hear the Reasons, why others are so too:
Those Courtiers that are for it, give me Evidence enough to think, that in
Nature there is nothing which they cannot willingly endure.

First, Sir, As to the Author and Framer of this House of Peers; Let me put you
in mind, it was he, that with reiterated Oaths, had often sworn to be True and
Faithful to the Government without it; and not only sworn so himself, but had
been the chief Instrument both to draw and compel others to Swear so too. So,
Sir, that the foundation of this Noble Fabric was laid in Perjury, and was
begun with the Violation and Contempt, as well of the Laws of God, as of the
Nation. He, Sir, that called Monarchy Antichristian in another, and indeed made
it so in himself: He that Voted a House of Lords dangerous and unnecessary, and
too truly made it so in his Partisans: He that with fraud and force deprived
you of your Liberty, when he was living, and entailed Slavery upon you at his
Death: It Is he, Sir, that has left you these worthy Overseers of that his last
Will and Testament; who, however they have behaved themselves in other Trusts,
we may be confident, they will endeavor faithfully to discharge themselves in
this. In a word, Sir, had this Other House no other Fault, but its Institution
and Author, I should think that Original Sin enough for its Condemnation: For I
am of their Opinion that think, that for the good of Example, all Acts and
Monuments of Tyrants are to be Expunged and Erased, that, if possible, their
Memory might be no longer lived than their Carcasses. And the truth is, their
good Laws are of the number of their Snares, and but base Brokage for our
Liberty.

But, Sir, to impute to this other House, no other Faults but its own, you may
please in the first place to consider of the Power which his Highness has left
it, according to that humble Petition and Advice, which he was pleased to give
Order to the Parliament to present unto him. For, Sir, as the Romans had Kings,
so had his Highness Parliaments, amongst his Instruments of Slavery; and I
hope, Sir, it will be no Offense for me to pray, that his Son may not have them
so too. But, Sir, they have a Negative Voice, and all other Circumstances of
that Arbitrary Power, which made the former House intolerable; only the Dignity
and Quality of the Persons themselves is wanting, that our Slavery may be
accompanied with Ignominy and Affront. And now, Mr. Speaker, have we not
gloriously vindicated the Nations Liberty? Have we not worthily employed our
Blood and Treasure, to abolish that Power that was set over us by the Law, to
have the same imposed upon us without a Law? And after all that Sound and Noise
we have made in the World, of the Peoples Legislative Power, and of the
Supremacy and Omnipotency of their Representatives; we now see there is no more
Power left them, but what is put in the Balance, and equalled by the Power of a
few Retainers of Tyranny, who are so far from being of the Peoples choice, that
the most part of them are only known to the Nation by the Villainies and
Mischiefs they have committed in it.

In the next place, Sir, you may please to consider, that the Persons invested
with this Power, are all of them nominated and designed by the Lord Protector;
(for to say, by him and his Council, has in effect no more distinction, than
if one should say, by Oliver, and Cromwell.) By this means the Protector
himself, by his own and his Peers Negative, becomes, in effect, two of the
three Estates; and by consequence, is possessed of two parts of the Legislative
Power. I think this can be a doubt to no Man, that will but take the pains to
read over that fair Catalogue of those Noble Lords; for certainly no Man that
reads their Names, can possibly fancy for what other Virtues or good Qualities
such a composition should be made choice of, but only the certainty of their
compliance with whatsoever should be enjoined them by their Creator. (Pardon,
Sir, that Name, for it is properly applyable, where things are made of Nothing.)
Now, Sir, if in the former Government, increase of Nobility was a grievance,
because the New Nobility, having fresh obligation to the Crown, were the
easilier led to compliance with it: And if one of the main Reasons for
Exclusion of the Bishops out of the House of Lords, was because that they being
of the King's making, were, in effect, so many certain Votes for whatever the
King had a mind to carry in that House: How much more assured will that
inconvenience now be, when the Protector, that wants nothing of the King, in
every sense but the Title, shall not only make and nominate a part, but of
himself constitute the whole House? In a word, Sir, if our Liberty was
endangered by the former House, we may give it lost in the other House: And
it is in all respects, as advantageous and secure for the Liberty of the Nation,
which we come hither to redeem, to allow this Power and Notion to his Highness
Officers, or Council; nay his very Chaplains, as to his other Creatures and
Partisans in his other House.

Now having considered, Sir, their Author, Power and Constitution, give me
leave to make some few Observations, though but in general, of the Persons
themselves that are designed to be our Lords and Masters; and let us see what
either the extraordinary Quality or Qualifications are of these egregious
Legislators, which may justify their Choice, and prevail with the People to
admit them, at least, into equal Authority with the whole Representative Body
of themselves. But what I shall speak, Sir, of their Quality, or any thing else
concerning them, I would be thought to speak with distinction, and to intend
only of the Major part. For I acknowledge, Mr. Speaker, the mixture of this
other House to be like the Compositions of Apothecaries, who are used to mix
something of Relish, something grateful to the Taste, to qualify their bitter
Drugs, which else, perchance, would be immediately spit out and never swallowed.

So, Sir, his Highness, of deplorable Memory to this Nation, to countenance as
well the want of Quality as Honesty in the rest, has nominated some, against
whom there lies no other Reproach, but only that Nomination; but not, Sir, out
of any Respect to their Qualities, or regard to their Virtues, but with regard
to the no Quality, to the no Virtues of the rest: which truly, Mr. Speaker, if
he had not done, we could easily have given a more express Name to his other
House, than he has been pleased to do: For we know a House designed only for
Beggars and Malefactors, is a House of Correction, and termed so by your Law.
But, Mr. Speaker, setting those few Persons aside, who, I hope, think the
Nomination a disgrace, and the ever coming to Sit there, much a greater* Can we
without Indignation think on the rest? He that is first in their Roll, a
condemned Coward; one, that out of fear and baseness, did what he could to
betray your Liberties, and does now the same for Gain. The second, a Person of
as little Sense as Honesty, preferred for no other reason, but his no Worth,
his no Conscience; except that his cheating his Father of all he had, was
thought a Virtue, by him, who by sad Experience, we find has done as much for
his Mother, his Country. The third, a Cavalier, a Presbyterian, an Independent;
for a Republique, for a Protector, for every thing, for nothing, but only that
one thing, Money. 'Twere endless to run through them all, to tell you, Sir, of
their Lordships of Seventeen-pound Land a year of Inheritance, of their Farmer
Lordships, Dray-men Lordships, Cobler-Lordships, without one Foot of Land, but
what the Blood of Englishmen has been the price of: These, Sir, are to be our
Rulers, these the Judges of our Lives and Fortunes; to these we are to stand
bare, whilst their Pageant-state-Lordships deign to give us a conference upon
their Breeches. Mr. Speaker, we have already had too much experience, how
unsupportable Servants are, when they become our Masters. All kind of Slavery
is miserable in the account of all generous Minds; but that which comes
accompanied with Scorn and Contempt, stirs every Man's Indignation, and is
endured by none, whose Nature does not intend for Slaves, as well as Fortune.

I say not this, Mr. Speaker, to revile any Man with his Meanness; for I never
thought either the Malignity or Indulgence of Fortune, to be (with wise or just
men) the Grounds either of their ill or their good Opinion. Mr. Speaker, I
blame not in these Men the Faults of their Fortune, any otherwise, but as they
make them their own: I object to you their Poverty* because it is accompanied
with Ambition; I mind you of their Quality, because they themselves forget it.
So that it is not the Men I am angry with, but with their Lordships; not with
Mr. Barkstead, or Mr. Jailer (Titles I could well allow them) but with The
Right Honorable, our singular good Lord and Jailer: It Is this incongruity, Mr.
Speaker, I am displeased with.

So, Sir, that though we easily grant Poverty and Necessity to be no Faults,
yet we must allow them to be great Impediments in the way of Honor, and such
as nothing but extraordinary Virtue and Merit can well remove. The Scripture
reckons it among Jeroboam's great Faults, that he made Priests of the meanest
of the People; and sure it was none of the Virtues of our Jeroboam (who has
set up his Calves too, and would have our Tribes come up and Worship them) that
he observed the same Method, in making of Lords.

One of the few Requests the Portugals made to Philip the Second of Spain, when
he got that Kingdom (as his late Highness did this) by an Army, was, That he
would not make Nobility contemptible, by advancing such to that Degree, whose
Quality or Virtue could be no way thought to deserve it. Nor have we formerly
been less apprehensive of such Inconveniences our selves; it was in Ric. I's
time, one of the Bishop of Ely's Accusations, that Castles and Forts of Trust,
he did Obscuris and ignotis hominibus tradere, put in the hands of obscure and
unknown Men: But We, Mr. Speaker, to such a kind of Men, are delivering up the
Power of our Laws, and in that the power of All.

In the 17 Edw. 4. there past an Act of Parliament, for the Degrading of John
Nevil Marquess Mountague and Duke of Bedford; the Reason expressed in the Act,
Because he had not a Revenue sufficient for the maintaining of that Dignity, to
which he added, That when Men of mean Birth are called to high Estate, and have
no Livelihood to support it, it induces Briberies, Extortions, and all kind of
Injustices that are followed by Gain. And in the Parliament of 2 Carol. the
Peers in a Petition against Scottish and Irish Titles, told the King, That it is
a Novelty without Precedent, That Men should possess Honors, where they
possess nothing else; and that they should have a Vote in Parliament, where
they have not a Foot of Land. But if it had been added, Sir, Or have no Land,
but what is the purchase of their Villainies, against how many of our new Peers
had this been an important Objection? To conclude, Sir, it has been a very
just and reasonable care, amongst all Nations, not to render that despised and
contemptible to the People, which is designed for their Reverence, and their
Awe: Which, Sir, bare and empty Title, without Quality and Virtue, never
procured any Man, any more than the Image in the Fable made the Ass adored that
carried it.

After their Quality, give me leave, Sir, to speak a word or two of their
Qualifications; which certainly ought in reason to carry some proportion with
the Employments they design themselves. The House of Lords, Sir, are our King's
Hereditary great Council: They are the Highest Court of Judicature; they have
their part in Judging and Determining of the Reasons of making new Laws, and of
Abrogating old: From amongst them we take our great Officers of State; they are
commonly our Generals at Land, and our Admirals at Sea: In conclusion, Sir,
they are both of the Essence and Constitution of our old Government; and have
besides the greatest and noblest Share in the Administration. Now certainly,
Sir, to judge according to the Dictates of Reason, one would imagine some small
Faculties and Endowments to be necessary for the discharging of such a Calling;
and those, such as are not usually acquired in Shops and Warehouses, nor found
by following the Plow: Now what other Academies most of their Lordships have
been bred in, but their Shops; what other Arts they have been versed in, but
those which more require good Arms and good Shoulders than good Heads, I think,
Mr. Speaker, we are yet to be informed. Sir, we commit not the Education of our
Children to Ignorant and Illiterate Masters; nay, we trust not our very Horses
to unskilful Grooms: I beseech you, Sir, let Us think it belongs to Us, to have
some Care into whose Hands we commit the management of the Commonwealth: And
if we cannot have persons of Birth and Fortune to be our Rulers, to whose
Quality we would willingly submit; I beseech you, Sir, for our Credits and
Safeties sake, let us seek Men, at least, of Parts and Education, to whose
Abilities we may have some Reason to give way. If, Sir, a Patient dies under a
Physician's hand, the Law esteems that not a Felony, but a misfortune in the
Physician; but if one that is no Physician, undertakes the management of a
Cure, and the Party miscarries; the Law makes the Emperick a Felon, and sure,
in all Men's Opinion, the Patient a Fool. To conclude, Sir, for Great Men to
Govern it is ordinary; for Able Men it is natural; Knaves many times come to it
by Force and Necessity, and Fools sometimes by chance: But universal Choice and
Election of Fools and Knaves for Government, was ^ever yet made by any, who
were not themselves like those they chose.

But methinks, Mr. Speaker, I see ready to rise after me, some Gentlemen that
shall tell you the great Services their new Lordships have done the
Commonwealth; that shall extol their Valor, their Godliness, their Fidelity
to the Cause; The Scripture too (no doubt) as it is to all purposes, shall be
brought in to Argue for them; and we shall hear of the Wisdom of the poor Man
that saved the City; of the ^ot many Wise, not many Mighty; Attributes I can no
way deny to be due to their Lordships. Mr. Speaker, I shall be as forward as
any Man to declare their Services, and acknowledge them; though I might tell
you, that the same Honor is not purchased by the Blood of an Enemy, but of a
fellow Citizen; that for Victories in Civil Wars, till our Armies march through
the City, I have not read that the Conquerours have been so void of Shame, as
to Triumph. Caesar not much more indulgent to his Country than our late
Protector, did not so much as write public Letters of his Victory at
Pharsalia, much less had Days of Thanksgiving to his Gods, and Anniversary
Feasts, for having been a prosperous Rebel, and given Justice and his Country
the worst.

But, Sir, I leave this Argument, and to be as good as my word, come to put you
in mind of some of their Services, and the Obligation you owe them for the
same. To speak nothing, Sir, of one of my Lords Commissioners Valor at
Bristol, nor of another Noble Lords brave Adventure at the Bear-garden. I must
tell you, Sir, that most of them have had the Courage to do things, which (I
may boldly say) few other Christians durst have so adventured their Souls to
have attempted: They have not only subdued their Enemies, but their Masters,
that raised and maintained them; they have not only Conquered Scotland and
Ireland, but Rebellious England too; and there suppressed a Malignant Party of
Magistrates and Laws. And that nothing should be wanting to make them indeed
complete Conquerors, (without the help of Philosophy) they have even Conquered
themselves. All Shame they have subdued, as perfectly as all Justice; the Oaths
they have taken, they have as easily digested, as their old General could
himself; public Covenants and Engagements, they have trampled under-foot: In
conclusion, so entire a Victory they have over themselves, that their
Consciences are as much their Servants, as, Mr. Speaker, we are. But, Sir, give
me leave to conclude with that which is more admirable than all this, and shows
the confidence they have of themselves and us: After having many times trampled
on the Authority of the House of Commons, and no less than five times dissolved
them, they hope for those good Services to the House of Commons, by the House
of Commons, to be made a House of Lords. I have been overlong, Sir, for which I
crave your pardon, therefore in a word I conclude. I beseech you, let us think
it our Duty to have a care of two things: First, That Villainies be not
encouraged with the Rewards of Virtue: Secondly, That the Authority and Majesty
of the Government of this Nation be not defiled, and exposed to Contempt, by
committing so considerable a part of it, to Persons of as mean Quality as Parts.

The Thebans did not admit Merchants into Government, till they had left their
Traffic ten years: Sure, 'twould have been long before Cobblers and Dray-me^
would have been allowed. If, Sir, the Wisdom of this House, shall find it
nece^sary to begin where we left, and shall think we have been hitherto like
the Prodigal, and that now when our necessities persuade us ( i. e.) that we
are almos^ brought to herd it with Swine, now it is high time to think of a
return; let u^ without more ado, without this motly mixture, even take our
Rulers as at the first so that we can be but reasonably secured to avoid our
Counselors as at the beginning.

Give me leave, Sir, to release your Patience with a short Story. Livy tell^
us, There was a State in Italy, an Aristocracy, where the Nobility stretched
their Prerogative too high, and presumed a little too much upon the Peoples
Liberty and Patience; whereupon the Discontents were so general, and so great,
that they apparently tended to a Dissolution of Government, and the turning of
al^ things into Anarchy and Confusion. At the same time, besides these
Distempers at home, there was a Potent Enemy ready to fall upon them from
abroad, that had been an over-match for them at their best Union, but now in
these Disorders, was like to find them very Ready, and very easy Prey: A wise
Man, Sir* in the City, that did not at all approve of the Insolency of the
Nobility, and as little liked Popular Tumults, bethought himself of this
Stratagem, to cozen his Country into safety. Upon a pretense of Counsel, he
procured the Nobility to meet all together; which when they had done, he found
a Way to lock all the Doors upon them; goes away himself, and takes the Keys
with him: The^ he immediately Summons the People; tells them, that by a
Contrivance of his* he had taken all the Nobility in a Trap; That now was the
time for them to be revenged upon them for all their Insolences; that
therefore they should immediately go along with him, and dispatch them. Sir,
the Officers of our Army* after a Fast, could not be more ready for the
Villainy, than this People were* and accordingly they made as much have to the
Slaughter, as their Lord Protector could desire them. But* Sir, this wise Man I
told you of, was their Lord Protector indeed: As soon as he had brought the
People where the Parliament was Sitting, and when they but expected the Word to
fall to the Butchery, and take their Heads: Gentlemen, says he, Though I would
not care how soon this Wor^ of Reformation were over; yet in the Ship of the
Commonwealth, we must not throw the Steers-men over Board, till we have
provided others for the Helm: Let us consider before we take these Men away, in
what other hands we may more securely trust our Liberty, and the management of
the Commonwealth. And so he advised them before the putting down of the
former, to bethink themselves of constituting an other House.

He begins and nominates one, a Man highly cried up in the Popular Faction* a
confiding Man, one of much Zeal, little Sense, and no Quality; you may suppose
him, Sir, a zealous Cobbler: The People in conclusion murmured at this and were
loath their fellow Mutineer, for no other Virtue but Mutining, should come to
be advanced to be their Master; and by their Looks and Murmur, sufficiently
expressed the Distaste they took at such a Motion. Then he nominates another as
mean a Mechanic as the former; you may imagine him, Sir, a bustling rude
Dray-man, or the like: He was no sooner named, but some burst out a laughing,
others grew Angry and railed at him, and all Detested and scorned him. Upon
this, a Third was named for a Lordship, one of the same Batch, and every way
fit to sit with the other two. The People then fell into a confused laughter
and noise, and enquired if such were Lords, who (by all the Gods) would be
content to be the Commons?

Sir, let me be bold (by the good leave of the other House and yours) to ask
the same Question? But, Sir, to conclude this Story, and with it I hope the
other House: When this wise Man I told you of, perceived they were now sensible
of the inconvenience and mischief they were running into, and saw that the
pulling down their Rulers, would prove in the end, but the setting up of their
Servants; he thought them then prepared to hear Reason, and told them* You see,
says he, That as bad as this is, we cannot, for any thing I see, agree upon a
better: What then, if after this Fright, we have put our Nobility in, and the
demonstration we have given them of our Power, we try them once more, whether
they will mend, and for the future, behave themselves with more moderation?
That People, Mr. Speaker, were so wise, as to comply with that wise
Proposition, and to think it easier to mend their old Rulers, than to make New.
And I wish, Mr. Speaker, we may be so wise to think so too.

POSTSCRIPT.
Taking Notice, That many in our TIMES, (I hope Honest and Well-meaning Men)
have a great Reverence for the Memory of Oliver Cromwell, Protector; as being a
Man of Piety, and a great Champion for the Liberties of this Nation, I thought
the reviving the foregoing Excellent Speech (lately by Accident coming to my
Hands) might conduce much to the rectifying of their great Error and Mistake
herein, by the Reprinting it; and therefore have left it to the Dispose of the
Printer.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BRethren in Iniquity: Or, the Confederacy of PAPISTS with SECTARIES, for the
Destroying of the True Religion, as by Law Established, plainly detected.
Wherein is showed a farther Account of the Romish Snares and Intrigues for the
Destroying the True Reformed Religion, as Professed in the Church of England,
and Established by Law, and for the Introducing of Popery or Atheism among us;
clearly showing from very Authentic Writers and Testimonies, That the
principal Ways and Methods whereby the Papists have sought the Ruin of our
Religion and Church, from the Beginning of our Reformation, to the present
Times, and by which they are still in hopes of compassing it, are by promoting
of Toleration, or pretended Liberty of Conscience; and that for above these
Sixscore Years the Papists have so craftily Influenced our Dissenters, as to
make them the unhappy Instruments of effecting their most pernicious Designs,
which they contrived for the Subverting our Church and State. London Printed*
and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1690.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1692.


