A Brief Account of the Designs which the Papists have had against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, occasioned by his commitment, July 2. 1681.
Though the apprehending of the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury has
filled the Town and Country with talk and noise, yet it neither frightens nor
discourageth any true Protestant or good Englishman: For as they have their
innocence to support them under the troubles which the perjuries of needy and
suborned Villains may bring upon them, so they noways doubt but to unravel all
this Sham-Intrigue, and trace it through all its steps and windings to the
fountain and original of it. And as this honorable person is more loyal than
to conspire against the Life of the King, or the Peace of the Government; so
were he a person traitorously inclined, yet he is wiser than to communicate a
design of levying War for the deposing or destroying his Prince, to such base
and mercinary Rascals as are said to have witnessed against him. For his folly
would have equald his wickedness, should he, under a pretense of preserving the
Protestant Religion and Interest, have entered into so hazardous and black a
conspiracy, not only with beggarly Fellows, but with Irish men and Papists. And
though no man can think himself safe should the Testimony of such Varlets be
allowed, who will, for money, swear any thing they are prompted unto; yet there
is not so much as one person that will either abscond or withdraw: But all do
rather under the satisfaction and comfort which they have in their own
innocence, choose to perish by the malignity of false Tongues, than derive an
aspersion upon their integrity, either through flight, or the concealment of
themselves for a season. And for this honorable Gentleman that is first
singled out for the Papists to glut and exemplify their malice and rage upon,
the whole tenor and universal conduct of his life have spoken him, not only a
person of the greatest abilities and wisdom, but of the highest loyalty to His
Majesty, and warmest zeal for his service, that any these Three Kingdoms have
produced in this Age. Nor is there a Nobleman or Gentleman within the King's
Dominions, to whose influence His Majesty does more owe his peaceable and happy
Restoration, and the succesful administration of His affairs for many years
together, than to this wise and noble Peer. And as the King can never forget
the many great and memorable services which this Gentleman did him, when few
had either courage, loyalty or prudence to render them useful to his interest;
so whenever His Majesty comes impartially to examine the Counsels and
Transactions for which he has of late years undergone so much obloquie, and
stood exposed to so many personal dangers and hazards, he will find them all
directly calculated for, and lying in a direct subserviency to the preservation
of His Person, Crown and Dignity, and the promoting the glory of His Reign.

Nor can it be supposed that one possessing that room in the favor and esteem
of His Prince, which my Lord Shaftsbury did, and trusted with so supreme a
manage of His Royal concernment as he was, would have withdrawn himself from
meddling in the affairs of His Sovereign, or run into a misunderstanding with
any at Court, but that he could not concur in designs which he conceived tended
to the ruin of these Kingdoms, and the endangering the Monarchy, as well as to
the subversion of the Protestant Religion both here and elsewhere. His faithful
and unwearied cares and endeavors to obviate the formidable growth of France,
and to prevent the reestablishment of Popery in these Nations, and thereby the
enslaving them again to Rome, may be thought the occasion of all the slanders
which have been cast upon him, and the only true source of all the troubles he
has either conflicted with, or stood obnoxious unto. And by how much he has
been eminently instrumental to detect and defeat the many mischievous
contrivances and designs of a French and Popish Party and Faction, by so much
are all the Friends and Abetters of Arbitrariness and Popery at home, or such
who have sold themselves for foreign Pensions to advance the Grandeur of
France, and to contribute to the success of their conquests abroad, become his
implacable and professed enemies.

And more particularly, That which gave a new ferment to Popish rage, and
enflam^d their indignation against this Noble Peer, was his early discovery and
resentment of the Duke of York's being reconciled to Rome, and his having joynd
himself in a close correspondency with the French King and his Ministers. For
though these things are since the publishing of Coleman's Letters become obvious
to all the world; yet this great and sagacious Minister had gotten view of, and
penetrated into them long before. And the sensations as well as prospect which
he thereupon had and declared of what would thence ensue to the danger of His
Majesty's person, the disturbance of his Government, and the ruin of his
Kingdoms and the Protestant Religion, which he is sworn to protect and defend,
may be easily conjectured by the alarm which the whole Popish party immediately
took, and by the bloody machinations which they entered into and cherished
against him. And therefore even while he was Chancellor, and stood clothed with
the supreamest Authority that a Subject is capable of under His Majesty, he not
only apprehended, but upon the best intelligence found himself in that danger
from the Papists, that he expected every night to have his Throat cut, and
accordingly kept a constant Watch in his House to prevent his being murdered
and assassinated. And when they found that the taking the Seals from him (which
there is reason to believe proceeded from Popish Counsels, though he had attained
unto them upon as great merit, used them with as great justice, and parted with
them with as great honor as ever any did) could neither find ambition nor
convetousness in him to impress and work upon, so as to bring him to their
Lure: They accosted him with such tenders of greatness, honor and wealth, as
few Subjects would have had the humility, uprightness and self-denial to
refuse: But to their shame and his glory, they found him of a nobler
complexion, and a more generous and upright mind, than to abandon his
principles of duty to the King, and faithfulness to his Country, for Riches,
Honor and Power, though in conjunction with the favor of more than one
Potentate. And therefore finding him above these low and pitiful temptations,
and that he despised what others to the loss of their credit, and hazard of
their Souls court and pursue; there was another method thought of, and a
resolution taken by some great men to impeach him of Treason. And as Colonel
Conquest in pursuance of this determination, undertook to be his Accuser, so
all Offices wherein his Lordship had been concernd, were narrowly inspected and
enquired into to find just matter for a charge. And as they greatly reckond
upon the House of Commons which then was, as concelving it admirably molded
for their business, and entirely disposed to have gratified them in such a
design, rather than many of them to have forfeited their Pensions at the end of
the Sessions, they collected a great mass and number of particulars, which
misinformation, surprise, or shortness of understanding might have betrayed the
best and wisest of men into. But the Kings Learned Council at Law, having
seriously examined the several matters which were prepared in order to a charge
against him, and preferring their Masters Honor, and the Peace of their own
Consciences, before the obliging a few angry and interested men, they declared
that all which with so much industry was collected and produced, was
insufficient to the purpose to which the malice and revenge of some had
designed it. And hereby miscarrying in their attempts upon the Life of this
great and excellent person, they thereupon change the Scheme of their designs,
and lay a Plot for the blasting his reputation and honor. And conceiving the
Ecclesiastics in a more implicit obedience to them, and that they have less
honor to lose than others, they muster up, as much as they could, the whole
posse of the Clergy to reproach and defame him. And as if it had been of more
consequence to sink and eclipse the credit of this Peer, than to gain or
convert Souls to God, the Pulpits instead of commending Jesus Christ to the
Consciences of men, were employed through all parts of the Nation in blasting
the Earl of Shaftsbury: And when none other could be found sufficiently
qualified to revile and asperse this poor Gentleman, Needham, whose Pen had
been employed near Twenty years to defame His Majesty and his Father, was hired
to Write false and scandalous Books against him: As if there had needed no more
to bespatter this innocent person, but for that mercinary Scribler to gather up
the dirt which he had thrown upon Two Kings, and to cast it at him. Nor could
he want impudence to brand his fellow Subject, who had accustomed himself so
long in reviling his natural Princes. But all this not answering the ends which
were expected from it, namely, the lessening him in the love and esteem of
Loyal and True Protestants, an advantage is embraced of sending him to the
Tower, upon pretense of a crime which all unbiassed men thought the freedom of
Speech, which is an essential privilege of every Member of both Houses had
acquitted and justified him from.

And as this conduced nothing to make this free Generous and great minded
Person to crouch and stoop to the exorbitant pleasure of those he judged
Enemies to the happiness of his Majesty and the Kingdom, so the House of Lords
themselves, by whom he was committed in Feb. 1678, Have since the Earl of
Danbies coming under an Impeachment, through a sense of the injustice and wrong
which was done to this Lord and several other Peers, made an Order to Damn with
an abhorrence that whole procedence. But finding that this one man's wisdom and
diligence was so fatal and pernicious to all their Designs, and that many of
them had been rendered abortive, and others made to redound upon themselves
through his Intelligince, Care and Activity; the Papal Party have united all
the Fraud and Policy which are among them, to the cruelty and rage which
naturally acts men of their Religion, against sincere and hearty Protestant^,
and all for the destroying this honorable Person, and so far as we yet know,
till we find the contrary proved upon a fair Trial, a most Loyal Subject to his
Majesty, as well as an useful Instrument toward the preservation of our
Religion, Laws and Liberties. And for the compassing what they earnestly long
for, they have, since the discovery of the Popish Plot, and the apprehension of
his zeal in pursuing those that are criminals, entertained many Designs, and
treated with several persons for the killing of him. And besides the many
Evidences that we have of this from the Testimonies of Francisco de Faria, and
diverse others of the Kings Evidence, Dangerfield, not only tells us of a design
carried on by my Lady Powis to have him stabbed, and that several were
contracted with about it; but that two or three upon her importunity, and the
encouragement of a reward undertook it. And Prance assures us, that no fewer
than six, viz. Adamson, Proser, Matteson, Bradshaw, Stawley, and Messeger,
furnished themselves with Arms in order thereunto, and swore to accomplish it.
But the holy and watchful providence of God, with the subservient Ministration
of himself and those about him, having prevented them in all those desperate
and malicious designs; they again shift their methods and bethink themselves of
a new way whereby to ruin him under the countenance of the Law which is
thought to be the protection of the Innocent. Accordingly he was one of the
first that was to be involved under the guilt of Mrs. Celliers, and Mr.
Dangerfields Plot, which is commonly called the Meal-Tub Plot. And this being a
more likely way to destroy him, than that of violence and force, seeing neither
his own watchfulness, nor the attendance and assistance of his Servants can
secure him against the false deposition of an indigent mercenray and perjured
Rascal: there is some reason to believe that the present accusation upon which
he stands committed to the Tower, is upon the subornation of the Papists, and
as full of falsehood as malice. And though we will not suspect the Justice or
honor of the Board; nor affirm that his Majesty and the Council could do
otherwise than they have done, seeing we are to suppose them ignorant of the
Arts by which these fellows may have been prevaild upon to swear against this
noble Peer; yet forasmuch as we are to believe every man Innocent till he be
found and proved Guilty, we crave liberty to say, that we cannot think this
Earl so Criminal as he is reported to be. For of all those that have
opportunity to converse with him; there are none but those few Fellows, who
besides their being Irish-men, are also Papists, that pretend the having any
thing to charge him with. And as it is not to be conceived, but that he should
use as much freedom with Englishmen, especially with such as are of Quality,
as with those beggarly Rascals; so it is an Infamy which his Majesty's good and
Loyal Protestant English Subjects will not know how to digest; that they should
be thought to conceal a Treason against their prince, when Irish Papists, and
such as by their own confession have been in Plots against the Government;
should have that fealty for his Majesty as to detect it. Some of those that are
said to have deposed against this noble Lord, stand already Indicted for
Subornation; and whether to atone for being charged with suborning on one
side, they will really perjure themselves on the other, must be left to time to
reveal. Others have acknowledged that they are hired to swear what they have
done, and whether the credit of such men can support such a charge against a
Peer of England, as the Earl of Shaftsbury is committed for, I leave every
rational and sober man to judge. But it is not fit at present to represent all
those things concerning the Witnesses, which we easily might, for that is to be
reserved till his Lordship comes to his Trial; When it is possible such matters
will be detected, as will fill the minds of all men with Astonishment, and make
the Authors and Abetters of these shams and subornations, the objects of his
Majestys just and severe indignation. However it is with great amasement that
we hear of a Peer's being sent to the Tower for Treason, without being allowed
to have the Witnesses that swore against him, confronted with him and examined
ore tenus. And why this should be denied a Nobleman, and a Protestant, when it
was granted to the Papists of the meanest rank, I do not know, but I am sure it
heightens the surprise. And whether the sending Letters up and down from
unknown hands, and without names, to honest and Loyal persons, to lay aside
their Papers, be not some argument, that all this against my Lord Shaftsbury is
a mere Popish Intreague, and that they seek to promote the belief of a
Presbyterian-Plot by little arts and tricks, I shall leave men to think as they
see cause, and only subjoyn the Copy of one of the Letters. Nor will I either
comment upon it at this time, nor pursue the thread of this discourse in
relation to the Imprisonment of this great and noble Peer any longer, hoping to
have another occasion, when this whole matter stands in a clearer light to
deduce it as it ought, and make these remarks upon it, which the Service of his
Majesty and my Country do require. Only it may not be unworthy of our
observation, that none of all their Lordships at the Council Board had the
confidence to say, that they believed the truth of the Depositions, when my
Lord of Shaftsbury appealed unto them in that particular, and asked whether they
judged him so void of prudence as to treat with such persons about matters of
so dangerous concernment?

Mr. Gibbs,
MY Lord Shaftsbury being just now committed to the Tower, and Sir Tho. Player
under Examination before the King and Council, and several Warrants out against
several of our dearest Friends, and now all like to be discovered; I was
desired by his Lordship to give warning to his Friends; And particularly those
in Wapping to secure all papers and things, etc. of which I desire you to give
notice to so many as you can think, that they nor you may be surprised, being
in more have than ordinary, have only time to subscribe my self,

Yours in all Secresy. J. T.
Whitehal July 2d. 1681. Your Name is in the List with others of your
Neighbors.




Printed for R. Baldwin. 1681.


