A BRIEF EXAMINATION AND CONSIDERATION Of the unsound PRINCIPLES Upon which the
Armies Plea (Lately committed to public view,) is grounded. Wherein the
Repentance of those Army-men, and the Conversion of all other persons from the
Error of their ways, who have (in what capacity soever) acted by the said
Principles, is most earnestly desired and specially aimed at.

By a Friend to the Truth.

LONDON, Printed for Humphery Tuckey at the black-spread-Eagle in Fleetstreet,
near Saint Dunstans-Church. 1660.

A brief Consideration of some Principles upon which the Armies late PLEA is
grounded.
Principle The first.
THat the principal End of public Government (next unto the glory of God) is
the protection and preservation of all good men, in their peaceable and quiet
living in all godliness and honesty.
If the end of Government be so limited, only to the protection of good men,
(who are known only to God) and of such only as live in all godliness and
honesty, (which very many do not) this Government notwithstanding, all ungodly,
dishonest and evil men may commit what outrages they will upon one another. And
whereas they that really and truly good, may be had in abomination among men,
as that which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God;
by this Government thus limited, the good people of God, whose life is hid with
Christ in God, may be liable to all the injuries and mischiefs which they that
Saint themselves, and (contrary to the Apostles rule) esteem themselves better
than others, and act their hypocrisy in the fairest colors of zeal and
sanctimonie, can put upon them.

The second.
That the Magistrates duty in all forms of Government whatsoever, is to defend
all good men from all injuries while they so live.
This limitation also exposes all good men, that are really and truly such, to
the greatest insecurity; it being impossible for them to be assured that they
shall be deemed such. And it also opens a wide gate to injuries, in some case;
to wit, in case they to whom they are done, do not so live. But surely, no good
Government will permit injuries to be done to any person or persons whatsoever.

The third.
That the belief and persuasion of the former principle, is a Light that has
shined into the minds and judgments of many sober and discreet men.
Yet perhaps, even in this, darkness is put for light, and light for
darkness. For, it is too probable, that such a principal end of Government as
shall serve only some men's turns, may exclude from protection by it, even some
of those discreet and sober men themselves, and give them cause to confess the
darkness of that light. Otherwise, he that is but deemed and taken, or but
suspected to be no good man, or an evil doer in any kind, may be torn in pieces
by hypocritical Zealots, or turned out of his whole estate, without any legal
trial, or due process of Law against him.

The fourth.
That the peoples safety is the chief Sovereignty.
Salus populi est suprema lex, The peoples safety is the supreme Law, is a good
rule, in a right sense: that is, when by [the people] is meant the whole
Nation, not a party only, professing themselves to be good men. And the meaning
of it may be, That all Laws in every Nation should be such as may serve to that
end, the general safety of that whole Nation; in which universal, the Prince
and Peers are especially comprehended. But if there be any Law already enacted
in this Nation that is not more disproportionable to that end, than those most
ancient Laws and Customs are, upon which the true Government thereof is
founded, (under which that Supreme end has been time out of mind obtained much
more fully than since that was interrupted,) is such a Law, (if also backed
with promises, Protestations Commands and Oaths) by mere force to be run down,
before it be duly repeated by all that Authority that made it. If this be
asserted, What assurance can the people of the Land ever have, of life, estate,
or liberty, by any ancient, present, or future Law or Laws, by what Authority
soever established? And whether the Law be convenient to that end or not, who
shall judge? What, they that have nothing to do with the Legislative Authority?

The fifth.
That Kings, and all that are in Authority, are Gods Ministers for his peoples
good.
Very good! Therefore Kings, and all that have like authority in every Nation,
must needs have their civil power from God, and that directly and immediately;
there being no intermediate power between his which is the principal, And the
ministerial, which is the Kings: as there is no natural power between that of
the Principal Cause, and that of the Instrumental, in any work of nature.

What then can any persons whatsoever have to do, to question, or control that
Supreme Person, whom God has thought fit to use as his own Minister? What if
such a Sovereign Prince be as ill a Governor as Nero was? He, was once such a
Minister of God; to whom, as bad as he was, the Apostle commands every soul,
that is, all, but such as have no souls (nor consciences neither,) to be
subject to; and that, even for conscience sake.) But, the Christian Kings of
this Nation have ever been Nursing Fathers to the Church, not persecutors of
it, as that Tyrant was; and are therefore (upon that account) much more true,
proper and immediate Ministers to Him that is the only Supreme Head of the
Church, than that Heathen was.

There is not therefore less obedience due to these, but more: Howsoever,
since they are the Ministers of God, and as his Ministers, entrusted of him,
they must needs have full power and authority from God to pursue that trust:
Therefore, as the whole Nation cannot acquit the Supreme lawful Magistrate of
the Trust, nor vacate the act of God, (in committing to his trust a part of his
own universal Government of the world,) no more can they lawfully resist or
endeavor to suppress, or lessen that just and rightful power, upon which the
pursuance and effectual performance of the same trust depends.

It is therefore a false and groundless insinuation, that because Kings are
Gods Ministers for his peoples good; Ergo the people of God, that is, the
Independents, Anabaptists, and the Quakers, may lawfully turn Him out of that
office, and out of the world too, if they (though private persons all) do judge
it conducing to public (that is, to their own) safety, (being conscious to
themselves of their unrighteous practices,) so to do.

The sixth.
That Governors were made for the people, and not the people for them.
What then? Ergo, the people may cast off their Governors, and all known law,
and the only lawful Government also at their pleasure. Non sequitur. Christ as
man, was made for the people, Ergo, The people had a just power to deal by Him
as they did. This collection is more horrid, but the other as false as this.

The seventh
That they (to wit, Kings and Governors) have no power and authority, but what
(under God) they have from the people, and for their use.
That which is from the people, and only under God, is not of God, or from Him.
And what is this but expressly contradictory to the words of the Apostle?
There is no power, or the power is not but from God. There are two great
Kingdoms, the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Kingdom of the world, and God is
immediately by himself the King, as well of the latter as of the former; (The
Lord is our King, Isa. 33. 22. King of Nations, Jer. 10. 7. The Kingdom is the
Lords, and He is the Governor among the Nations, Psalm. 22. 28.) Therefore the
Apostle exhorting the Christians to be subject to the Civil Government, gives
this reason of his exhortation, For the power (though merely Civil) is of God.
And lest men should think it is of God, but as the Universal Cause of all other
things, and not as the sole and immediate Author and Dispenser of it, He
expressly denies it to be of any other: The power (says he) is not but from
God. For, let it be considered, if it be not against all understanding, to
think the Apostle would exhort Christians to obey the Civil Power, only upon
this general account, that it is from God as all things else are, and not
otherwise. For, upon that account the exhortation must needs also carry them to
obey a thief, and that for conscience sake; for even a thiefs power by which he
is able to rob and do mischief, is (in this sense) as much from God as the most
lawful power that is.

The Apostles meaning therefore must necessarily be (and in that the difference
lies,) that the Civil power which the Magistrate as the Minister of God is
endued with, is the special donative and gift of God, which the other is not;
yet they both agree in this, that they are both (as all things else are)
immediately from God: As indeed whatsoever He does, He does by Himself
immediately, not mediately, (as is falsely fancied.) For how can He that is
immediately present every where, and in every thing, stand off at a distance in
any work of his? How then, in the collating of the Civil power? If it be his
Authority and Power that is in His Minister, the Supreme Magistrate, it is
manifestly against all truth and sense, to imagine that He gives it not
immediately by Himself, who must do every thing by Himself immediately that is
done by Him. And if it were not Gods own Authority which is in the Supreme
Civil Magistrate, who only in himself without Commission from any earthly
Power, bears the sword; since God alone in the Lord of life, and every man is
created in his image, it were absolutely impossible that it should be just and
lawful for the Magistrate to take away the life of a man in any case
imaginable. And as for the whole people, not having the power of Magistracy
personally committed to them of God, they have no more power of the life of any
man, than any one private person has. If then the power of all Sovereignty or
Supreme Authority, by which the life of man, in any case, may lawfully be taken
away, be only Gods own peculiar, and not man's, it is impossible that the whole
people, or all the men in the world, should give that which is none of theirs
to give.

He therefore that has a public, known, certain, and unquestionable right to
govern as supreme Magistrate, either by ancient inheritance (which is the best
and clearest right that can be had of any thing,) or by any other just and
lawful means, the same has all civil power and authority to govern only and
immediately from God, whose peculiar it is. In as much then as the right and
just authority to govern, is solely and immediately from God, where that right
and power is once fixed, (by what means soever it first came so to be,) it is
there fixed by God; and can never lawfully (without a special command from God)
be refixed or disannulled by man.

If this may not be deemed, as it really is, a clear demonstration; let it be
duly and impartially considered, whether there be any at all, or the like
evidence for the opposite opinion, which is here laid as a Principle, without
any proof; and as a main foundation, upon which a very great weight relies.

Yet, without doubt, the solidnesse of this Principle is the more to be
suspected, because none but Heathens and mere Politicians have ever held it,
till it came to be professed by some in this Nation, a few years since.

And those first Authors fell into it, merely upon the account of Infidelity;
to wit, in that they either knew nothing of, or did not believe that the only
true God is the worlds Creator, and (by that special right) the sole Governor
thereof; and consequently, that all power of government is solely and precisely
His; which (then,) it is impossible that any should have a right to give but He.

Seeing then, that Salus populi, the peoples eternal safety is (indeed) the
only supreme end in immediate subordination to Gods glory, it would be well
considered by them all, and especially by them that must answer for them all,
and for themselves too, whether it be not the only safe way to that Supreme
safety, (yea and to their temporal safety too,) to do that wherein they cannot
do amiss: to restore an ancient Right: For, to do this, is no more nor less
but what natural righteousness it self requires, as the proper and inseparable
act and duty of it. And, besides that, the whole torrent of the Scriptures are
for it, and not one syllable (so much as seemingly) against it. It may be
considered also that the said opposite Opinion and Principle has no foundation
at all in Scripture, (nor in the reason of a Christian:) For, therein, there is
no mention of the peoples giving Civil authority, or making a King, but where
that King was made before of God, without the peoples consent, or notice of
such a thing. Neither is there in Scripture any Example of a peoples casting
off finally their Allegiance, but of the ten Tribes: And yet that was by a
special appointment of God; but this was more than they then knew; and
therefore, to them, it was as their own act; and being so, God punished them
for it with perpetual and final dereliction to Idolatry. There are no safe
untrodden paths in the way to Heaven.

The eighth.
That uncontrolable power and absolute authority do become none but only Him,
whose nature is perfect, and can do no wrong.
Power is absolute and uncontrollable two ways; first, by being so in it self
intrinsecally; secondly, by being so in relation to men; that is, though it be
controulable by God the immediate Author of it, yet by men it is not. This
uncontrollable authority in relation to men, must be found, and is; in all
supreme Magistracy: For if supreme or chief Magistracy be controulable in
them that justly possess it by any other men, (of what quality, or in what
capacity soever they be,) those Controulers themselves either have
uncontrollable power, or they have not: If they have not, then may they also be
controuled by others, and those again by others, and so onward, to an endless
and indeterminable confusion; If they have, then there is some uncontrollable
power beneath that which is in God: And if so, then certainly it can only be
where God, from whom all power is, has placed it; that is, where it has ever
visibly resided, and practically appeared, by divine permission, approbation,
and special Ordination, time out of mind. If it has so resided and appeared
time out of mind in those that think they may control it in the Supreme
Magistrate, then let them for ever have it: But if on the contrary, it has
been publicly and experimentally known to have resided ever in the Supreme
Magistrate (whose Supremacy has been recognized even by National Oaths,) it
is only His Right, maugre all that can (with sense) be said to the contrary.

The ninth.
That though Supreme Magistrates be above every individual, yet are they
beneath, and inferior unto the whole.
Certainly, the too much boldness, or the too little brains of such as being
but a handful in comparison of the whole will yet pretend the authority of the
whole for their lawless practices, may justly be wondered at. There never was a
Schism in the Church, but the parties to it immediately took upon them the
Name and Title of the Church, as if there were no Church, nor any true
Christians beside themselves, the unworthiest indeed of all other to be so
accounted. And exactly so it is in the Civil State: Any number of persons once
combined and formed into a faction, (especially having gained power enough, as
they think, to prevail over the rest,) will immediately bestow upon themselves
very liberally the Name and Title of the Nation, the whole people, and the
Commonwealth; and will certainly call their own Security in their unrighteous
ways, the Public Safety, and the Common good; and all other men, that justly
hate their gross unrighteousness, the Common Enemy. And here, a Party not
very considerable in comparison of the whole, takes upon them to talk of the
whole, as if there were no people in England, or none of any note beside
themselves. Or, if they speak, as in behalf of the whole, (whose mind and will
they either know not, or know to be justly opposite to theirs,) they should
remember, that when the whole should appear and show themselves in their
Universal capacity, in choosing freely their full and equal Representative,
they were to have the base bondage put upon them, to be so limited therein, as
to be made the Instruments of their own destruction. Have any of the Kings or
Queens of England so tyrannically encroached upon the Peoples Right, as to
limit them in their Choice, beyond or beside the limit of known Law and
Custom? But the whole people (after too palpable Experiment of the Loss of
their ancient Liberty,) will never be flattered into eternal bondage to any
Party or Faction by being told of a new Discovery of an unknown right, by those
men that have deprived them of their old; Nor will they ever be made believe,
that their Lawful Supreme Magistrate, whom (they very well know) God has set
over them, is inferior to them.

But, how little truth there is in the fore-recited Principle, [That Supreme
Magistrates are inferior to the whole, though about every individual,] it
evidently appears, in that it plainly signifies little less than a
contradiction: For, what is it but every individual in any number whatsoever,
that makes up the whole? Or if it be meant not of every, but of any one,
severally taken, it signifies nothing; unless it be, That the Supreme
Magistrate is superior only to Thomas, and William, and James and John, to
wit, severally, but not jointly: And, if this were true, it would indeed be a
brave encouragement to any powerful party that should oppose the Public Weal,
and seek the subversion of the Fundamental Laws, Customs, and Constitution of
the whole Civil Body of the Kingdom. And how soon such a Party, well armed,
will call themselves the Whole, experience enough has taught all men to know:
And then all the rest of the whole Nation is at their mercy, and that without
remedy: For the Supreme Magistrate has no authority over them as they are a
combined pack of Rebels conjoined in a close conspiracy, whatsoever authority
He may have over every individual, in severalty from the rest, now called the
whole. Who sees not that this Doctrine is merely Anabaptistical, striking at
the root of all Magistracy properly so called? For whatsoever power can be
pretended or imagined to be in the whole people, (which is indeed the whole,)
it is no such thing as Magistracy. And if there be any such power that can
justly nullify or check all Magistracy, the most rigid Anabaptists will
require no more, to warrant any enterprise for the utter subversion of it. But,
that there should indeed be any power in a Nation, (beside the natural vigor
that is in them,) but only the Civil power of Magistracy, is a mere Chimaera.
All the individuals, and every one put together (the Magistrate excepted) are
but private persons, endured with no more civil authority than any one of them
is by himself alone: Consequently, the Supreme Magistrate must needs be above
and Superior to the Whole number of them all. There is a sure way of arguing
in Logic, which they call Induction; by which, out of a full enumeration of
every individual, an Universal is undoubtedly concluded: And Universal is that
Whole that is made up of nothing else but of every particular or individual
contained under it. That the Supreme Magistrate therefore is Supreme to every
individual (without exception,) (which are mere private persons all) but
inferior to the Universal or whole, (for all that) is too much a nicety (at
best) for the whole weight of men's salvation to rely upon; it being no less
than damnation that God has already denounced against them that practically er
in this particular.

Besides, it may be here considered, that that which in every Nation makes the
several individuals to become one Whole, is that whereby they are incorporated
as members of the Civil Body of a Kingdom or Commonwealth; and that is, the
anciently received, accustomed fundamental constitution of it: This therefore
dissolved, either in all, or in any of the Essentials of it, the whole Compages
and joynting together of this Body is utterly dissolved with it. If therefore
the Supreme Magistrate, (who, in every ancient Kingdom can be no other but the
King,) being the sole Head of the Civil Body of such, be taken away, suppressed
and banished, and the Kingdom (by consequence) cease to be what it was and has
ever been, the people are no more one Whole (however held together by
constraint) than a heap of stones; and the only foundation of true justice, and
of all civil administration that can be just, is taken away And, to prevent
this fatal mischief, and for no other cause, it has ever been a maine and
fundamental Maxim in the Law of England, That the King can never dye.

It can never therefore be possible in this or in any other Kingdom, for the
Whole Body to destroy the Head, but that Body must be felo de se, and utterly
cease to be any Body at all. This Whole therefore can never in Law, or right
reason, or common justice have any Superiority above the Supreme Magistrate, to
any such effect.

The tenth.
That the Essential End of all Kings, Rulers, Laws and Governments is the
Common peace, justice, and safety of the people.
This principle may be true, but can be nothing to those men's purpose that seek
to justify the utter dissolution of the whole Civil Government thereby. There
is not a Government in any Nation in the world, but in some usages, Customs,
Offices, Officers, Laws or administrations may be apparently obnoxious to some
obliquities and deviations from the true End of Government: Shall therefore the
Government it self be blamed? Shall it wholly be dissolved? Shall private
persons do it? Or shall it be lawful for those (in what capacity soever) to
seek the subversion of it that have sworn to maintain it? Any violent change in
a Government brings more and greater evils with it, than can ever be removed by
it; and perhaps, the same that were complained of in a far greater measure, and
with less hope of remedy. The total dissolution of a Government (that not
reserved that is most essential to it,) infers an Universal Parity, leaving
none in more just authority than other. And it must needs be so. For, (the only
known Legal Government once dissolved,) what should such just authority in any
over others be grounded on? What then have any to do in setting up a new
Government more than others? And why have not others a better right to
re-enforce the old, than any can ever have to erect a new? Nothing can here
make a difference, but mere force and violence; than which, nothing in the
world is more directly opposite to what is truly just. And, it would be
remembered, That, violence is never of any long continuance; but Turnings, and
Overturnings will have their certain revolutions, till Force shall cease, and
Justice come in place, whose inseparable act it is, to restore to every one his
right.

If the common peace, justice, and the safety of the people be the End of
Government, then is Government the Means to that End; which no Government can
ever be, if it be not just: And no new Government ever can be such. And the
Change of an ancient Government in any Original and Fundamental part, is the
erecting of a New one. And for this cause it is, that the Wisdom of God in
Solomon commands us to fear the Lord and the King, and forbids to meddle with
them that are given to change: to wit, because the change of a settled and
ancient Government (especially, without an universal consent, as well of the
Governors, as of the governed,) is necessarily unjust: (besides the most
unjust Subversion of the great End, the common peace, and safety of the people,
in the effecting of it.) For, though other Forms of Government be just in
themselves, yet none can be just in this or any other Nation, but that which is
established upon the only proper foundations of justice in it: and what are
those, but the fundamental Laws, Rights, Customs and Possessions that have
ever inviolably and immutably continued in it, (which have no other foundation
beside or beyond themselves, and which all particular Laws and Sanctions are
established upon;) For, if these be not the unquestionable Rules and Measures
of Justice in this Nation, it can never come to be agreed on what Justice is,
or what is just. Hence it is, that, since the violent casting down of these
foundations, (that is, de facto,) people talk of Justice at all aventure;
making no Law Divine or Humane, but their own self will or fancy the only
measure of what they call just.

The eleventh
That no Governors or Governments are to be continued and tolerated which are
directly and plainly destructive unto the chief end of their Original
appointment, viz. Common Good.
Let this be the Major; and then the Minor must be this; But, all the
Governors, and the whole Government of this Nation (under which the people
have long flourished in wealth and peace,) was, all on the sudden, become
directly and plainly destructive to Common Good. Ergo, The Government of this
Nation, or any of the Governors thereof are not to be continued and tolerated.

What if this Conclusion were true? May such Governors or Governments as are
not to be continued and tolerated, be taken away and destroyed by private
hands? When Saul was such a Governor, and not to be continued, did David
(though already in Saul's room anointed,) seeks to destroy him? No; but, as the
Lord lives (said he) the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye,
or he shall descend into battle and perish. Else, what security could there
ever be to the best Governors or Governments in the world? How easy a thing
is it for any private person, transported with prejudice or passion, to
discern (as he thinks) the Magistrate (how good soever he be) to be directly
and plainly destructive to Common Good? There can no seditious party arise but
must needs be of that persuasion: Shall this then Legitimate an Insurrection?
Or, shall it be lawful for any one among them to do as Raviliac, or as Felton
did? And, against the only Ancient and Legal Government it self, (upon which
all the Authority in the whole Nation necessarily depends) all persons
whatsoever are but private men.

But, the Conclusion must needs be false, because both the premises are so: And
first, the Major which is the principle. For there can be no Government, (if it
be but that) which can be destructive (as is supposed) to the chief End of its
own appointment. The general good of Government must needs be competible to
every lawful kind of Government, under what corruption soever. Therefore every
Government, which is the only lawful Government of any Nation, must be
continued and tolerated, to avoid as well unlawful usurpation as lawless
Anarchy, (one of which must otherwise inevitably ensue,) and only the
corruption be taken away, (if any be found in it.) The Minor Proposition
(which, to make that Principle applyable to the present practice, must needs be
added,) is matter of fact; to wit, That all the Governors and the whole
Government of this Nation were directly and plainly destructive to the Chief
End of their appointment.

To be destructive to the Chief End of Government, is apparently inconsistent
with any lawful kind of Government, that is really such, as Monarchy (for
certain) is: Nor is any such Government capable (as long as it remains such,)
of any possible corruption that can destroy that End, viz. Common Good; which,
nothing but the evil of Anarchy can (directly and plainly) be destructive of.
It is as unlawful therefore to destroy a lawful Government of any kind,
(justifiable against all other by the prescription of all time past,) as it is
to introduce the Opposite to the inseparable End of it; to wit, Universal
Mischief, The inseparable Effect of Anarchy; or, Universal Injustice, the
unseparable Adjunct of Usurpation. The End of all Government, (which is that
Common Good, by which the Common Evil of Anarchy and of unjust Usurpation is
taken away,) being inseparable from it, the Supposition of this Principle, That
Governors and Governments can be destructive to Common Good, is a
Contradiction in adjecto.

The twelfth
That the power and disposition of the public Militia, and of the public
Treasury, were never vested by the people in their Supreme Governors, but for
their use, peace, and safety.

If these were never known in any former age to be in any other hands, but have
ever been in the actual possession of the Supreme Magistrate time out of mind,
and beyond the mention of any certain History, who is able to say they were
ever by the people vested in them? If the Supreme Magistrate be entrusted of
God, whose peculiar all Government is, and not of man, or men, whose it is not;
as the power of Government, so the sinews of that power, (the Treasuries and
the Militia) must needs also be invested in Him, not of the people, or any
other, but of God alone.

All along it may be observed, how the Politicians of these times have raked
Hell for their policy. Plato and Aristotle, and other Heathens, who thought the
world was from eternity, and never knew the only true God, much less that he
was the Maker and Creator of it, did not understand, that the whole Government
of the world, and of the Nations of it, was, in right of Creation and
Conservation, His peculiar; And so, (not so much as owning the true God,) could
not imagine whence Civil power should arise, if not from the people. But that
(even under the profession of Christianity) this old Heathenisme should obtain
a Resurrection in the policy of a Christian Nation, is a very sad presage.

Since God, as the worlds Creator and Conservator, is, of his own right, the
only Governor thereof, none can ever justly govern, but by Communion therein
with Him, in whom it ever must inseparably remain. For, all Dominion, and
power, and glory are so properly His, that the property of them can never be
made over absolutely to any other. Whosoever therefore has a just Right to
govern, has it only by Communion therein with God, as His Minister in the
administration of it, and not from men. Hence it was, that the Israelites (of
old) when they desired to have a King as other Nations had, went and made their
address directly and immediately to God. For, till then, God had kept the
administration it self over that people in his own hand; which is an evident
indication where and in whom all civil power is properly recideing; and this
plainly shows that from Him alone it can be communicated to them that are His
Ministers in the formal dispensation of it. In as much then as the civil power
cannot be dispensed without the public Militia and the public Treasury, these
also as well as the power it self are entrusted by God into the hands of His
Supreme Minister and Vicegerent, and not by the people. More especially, the
Militia, being the more public Sword of justice, can never justly be in any
hand, but his, to whom God himself, the only Lord of life, delivers it.

Thh 13th.
That whatsoever Laws, Usage, or Customs are against the Laws of true Religion,
Reason, Nature and Grace, are irreligious, unreasonable, unnatural and
graceless; and therefore Null and void in their very making, and cannot oblige.
But, Such were, and are, all the known Laws, Usages and Customs of England,
by which the true, and only lawful Government by King, Lords, and Commons
assembled in Parliament, have been originally constituted, and have hitherto
continued. Ergo, All those Laws, Usages and Customs are null and void, and
were so in their very making, and cannot oblige. That must be the Assumption,
and this the Conclusion; or else, the Principle is nothing but so many empty
words, which signify just nothing, as to the present practice.

But the Conclusion must needs be false, because the Assumption is not only
false, but impossible to be true; unless it can be thought a thing possible
that a true Christian Nation should at first commence, and for many hundreds of
years uphold, maintain and continue such a Government as is founded upon such
Laws, Usages and Customs as are against the Laws of that true Religion that is
professed by them; and not only that, but against reason, nature and grace; and
consequently, irreligious, unreasonable, unnatural and graceless. Such a
Government certainly there neither is, nor ever was, in any Nation, Christian,
Mahumetan, or Heathen: It being a thing impossible that any whole Nation should
so far cease to be men, as to erect and continue a Government, and establish
Laws, and give way to Customs that are against that reason and humane nature
by which they are men, and not Horses, Mules, Lions, Tigers, Bears, or Wolves:
Or, that they should be of any Religion good or bad, and make Laws contrary to
that Religion that is professed by them.

The result upon the whole matter is this; If this impossible and most absurd
Assumption be not true, the present practice upon the confidence of the truth
of it, is not to be justified, but to be justly condemned, and either to be
repented of, or finally punished (perhaps in this world, but certainly) in the
world to come.

Next to those Principles, it follows thus;

These and many the like Principles of common reason have been distilled into
the judgments and consideration of the free people of this Nation, by means
whereof it will not be an easy matter for any Rulers in any form of Government
whatsoever, to reduce them again unto their former yokes of bondage and slavery.

Here Is the desperation of all firm, stable and constant settlement in any
form of Government whatsoever. For if these Positions must be all taken for
undoubted Principles, and the practical Application of them left to private
persons, that is, indifferently to the free people of the Nation, there can
never be any Sedition or Insurrection but may be justified: For if the Parties
to it may themselves be judges, it were madness in them not to condemn
subjection to the present Government (how good soever) to be bondage and
slavery.

But, because it is here intimated, that the free people of this Nation have
been under former yokes of bondage and slavery, it would be considered, first,
whether bondage and slavery was really and truly the condition of the people of
this Nation in former times: Secondly, how much worse their condition of such
former (falsely called) bondage and slavery was, than the (pretended) Liberty,
wherewith they have since been vexed, harrassed, impoverished and (little less
than) ruined; and under which they must expect to suffer the same horrid
Exactions of immense sums of money, as long as any new Government shall stand;
which can no longer stand than the vaste charge of a huge Army shall uphold it.
This the poor enslaved and miserably depressed free people of this Nation do
all in general so very well understand, (it having with heavy strokes been
beaten into their heads,) that a few sugared words, and fair promises (from
them that profess they will keep none, and have broken all they have already
made, though bound with sacred and solemn Oaths,) will never be heartily
believed, or much regarded.

But, if under the ancient Government there was any such thing as real bondage
and slavery (beside the bondage which poor Copiholders are still like to endure
under those that knew how to free themselves from the Court of Wards;) it would
be considered whether the fault was in the Law, or in the form of Government,
or in the Office of governing, or in the persons in whom the public
Administration resided?

The Government and the Form of it, were certainly without exception: For,
three simple forms of Government there are that are lawful and just in
themselves by the confession of all men; and the ancient and only lawful
Government of this Nation has all that is good in all the three; and is
therefore in it self the best Government in the world. Consequently there could
be no fault, unless it were in the personal Administration; and then it would
again be considered, whether there was any such thing as was reputed a fault;
and whether that, that was deemed a fault, were any fault at all, since they
that will despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, will also speak evil
of those things which they know not. And then whether any Governors are
obliged to a Papal infallibility, under the penalty of having their heads taken
off at their own gates? And lastly, Whether it be just to punish and persecute
with the Sword, and utterly to drive into eternal Exile, and for ever to
disseize of an ancient inheritance, Him or them that have never offended?

The 14th.
That when those in Authority shall neglect the great Ends of Government, and
improve all opportunities and advantages by means of their Power and Grandeur,
unto their own Personal and Family interest; especially when they shall
wilfully, and against common and universal reason, act contrary thereunto, to
the apparent danger of common safety, they determine their Authority; and
having in such cases quitted their care and respects to the peoples protection
and welfare, they likewise quit the people from their allegiance and obedience.
If by those in Authority be meant those that have no more Authority than what
the sundry pretenders to it have really had, since the suppressing of the
known, legal and true Parliament of England; their improving all opportunities
and advantages to their own personal and family interest, is no more than what
in reason could be expected from them. And if they that set up such strange
Authorities, which England has ever heretofore been happily unacquainted with,
shall take them down again at their pleasure, there needs no special plea for
such a practice.

But if by those in Authority be meant the full, whole, equal and free
Parliament of England, in its ancient and legal constitution; that such an
entyre and true Parliament, consisting of the Prince, the Peers, and the whole
people (in their equal Representative) should all conspire together (there
being no just power in any one of those three estates to make a binding Law
without the other two, or in any two without the third,) to be so grossly
unrighteous as to improve all their power jointly to their several personal and
family interests, (if it were possible;) or should all at once fall into so
high a degree of folly or lunacy as wilfully to act against common and universal
Reason; and that, to the apparent danger of Common Safety, wherein their own
share is greater than of tentimes so many other men; Surely, to imagine such a
thing first, and then to suppose it as probable, and (more than that) to
insinuate that it has been so done de facto, and practically to conclude from
thence, that the People, (that is, they that Will be called the people,) are
quitted from their Allegiance, and from all Obedience to their only lawful
Governors, and the ancient fundamental and only lawful Government of the
Nation; what to call this, to give it a proper title, will require some time to
consider.

The 15th.
That as all Laws, Statutes, Acts and Ordinances, so all Engagements, Promises,
and Protestations, all Acknowledgements, Subscriptions, Vows and Oaths, all,
and all manner of Obligations and Expressions thereof, are only binding unto
the Public Safety, and not at all to the Persons of the Governors, or forms
of Government, but with reference thereunto.
That which is here insinuated and must be so understood, (if all this be any
thing at all to the justification of the present practice of suppressing by a
lawless power all the fundamental laws of the land, and the whole ancient and
lawful Government thereof,) is, that all the said Laws, and the whole
Government it self are utterly inconsistent with, and certainly destructive to
the Public Safety: That is, all our Lawgivers, Kings and Parliaments in all
former ages were either ignorant of what was conducing to that End, or
maliciously bent against it; and the whole people that have generally promised,
protested, covenanted and sworn to maintain the ancient Government and the
known Laws of the Land, were either all out of their wits when they did it, or
never had any, till the Light, the Light of these rare Principles came forth,
and shined upon them. And yet (for all that,) the Public Safety (which was
never much endangered till these blessed days) has been ever hitherto
effectually preserved, no man can imagine how!

But if this new Doctrine may pass for current the Use and End of all
Promises, Covenants, Protestations and Oaths is utterly lost; and consequently,
it must be a taking of Gods name in vain to promise any thing upon Oath in any
case. For needs must that be in vain that can never attain the End that is
pretended for it. The only end of an Oath by which a Promise is confirmed, is
the unquestionable assurance of the effectual performance of that which is
promised: If then in this, he that promises may be fast or loose, as he
himself shall judge the real performance conducing or not conducing to Public
Safety, the undoubted Assurance which that Oath should cause being the greatest
uncertainty, the Oath is absolutely taken in vain; and consequently perjurious
in the very taking of it, as well as in the ensuing contempt, if not performed:
For, that God is not invoked in the Oath taking to give testimony to a lie,
must merely depend upon the fallible opinion of every one that takes that Oath,
touching what is, or is not conducible to Public Safety.

And whereas it is said, that Promises, Protestations and Oaths are only
binding unto the Public Safety, there can be nothing more abominably and
scandalously false. For, that the special matter of the Promise or the thing
promised by Oath, is that only thing to which the Oath and the Promise (as
such) do properly oblige, is a truth too apparent to be contradicted, or
doubted of. Otherwise, when a Witness has sworn, or promised by Oath, to
speak the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, he may safely neglect this
special matter of his Oath, and speak any thing or nothing, in case he be
convinced in his judgment that the discovery of such a truth is inconvenient
for the Public Safety. If the case be not the self-same, when men have sworn
or promised by Oath, to bear faith and true Allegiance to the King, his heirs,
and lawful successors, wherein lies the difference? Why does not the Oath in
this case bind simply to the special matter of it, as well as in the former, or
in any other?

If Oaths be binding only to the Public Safety, or to some other real or
pretended End, and not at all to the persons of those men to whom the promises
(thereby confirmed,) are made, nor to the special matter, to wit, the actual
and effectual performance of what is promised, two gross absurdities will
follow; First, that there can be no such thing as perjury, or breach of Oath
committed by any person in any case imaginable. For that man is mad that will
ever judge that to be Public Safety, wherein his own is not included; and a
man's own safety is that which every man does naturally and necessarily desire,
and most earnestly pursue (according to his power, and the uttermost of his
understanding) in all his actions: Therefore, if an Oath binds only to this
End, he steadfastly aiming at this, in the nonperformance of his Oath, is
guilty of no breach of it, in what case soever it be: and so, perjury is simply
impossible in any case imaginable.

The second is, That all promises confirmed by Oaths, are to no purpose at all,
(be the case what it will, or can;) For, they either have no binding force at
all, or they must needs bind to the performance of them, and that to the
person or persons to whom they are made: if therefore they bind to neither of
these, they signify just nothing; and consequently, all Oaths taken in
confirmation of them are absolute perjuries and blasphemies. For, the Oath
binds only and precisely to what the promise does; because the Oath binds
only to make good the promise, and the promise cannot be made in the air, but
must necessarily be made to some person or persons; If therefore the promise
bind not to the persons of those men to whom it is made, nor to the
performance of what is promised, no more does the Oath; and so nothing at all
comes of either, but palpable wrong to the persons abused, and deluded by them,
and a blasphemous invocation of God to be witness to a lie.

The Authors of equivocations and men al reservations had not the wit to think
of this new device, to elude the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: Those
inventions were but toys to this. This had they happily hit on, and could in
their little modesty have owned, they might have allowed the taking of those
Oaths as lawful, even in the plain sense which the words do expressly
signify, though they had held the real and actual performance of them never so
unlawful: For now, they and all the world are taught (to the high Scandal of
the Protestant Profession,) that all Oaths and other Obligations (of what kind
soever) are not at all binding either to the real and true performance of them,
or to the persons of those to whom they are made, (though both these be
expressed in the plain words of the Oath;) but only to the Public Safety,
(though this be never mentioned at all therein:) Thus might those holy Fathers
have eluded the Obligation of those Oaths, and of all other put upon them, or
upon any of their party: Especially, if they had considered withal, that that
which was Public Safety to their foes, was no Public Safety to them, (their
own, being least of all included in it:) and so the said Oaths could bind them
to nothing at all, if only to that which they (in all reason) must esteem the
Public Safety.

Psalm. 15. Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, etc. -- He that swears to
his own hurt, and changes not.

Also, that Oaths should be binding only to the Public Safety, and not at all
to the persons to whom they are made, nor to the real and true performance of
what is promised thereby, is irrefragably confuted by the example of the Oath
of Joshua and the Princes of Israel to the Gibeonites. How comes the Oath of
Allegiance (backed by those other, of the Protestation and the Covenant,) to be
less binding to the persons of the King and his Heirs, than that was to the
persons of the Gibeonites? And how is real and effectual performance less
necessary for the avoiding of perjury now, than it was then? Let all the
Chaplains of old O lay their heads together to give a clear categorical answer.

But this will appear to be the harder undertaking, if it be farther
considered, that, by the late and present practice upon the Principle
aforesaid, two of those three qualifications which God Jer. 4. 2.
himself has annexed to all Oaths, are utterly despised and made nothing of;
to wit, Truth and Righteousness. For, first, the Truth that must be found in
the Oath, consists in the full Congruity of the thing promised (in the real
performance of it,) with the words of the Oath, under which the promise is
made. As, in the Oath of Allegiance, J. A. B. do promise, that from henceforth
I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and
lawful Successors: If the Faith and true Allegiance to the King and his Heirs
here promised, do and shall fully answer to the words of the Oath henceforth;
then, in that congruity of the thing promised (and effectually performed) with
the express words of the promise, is the truth of that Oath; But, if this
Truth be wilfully neglected, and the contrary thereto (upon whatsoever
pretense) admitted, it is (unavoidably) the most absolute and formal perjury
that men can ever possibly be guilty of. And then, if truth be wanting, the
other qualification of Righteousness must needs be so. For if the Faith and
true Allegiance promised were not due by Law (as by all Law, Divine and Humane,
it is,) yet the solemn and express promise of it, and that upon Oath, must
needs put the duenesse of it past all dispute. Therefore the failer of truth,
in the difformity between the duty promised, and the words of the promise
(which the Oath includes,) does necessarily infer the failer of Righteousness
also; it being the special and proper act of Righteousness, Romans 13. 7.
to render to all their dues. If the righteous scarely be saved 1 Pet. 4. 18.
, where shall the unrighteous (and perjurious too) appear?

There is another device to elude (if God could be mocked) the Obligation of
this Oath: And that is, That when they took it, they then did really and truly
intend to perform it, (though they have seen cause since to be of another
mind:) and, that the truth of that their first intention, is all the truth
that belongs to the Oath for ever after. How cunning some men can be, to damn
their souls! Mere Politicians and formal Atheists must they needs be, that can
with any confidence put all the little hope they have of Heaven upon the
validity of that, which (upon the least consideration) must needs appear to
themselves to signify just nothing. For, (unless they took the Oath with no
judgment,) they cannot but know, that their inward intention of keeping it, was
not so much as mentioned therein: Nor did they at all swear, to intend then the
performance of it; but, from thenceforth to perform it. Therefore the truth of
their intention (if there were any,) never was nor is any thing at all to that
special truth which ought from thenceforth (that is, in all time to come,) to
be bound in the special matter of the Oath, which is only and precisely the
real and effectual performance of that formal act and duty, of bearing faith
and true Allegiance, etc. And, as the pretended truth of intention, is nothing
to the truth, or is not the formal truth of the real performance of that duty,
(which is the only thing promised by the Oath;) So is it nothing at all
conducing to the special and proper End of it: For, the End of that Oath was
not to discover the secrets of men's hearts, (the knowledge whereof belongs to
none but God and themselves,) but to bind them to their External and Civil
duty. The failer of truth therefore as touching this, is (without all
contradiction) that foul and gross perjury, for which there can be no Apology,
nor pardon without repentance.

If this Nation therefore should so far forget their natural and necessary duty
of Allegiance to their only lawful Sovereign, as to break through the strongest
obligation of this most solemn public and legal Oath and diverse others by
which they have promised and sworn the due performance of it, such a National
Wickedness committed in an open, bold, and daring manner, involving an
Atheistical defiance of the God of Truth by whom they have sworn, would very
soon draw down upon them a National and fatal judgment; and that infallibly:
And the reason hereof is, because this kind of impiety not only dishonours God
obliquely, (as all sin does,) but directly darkens the glory of God in his
great Attribute of Truth, wherein he alone excels all other that are falsely
called so. And because the scandal of the wilful breach of this National Oath
can know no limit, it can be no less than a total Eclipsing (as much as in men
lies) of the glory of God (which he will part with at no rate) in the eyes of
all the Nations of the world. And in this kind of sin, this is singular and
proper, that, for this, if wilfully committed, no man may pray, that God would
remit or avert the temporal and speedy vengeance that is due unto it: because
this is the only proper Expedient for that necessary and indispensable
Vindication of Gods glory in the eyes of men, being by that kind of sin caused
(as much as in men lies) to be disreputed among all other Nations to be the God
of Truth, or, the only true God. And the wilful Breach of this Oath is the more
horrid, in that it is committed against the highest, cleerest, greatest and
most publicly known Right in all the world. 1 Cor. 6. 7, 8. -- Why do ye not
rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded?
Nay, you do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren; What aggravation then
were this! And that your public Father, even the greatest nursing Father of
the Church, the truest Defender of the Faith, and (under God) the greatest
Patron of the purest Profession of that Faith in all the world, and by all
other Nations (holding the same Profession) ever so accounted.

But, lest they that have never in their proper persons taken that Oath
aforementioned, should think themselves to be little concerned in it, it is
here to be farther noted, 1. That the Law of God, by the intervention of the
inviolable and fundamental Law of the Land (without which the eighth Precept as
well as the fifth, of the moral and eternal Law of God would have nothing in
this Land to take effect upon,) does of it self (before and without that Oath)
oblige the conscience of every one of the free people of this Nation to perform
the duty of bearing faith and true Allegiance to the lawful and rightful King
and Governor thereof. 2. That the Oath of Allegiance and every other legal
Oath to the like effect, being once taken by the whole Nations Representative
in Parliament, and in the capacity of such a Representative, must necessarily
oblige the Nation represented, no less than the Representative it self; and
that (according to the tenor of the Oath,) from thence forth; that is, in all
time to come. And this appears evidently by the example of the Oath of the
Princes of Israel to the Gibeonites. The Princes being the whole peoples
Representative, and for that cause, styled the Princes of the Congregation, the
whole people stood obliged by it, (though not formally taken by every one,) and
that for ever after. 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2.
And this appears by the heavy judgment of God upon Saul's family, four hundred
and thirty years after, for the breach of that National Oath, though He himself
had never formally taken it.

For though an Oath be vinculum personale, yet that is no reason why in such a
case it should not bind the consciences of those persons that (formerly) took
it not, but rather why it should; to wit, because those persons that took it,
took it not only in their own formal capacity, as so many single men, but more
especially in their Public and Representative capacity, as sustaining the
persons of all the rest of the people; In which case, the persons of all other
represented by them are obliged by that Oath; it being even to them, at least
by interpretation, a personal Oath; and they themselves personally took it:
For, in this case, or any other the like, Quod quis facit per alium, facit per
se; That which any one does by another in his stead, he does by himself.
Therefore as the whole people do by their freely chosen Representative consent
to the enacting of a Law, so to the taking of this legal Oath, and are
therefore no less obliged personally by both than their Representers are.

All the Persons therefore of the whole people that shall formally consent to
the Breach of this National Oath, are as formally guilty before God both of
that Perjury and injustice as any particular persons are, in what capacity or
place of Authority soever they be.

These are all but one, which is rather employed, than expressed, and is to this
effect, viz. That it is lawful to justify one iniquity by another: Or, that,
because some persons have done such things, others may do the like. Or, (more
expressly,) That, strange and unknown practices, never done before, nor at all
justifiable by any known Laws, and (doubtless in respect of the letter of the
Law,) very illegal actions (and those in express contradiction to diverse
National Oaths,) may lawfully and justifiably be done; (and that) by persons,
that are not the whole or the greater part of the whole number of those, in
whom the Supreme Government is (by the ancient constitution and uninterrupted
usage, and known Law and Custom of the Nation,) really and of right existing:
And that such unknown and strange practices, (extending to the total
dissolution of the only known legal Government,) being justifiable by no known
Law, Divine or Humane, by no former Precedent, good or bad, nor by any certain
Rule and just Measure of Civil Righteousness, may yet be jusified by the
pretended Light of the aforesaid Principles, falsely called Principles of
common Reason, Justice and Equity.

What S. Ireneus of old said of the horrid and gross Heresies of the
Valentinians, That the mere discovery of them was Confutation enough, may very
well be said of this no less horrid and heretical Assertion.

The pretended Light of the aforesaid Principles, (much like that of the
Quakers, is here confessedly opposed to all the known Law of the Land. And yet,
beside the whole body of all the known Laws of the Land, and true Customs of
the Nation, there is not any thing imaginable, by which the several persons of
it are or can be actually united and formally constituted a Civil Body. And,
that, where there is no Civil Body, there can be no civil Authority, is as
plain and certain, as that twice two is four, or thrice three, nine. By what
Authority then could or can any such strange and unknown practices be done,
which (by the Actors own confession) are not only beside, but directly contrary
to all known Law?

It is impossible for a stream to rise higher than the Fountain out of which it
flows. The known Law of the Land, and the fundamental Customs of the Nation
(and not the light of any principles of common reason, which all the Nations of
the world are equal partakers of,) being the only proper and formal cause of
the very constitution of the Civil Body as such, must needs be the only
fountain of all Civil Authority and lawful Power in it: This therefore can
never rise higher, or reach farther than that Law, Custom, and civil
Constitution. Therefore whatsoever has been done, by what persons soever,
beside, or beyond, or more directly contrary to the known Law, Custom and
civil Constitution of the Kingdom, has been done by no civil Authority or
lawful power. And consequently, whatsoever has so been done, (by what person
soever, or in what capiacity soever,) must necessarily infer the guilt of that
unrighteousness, which nothing but true repentance can remove; and no
repentance can be true, if the sin it self be wilfully persisted in.

FINIS.

