Christian Prudence, OR, Directions FOR THE Guidance and Conduct of our Selves,
In the Case of Judging one another.

Being several Discourses on

MATTHEW. 7. 1. Judge not, that you be not judged. By G. Bright, late Dean of St.
Asaph, Rector of Loughborough, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Matt. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street, and G.
Conyers, at the Ring in Little Britain. Price 1s. 6d. 1699.

(...)

Cum Charitate and pruden^^^

London Printed for John Wright

P Holmes sclp


The PREFACE.
Good Reader,
THe Reason in very short why this small Treatise is Published is, because it
was judged, that there would likely some more Good come of it than of not doing
it, and this again because the Matter therein contained was thought true, and
in some considerable degree useful and profitable, and not yet either so
particularly, or in such Method and Manner discoursed by any other as to render
this Discourse superfluous.

The first of these is but too little regarded especially in Practical Matters,
where Men attending principally to the Practice of them, do less mind the
precise and exact Truth, and therefore whether they are not (as commonly they
are) too unlimitedly and generally affirmed. Besides Men commonly receive
Practical things and what is taught concerning their Duty with more general
Veneration, which makes them more easily and presently to attribute to them the
perfection of Truth, or to judge them true. Men are apt too to suspect
themselves of some unwillingness to do, and consequently to know their duty,
when they question and examine whether it be truly so or no; and that this
sticking and doubting proceeds from thence, which indeed is too often true,
whence it comes to pass that Men are generally more careless and secure
concerning the truth of these Matters when they deliver them, and many hurtful
mistakes are conveyed with some profitable truths.

As for the profitableness of the Argument, and what is discoursed thereupon, I
know it will be variously judged according to Men's various inclinations or
informations. Men judge things profitable, either because they will, it pleases
them to judge so, or because they see and perceive them to be so; that is
because they perceive and apprehend the good effects thereof, the one commonly
is called the Judgment of affection (because our inclinations are usually from
Affection) the other the judgment of Reason; both may be in several, nay in the
same Men various enough. The first is the most inconstant and diverse, but the
second is so too according to Men's various informations or apprehensions from
Reason or Experience; one Man may have observed and remembered many excellent
effects or uses of any certain thing, another very few, or none, or bad ones
only, whence one judges it very profitable, another very little so, or not at
all, or bad and hurtful, and yet both may judge prudently and truly, if it be
only of what appears to them: I leave every one freely to their own Reason and
Observation in this particular, only I suggest that they would not exclude
their future information, that they would not judge only according to what they
have heretofore; but also according to what they may hereafter observe
themselves, or learn from others. The miscarriages in judging one another are
so universal among the common sort of Christians, and so frequent and little
regarded even in wiser and better disposed, and yet so very mischievous, as may
be partly understood from one part of this Discourse, that it is to be presumed
the mischievous effects thereof have not been hitherto so much taken notice of
and resented, as they seem to have deserved in compare with other Matters. We
see Men every day eagerly and fiercely and even to Persecution to contend
concerning the usefulness and truth of their knowledge and judgment in other
Opinions Religious, Secular, Divine and Humane, which would put very knowing
but unprejudiced Men to much study to find out any good use or effect thereof,
more than oft-times the pleasure of mere knowing somewhat though very useless,
confusedly, or only conceited some great matter by them; when in the mean time
they are utterly careless of their knowledge and judgment of one another, whence
it is manifest they are presently affected with mutual esteem and love, or with
contempt and hatred, are Friends or Enemies, and consequently effectually
disposed to be negligent of at least, or to do good or mischief to one another,
and consequently to hinder or help what they are good for in the World, and who
knows where the Good or Evil may stop? I hope it will not be the less useful
and truly valuable for being that which is truly Moral Knowledge: For that being
only the knowledge of our Manners, that is, the habitual inclination of our
Wills, Choices, and active Faculties, what should be perpetually their ultimate
Object or their End, which can be but one, viz. The greatest perfection and
happiness of the whole Universe known to us taking in God himself, what the
intermediate ones or means; in what degree they are to be proportioned. The
Knowledge of the one true and right end and just measure of all our habitual
Inclinations and Actions, I say, Moral Knowledge being this, it is manifest
there is no other Knowledge we are capable of comparable for its good use and
effect, and consequently much to be valued, separated therefrom, or considered
not subservient or instrumental thereto.

For by it alone we are directed to the obtainment of that perfection, by which
we tend to do any good to others, or which keeps from doing any harm, the fruit
or good effect of other Knowledge considered alone is chiefly the pleasure and
delight immediately arising to the Mind, and is confined within our selves.
Good Morality in this sense is the greatest perfection our Natures are capable
of, being nothing but the universal right determination of our Wills and
Choices to the best and most excellent end, viz. The greatest Perfection and
Happiness of the whole Universe, taking in God himself: It is nothing but
Universal Goodness, it tends to an infinite good without our selves, and
therefore no wonder that the possession and exercise of it in sincerity and
vigor fills the Soul with the greatest delight and satisfaction. All other
things in the World may be used well or ill, and seem to be equally capable of
both, and therefore indifferent; this only cannot be the cause of any thing but
good in the World, nor can it be conceived that any thing else should render us
capable of reward from God, that is, of any Happiness or Perfection, but at
least a Will to do all the Good with it that it is usable for. For why should
we have either, if we do no Good, or do Mischief therewith? But if this
Morality be the most excellent thing we are capable of: Then sure is its
Knowledge.

Some have valued and prized Knowledge by other Characters than Usefulness and
good Effects; such as is its being by Revelation or inspired: And therefore
have thought every Truth and the least revealed to be of greater concernment or
worth more than the greatest known by reason or natural Light, especially if
not revealed too; not attending that the Reason of Revelation is not only the
utility of a truth (though there is always sufficient) but the difficulty of
its being otherwise known.

Much more might have been suggested in so considerable a Matter: But this is
enough if not too much in this place.

Lastly, As for this Discourse's not being superfluous, I should be glad to be
mistaken, and that this Argument has been so Handled and Treated of already as
to render this useless.

I shall give thee no further trouble (Good Reader) but only desire that thou
would read this Treatise (if thou think fit to read at all) with the same
design it was Composed, viz. Of Guidance and Conduct of our selves in this
particular, and consequently that it might contribute something to the
increase of universal Charity, Justice, and Wisdom in the World.

The Contents.
CHAP. I.
. I. THe several senses of the word (...), to Judge. p. 7, 8. II. That in the
general sense of the word (...), to Judge, two parts may be observed, 1. The
inward action of Mind. 2. The signification of the Action. p. 11, 12.
CHAP. II.
What Judgments may be thought forbidden by our Savior both Principally and
Secondarily, or Occasionally, are reckoned up, which are six. p. 13, 14.. I.
The first prohibited Judgment, too great a proneness to pass our Judgments
concerning Persons in any respect at all. p. 15.. II. The second is too great a
proneness to pass judgment on the worst side. p. 19, 20.. III. The third is
rash Judgment, without any reason or without sufficient reason. p. 23, 24,
etc.. IV. The fourth is false Judgment. p. 29.. V. The fifth thing forbidden is
too great a proneness to declare and signify our Judgment. p. 34.. VI. The
sixth and principal is the undue end of Judging, viz. Vltimately to please ones
self, (Selfishness, Self-love) and this by Malice, Hatred, Pride, Affectation
of Superiority, Revenge, Envy, Flattery, by Anger, Fear, Busie-bodiness,
Curiosity. p. 37, 38.
CHAP. III. What Judgments are not forbidden.
. I. 1. In general not a Judging out of Charity. p. 39.. II. 2. In general not
when there are and appear more good Effects thereof than of the Omission. p.
40.. III. 3. Many particular Cases are instanced in for example to our
Prudence, in which it is not prohibited in general to observe and pass Judgment
concerning others Qualities and Actions. p. 42, 43.. IV. 4. It is not
prohibited universally to pass Judgment on the worst side. p. 45.. V. 5. It is
not universally forbidden to declare our Judgment and that on the worst side.
p. 46.
CHAP. IV. Contains some Causes of these forbidden Judgments.
. I. The Causes of too much proneness to Judge in general, of which the first
Idleness. p. 49.. II. The second love of Activity, of doing somewhat. p 52..
III. The third is Curiosity or of knowing somewhat. p. 54.. IV. The fourth a
Self-pleasing in our Ability or reputed Ability to judge. p. 56.. V. Causes of
too great proneness to judge on the worst side, of which the first is mere
Ignorance. p. 57.. VI. The second ill dispositions of Will, as 1. Hatred. 2.
Revenge. 3. Pride. 4. More particularly Affectation of Superiority in any
thing. 5. Envy. 6. Contempt. 7. Flattery. p. 59.. VII. That the Causes of rash
Judgment are the same with those of the two former. p. 68.. VIII. That the
Causes of false Judgment concerning Persons are defect in our understanding, in
our Will. p. 69.. IX. The first Cause reducible to one of those two is
Ignorance. p. 70.. X. The second an Opinion or Judgment too unlimited, that all
Men are like our selves: Some instances hereof: This extended to God himself;
that it has been the Cause of making God in Humane Shape, and that the
representing God or any thing in him by Humane Sh^pe is likewise the Cause of
such an Opinion concerning God. p. 76, etc.. XI. The th^rd is too general a
belief of Testimony or Report. p. 85.. XII. The fourth Cause is an observing
only what is good or what is bad in a Person, and not observing both. p. 88..
XIII. A fifth is a want of a prevalent love of Truth. p. 92, 93.. XIV. A sixth
is our Passions, the instances thereof. That Passions determine our Judgments
three ways among others. 1. By bringing to mind only those things which are
true indeed, but serve to maintain or increase them; but keeping out those
which tend to abate them, so that they never appear. 2. By thrusting into our
Minds more than is true of that which maintains them. 3. By thrusting out those
things which may be suggested and true, but yet serve to extinguish them; or by
causing a Man not to attend thereto, or the Evidence that is in them; or by
confounding the attention or perception on purpose that it might not see the
most necessary truth which it cannot deny if it did see. p. 97, 98, etc.. 15. A
seventh Cause of false Judgment either on the good or bad part is all Appetites
whatsoever, besides those of Truth and Universal Justice, of which one more
useful Instance. p. 106.. 16. The Causes of too great a proneness to declare
our Judgments much the same with what have been mentioned, viz. Idleness,
Self-pleasing by Activity, Curiosity, Conceit of ability and sufficiency to
judge, by fancied Reputation there for, by Hatred, Revenge, Pride, Affectation
of Superiority, Envy, Contempt, Anger, Flattery. p. 110.. 17. The Causes of the
last prohibited Judgment out of such bad Principles as are abovenamed, the
Corruption of our Natures improved by Custom, and wilful ill Usage of our
selves. p. 111.
CHAP. V. Treats of the mischievous Consequences or Effects of these prohibited
Judgments.
. I. The ill Effects of too great a proneness to judge others in general are, 1.
Too great a neglect of our own Affairs* and principally our Manners, in which
we are principally to employ our selves. For, 1. We cannot so well know that in
another Man concerning which we pass judgment, as what is in our selves. And,
2. We can make more certain effectual use of our Judgment and Observation of
our selves. p. 112, 113, etc. A 2d. ill Effect of too great proneness to judge
in general, is an Usurpation of another right, or Tyranny. p. 118, 119:. II.
The ill Consequences of too great proneness to judge on the worst side are, 1.
False Judgment. 2. Unjust Contempt, 3. oft-times unjust Suspicion in others of
the Judgment coming from the worst Principles, whence 4. Contempt, Hatred,
Revenge in the Persons judged against the Person judging. p. 122, 123.. III.
The ill Consequences of rash Judgment are, 1. The usage of a Man's self thereto.
2. The rendering a Man's Testimony inconsiderable. 3. It is occasion to Men of
Hatred, Contempt, Anger, etc. p. 125.. IV. The ill Consequences of false
Judgment are, 1. A Man's own Discredit. 2. The ill distribution of the Good or
Evil that is in a Man's power to bestow or inflict. p. 126.. V. The ill
Consequences of too great a proneness to declare ones Judgment are, 1. It
renders a Man contemptible. 2. It draws others from their Business. 3. Mutual
Suspicions, Animosities, Envyings, Contempts or foolish Admiration and Esteem,
vain Trust and Expectation. p. 127.. VI. The ill Consequences of judging out of
Hatred, Revenge, Pride, Affectation of Superiority, Envy, Anger, Contempt,
Flattery, etc. are, 1. The increase of those Passions with their ill Principles
in our selves and others, which are the most detestable things, 2. It exposes
to the Hatred, Anger, Revenge, Contempt of others. 3. The Persons who are thus
judged by us, judging us again untruly on the worst side out of Revenge. p.
133.. VII. The contrary of all these mischievous Effects and Consequences put
together and briefly counted. p. 138.
CHAP. VI. Contains some Remedies to prevent those prohibited Judgments. Of
which the
. I. 1. And one of the most general is to remember and attend to the
mischievous Consequences thereof, as also their Causes. ^ The one to make us
willing, the other able to abstain therefrom. Those more affectionately
Represented, and these Exhorted against. p. 146.. II. A second Remedy is to
possess our hearts with an universal Charity and Benignity to all. p. 155..
III. 3. Is to rivet soundly in our Minds the love of Truth. p. 156.. IV. 4.
More particularly ask thy self again and again, whether thou art sure thy
Judgment be true. p. 157.. V. 5. Ask thy self whether thou would not have
true what thou judge. p. 160.. VI. 6. Use thy self much to dwell at Home. p.
ibid.. VII. 7. Have a special care of all Passions that they do not precede but
follow thy Reason, and when they do this, that they do not blind or confound
it. p. 162.. VIII. 8. More particularly be sparing in, or refrain altogether
from judging a Person thou art inclined to hate or be angry with, or more
expressly then set thy self to shake off all Prejudices, of which more, and more
properly in the Rules to follow. p. 164.. IX. 9. Discourse more of Things than
Persons. p. ibid.
CHAP. VII. Some few Rules to be observed in our Judging generally and for the
most part.
. I. Pass and declare all thy Judgments out of Charity. This Charity how meant.
The signs of this Charity to others in judging. 1. More readiness to judge on
the good side than on the bad. 2. An excusing others, and saying all we can
justly for them. 3. Frequent judging our selves. 4. Calmness and Modesty. p.
164.. II. A second Rule briefly mentioned is to judge truly. p. 173.. III. A
third, Have a care of all Passions, but especially of Anger before Judgment. p.
ibid.. IV. A fourth, Declare not thy Judgment, when thou thy self art guilty,
of which the Reasons. p. 175.. V. A fifth, If thou judge when guilty, resolve
to be innocent for the future, and first condemn thy self, of which the
Reasons, 1. Because every one ought to love himself as well as his Neighbor in
all Circumstances alike, 2. It is an excellent Example in a thing very rare,
and yet extraordinary useful. 3. Ones own Judgment concerning others is thereby
rendered more effectual. 4. Every one knows more certainly the truth of his
Judgment concerning himself. 5. Men's Care and Zeal will be here more certainly
employed with success. p. 177.. VI. A sixth, That it is more safe generally not
to declare thy Judgment than to do it, of which one Reason. p. 179.. VII. A
seventh, Be more cautious in passing or declaring thy Judgment in these
following Cases, 1. Concerning thy Superiors. 2. Thy Friends, 3. Thy Enemy. 4.
A Person generally innocent and well-disposed, but once or rarely overtaken. 5.
Wrathful and Bashful Persons. 6. Before much Company. 7. Before Enemies. Of all
these their respective Reasons. p. 180.. VIII. An eighth is, Be inclined rather
to defer thy Judgment till thou art desired. Some Reasons hereof. p. 190.. IX.
A ninth, Is more freely and frequently to pass or declare Judgment concerning
one to another, when thou see a Person concerned, defective in his Ability or
Care for himself. Followed with some Reasons, these Rules rerecounted briefly.
p. 192.. 10. An Exhortation to the exercise of Charity and Prudence in this so
considerable a part of our Conversation, the Scope and Design of the whole
Treatise. p. ult.
Errata.
Page Line For Read 5 7 Foolishly out of, etc. Foolishly, out of etc. and a
little readiness. 19 2 And readiness, ib. 11 Dele and. ib. 19 Contrary to the,
etc. contrary to it, the. 33 14 Judgment: This rash Judgment. This etc. 38 21
Principally moreover, Principally: Moreo. are. 43 16 ca^e, ib. 19 Those out of,
etc. Those. Out of, etc. 54 9 There, for, etc. Therefore, 60 5 Our selves so to
do; Our selves, so to do; ib. 13 Pleasures, Pleasure. 62 7 It is so: In, etc.
It is so. In, etc. 63 2 To be an excellent, To be in an excellent. 73 19 (For
Christ) (For Example.) 75 15 Looks, Books. 98 ^8 Increased, Increased. ib. 27
(which obtains in Inanimate things but principally in etc. (which may be to
Inanimate things, but principally to, etc. 99 9 Many or all, perhaps Many or
all perhaps, 104 7 By bringing into our Minds not only what Not only bringing
into our minds what. 106 26 And favor; nay, etc. And favor. Nay 117 12 More
then in thine, is, More in thine, etc. are. 122 14 124 17 (...), (...). ib. 22
(...), (...). 129 17 To bad, etc. Too bad, etc. ib. 18 Too be, etc. To be, etc.
135 27 More ore less, More or less. 146 1 when we judge to do, when we judge, to
do. 147 2 Therefrom. The Therefrom, the etc. 153 11 Instruction: Hardly.
Instruction. Hardly.

A TREATISE CONCERNING Judging one another.
CHAP. I.
Mat. 7. 1. Judge not that you be not Judged.
A Very good Commendation of any Argument or Subject of Discourse, is its
Usefulness for the Prevention of very Mischievous and Hurtful Effects and
Consequences: Such is this of Men's passing Judgment concerning other Men's
Qualities and Actions, the Principles and Effects of them. The too great
Proneness, Readiness and Frequency of doing it, and that on the bad side, to
Suspect, Accuse and Condemn, and this most-what rashly, that is, without
Reason, Uncertainly, often Falsely. Nay, not being content with this, on all
Occasions without any Reason or Cause but Self-love, Pride, Hatred, Envy,
Flattery, Curiosity, Busibodiness, or the like, to make it known and declare it
to others. Whereby they dispose themselves to be Unjust and Uncharitable to
others, and hardly to like any Body but themselves, or those that are like
themselves, or some way or other Useful and Profitable to them, that is,
themselves in others. And as much do they dispose others by this their
Behavior and Temper, both by way of Imitation and Revenge, or Self-defence, at
least to behave themselves in like manner to them, and to pay them in their own
Coin. Men hereby too, growing Strangers to themselves, and being busier in
other Men's Tempers and Actions than their own, are taken up in mending in
others that which is not Faulty, or they can less mend if it be: While they
neglect themselves where it may be more to be mended, and where they can better
do it.

A Vice or Fault, this seems too Extraordinary frequent. For what more
frequently comes into our thoughts and Discourses at all times, than other men's
Persons, and consequently their Qualities and Actions. All our Behavior to one
another, to all sorts of Persons, supposes and follows our Judgments we make
one of another; which are very rarely exactly true, and sincerely Charitable;
but most-what altogether rash and prejudiced by Self-love, and consequent
Passions, or blended and mixed. Few Men also employ themselves in Judging, or
Discoursing of things appertaining to Persons abstracted from Persons, because
they are not accompanied with a sensible Subject; which with what appertains
thereto, they best apprehend and conceive: And for the same Reason among
others, the Persons are others, not themselves, they most frequently occurring
to their Senses. Men seldomer see themselves in their Glasses, than others
directly with their Eyes: And then they being great, but as foolish and
unreasonable Selflovers, are not only willing therefore to have nothing Faulty,
Bad, or Imperfect in themselves, which is well: But also not to see it, and
then they judge they really have none; when they have as many, or more, and
greater than others; which is foolish and bad. Bad, because it proceeds from
ultimate Selflove: Foolish, because the mistake through Self-flattery, is very
Hurtful and Mischievous to themselves, whom they so much love. For hereby they
deprive themselves of the greatest good, that is of becoming universally Good
and Virtuous; while they overlook what is amiss in themselves, and see it not
at all; or if they do, they take it for something that is Virtuous and
Commendable, or much more so than it is. Nor is this Fault or Vice, only to be
seen in ordinary Persons: But is also very general to all sorts, even to those
who have had the Opportunity of the best instructed Education. Witness Books
and Writings, where oft-times Men proclaim aloud, and leave upon Record; and
this most willingly, rashly, foolishly, out of Pride, Envy, Revenge, Contempt,
the Ignorance, the Folly and Mistake, the Rashness, Falsehood, Knavery,
Hypocrisy, Obstinacy of one another. This is that which our Savior here Warns
and Advises against in this long and Excellent Discourse of his, both to his
Disciples and a multitude of People, who were gathered together from all the
Country about, to see and hear what he did and said: And it seems they heard
so much, as put them into great Wonder and Astonishment. Both in respect it is
like of the Excellent Matter of his Preaching and Discourse, being more Moral
and Spiritual than that of the Pharisees and their Scribes and Doctors was, who
most-what read them Lectures of tithing Mint and Gummin, and the minute small
Matters of their Law: And then in respect of his manner of Speaking, which was
with more Authority: That is, so as to move them more to mind and believe the
things he said, and that (among other Ways) by speaking them so, as if he most
certainly knew the Truth and Concernment of what he spoke; they on the
Contrary, it may be, only probably, uncertainly, dubiously and coldly reasoning
about their small Questions.

In treating of this Argument; the Sum or Contents of our Discourse shall be
these;

I. Only just to mention the true Sense of the word here used, to Judge, or
(...).

II. The Judgment here forbidden, shall be more particularly explicated.

III. What Judgment here is not forbidden, though in danger of being taken for
that which is.

IV. Whence this forbidden Judgment here proceeds, what are the Causes.

V. The mischievous Effects or Consequences hereof, which will be so many
Reasons too, why we should not be guilty of it.

VI. The Remedies to prevent or mend it.

VII. How we should govern our Judgments of Persons, both concerning their
Virtues and Vices.

Sect. I.
I. For the First. The word (...) here rendered to Judge, has several
Significations in Scripture.

1. In General to pass Judgment, that is, to affirm or deny, any Proposition or
Sentence thought of. This is the most ordinary Sense, and every where occurs, 1
Cor. 11. 13. Judge in your selves, [(...).] Is it comely for a Woman to Pray
with her Head uncovered. And the same in 1 Cor. 10. 15. I speak as to Wisemen,
Judge you what I say: i. e. Pass your Judgment, give your Opinion after
Consideration, of what I am now about to propose unto you: And where this word
(...) is thus used in the Septuagints Translation of the Old Testament, it may
Answer to the Hebrew words (...), and other words.

2. More particularly, To pass Judgment concerning the Actions or Qualities of
a Person, either of his Virtues or Faults, Good or Bad: And this is as often
met withal; and so it is, three or four times presently after one another, in 1
Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5. But with me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged
of you, or of Man's Judgment: Yea, I judge not mine own self: That is, As for
yours, or any Man's Judgment concerning my Faithfulness in my Stewardship, of
the Mysteries of the Gospel (of which in the two former Verses) whether I am,
or am not Faithful, I make a little account of it. Their Judgments upon many
Accounts, it may be, being but little, if any probable signs of the Truth. Nay,
I pass not Judgment concerning this thing Universally my self; I, it may be
forgetting, or not seeing many things in my self: But the Lord is he that does
always, and has right to Judge, who is All-knowing and Just, as it is in Verse
5.

3. More particularly yet: It signifies to pass Judgment concerning a Persons
Innocence or Merit, that he is Innocent: That is, an Acquitting and Absolving
him, so is the Sense: To Judge the Cause of the Poor and Needy. Spoken of
Jehoiakim's Father. And, To Judge the Fatherless and Oppressed, that the Man of
the Earth may no more Oppress, Psalm. 10. 18. Here, and in such like the
Septuagints word is (...), answering to the Hebrew, (...) and (...).

4. On the contrary, it oft-times signifies to pass Sentence or Judgment
concerning a Persons Fault, or Guilt, or Punishment he deserves, that he is
Guilty, and deserves Punishment; that is, to Condemn or Accuse. For in both
this is done, in the one as a Judge, in the other as a Witness: And therefore it
signifies the same with its Compound, (...), to Condemn. This is also a most
frequent Sense of this word, both in the New and Old Testament, as Romans 14. 3,
4. Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not: And let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats. That is, As he that did Eat, and was so well
informed in his Liberty, of the good Effects of it, as to put no Distinction
between Meats, upon the Account of any Divine Command, but only his own
Prudence, was not to despise the other for his Ignorance: So he also who did
make such Distinctions, was not to condemn the other of Unconscientiousness or
Profaneness; that is, Neglect or Contempt of his Duty commanded by God's
Revelation. And in verse 4. is the same Sense, Who art thou that Judge? that
is, Condemnest another Man's Servant. Where, by the way, you must take
Condemnation in the Sense I shall by and by limit, as also understand it here
between private Persons, and with this Circumstance, that it was before the
Christian Jews had time to inform themselves well, and to understand the
Reasons of this Liberty; and to get rid of their Inclinations, to believe still
the Mosaical Law, to be observed even under the Messias's Government: But that
by the Bye.

And to go no further, ver. 10. still of the same Chapter, Why do thou judge,
or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? That is, surely, Why do thou so
judge thy Brother, as after Judgment to contemn him, and to despise him? But
such a Judgment must be, that he is Faulty, or Ignorant, and that is to condemn
him. Now which of these Senses the word (...) here has, I shall by and by tell
you, when I more explicately and distinctly inform you, what Judgment it is
that is here forbidden.

Sect. II.
To give you yet a more distinct Notion of the General Sense of this word
(...), it is to be observed, that it consists of two Parts. The First is the
Inward Action. The Second, the Signification of it.

The First, Is to pass Judgment only in a Man's thoughts, silently in ones own
Breast.

The Second, Is to signify this our Inward Judgment to others, by Words and
Speech, or any other convenient Sign. I observe this principally, because it
may be permitted and laudable oft-times to do the First, when it is not to do
the Last. A Man may, nay ought often to give Judgment concerning things and
Persons; when he may, and ought not for many Reasons to signify it. Such as
are the Circumstances of the Persons Faults, who may be a Superior, a
Governor, a Friend, one otherwise very Wise and Innocent, or one either
through Bashfulness, or Wrathfulness, not able to bear it, or many the like: So
the Circumstances of Company, either that there are any, or too many, or such
as will make more ill use of such a Judgment of ours, may make it reasonable
and just, to abstain from making known our Judgment. And many still, other
Circumstances may there be, for these are but to give Instance.

CHAP. II.
WE proceed to the Second General, viz. What kind of Judgment may be here
Forbidden, or Commanded against, what this may ^^ more Distinctly. And they may
be among others, these Six things, some principally and firstly, some
occasionally and secondarily.

1. Too great a Proneness, Propensity, Inclination, Readiness to pass any
inward Judgment in General, concerning other Men's Qualities and Actions.

2. Too great an Inclination to pass this Judgment on the worst side, to judge
them Imperfect or Bad, to attribute some Defect or Infirmity to them, or to
accuse or condemn them for some Fault.

3. To pass this Judgment without any Reason at all oft-times but only a Man's
will: Sometimes indeed with some Reason, but little, slight, sudden or in
general, not with so much either on one side or the other, as a Man might and
ought to have found out and considered: When one does not spend so much Time,
nor use so much Care, Heed, and Attention, in the Reason of his Judgment as he
ought, which sometimes is more, sometimes less, according to the Import^nce of
the thing judged, or rather of the Judgment. And this is called Rashness, or
Temerity, a rash Judgment, a rash Censure of others.

4. To pass this Judgment contrary to the Reasons even appearing to us, (which
must always proceed out of some bad Principle next to be named) sometimes with
some appearing Reasons, but falsely. And this is called False Judgment, which we
ought to do what we can, when it is permitted us to judge, to prevent.

5. Too great a readiness to declare, signify, talk of these our Judgments;
and that is, principally to do it upon all Occasions not sufficiently
Reasonable, nay, upon none at all.

6. And lastly, Above all (in which only the Blame, Fault, Viciousness,
Iniquity, is to be found) a bad Principle or End of our Judgment concerning
others, which is but too often the cause of all the other Imperfections. Such
as is a want of Charity, Hatred or Malice, Self-love in General, Pride,
Affectation of Superiority, Envy, and the like, of which hereafter. In all the
former we may be Defective, Wanting, Imperfect; but here we are Wicked, Bad,
Unrighteous.

Sect. I.
1. Too great a Proneness and Readiness to pass Judgment, concerning others in
any Respect; which is always concerning their Qualities of Power, or Knowledge
and Wisdom, or their Goodness, or their Actions hence proceeding. I say, too
great an one; for all passing of Judgment is not here prohibited, as I shall
hereafter mention. Now this too great a Proneness or Inclination, is Various
according to Persons, and must be determined by every Man's Prudence, when it is
so. In some Men it may be much their Calling, their Business, it may be what is
committed to their Care, for very excellent Uses and Purposes to observe and
give Judgment of others. And therefore they are to bend and incline themselves
to get so much Readiness and Aptness, or Quickness, to observe and judge, as may
make them best able to discharge that Trust. Such are all kind of Governors,
who have the Care of others Qualities and Manners; Magistrates, Ministers,
those who have the Education of Youth, Masters of Families. All these will do
ill if they do not take notice, and judge concerning the Tempers, and Behaviors
of their Subjects, People, Youth, Children and Servants, as much as they can,
without too much Neglect of themselves, or other worse Effects. Again, There
are some that observe others to very good Use and Purpose: what is Good, they
are prone to imitate; what is Bad, to shun and avoid: and this that they may
clearly apprehend Virtue and Vice; which oft-times we better see in others,
than in our selves. What is usually signified by the Proverb, That Standers-by
see more than Gamesters. Men oft-times would neither be so Sensible of their
own Virtue nor Vice, Good or Ill-Qualities, if they did not observe them in
others. When they see a Man practicing any Virtue, cr using any good Quality of
Prudence, Diligence, any Instance of Power rightly and well, and especially
when commended or thought well of, or having some other Advantage; it makes
them well pleased with themselves in these things, if they have them, or to
endeavor to obtain them, if they want them. And so Vices often appear to us
more and more ugly and nasty in others, than in our selves: Such as is
Intemperance, Pride, Oppression, etc. And what may the Observer say, Am I like
such a Person? I did not think I had been so Foolish, so Contemptible, Base, or
Vile a thing before. These Men too are so far from neglecting themselves
thereby (the common Mischief of our concerning our selves so much with others)
that they mind themselves hereby the more, and to better purpose.

But now on the other hand, but few Men are Governors of others at least of
many: many also observe and take notice of others good Qualities, and are
thereby excited to affectation of being Superior, consequently to envy
Detraction and Contempt. And you shall see them judge and speak often of the
most considerable Men, and the most considerable Qualities in them, with
Abatement and Diminution; which as it may not sometimes, so it most-what
proceeds from the abovenamed Principles. They Will take notice too, more surely
of their Imperfections, and be apt to be moved to be well-pleased therewith,
from the former Principles still; and consequently to multiply and magnify
them. Now it were a great deal better for Men of such a temper, to withdraw
their Eyes from abroad, and to turn them home-ward, unless they could or would
make better use of their Observation; and readiness in such Men to Observe and
Judge others is too much, and therefore here forbidden. Others again there be,
who may and do take notice and observe what others do, and are generally with
Approbation, and be ready to imitate every thing, and it may be the worst
things most. Those who you shall ordinarily here say, that such Persons do so
or so, that they may excuse themselves; these it were better for them to
neglect and take no notice of other Men, and not to mind what others do. It is
much better for those Men to mind what they themselves should do, than what
others do. Here again a little proneness to mind or judge what others are or do,
is too much.

Sect. II.
2. The Second thing I conceive may be here forbidden, is too great a Proneness
to pass Judgment on the worst side, to attribute some Imperfections to others,
to accuse and condemn them. And this may be, though our Judgment be not false,
(which is another Particular forbidden) but never so true; nor do we yet
consider or attend to the Principle from whence it proceeds, but only to the
effect which is consequent; and here again as in the former Particular, the
Degree forbidden is various. Some Persons may and ought to take notice of, Judge
and Condemn other Men's imperfections and faults (but always be sure, with as
accurate truth as they can, with Prudence and Charity) more often and
frequently, others rarely or little. Those as I said in the former Particular,
who are Governors of others so far forth as they do and ought to undertake
that Office, so much ought they to take notice, observe, judge, condemn, yea,
reprove and correct (but always with Prudence and Charity, of which more
hereafter) their Infirmities or Misdemeanors. Those also who do it out of no
worse end, nor find no worse effect, than the good one of freeing themselves
from too general and confused admiration of other Men's Persons, and
consequently Approbation, imitation of all they do, though many things weakly
and amiss; finding themselves first without Self-flattery, able to Judge from
other Reasons than Examples.

Those also who having a desire to be more exquisitely and accurately perfect
and good, mark the Imperfections or Miscarriages of Men, and that of the best
and most considerable, that they may prevent and amend them in themselves, and
be more accurate Patterns and Examples of Accomplishment and Virtue. Not out of
Pride or Affectation to be Superior to all others; but out of a great desire
of perfecting themselves, and out of Charity to others.

Such Persons of such a Temper, though very rarely I doubt, we may sometimes
meet withal. So likewise when Persons, Estates, or Qualities are of great
concernment, and influence to us and others, to the Public, and this presently
and on a sudden; and our Judgment might tend to prevent any mischief
therefrom, which deferred would be too late in such Cases, Sufficiency and
Tendency to judge or believe rather on the worst side, is to be preferred. The
contrary would be too pernicious or hurtful Security. Such as these, I say, and
Men in such cases, are to be allowed more frequently, to employ themselves in
observing and judging other Men's Imperfections or Faults, in their Temper or
Conduct. But these on the other hand, who may experience not elsewhere better
effects of this their Observation and Judgment, than an occasion and temptation
for, and a gratification of their Pride, Self-love, Envy, Affectation of
Superiority, Malice, Ill Will, Revenge, or the like; so far forth as they
experience this so much to them is it Prohibited.

And in general, it may be delivered as one pretty general sign, when we may do
this too much (there seldom being a better effect than this, a bad one) viz.
When thereby we are indisposed and hindered to take notice of, and approve of
the good qualities and laudable that are in the same Persons, and consequently
judge of them in general very unjustly, and are according unreasonably affected
toward them, undervaluing, contemning, hating them; that is, the qualities in
them when we ought not, or more than we ought: And this we may see, I doubt,
too frequent and common an effect, of this Judging and Condemning Persons; in
so much that there are very few but may be hence concluded to be too much
inclined and prone thereto, and to do it but too much. Where you hear one or
once commended, and his good qualities observed, you may hear many, and many
times dispraised, and his Faults and Imperfections quoted; at least oftener than
they are really in proportion to their good Qualities and Actions, or oftener
than they should be signified and made known.

Sect. III.
3. The third thing I conceive may be here forbidden, is ones Judging without
any Reason at all, but only ones Will and Inclination, or without sufficient
Reason, the best he could or ought to have had all Circumstances considered;
that is, rashness or temerity in Judging, and when it is on the worst side, to
condemn any Person, it is now usually called rash Censure. Of the first of
these there is no Degrees or Differences, but it is perpetually in all Persons
at all times forbidden. For if there appear no Reason at all to us, why we
should judge one or the other way, we are to suspend our Judgment. That which is
usually expressed by saying, we do not know, we cannot tell, it may, or it may
not be so indeed; (if we apprehend the possibility) but whether it be or be
not, we are Ignorant. In our Judgments concerning some things, we may sometimes
follow our Inclinations both without and contrary to some smaller Reasons; but
then they must be very strong, such as are natural and born with us, and which
we cannot oppress or hinder by our wills though we would, and we do not find
they proceed from any Insincerity, any secret desire or inclination to gratify
any Lust, but that we are possessed with a serious and upright unmixed desire to
know the truth in order to Goodness: And this, indeed, seems to be a sign of
great reason for that Judgment, viz. Of this inclination being Impressed by
God, and consequently he being Good, that it is true and useful. Such are Men's
strong inclinations notwithstanding all appearance of reason (though but such,
and and real deceits) to the contrary, which may be brought by Cavilling men,
to believe God's Existence, his Justice to punish and reward, Immortality of
Souls, distinction of Actions right and wrong, universal Goodness our great
perfection, and ultimate Self-love, contrary to the truth of our Senses, etc.
these God has anticipated us withal. But in our Judgments concerning Persons,
no such inclination is to be followed by no means, which notwithstanding is
extraordinary frequent, but always from some secret passion of hatred,
displeasure against the Person, not for any reason, but some bodily temper
which is called Antipathy, and oft-times past offenses, etc. Of the other, viz.
Judging without sufficient reason, there is variety; that which may be
sufficient reason to one Man, or at one time in one thing, may not be to
another. One Man may be more capable and able to examine a thing further than
another; and yet both, may be, ought to pass their Judgment: As if one Friend
should for very good ends, ask the judgment of some other, concerning the
Qualities or Actions of a third. So sometimes the time for Deliberation or
Information, may be necessarily shorter in one affair than in another; and yet
the Judgment is then to be passed too, and not neglected: And so the Judgment
concerning one thing of less moment (and yet enough to deserve and require our
Opinion too) may be with less reason or probability, than another of greater
Importance. And here this rash Judgment is not to be allowed on either side, as
well to the advantage as disadvantage of the Person, concerning his good or his
ill-qualities or actions. We are not to judge Men better than they are, as well
as not worse; and consequently falsely and foolishly admire and approve of what
they say or do without reason, only because we will, and as we say we imagine
so; not with that sufficient Reason as we ought to have: Though the extreme of
Judging Men rashly better than they are, being less frequent or hurtful, I
suppose the other is here principally intended, viz. The Judging Men rashly
worse than they are, and censuring them.

This Imperfection very often proceeds from Ultimate, and therefore Inordinate
Self-pleasing our selves by mere Activity of this kind. We must be passing
Judgment of every thing we see, or that appears to us, and as soon and as fast
as may be; we cannot stay so long as to call to mind, or examine Reasons. This
is too troublesome to most, and would spoil the pleasure of it: Oft-times Men
make it their Diversion but imprudently chosen, to be at any rate wantonly
Judging and Discoursing of Persons in general. Oftentimes also the Cause or
Principle is Self-pleasing again, by the exercise and sense of our ability and
sufficiency of Wit or Understanding; we much pleasing our selves that we can
observe what others do and judge, and discern whether they are good or bad, do
well or ill, especially what the most considerable Men do; and here most,
because it is a sign of a greater Comparative ability, that we see
Imperfections and Defects, even in the Wiser and Better sort of Men, which they
do not (as we think) see in themselves. The first of these Causes is more
ordinary, the second in those most often, who really are of considerable
ability. These are more innocent Causes as not arguing so much of Self-Love, in
opposition to the good of others or to Charity; as the other of Malice, Hatred,
Revenge, Pride, Affectation of Superiority, and thence secret Envy which are
but too frequent.

Sect. IV.
4. The Fourth thing forbidden is false Judgment, which although it may be more
hurtful in effect, yet it may be and often is more innocent in the principle or
end, than the former. For a Man may often judge false and out of Charity and
Duty too, and with as sufficient reason as he could find or observe. But yet a
Man having first seen he may or ought to pass his Judgment, ought to adhibit
the greatest care that it be true: This is a great instance of Justice which as
every Man at all times is bound to, so then especially when he undertakes to be
a Judge.

The most general Instances of rash and false Judgment concerning Persons,
Qualities and Actions, and perhaps which comprehend all others, are these:

1. When we Judge imperfections, defects, faults, of any kind or sort to be in
Men, when they are not.

2. When we Judge those to be much greater imperfections, than indeed they are
compared with others, we mistake in the quality. The first again is, First,
Either when we judge Imperfections to be in Men one or more, when either there
is none, or not so many. When we mistake in respect of the Number. Secondly,
When we Judge more of that which is; a greater Degree and a greater Constancy of
these Imperfections, which really are in the Persons, to be in the Persons,
than there is, we mistake in the Degree and in the Continuation or Duration:
And thus on the contrary also, we often judge as rashly and falsely of our
selves, or any we favor, or who are Friends to us.

We judge perfections and good qualities to be in our selves and them, and more
of these Perfections in number, and them to be greater, and more of each of
them in Degree and Frequency, or Constancy, than indeed there is; when all this
is a mistake, and often a silly or wilful one, and on the contrary judge ours and
our Friends Imperfections and and their degrees of Intention and Frequency
fewer, and the Imperfections less than indeed they are; and we to that purpose
conceal, connive at, forget them willingly, even to our own Consciences and our
best Friends, and this out of ultimate and foolish mistaken Self-love. A thing
often to be observed in sick and dying Persons, very backward to take notice of
their sins and faults, and the degrees of them, and to reckon them up all, and
to make a frank acknowledgment to their own Consciences or their Friends. A
sign too of no very great degree of Repentance, or a Conversion from sin. In
the first, we multiply and magnify the Imperfections, Infirmities, Defects,
ill-Qualities of others: Here the good ones. Surely much the better extreme as
to its Effects (as it seems) even when it proceeds from ultimate Self-love, as
well as the other extreme (which is too often) and not out of Charity.

A more particular and very useful Instance of the First General is, when we
Judge the Actions of Men to proceed from worse Principles, Ends, Designs and
Qualities in them, than indeed they do. A thing the more diligently and
carefully to be avoided, because of very mischievous and evil consequences, and
yet extraordinary frequent and easy to be fallen into. Thus often we accuse
and condemn Men of Covetousness, Pride, Unconscientiousness, or the like, from
some actions which really were the effects much of a wise and discreet Virtue,
and had very little mixture if any of these Vices.

A thing very often, especially happening in refusal or denying, the Cravings
and Desires of others.

Thus we accuse Men often of great Wilfulness, when it is Weakness, of
Wickedness or Evil-disposition of Will, when it is Ignorance and Imprudence; of
deliberate Mischievousness, when it is a sudden Surprise. How often shall you
hear Men fiercely accuse one another of Malice, Hatred, Revenge, Pride, than
the first of which nothing more devilish and worse, can be thought or said of a
Man, (though I wish it were not so often true) when there is no such matter,
but an impartial and upright Justice; that is, Charity to the Public, or at
worst ignorance, mistake, Men's not attending, forgetfulness or the like. This
is very often seen in the behavior of Sects and Parties one toward another:
Where the Inconsistency of Opinions with good Conscience, is often fiercely
affirmed too universally, before it is known what Advantages they have had for
Information. Though I acknowledge too, there may be often very sufficient signs
for a very probable Judgment: This rash and false Judgment in these or the like
Instances being so mischievous, and yet frequent, is (as I said, when it is on
the false side) diligently to be avoided; and rather let the defect, the
rashness, and the mistake, be on the other hand; which usually argues much of
Wisdom and Charity, good Nature, and a great freedom from ultimate and
inordinate Selflove, and especially when it is toward Adversaries: And
therefore it is a lovely and amiable thing, it is called good Interpretation
and Candor. When one judges most favorably, and puts the best sense and
meaning upon Actions and external appearances, when there is equal probability
on both sides, or there is none at all of either appearing; and when it is
constrained to judge worse, it is with pity: According to that invaluable 13th
Chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, to be written in the most deep
and lasting Characters in our Souls, and to be read every morning, nay, as often
as may be, verse 5. Charity as it bears all things, so it believes and
hops all things.

Sect. V.
5. The Fifth thing forbidden, is, too great a Proneness and Aptness to
pronounce, to declare and make known our Judgment and Opinion concerning
others, especially on the bad side: To be always talking thereof, though to no
visible good effect, nor out of any good Principle. And to be in pain as it
were till they have delivered themselves, and this usually comes too from the
Inordinate love of Activity, of doing somewhat, of Restlesness, which is called
Busibodiness; and sometimes from the other worse Qualities so often mentioned,
Malice, Pride, Envy, Revenge, etc. and mostly from a mixture of more of them
together: With all which too, as in all other Actions of Men insincere, (as
most are I doubt) some small mixture sometimes there may be of Justice, that
is, of a kind of common Charity. This too great Proneness or Inclination
considered without its Principle or End, (as I have told you before) admits of
Variety. Some Men ought to have more, as all Governors and Overseers of others
Manners, or in general of their good Qualities. Those also that find the good
effects of good Instruction, Self-amendment, kindly and laudable Emulations,
Pity, an endeavor for the good of the faulty, and of others, to amend or
prevent the same elsewhere. Others on the contrary who are private Persons, in
a private Capacity or Condition, apt to gratify thereby their Envy, Pride,
Hatred, Contempt of others, Self-conceit, affectation of Superiority, will have
seldomer sufficient reasons to pass or declare their Judgment; and when they
have, the good effects are not so considerable in them as in the former
Persons: Consequently they must nourish a lesser Proneness and Inclination
thereto. These Men also who find they can better discern, choose, govern, and
Instruct themselves in all Circumstances, of declaring their Opinion concerning
Persons, such as I have before mentioned, of the Persons judged, the Persons
before whom, etc. These also may be more free, and allow themselves more of
this Proneness. Those on the contrary, who may and ought to observe themselves
forgetful, unable to take notice, or discern the fittest Circumstances; or not
to be able to moderate or govern themselves when they do, but what they have in
their mind it must come out; those who are thus dull and weak, ought to lay
aside this Proneness and Inclination, to subjugate or weaken it so far forth,
and to betake themselves more to mind their own affairs immediately.

In General (of which more hereafter) the declaration of this our Judgment,
must always be done with all the signs, and with the best effects we can of
Charity, in doing Good, and consequently Self-denial. Charity, I say, sometimes
more immediately respecting the Person of whom we judge, sometimes our selves,
it may be, (as in the case of sin, when we ought to vindicate our selves)
sometimes some others, Bystanders, sometimes altogether: Be sure let there not
appear any the least sign of doing it out of ultimate respect to our selves in
any kind, nor let the effect be only such with a neglect of, or in opposition
to the good of the Person, or others. And a great many signs there are of this,
which may better come in in another place.

Sect. VI.
6. And lastly. And above all is here forbidden, the undue end of our Judging
others, viz. Self-pleasing ultimately, and that several ways, by others hurt or
mischief, positive or privative: These are, Malice, Hatred, Pride, Envy,
Revenge, Flattery and base Fear, Busibodiness, Curiosity, etc. This is that
which is here principally intended; this mainly advised against by our Savior;
as also judging on the worst side, suspecting, accusing, condemning Persons out
of the foresaid Principles. As appears by the reason subjoyned both in this and
the next Verse, [ Judge not] is here taken in the sense in which [ that you be
not judged] is: But by that is meant suspected, accused, condemned by others,
principally out of the former Principles. For if it were meant of the Judgment
of the good side, the avoiding of that would be no motive not to judge, because
it would not seem an evil to the Person judging. I say, principally: Moreover,
I have mentioned the defect of being too prone in general to pass Judgment,
though it may happen on the good side; and so to declare ones Judgment, and to
judge rashly or falsely, though still on the good side on this occasion, as
belonging to our Judgments, to suggest unto you, that they might be
occasionally forbidden too, and are Defects, Infirmities. All the forementioned
Particulars, if they can be supposed to proceed not from these bad Principles,
but from good, viz. Charity, though imprudent and mistaken; though they may be
immediately hurtful and do mischief, yet they are not vicious, faulty, wicked.
But more of this when we come to the Causes of these forbidden Judgings here,
especially of rash and false ones.

CHAP. III.
Sect. I.
BUt what Judgments are here not forbidden, though they may be apt to be
mistaken for those which are. And in general these two, viz.

1. Not an observing or judging out of Charity, a sincere and unmixed Charity.
For sometimes, surely, we may exercise our Charity both in good and bad
Judgments. The principal thing here forbidden, is passing our Judgment out of
bad Principles, such as are Ultimate Selfishness, Malice, Hatred, Pride, Envy,
etc. But then the contrary cannot be forbidden to pass Judgment out of a good
one, and the only good one, viz. Charity, or Goodwill, unless all Principles of
a Man's actions were forbidden.

Sect. II.
Nor, Secondly, Is it ever forbidden to a Person, when there are more good
effects of his doing this, than of his omission: Nay, then contrary-wise he is
commanded to do it. The first respects our Principles or End: The second our
Prudence or the Effect. The first of these may be without the second, viz. A
Man may give his Judgment and Opinion concerning Persons and Actions, out of
Charity and very good Intentions of doing the most good unlimitedly in general,
whether it be particularly applied to our selves or others, or both; and yet,
as far as we see, the effects of it may be bad. A Man may both inwardly and
outwardly commend and discommend Persons unseasonably with a very good meaning,
through want of Information. And so the second may be without the first too;
that is, There may be very good effects and consequences of a Man's passing and
pronouncing his Judgment, when the principle may be bad enough. A Man may
approve or condemn what is truly good or bad in others, and consequently
dispose himself and others to an imitation of the one, and an eschewing of the
other, especially if he be a Person of some esteem; and yet he may do the first
out of fear or flattery, or because it is like somewhat in himself, not
because it is a quality or thing really profitable to the World, and therefore
would have it more propagated. And the second out of Envy, Hatred, etc. not
because it is a thing mischievous and hurtful to the Person himself, to others,
or displeasing to God Almighty.

In sum, whenever it does appear to any Man that it would be worse if he did
not pass his Judgment, that there would be worse consequences thereof than if
he did, any where to others as well as himself, considering himself but as any
other Person, just in the same Circumstances; and to do it for this very reason
and cause, this common Good; this, I say, is not here prohibited.

Sect. III.
Thirdly, But more particularly therefore in the first place, it is not
universally prohibited here to pass Judgment. In the Cases and Circumstances I
have formerly mentioned, and innumerable more (if we descend to particulars) it
is not. It is much permitted, nay, enjoined to Governors, somewhat less to
private Persons. Laudable it is in Men to have regard to, and observe the
qualities and actions generally of those that are their Superiors, to compare
their own with, and see their defect, and to be excited to Amendment and
Imitation: To look at, and to judge their own faults in others, if thereby they
find themselves disposed to see them more clearly in themselves, and to be put
in mind of them. Laudable it is to observe good qualities in others that we may
rejoice in them, and be glad to see any thing good in the World, and be able to
encourage it by a discreet Observation and Commendation thereof. Consequently
we are not commanded to be negligent, and utterly careless of what other Men
are or do: For this is contrary to the former generals of Charity and Prudence,
we should then be prohibited both those. Out of Prudence and Charity to our
Neighbor, both good and bad Men, and to our selves too, we are obliged to take
notice of them what they are and do; to encourage and help, or to rejoice in
what is good, to check, hinder, and prevent what is bad and mischievous in the
World, by our pity and just endeavors. We are not surely to say with Cain, Am
I my Brothers keeper? Yes, we are all so, that is, we should be so: We are not
like Brutes, to live only within our own Skins, to care for no Body but our
selves, and inhumanly to say, What care we what others do? We'll look after our
selves; let them be good or bad we matter not, we think it best always to mind
our selves; we see Men busy themselves too much about others matters. In the
first of which thou art bad and wicked, being only selfish; in the other
mistaken and imprudent. Thou art always to have regard to the common good in
all thou art and do, and therefore when thou appliest thy self to mind thy
self, and to do good to thy self, it must always be to fit thy self to do most
good in general, it must have that for the end. Thou art also often (and thy
own prudence must determine, for it may be too often) to step out and see what
others do and are, and concern thy self charitably and prudently for thy
Neighbors, and to please and serve God consequently; there is a time when this
is best. Besides, indeed thou mindest thy own self to best purpose and effect,
when thou disposest thy self to be of this charitable and prudent Temper; which
may sometimes be best done by use and exercise.

Sect. IV.
Fourthly, Nor in the next place is it prohibited universally to pass Judgment
on the worst side, to Accuse or Condemn; for it is permitted to the Overseers
of others Manners, and Instructors, and Teachers of good Manners; and to
Friends, whose care and industry for the good of those whom they thus judge it
will excite; to those that would free themselves from too partial an admiration
of Persons; to those who have a mind and design to be more accurately good, in
things of more great and public Concernment; and in many other Circumstances,
which every ones private prudence must determine. Much less still is the
contrary commanded or indulged, viz. To judge that good and laudable which is
bad and to be condemned, to judge falsely on the best and favorable side: for to
judge falsely is ever forbidden, and to judge according to Truth when we do judge,
is always commanded and enjoined. We are not neither to think well of all
Persons, and all in Persons, to praise, speak well of all things. We may and
ought, when Charity and Prudence are the reasons of our using our Judgments, to
think of things as they are, to think that bad or faulty which is so, as near
as we can be informed, and to say so too; as it follows in the next particular.

Sect. V.
Fifthly, Nor in the next place is it here universally forbidden to declare and
make known our Judgments, and that on the worst side. But there are many
Circumstances in which it is of much better effect so to do. Sometimes to
reprove (always with Charity and Discretion to be sure) the Guilty or Faulty,
and to let him know our Opinion concerning any Actions, or Temper, or Quality
in him, may be of excellent use, and be a means to amend the Persons, and to
prevent the like for the future. Sometimes to admonish others, lest they
imitate or do the like; we may make known our Judgment to them, especially when
the faulty Person is Incorrigible, or to prevent some fraud, or hurt or
mischief that otherwise might be done by one to another: We are not always to
hold our Tongue, nor conceal all signs of our Opinions, be Mealy-mouthed for
fear of displeasure, or the like causes; which as it may be in the effect very
mischievous, so it proceeds usually from Treachery or Cowardice. Much less
still is it commanded or permitted here to signify a contrary Judgment, to
what we really have in our Breasts; to speak or otherwise so to behave our
selves as if we thought well of, approved and liked that which we do not: To do
this out of the selfend of preventing any evil, or procuring any good from a
Person, is called Flattery. We are not to say, That evil is good, or darkness
light. We are not either for fear or favor, to Commend and Praise what in our
Judgment and Conscience we condemn. But when we think our selves obliged to
declare, and make known our Opinion and Judgment concerning any Person or
Actions, it must always be with Truth, although it be to disapprove or condemn.
But then to be sure, let this be always done with a sincere inward Charity, and
all the just signs of it, and of freedom from any Self-design, and especially
that which is in such a case most ordinary and suspected, viz. from Pride and
Imperiousness, and therefore with Modesty, with great Discretion and Prudence;
that is, a discerning and foreseeing when it may, and when it may not be of
good use and effect to do or not do it: Of which hereafter under another Head.

Here is to be noted, that as these Actions of Judgment are not prohibited, so
not all Inclinations thereto.

CHAP. IV. We proceed to the Fourth General Head. viz.
Sect. I.
TO Instance in some of the Causes of these prohibited Judgments here, those
especially which are more Proper, Immediate, Frequent, and most in our own
power to prevent.

We must run them over again. And First, Of too much Proneness to judge in
general the Causes some of them may be:

1. Too much Idleness: By which I mean not a Man's doing nothing (for that
cannot be, every Body is always employed, his Thoughts are always taken up
about somewhat) but a Man's not having any destined or set-purposed-Employment,
which one should always choose, as that in which he can best serve God and the
World, do most good in his Generation. A neither designing nor purposing to
pursue always, (or at least but when any extraordinary occasion happens) any
particular, nor his General calling, as is usually distinguished; neither that
which he with some others employ themselves about, nor that which all Men
should, such as Reflection upon ones own Actions, the end, design, the event or
effect of them; the having respect to the pleasing of God, and doing good some
way or other to our Neighbor, to the Public, and the performance of some
general Duties to God and our Neighbor, which all are constantly obliged to
perform. Men's not having, I say, constantly such designed, purposed, and
set-employment, gives their Mind leave, lets them at liberty to wander about
any where, to be employed about any thing that shall from any cause be thrust
upon them, or shall occur. Now this is far more usually others Persons and
Actions than themselves; partly because they are far more the object of our
External Senses, which affect Men generally more strongly and frequently than
any thing from within themselves; and then what we have proposed or objected to
us, we naturally and laudably are prone to be judging somewhat or other
concerning them, or appertaining to them. But Men that have any set constant
Calling to employ themselves in, and besides perform their general Duties to
God, their Neighbor and themselves, are not so much at leisure to mind and
attend to what others are and do, and consequently to judge. Just for Example,
as Idle wandering Beggars, who, as we say, are never out of their way, and have
no certainly designed Place or Business, turn to every By-House to see who
dwells there. They look upon, observe, talk to or talk of every Passenger they
meet; when the Man that has some designed Affair or Business, with certain
time and place in his Journey, hardly observes or minds, or but very little and
passingly, the Company upon the Rode, nor any way diverts or stops himself:
Such was the fault of the younger Widows which Saint Paul bids Timothy to
advise: They learnt to be Idle, wandering about from House to House; and then,
They were Tatlers and Busiebodies, speaking things which they ought not, 1 Timothy
5. 13. This is a privative Cause.

Sect. II.
Secondly, The Love of Activity merely, ultimately, to no better end but only
to please themselves therein. Themselves are too little a Sphere, there is more
variety of things to be observed and judged in all others who they know, than
only in themselves; whence they do it with greater life and vigor, Men think
it a dull thing (and that is their only reason) to mind principally themselves,
and things appertaining to them, and it may be the same things too for the most
part, to live in a round; not always, but so much as is for most Men most
expedient. And then when Men do observe or take notice of others Persons,
qualities, and actions, they will be passing Judgment, because there is more of
Action, than in suspending, doubting, or merely observing. That seems to be a
slow dull thing too in compare with a Man's briskly and smartly, and
uninterruptedly passing Judgment. Besides that, suspending, doubting, being
Ignorant, argue an imperfection, and this fault may have the name of
Busibodiness, viz. When out of love of being Busy, merely to be always doing
somewhat, and that with vigor and smartness, Men employ their Thoughts in
Observing and Judging other Men's, either Qualities or Actions: Not out of any
Neighbourly or Charitable Principle; not because they see a great deal of good
they may do by it, and therefore would do it accordingly; that is, not out of
Reason, Prudence, Charity. Men oft-times Bussle and are Busy in the World, and
they know no other Reason but that they love to be so; and nothing more often
occurs about which they may be so, than what other Men are or do.

Sect. III.
Thirdly, The third cause is sometimes Curiosity; that is, a Man's pleasing
himself merely and ultimately, in knowing something he did not know before, and
being very much conceited of himself there, for not directing his knowledge to
those things which are most profitable, which he can make best use of, do most
good withal, nor attending to them. Hence it comes to pass that Men are not
content to mind, and know themselves or their own minds (if it was less
difficult than it is;) nor yet things more nearly Relating to themselves, which
is more easy: But they are also more inquisitive into, and desirous to know
the Affairs of others, what they are and do, and observe them, and consequently
to pass Judgment of them; which is a sign to them, but often a very false one,
that they do know: Because we use to do so, and should do so, viz. Pass
Judgment only of things we do know. If we should not pass Judgment, but doubt
or suspend, we should seem to our selves to be Ignorant; which we would not do
because we will ultimately, and please our selves not to be so. To doubt, or to
suspend ones Judgment because one does not know, is but very rare and in few
Tempers; but it should be always and is to be preferred before Knowledge,
because it is a better thing, a greater excellency to withhold a Man's Judgment,
where there is no Reason seen, where one does not know or see (the Connection of
what he affirms and does) the Truth it self, than it is to know the Truth it
self. The one is but a perfection of our Understanding, the other a great virtue
of our Wills, and we shall be the wiser the more we thus judge, and accordingly
behave our selves: I say, rather to say and think we do not know when we indeed
do not, then to know though never so certainly.

Sect. IV.
Fourthly, A fourth cause may be an Instance or Branch of Pride; that is, to
please our selves too much merely, either that we have, or are reputed to have,
an ability and sufficiency to understand, and direct others and their affairs
too, better than they themselves can: When it is only so conceitedly by us, and
we know not others Circumstances; or were we in them we would do the like or
worse; or if we had this ability, perhaps we had better be without it; whilst
it makes us less able to understand and direct our selves, by using our minds
to Wander abroad, and to attend to others, and depriving us of the
opportunities of Self-reflection. It is very often seen, that those who are
extraordinary forward not out of some sense of Duty to give Counsel, Advice, or
Judgment of other Men's Concerns, are very negligent and careless, and unapt to
follow the very same, when it is as useful and profitable for themselves.

Sect. V.
Secondly, For some of the Causes of too great a Proneness to judge on the worst
side, whether truly or falsely, (but not therefore, or because they are true or
false) in our selves, they are all either Ignorance, or some Ill-disposition of
Will.

1. Ignorance, viz. Of the bad effects or consequences of this our too great
Proneness, which Ignorance may proceed from Ill-dispositions of Will, either on
set purpose, or designed then when we judge; and we wilfully shut our Eyes, and
do not attend to what might better inform us; or it may be contracted before.
But it may proceed too sometimes, even from Love and Charity. So we see
sometimes Persons much desirous of their Relations, or others Good and
Welfare, very apt always to suspect the worse of them, and to observe their
Beginning, bad Inclinations, and to think them so; but not so much to take
notice of the contrary good ones in them; and this partly that they might
timely prevent any evil that may happen to them thereby. And so may it be in
public Affairs, and of very great and universal Concernment especially, and
yet soon out of our power; nay, so we see it in our selves sometimes. Some Men
being too apt to look upon their Faults and Imperfections, and to magnify
them, and to take no notice of what is good in themselves, and consequently to
judge falsely concerning themselves on the worst side: Though this is but rare in
compare with the other extreme, and proceeds from an imprudent and ignorant
love, not attending that they ought, and may do themselves as much good by
their being pleased with, and encouraged by, and thankful for the good they
have; as by being afraid of, removing, and preventing any evil fallen upon
them, or that may fall upon them: and not considering still that it is best be
sure, all things considered, to judge always according to Reason and Truth; not
to trouble and perplex our selves with vain fears and endeavors, and for other
good effects thereof.

Sect. VI.
Sixthly, But I doubt the far more usual Causes of too great Proneness to judge
on the worst side, are ill-dispositions of Will in general, Self-love and
Self-pleasing ultimately in various Instances, such as are more particularly
Self-pleasing by:

1. Hatred of, or Malice (an habitual Hatred) against any Person in general:
Than which there is nothing in the World more detestable, because the most
Mischievous, and it is the greatest degeneracy from, the most opposite and
contrary to, the most excellent perfection in the World, which is Goodness, and
is usually attributed to the Devil; that is, the worst of Beings. This is when
a Man pleases himself ultimately in doing mischief to, in vexing and hurting
another Man, other Persons. It is easy to see, how this disposes a Man to the
greatest readiness to judge any thing bad in the Person to whom he is thus
affected. For if we thus please our selves in doing Mischief, we shall
endeavor that we may still please our selves, so to do; and that we may so do,
we'll represent Persons as bad as we can, as great evils (whether true or
false, it matters not) as we can. This, I say, manifestly is a Cause in us of
being mischievously affected, and of doing what we can to them: And this again,
is a Cause to such Persons of Pleasures and Delight. He therefore that wills
the End, viz. Pleasing himself by the mischief of others, will will the Means
thereto; and that is one, viz. Judging them as great Evils as we can. It is like
a Man's dressing up another Person in ugly or contemptible Habit, that he might
please himself in hating or contemning him; whereas the Person's true and
natural Make or Features, was more beautiful and comely than his own. But this
is so truly a hateful disposition, that I would be willing rather to think
there is no such thing amongst Men, whatever there may be amongst the Infernal
Spirits, or elsewhere in the World.

2. Though in the second place, Revenge comes somewhat near it; that is, to
please ones self in doing evil to another Man, merely because he has done evil
to him; which is a very unreasonable thing. For why should there be more
mischief in the World, because there has been some already? Clear contrary,
the more there has been, the less there should be. I know oft-times there is a
mixture of Justice and Selfdefence, to prevent the like for the future, but
oft-times too there is more pretended than there is; and when there is a love
to Justice and a just and reasonable Defense, it is a Cloak to hide much of the
other too, or a Pill that has much of that Poison in it. We have the more need
to be Skilful and Subtle in the discovery of the sincerity of our Hearts; that
is, the ends or designs that move our Wills.

Now it is here likewise manifest, that to judge a Person as bad and as
imperfect as we can, will augment, whetten and sharpen our Revenge, and
consequently if we be so wickedly disposed, our Pleasure and Delight too; and
as before, he that wills the End wills the Means thereto, when he sees it is
so: In revenge too, is often mixed the affectation of Superiority.

3. Somewhat less a bad Cause, but bad enough too, is Pride, or a Self-pleasing
ultimately in the instances of our power: And here more particularly,

(1.) Self-pleasing in our Superiority to others in any thing, a branch of
Pride, i. e. to be Ultimately and more than ought pleased therewith,
inordinately and immoderately. A very mischievous Temper and Appetite. I do not
see that any degree thereof is allowable, or that it does any good more than
the gratification of the proud Person. To affect to be Superior in some
excellent and useful Quality, may be an occasion sometimes of a Man's excelling
therein, and consequently of some good effect: But it is not because he affects
Superiority, that is not the precise Cause, but because that Superiority
happens to be in an excellent thing. And yet more particularly.

(2.) Envy a kind of this affectation of Superiority, not the passion so much;
that is, a desire of depriving others of any Good they possess which we have
not; (as is to be understood too, in the foregoing cause of Hatred and
Revenge) but the cause or principle of our being prone to this Passion; that
is, pleasing our selves ultimately, that we have some good things which others
have not, and being very glad they have them not, and sorry and grieved if they
have them: And this makes us to will both that it should seem so to us, and
that it really should be so. That it should seem so; and therefore we wilfully
judge it is so, that others are in general much Inferior to us in any good
thing, or less Superior at least than indeed they are, and therefore
particularly that they are guilty or defective, where we are not, that they are
such or such. We would have others not better, or as bad, or worse than our
selves, and are much pleased it is so, and therefore we make it to seem so to
our selves, and wilfully judge it so, when it may be it is not in our power
really to make it so. For the same reason Envy also makes us to will it should
be so indeed, and to endeavor it as much as we can: and therefore
particularly, so far as we esteem, honor, love; reward good things, that they
should not be honored, beloved, rewarded, or the like, and consequently that
they should not seem to others to merit it; and consequently both to judge and
make known our Judgment very greedily and readily that they do not, to bear
witness against them. It is called Detraction, when a Man from this or such
like Principle, is judged not to have some good Quality that he has really;
and Slander when he is judged to have some bad one, which he is free from. A
contrary temper to that wise Admonition of the Wiseman, Prove. 24. 17. Rejoice
not when thine Enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth.

(3.) Contempt, this has an effect contrary to admiration: Admiration of any
Person in general and confusedly, causes a Man to judge all things in or any
way belonging to that Person excellent, and to attribute more to him than he
has. Contempt in general of a Person, on the contrary, causes us to judge all
things appertaining to the Person contemned, mean or small, or to attribute to
him many and greater Imperfections than indeed are in him, in some such manner
ordinarily signified. Tush, there is no great matter in such a Person, indeed
he may be so or so: But that is a small thing if he be; nay, there is nothing
laudable in him, what is matter what he says or does? He is weak, silly,
wilful, etc. Whereas we ought not thus confusedly to pass Judgment, but more
distinctly; if there be any thing contemptible, yet there may be other things
very considerable. Men also may please themselves merely in contempt of
another, as a Mark or Sign (to themselves, though it may be to no Body else) of
their own Superiority, and being better; and that they may more contemn and
consequently please themselves, (as it was before in hatred) make him appear to
themselves, and judge him much more contemptible than he is. Both these last
particulars are contrary to the Apostolical Precept, in that excellent Chapter,
Romans 12. 10. In honor preferring one another. Be we rather inclined to judge
others better than our selves, and to give unto them the signs thereof, rather,
I say, than assume them to our selves, even when equal probability of both
sides, or some (it may be) advantage of our own: for the more excellent effect
only sometimes of checking and controuling, and subduing, and bringing under
Command, that unreasonable and inordinate Self-love. These three are Branches
of Pride.

(4.) A fourth cause is Flattery in Judging: That is, when a Man pleases
himself ultimately, in pleasing any one that is an Adversary or Enemy to the
Person concerning whom he gives Judgment, and consequently is well pleased to
hear of his Faults or Imperfections. A Man may use out of Flattery so often to
tell his Judgment to the disadvantage of a Person, that at last he may unawars
come to believe it himself; and partly that his Flattery may not at any time be
discovered, oblige himself to believe it, and persuade himself that that is
true, which before he did but say was so, though he thought the contrary. And
here it may be observed, that as too great a proneness to judge on the worst
side, does proceed from these Causes mentioned: So it is a most ordinary thing
for the passing, and especially declaring ones Judgment and Opinion on the
advantageous side, i. e. That a Man has more of some good thing than indeed he
has, to proceed from some of the same Causes too, viz. Hatred, Envy,
Indignation. For Example, That a Man has more Revenue, Treasure, Honor,
Power, Ease, Pleasure, than indeed he has, only to expose him more to the Envy
or Indignation of others. And in general, Men judge thus in a thing which they
account a reward to him who they think does not, or they would not have him
either to merit or receive it, most commonly it is an easy thing from
Circumstances, to discern from what Principles such Judgment proceeds: But some
may be so cunning as to conceal or dissemble.

Sect. VII.
Seventhly, For the Causes of rash Judgment and Censure, they must be the same
with those of the two former particulars. The Causes of rash Judgment in
general, Idleness, Busibodiness, Activity, Curiosity, Pride, and of rash
Censure or Judgment, without Reason, but a Man's own Will on the worst side as
such; are among others, Hatred, Revenge, Pride, Affectation of Superiority,
Envy, Contempt, Flattery. To which we may add Anger and Wrath, which if a Man
be not very careful, disposes us to as much uncharitable and unreasonable
Judging as the former, and a Man is seldom or never to trust his Judgment of
any Person after that fierce and confounding Passion, but refer it to another
time, when calmness and freedom from Passion, gives him more ability to see the
Truth, and more impartiality to judge. And now all these Causes, methinks, are
so Unreasonable, Inhumane, and Unchristian, when thus nakedly represented, that
they cannot but stir up in Souls not quite degenerate, or corrupted, dead, and
senseless of what is good, many of these very Passions against themselves, and
seem the ugliest Objects that can be beheld. These are those which compose a
Devil more, and are more essential to him than any other shape.

Sect. VIII.
IV. The Causes some of them of false Judging as false, or of falsity, error
of Judgment concerning Persons, whether on the good or bad side, may, as in all
other false Judgments, be reduced to two within us in General.

1. Defect in our Understanding which here in this case is but one, viz.
Ignorance, in a large sense, viz. the Absence, or want of Apprehension, or of
the actual Knowledge of something which would influence our Judgments.

2. In our Will, a mere inclination to any certain false Judgment, whether it
be from Custom and Use, or from the Love, and for the sake of any certain
Object.

In this particular case of false Judgments, some of the most frequent Causes
more or less remotely, and some way or other reducible to these two, are these:

Sect. IX.
(1.) In general; mere Ignorance of the truth of things, where there is no
defect of Will. So a Man may judge an action in respect of the effect and
principle of it, to be well or ill done, when it is the contrary; and it was
the case of the Jewish and Gentile Christians, passing Judgment of one another
Eating, and abstaining from certain Meats, and observing or not observing some
certain Days and Times, and consequently imposing them upon one another from
their own private Opinions; not as determined by their rightful Superiors or
Governors, Romans 14. Some of them through Ignorance judged, that those who took
the Liberty to eat forbidden Meats, contrary to the Mosaical Law (which they
thought was still even under the Messiah to be observed) did an evil Action,
and out of an evil Principle too possibly, viz. Profaneness, or want of that
respect for God's Commands which they ought: And this probably too, because
they found in themselves that if they should do so, it would proceed from such
a Principle (which will be a second Cause presently to be named.) The other
Gentile Christians judged right concerning the action of abstaining from Meats,
that it was not right; and the Non-observation of, or Liberty from the Jewish
Law was a Christian privilege, or it did not belong to the Christian Religion:
But possibly too they might (if they did not) judge wrong, concerning the
Principle of these Jewish Christians, viz. That it was out of Superstition or
Pride, that the Gentiles might not be in all things equalized to themselves,
and that the Ancient Constitutions of their Religion might seem more
considerable. From hence also (more particularly) it proceeds, that even very
Honest and Just Persons (though much oftener in the World, it proceeds from
ultimate Self-love or a mixture of it) judge themselves Comparatively more
Superior to others in good qualities, and truly more valuable than they are,
viz. They know and observe more their own Perfections and good Qualities, their
Number, their Nature, the degrees of their worth and excellency from their
effects, than they do those of others. They can tell better all the Good
qualities they have in themselves, than what are in others; many of which, or
but few, they may ever have had occasion to observe: They may also, and do see,
and take notice of all the uses and good effects of any Perfection which is in
themselves, having frequent occasion to observe them; but hardly of any of that
which is in another; when he possibly could quote as many more of his. And
hence (a little further) it comes to pass, that every one extols and cries up
his own Art though never so trivial, and prefers it before others, really
believing what he says. Hence also it is, together with some Rashness and
Precipitancy in inferring, that Men judge others too generally and too
confidently to be Ill or Good qualified Persons; to have more of Defects or
Perfection comparatively each with other, than they really have; that they have
(for) such or such ill qualities and imperfections (which may be true) but none
or much fewer good quallities to balance them, than indeed they have; and than
they themselves would have known, if they had had some other opportunities of
knowing them: They have had only occasion or means to know the defects and Ill
qualities, and not the Good, and so perhaps on the contrary; and yet they do
not observe so much, nor reflect upon it, nor attend unto this Caution. Now Men
ought to pass Judgment first distinctly, that at such or such a time, in such
or such a performance or action, there appeared to them such defect or
commendable quality, and then from thence according to the degree of
probability or likelihood in the Consequence (which if the observation be but
once, is often but very small) if there be just occasion, to infer and conclude
concerning the Qualities of the Person in general, as to number, degree, and
constancy; which men commonly do allin a clutter together confusedly. There
have been Men known, who have not only once but often appeared very mean and
defecttive, (especially in some Circumstances, as in Public, in Conversation
after Action, in haste or with expedition) and yet have at that time been much
more valuable, but could not show it; and generally in other Circumstances of
Life, they have much exceeded those who have appeared much better at certain
times.

It most often requires a pretty long Conversation, especially to more slow
Observers and Reasoners, to know and pass a general Judgment truly concerning a
Person: That which is usually signified by the Proverb, Of eating a Bushel of
Salt with a Man, before one chooses him for a Friend.

This is the reason ordinarily (to give no unuseful Instance) that Men are
often judged in general better or worse than they are by their Discourses and
^ooks. If a Person has wrote a Book in which there has appeared somewhat
considerable of Piety or Virtue, or Judgment, or Wit, or other Good quality, he
is generally thought more such in more things, and more constantly than he is,
whereas there is set down his Thoughts and Inclinations which are more rare;
whence also greater expectations from him in his Discourse, Conversation,
Employment, than are reasonable; and sometimes upon their observed failure,
greater contempt and under-valuing of him; sometimes (as when the Judger
follows common Opinion and Testimony, as most do) an undue admiration and
approbation of all he says and does. The like on the contrary; when Men for
some too light or satirical, or obscure Speech or Book, are judged more
careless, trivial, ill-natured, or confused in more things, and more constantly
than indeed they are. All which seems much like as if Men should from one
handsome or crooked-finger of a Person, judge confidently concerning the Beauty
or Deformity of his whole Body.

Sect. X.
(2.) More particularly; an Opinion or Judgment too universal and unlimted,
that all other Men are like our selves: Which as it is true sometimes, so it is
often false. This comes from actual Ignorance, or non-attention of this Rule's
not being Universal; and that other signs of Men's Qualities and Tempers are to
be adhibited and made use of, and that there is great variety in Men. So
oft-times we judge such an Action to proceed from such a Reason, or such a
Principle, or such a Temper in a Man, (suppose from Self-interest ultimately,
Pride, or Covetousness,) because it does so in our selves, or at least we are
strongly inclined thereto; never taking any other account of any other
Circumstances (such as his former Temper, manner of Life, Actions in the like
case, etc.) which might give us sufficient reason to believe and judge the
contrary. The same Action may proceed from several Principles, Ends, and
Purposes: And very different and contrary Actions (especially in diverse
Persons) may proceed, and full often do from one and the same general
Principle, and due End. So Men are apt to judge other Men's inclinations like
their own, and that some things please others as much as themselves; and other
things are distastful, tedious, and burdensome, because they are so to
themselves. So many judge that the Gratification of many inordinate Appetites or
Lusts in us, are extraordinarily pleasant to all Men, say they what they will,
and Virtue and Religion is a dry sapless thing to all Men; nothing of Pleasure
or Delight to all those that profess it, but that it is taken up or pretended
to, for some other particular Ends, and that they would be otherwise if they
dared, and would be glad to be rid of the burden, or freed from the
confinement thereof; and that therefore they are Hypocrites: And from the same
cause are frequent false Judgments on the Good side, and Persons and Actions
are often judged better than they are, which is the better extreme. In so much
that very often very Good-minded Men cannot believe that Men are so wicked as
they are, that they are so Selfish, Unjust, Fraudulent and Deceitful,
Perjurious, Filthy, and Sensual, Impious and Atheistical, as indeed they are,
and so are as often cozened in their dealign with them, and oft-times give
their Commendation and their Charity where they are not deserved.

This is so general a Cause of Error in our Judgments concerning Persons, that
we extend it to God Himself, and it takes place very frequently in our
judgments concerning God Himself. So Men judge Him not so much to love Holiness,
to hate or disapprove of Sin and Vice, and consequently that He will not so
much take care to reward the one, or severely to punish the other: No, He Will be
Kind and Merciful, and let them alone, and Indulge them to take their pleasure
as they will, or at least He will not be so hard to Torment or Punish them for
what is past; and all this because they are so disposed themselves, and they for
their parts are very indifferent to Virtue or Vice, and would let Men alone to
please themselves therein; they see no great reason why they should trouble
themselves or others there-about. Like those wicked Persons, Psalm. 50. 21.
These things have thou done, and I kept silence: Thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes.

Thus some Men think God Envious as it were, and if not delighted, yet content
with His Creatures misery for His own Pleasure ultimately. They think Him
Arbitrary, and Pleasing Himself ultimately in the exercise of His Power, and
this because they themselves are so, or at least inclined to be so. And one,
yet further, Reason of this, is Men's ultimate Self-love, whereby they are
inclined to, and do actually judge many things in themselves good Qualities and
Perfections which are not, and consequently attribute them to God, whom all Men
naturally judge to possess all Perfection: Which is true, supposing the
Perfection does not necessarily infer or involve some Imperfection: A thing
which is of great use to be taken notice of.

The same has been one reason of some Men*s (the Heathens at least)
Idololatrical making Images, and corporeal Representations of God in Humane
shape; viz. They have judged God in this respect in Form and Shape like
themselves, and this out of Selflove, together with a natural Proneness to
conjoyn things, which use to be in our Perceptions and Judgments conjoined:
Such as is a rational Soul and Spirit joined with a Body of Humane shape, for
which cause among others, Angels and Cherubims are so pictured. This is
observed by Cicero, in the Person of Velleius the Epecurean, Lib. 1. de natura
Deorum. Quod vero sine corpore ullo vult [Plato] Deum esse, ut Graeci dicunt
(...), id quale esse possit intelligi non potest, careat enim sensu, careat
prudentia, careat voluptate necesse est, quae omnia Deorum notione
comprehendimus, i. e. Plato's Opinion, That God has no Body, cannot be
understood: For then He must want Sense, Prudence, Pleasure, which we
comprehend in the notion of the Gods. And again, Quod si Omnium animantium
formam vincit Hominis figura, Deus autem animans est; ea profecto figura est
quae Pulcherrima sit Omnium. Quoniamque Deos Beatissimos esse constat, beatus
autem esse sine virtute nemo potest, nec Virtus sine ratione constare, nec
ratio usquam inesse nisi in hominis figura, hominis esse specie Deos
confitendum est. To this purpose: That if Humane shape be better than that of
any other Animal, and God be an Animal, then He must needs have the best and
the most Beautiful. And because God is a most happy Being, and He cannot be
Happy without Virtue, nor have Virtue without Reason, nor can Reason be any
where but in a Humane shape, therefore God is of that shape too. So Cotta, the
Academick, in his reply to Velleius: Homini homine nihil Pulcrius videri,
blandam enim conciliatricem esse naturam and lenam sui, i. e. Man, indeed,
thinks nothing more Beautiful than himself; so Nature flatters it self.
Herodotus in his Clio, relating that the Persians made no Statues, nor Temples,
nor Altars to their Gods, but that they counted them Fools who did so; gives
this Reason in his Opinion, viz. Because they did not think the Gods to be
(...), sprung from Men, and consequently (I suppose) not of their shape, as the
Greeks did. Whether this Proneness to judge God like our selves out of
Self-love, use and custom of conceiving and judging, has been the cause of
making Images, and corporal Representations of God, or something in God by
Humane shape, among Christians or no: Yet, I think, there is but too much
Reason to believe, that the judging God like Mens-selves, has been but too
much the effect of it, especially among the Vulgar: I am sure it has a very
great natural tendency thereto. And the effect (it is probable) would have been
much more, if it had not been hindered by the Christian Doctrine, (which
notwithstanding some have kept those in Ignorance of, who have in this respect
most need of it) and especially by the Admonitions and just reproaches of those
whom these Patrons of Images as fastuously, as foolishly, and falsely call
Heretics. A custom and usage so sottish and childish, that never any who had
their Religion from the True God, or who had any notion of His Spiritual and
Infinite Nature either among Jews or Heathens, pretended any sufficient reason
for, (as the instruction of the Vulgar, etc.) or did not contemn and deride it,
until some Christians in the times of the greatest Ignorance and Corruption of
Manners, within some few Hundreds of years, introduced it into the Christian
Church. But to return from this Digression.

In Opinions and Persuasions: Some even of the better natured Persons often judge,
that Men cannot be of such a persuasion but out of some ill disposition of
Will, and such a particular one too, viz. Self-interest; that is, it is for
some designed good to themselves (besides the being in the Truth) so to be
persuaded; and this because they find themselves inclined thereto, and if they
were of such persuasions it would be from such Causes: Not considering want of
Information, Ineptitude to apprehend things any other way but as they have been
accustomed, a great usage of themselves so to conceive and judge, may be the
causes of such really ^alse Opinions of theirs. Nor do I see it a thing but
very generally to be determined, how far a true Lover of the Truth, or an
Honest-man in this particular, may err and mistake. Though I think too on the
other hand, very ofttimes other Causes of false persuasions are alleged,
besides some naughty disposition of Will, when it is not so, or but in small
measure, and this alone has the greatest Influence indeed.

Sect. XI.
(3.) Too general a belief of every Testimony or Report, whether in Talk or
Books, which proceeds oft-times again from mere actual Ignorance, or
Non-attention, that most Reports are most-what very fallible signs of what is
true, and sometimes none at all: That there are much better Proofs of things
sometimes from contrary Testimonies of better Persons, sometimes from other
things. This proceeds also from love of Activity and Curiosity, of Knowing and
Judging somewhat new and fresh, and sometimes from the worser Principles so
often named. All Testimonies are more or less signs of what is true, according
as the Persons are more wise and knowing, or more veracious willing and careful
to say no more than they know: Now how many Actions of Persons reported to be
done with certain Circumstances, and from certain Principles and Reasons, by
those who neither do, nor can know any thing of them: Or if they do, yet
through temerity, rashness, and precipitancy, curiosity, suspicion, envy,
flattery, or some other disposition of Will, do so either invent or change, by
adding or detracting or substituting, that sometimes none at all, most-what but
little, rarely very much of what they say is true and to be believed. But yet
what more ordinary than for Men to believe all without stick or scruple. The
further too still Reports go, through the more Persons they pass, they are
still the more uncertain, because still the more alteration; and as it rarely
happens for Persons who observe things by their own sense or reason, to report
them just as they observed them, through forgetfulness or rashness: (Besides
that they might not discern some Circumstances.) So it is as rare and seldom
for the same things to be conveyed from any one to another exactly, without
some alteration. I believe that the more Cautious and Wise, cannot but have
observed, that in almost all Reports and Testimonies concerning Persons, their
Actions, Principles, Qualities, or Tempers, either the things are quite false,
or but some general part of them true. The more Cautious and Discreet, Honest,
and lovers of Truth we observe Men to be; the more we may in their Reports and
Testimonies concerning Persons, either on the Good or Bad side, defer to them
of our Belief and Judgment of the truth of what they say; and these in any
degree considerable, are but too few. A good short Memorandum of this
particular is that excellent Precept, (...). Remember to unbelieve or
disbelieve, i. e. Either to suspend thy Belief, or to believe the thing to be
false.

Sect. XII.
(4.) A fourth Cause of our false Judgment on either the Good or Badside, is
our attention to, and taking notice of, or observing only either the good or
bad Actions or Qualities, Perfections or Imperfections of Men, together with
their Effects and Consequences; and not both. Whence it comes to pass, that
those Persons in whom we attend to nothing or little but what is Good, (which
is still the better extreme) we judge much better than indeed they are; and thus
it is usually in our Judgments of our Selves or our Friends, or those we love
and favor: But on the contrary, those in whom we attend to, or observe what is
bad or imperfect only, their bad qualities or actions, the bad effects and
consequences of these; and not at all or but little of what is Good, we judge
them much worse than they are: Judge them to have done a great many and very bad
actions, to have a great many and very bad qualities; but none or very few
good. This as it is the most mischievous, so it is the more frequent extreme.
Men being now so far from that Humane and Christian temper of universal
Kindness and Good Will, that they are but very few they care for, or to whom
they are disposed friendly, in comparison of those they do not. This again may
sometimes proceed from mere necessary Ignorance and want of Information. For
sometimes a Man may have seen, or otherwise known much Good by a Man, and none
or little bad; either because the Man wanted his proper Temptation, or through
dissimulation of his temper and inclination, or for other reasons: And on the
contrary, a Man by himself or others, may know many bad things by a Person, and
little Good; when he may have much in him which he had never the opportunity to
observe, or the Means otherwise to know. But it most-what proceeds from some
undue disposition of Will, and when a Man is partially, not justly affected to
Persons, and as he ought; he is either pleased or displeased with Persons, more
than in general he might observe them to deserve or merit. Thus you shall but
too often see (to give Instances of that side which is most to be avoided) that
Men will take more notice of, and better remember one bad Action in a Person,
than twenty good ones; and consequently this shall procure him more
Disreputation or Disesteem, than they shall honor or good will: So ungrateful
and illnatur'd a thing, is but too much of the World: Whereas we should say,
such or such a thing indeed, at such a time is amiss, bad or evil; but then
'twas but once, or seldom perhaps; nay, I know it is oftener otherwise, and he
has such or such good qualities, there he is to be commended, that is or was
well done. And this should be done not to sooth Men up, or to make them content
and so well-pleased with themselves, notwithstanding many ill Actions, Vices,
and Imperfections, as not to endeavor to prevent, reform and amend them too;
but to encourage them so to do; since they have so much Good in them already:
And to make ones Counsel or Reproof more effectual; since this ready taking
notice and approbation of what is Good in them, is an Argument of an impartial
Love, Charity, and Kindness to them in the Person exhorting or reproving. And
here I Will only add by the way, because it is a thing of frequent and great use
in Humane life, that it is the same kind of Cause of our false Judgment of the
Goodness or Evilness of things, viz. We only observe and attend to either the
Conveniences or Inconveniences, the Good or Bad effects of things, but not to
both together; which is often from mere Ignorance, oftener from some Passion. We
may observe it every where in public Constitutions, in Domestic, Private and
Personal affairs. Whence oft-times we hurry and haste to mend things for the
worse, and are discontent, ill at ease, make our selves unhappy, repine,
murmur, and unthankful to God unjustly, and without reason; and yet after some
experience of the contrary Inconveniences we are running back again, with many
other mischievous and hurtful Consequences. Ofttimes too on the other hand, we
will not stir to mend things, taking notice only of their Conveniences, and
not of their-Inconveniencies, which might without greater be redressed. The
first generally is the defect of those who affect Novelty: The second of those
who affect Antiquity, i. e. Who inordinately and immoderately love them; either
absolutely for themselves without reference to any good use or effect, or more
than what they can really contribute to any such good use, does deserve. The
first is commonly the temper of Young Men; the second of Old: In the one being
an immoderate appetite of Activity; in the other of Ease.

Sect. XIII.
(5.) A fifth Cause is want of a prevalent love of Truth. Men most-what in
their Judgments and Discourse concerning Persons (nor is it much less in
things, witness the generality of Books) look more at other things, little or
not at all at the truth of what they judge or say; they take little heed whether
it be really true or no, and therefore seldom examine, suspend, or pronounce
doubtfully, or according only to appearing probability. It is true, they say,
and think things to be true, very confidently and strongly, but this not
because they see the truth of what they affirm, but because they would have it
true. Not because their Understanding and Perception goes before their
Judgment, and their natural affection to Truth makes them so judge, but some
other disposition of will; such as I have so often named, Activity, Curiosity,
Pride, Hatred, Envy, Anger, Contempt, Flattery, etc. Whereas we should be very
careful to possess our Minds with such a serious love of the Truth, that we may
have a constant reverend regard thereto in all our Judgments and Speeches
concerning others. And this we should do without much trouble, if we used our
selves thereto, and did but use to check our selves, and ask the Question, and
pause a little whether we know it to be true or no. We should love not only to
speak truth with our Neighbor, but of our Neighbor too. We should look upon
Truth as a most Sacred thing, ever to be inviolable and to be the main, if not
the only perfection of our Judgments; without which we had better have none at
all. We had better be utterly Ignorant, and never judge at all, than do it
erroneously: For by that means our Actions and Resolutions are determined and
directed amiss, and are mischievously made use of. For were it not much better
that we were ignorant, and passed no Judgment at all of Persons, either of the
quantity or quality of their Perfections and Imperfections, than by being
mistaken therein sometimes to neglect or punish the Innocent and
Well-deserving, and to be Beneficent and bestow good things upon those that ill
deserve, and make ill use of them. In few words, Men judge falsely because they
will not judge truly, or are not pleased therewith, or at least but little and
in such degree only that it is not effectual. For it is not every degree of
love to the Truth, that will secure a Man from false Judgments of things, and
here of Persons: But it must be a greater degree of Love thereto, than to the
thing which at any particular time may be a temptation to the contrary. And if
we would be always secure, we must have a stronger Affection thereto than to
any other Object, which may occur in our Lives, more than to the favor or
good will of the Greatest or Best, more than to Mischievousness, Superiority,
either in Reputation for, or Possession of any Good thing, more than to Power
or Greatness, more than to Gain or Riches, finally any other good Advantage or
Interest. We must look upon our uprightness or truth of our Judgments or
Opinions, as a far greater proper Good, a richer and more excellent Possession
than all these; whereby we do more Good than by all these without it. And
consequently be more shamed and afraid to be Erroneous, and live in Falsehood
and a Lie, than any other evil or hurtful thing to us, except Vice and Sin.

We must in a general sense, Buy the Truth, and sell it not: That is, prefer it
before all other things that are inconsistent with it, and cause us to part
with it, also Wisdom, Instruction, and Understanding, the means to obtain it,
Prove. 23. 23. If we do not do thus, if we be not thus tempered and disposed, if
we do not judge this a greater good; we shall have our Judgments affected,
strengthened, bent, and determined by our love to other things in all Matters,
where there is not apparent demonstration, but only high degrees of
Probability; as it is almost in all affairs of Humane life. Nay, even in these
a Man may wilfully blind and confound himself, or divert his attention; and if
not make himself judge false, yet at least hinder himself from clearly seeing
and judging truly, and make himself doubt as it were; saying, when a thing
cannot be denied, Truly, I do not know, or the like; and in such a manner
shuffle and contrive to bring himself at least to suspension and doubt and
confusion. Every Man has some degree of love to Truth naturally, some more,
some less, more than sometimes to more, sometimes fewer other things; and
accordingly they are more likely, more often to judge truly. But it is and must
be a greater degree than to all other things universally and constantly, that
will always secure from all prejudices of his will.

Sect. XIV.
(6.) The sixth Cause I shall name is our Passions, both those of the
Concupiscible and Irascible appetite, as they are usually called: Or more
plainly, those that have good, and those that have evil for their immediate
Object. Such as are the simple ones of Love, Hatred, Joy, and Grief, and
Desire: And others compounded of these, as Revenge, Anger, Hope, Fear, etc.
These all in every Case, cause us to judge to the advantage, and in favor of
themselves; that is, so as they may be preserved and maintained, the Instances
of which are everywhere, and innumerable. Thus for Example: Love causes us to
attribute to the Object beloved things that are lovely, whereby the Passion is
maintained or increased; and hatred on the contrary, to attribute, or ascribe,
or adjudg to the Object hated those things that are hateful and evil, for its
own preservation or increase, whereby it is kept up or augmented, and made more
keen and fierce: And all this without any regard to the truth or falsehood of
what is judged. So likewise what we desire, we will think it is good Positively
or Privatively. In desire properly so called, or where the good we desire, is a
possession of some good thing, we most readily judge the good thing a great
Good, and consequently its Possession. In Anger and Revenge, where the good
thing desired is a removal of some evil or grievous thing to us, by doing evil
to it (which obtains in Inanimate things, but principally to Persons) we are
extraordinarily prone and forced to judge this removal a greater good, and in
order thereto the evil to be removed a mighty evil. And therefore more
particularly in Persons to whom we are thus affected or passionated, we judge
many kinds and degrees of evil or bad things to be in them, many or all,
perhaps more than indeed there are, which are seldom but very confusedly
apprehended, and signified usually by some name, to which our passions of
Anger, Hatred, or the like have been joined, (as that of some Sect or Party)
whereby still these our Passions are gratified; that is, supported, maintained,
nay, augmented and boiled up to the greatest degree of Agitation and Violence.
And those Men's judgments thus from Passions, whereby they are maintained and
increased, though they may happen to be true; yet it appears by Experience,
that they are more generally false. Their happening to be true, sometimes makes
Men oft-times justify and think well of such passionate Judgments; whereas the
truth was not at all seen by them, nor was it the Reason or Cause therefore of
their Judgments.

These Passions thus bias, and warp, and determine our Judgments three Ways
among others.

1. By bringing to mind and furnishing our Invention only with those things
which maintain or increase them, and which are true; and keeping out the
contrary, hindering those from appearing which may abate or extinguish them,
which are as true too. We all may have often observed how much we have
presently to say for a Person whom we love, how plentifully and readily our
Invention is furnished; What long Orations we can make in his behalf and
praise; How many excellent Qualities, and in what great Degree, appear to us in
him, and we attribute to him. All which grant to be true. But we have nothing
to say against him, nothing to his disadvantage, nothing that is bad,
imperfect, or faulty in him appears, or comes to our mind; when as much might
as truly there have been said too. And so on the contrary (the worse or at
least the more frequent extreme) in a Person whom we hate, are revengefully and
wrathfully affected to, with whom we are angry: Then how many Faults in him, or
Imperfections crow'd presently into our Minds? All his past bad Actions and
Qualities remembered, his present observed, nay, his future too foretold; and
altogether fly about immediately in our Fancies; and we could give a Catalogue
sometimes of many hours long, and make large Declamations against him; the Man
has been this and that, and the other, all which we'll grant to be true too: But
then, how barren are our Inventions for him, we have nothing or very little to
say to commend him. This would be a very dry Theme for us. We remember, or take
notice of nothing considerable in him: Whereas it may be here is as much, and
as true to be said by any other Person who is Calm and Reasonable, not thus
possessed by these Passions against him; nay, and we our selves can do it when
we are out of that Passion, when the Man is not altered (except it be in that
one particular for which we are angry with him) he is the same still, he is no
better nor worse, when we are, and when we are not so affected to him; it is we
only alter and change. And so in particular Actions, how easily can we, by how
many Arguments, commend, justify, or excuse any Action of our Friends, and
with as many discommend or aggravate that of our conceited Adversary, whom we
are in hatred with, or bear grudge against, or are wrathful and angry with?
Hence therefore we give false Judgments concerning Persons qualities or
actions; judging them much better or worse than they are; we having only
Arguments and Proofs on one side brought to our Mind, by our passions, and
those on the other kept out by them. Which is like, as if corrupted or bribed
Officers should permit no Witnesses to come into, or appear in the presence of
the Judge, but those that shall serve for that side or the Cause that they are
bribed for: And yet often our Mind and Reason, the Judge, not attending and
taking notice of this Bribery and Partiality of these Officers, the Passions
(though it might and should) may think it very truly judged; at least as it
ought according to the Evidence that it had; and set down, and be content, and
think all was well done, and truly they were very honest and sincere in their
Judgments. This is one of the most sly and close Cheats and Tricks we by our
Passions put upon our Reasons. The more had we need here to be cautious, and
now more especially when the Deceit and Cozenage is discovered. And both on
this and the two following, as well as other accounts, it is a special Maxim of
Wisdom, not to trust those Judgments, where Passions have gone before Reason:
But do one of these three things. Either, 1. Be calm and and have no Passions
at all. Or, 2. If thou will for Invention-sake have any, then passionate thy
self equally on both sides. Or, 3. Raise up in thy self a greater and
commanding passion for Truth, which will make all the Evidence and Proof thou
have in thy keeping, appear equally on all sides. But here I may prevent what
is to be said in another Head.

2. And very briefly: Our Passions cause us to judge in favor of themselves,
bringing into our Minds what is true on one side, and keeping back what is so
on the other, but also by thrusting into them more than is true: And therefore
we observe in our Friends and in our Enemies, (that is, to whom we are so) more
virtues or faults, fine or foul things, and more of them too than any Body else
not alike prejudiced can see, or than indeed there are. And,

3. When things, on both sides do come to our Minds, as especially when
suggested by another, who would discourse or defend the Person we are
passionated for or against; I say, when this is, by thrusting them on one side
away again, or turning a Man from them, or causing one wilfully not to attend
to them; or if that cannot be, not to the Proof and Evidence that is in them;
nay, not to be able, it confounding and agitating our Minds, and drawing their
force another way: And so it is by every days Experience observed, that he that
is under the passions of Hatred and Anger against any thing or Person, will not
attend to what can be said or proposed in their Commendations or Defense; nor
will nor can ofttimes apprehend the Proof or Consequence thereof. So on the
other hand, Timidity, or Fear, or Scruple to judge amiss concerning Persons,
especially on the bad side, may cause many not to judge according to the best
probability that does appear to them, without any prejudice from any Person, or
ill disposition of Will: But this is an effect of Passions, more visible and
more to be observed by the Person himself misjudging, than the former, and
therefore in that respect more easy to be prevented. And here we see
manifestly one of the principal mischiefs of Passions, as there are also very
good use of them; and how much therefore it concerns us to govern them well.

Sect. XV.
(7.) Another Cause of false Judgment either on the good or bad part, may be
all Appetites whatsoever, besides those which have Truth and universal Justice
for their Objects. By which Justice, I mean, nothing else but such a love of,
and desire to do Good to each particular, as is most consistent with, or
productive, or effective of the greatest Good of the whole; that, always with
regard to, measured and moderated by this. I say, all Appetites besides those;
not only those which cause it on the bad side, as Malice, Pride, Envy, Revenge,
(which two last seem mixed of the two former) and others which have been
formerly mentioned; but those also which cause it on the favorable side, as in
Flattery, when a Man by passing his Judgment before another concerning himself,
or his Friend, desires to please him, and to gain his good opinion and favor;
nay, partial and imprudent Charity it self may be the Cause. As when a Man
having no Self-end (more than the pleasure of the Action) in giving his
Judgment concerning a Person to whom he has a strong inclination to do good,
but without that due actual heed to, or foresight of the Hurt or Evil that may
come of this his Beneficence to him, or to others elsewhere, or at some other
time, that is, partially or imprudently, judges him more deserving than in
truth he is.

To give particular Instances of false Judgments from these Causes would be
endless; only one may be observed for Example, which is frequent and of
consequence.

Contradicting the Judgment of others, passing Judgments contrary to those of
others; and oft-times the more, by how much the Number or Reputation of those
others are the greater. When we see one praised or dispraised by them,
contrariwise to dispraise or praise either in general, or quoting particulars,
and multiplying and magnifying of them. Generally this is out of Pride, that we
might Equalize, or be Superior to others in our Invention, or Discretion, or
Honesty, the Abilities which fit us for Judging; that we might not at least
seem to our selves or others, to be inferior in those Qualities; that others
might not seem as if they were only able and fit to do it.

In all which there is affectation of Superiority, Vainglory, and Ostentation,
Envy; which are several Branches of Pride. And this we see not only among the
Vulgar, and in ordinary Conversation, but among the Learned; who often when any
Author is generally commended (and it may be too much) set themselves to
multiply and magnify his Faults and Defects, but to diminish his commendable
Qualities, by concealing or extenuating them. And on the contrary, when an
Author is now outdone, and thought to be much exceeded by another, and
therefore comparatively undervalued, they endeavor to multiply and magnify
what is Good and Deserving in him; but to neglect, conceal, or lessen what is
Bad and Defective: And consequently by this unobserved prejudice, they give
false Judgments concerning them. I know these Instances may proceed from a
careful Veracity and Justice, because Men commonly both praise and dispraise
excessively, and their Judgments may be true; but it is more rare even to have
any thing thereof, but much more rare still to see this without some mixture of
the other Causes.

And here we may just take notice of one reason of the aptness of Men to
recriminate, to accuse their Accusers though never so Just and Modest; or
presently to quote their Infirmities and Faults, viz. Men know that by
possessing the Person to whom they are accused with Hatred, Envy, Anger, etc.
against him who accuses them, they shall cause him to judge confusedly, and in
general the Accuser a bad or silly Person, and consequently all that appertains
to him, and consequently his Testimony; and that therefore it is not to be
believed. We see this design most-what to take effect with the Vulgar, where
there is almost always Revenge too.

Sect. XVI.
The Causes of the Fifth prohibited Judgment, viz. Too great a Proneness to
declare and make known our Judgments, may be and usually are the same now often
mentioned in some of the former, viz. Idleness, ultimate Self-pleasing by
Activity, Curiosity, Vain-conceit of ones own sufficiency and ability to judge
of others, fancied Reputation therefore; also by Hatred, Revenge, Pride,
affectation of Superiority, Envy, Contempt, Anger, Flattery: And Persons who
are too prone thus to do on the worst side out of such Principles, especially
now named, one or more of them, and are frequent and busy in doing of it, are
those who are called properly Tale-bearers; concerning whom you have so many
Advisements in the Book of the Proverbs, and of the mischievousness of their
Employment, as Prove. 26. 20, 22. and 16. 28. and 11. 13.

Sect. XVII.
Lastly, For the Causes of Men's passing Judgment in Thought and Speech,
concerning Persons on the worst side, out of such bad Principles as are
aforenamed; I have no other now to name, but only the corruption of their
Natures, and inclinations thereof when born into this World, by some certain
Causes, and this improved and increased by too constant an ill usage of
themselves, their wilful compliance therewith; few taking care to correct and
amend by the Grace of God, what is bad and amiss in themselves, their natural
Degeneracy and Corruption, their Inordinacy and Immoderacy of appetite, but
swimming down with the Stream, and doing that which is most easy.

CHAP. V. We have dispatched the Fourth General Head, the Causes of prohibited
Judgment.
Sect. I.
THe Fifth is the mischievous Effects or Consequences, which are so many
Reasons, and should be so many Motives to beware and to abstain therefrom. We
shall observe some of these in each particular prohibited Judgment distinctly.

I. Of too great a proneness to judge others in general, the ill effects are
these:

1. The first is, That too great a Proneness, and Practice accordingly, to
observe and judge others, causes us to neglect our own Affairs. The more our
Eyes are abroad, the less at home; for they cannot be in two places. We cannot
mind two things at once so different and distant. And it is every where by
Experience seen, that those who little take notice of what others are and do,
are usually more attentive to their own Business, and what immediately belongs
to themselves. The time that is spent in Reflection upon others Actions and
Principles, would otherwise most-what (if we are not very dull for want of
Variety) have been converted to the observation of our own. Such shamefully
neglect ofttimes to purpose, or set apart their own Actions, what they will,
what they will not do; and their own Principles, out of what End, and for what
Reason, and the execution of their purposed Actions, that they even forget to
do what they themselves had purposed and designed, because they are busy and
employed in gazing at others. Wisdom is before him that has understanding, but
the eyes of a Fool are in the ends of the Earth, Prove. 17. 24. The sense may
be, That a Man of understanding regards and looks at more often his own
wisdom, to see where he acts wisely, out of foresight of, and in order to good
Ends; but a Fool's thoughts are roving, and employed about things far from him,
the most remote and impertinent; that is, of Persons and Actions (among others)
which he can little make use of in comparison. As the Man that looks at his own
next steps, employs himself generally to better Purpose, than he that gazes at
the Horizon, or bounds of the Heavens. Now the further ill Consequences of thus
doing, is this, that we transfer our Observation and Judgment there, where we
can make less good Use, if any; and from thence, where we could have used it to
much better purpose for the most part.

For, 1. Thou can not so well know that, concerning which thou judge in
another Man, as in thy self, thy Judgment will be the less certain, and
consequently the Effects of it less certainly good. All our Judgments
concerning others, are concerning their Qualities or Actions, and of their
Actions sometimes whether they have been at all, sometimes out of what
Principle, sometimes to what effect or good purpose, whether they should have
been done. Now, no Man can tell so well what Qualities are in another Man, as
what are in himself: No man can so well tell the Principles of another Man's
actions, his end, intention, and design, as those of himself; every Man may
know his own Heart better than another Man's. No Man can be so sure of what is
done by any Man, as the Person himself. And lastly, It is but rare that any Man
of these great Talkers or Judgers, know the Circumstances of any Man's
condition, and consequently what can or ought to be done by such a Person, so
well as he himself; and surely he does or may (unless it is because he is an
idle Busie-body, or worse) know the circumstances of his own Actions, better
than he can those of another Man, and consequently what is fittest to be done
in his own Case, better than in another Man's. Why then does he not busy
himself there? viz. At Home. (I speak not universally, but for the most part:)
For sometimes in some Cases a Man may know other Men's Affairs better than they
themselves, and than their own Affairs, and give their Judgment with Modesty,
and out of Friendship. Yet how frequent is it for Men, and the most Ignorant
and Sottish, most peremptorily and confidently to judge what others who are
truly Wise ought to do, what would be fittest and of best effect for them to
do, to direct or find fault; where it is apparent they know little of the
Circumstances of their Condition or Affairs, and these cannot reasonably be
thought to be such strangers to their own Business and Affairs as not to know
more, and to know better what they have to do, and ought to do; yea, and are as
good to do it too. But that is another Consideration.

2. But then, Secondly, If thy Judgment be as certain, and if another did
indeed such a bad Action, or out of such a bad Principle, or has any bad
Quality; it may be you can contribute little to the preventing the like for the
future, or to his amendment or help, it may be none at all, if distant, though
thou would, he is out of thy reach, thou can not let him know thy
Judgment, or he will not care for it if he do; but in thy self thou may do
much, prevent the next time, otherwise dispose thy self, nor do, nor be so any
more, mind thy own Faults or Infirmities. Thou art without Comparison, more in
thine own power to direct, alter, or change thy self, than another Man is, and
yet thou art very busy about him, and negligent of thy self. Which is like as
if one should be very sollicitous concerning another Travelling-ma^ ^way, and
diligently observe whether he went right, or in a bad way (it may be to direct
him too if he went wrong, it may be only to gratify Curiosity, or to laugh at
him) when he could not, or would not come at him to direct him; and in the mean
time he never minded his own, and so perchance falls into a Slough, or Ditch,
or wanders into a wrong one: Or as if thou should be careful of another Man's
Health, or Legs, or Eyes, which it is little in thy power to use when they are
never so perfect, and neglect thy own which thou can use at thy pleasure, and
it may be have more need of being looked after, and are worse than thy
Neighbors. Or to use part of our Saviors own Comparison here, to be peering
into thy Neighbors Eye, and taking notice of a Mote there, when thy own Eye
has the same, if not a Beam: When (as our Savior also Himself intimates here)
if thou pulledst out thy own mote or beam first, thou might use thy own
sight to help thy Neighbor; but if thou should pull out that of thy
Neig^^^urs, it may be thou can not assure he shall so well use his clearness.

2. Another evil consequence of too great a Proneness, and too frequent
Judgment of others, (or it then is so) is most-what an Usurpation of another
right, (or of that which for another to have, would do most good) a taking from
another what is his due, it is a piece of Injustice. For generally those who
give Judgment concerning others, would oblige them both to judge as they judge,
and do so too, to do accordingly. They are apt to impose their Judgments; and
this by all the power they have, and therefore will Inflict what evil lies in
their power if they do not; which may be at least Ill-opinion, disgrace, or
Ill-speaking-of, even in the meanest Person. They are seldom content themselves
to pass their Judgment, but they would have Persons of whom they judge, to Judge
as they do, and do as they would have them, or think sit they should; and are
Angry, or Illpleased if they do not: And here they would take away their
Liberty of judging in their own Affairs, in acting according to their own
Judgment; they would deprive them of making use of their own Examination and
Prudence, and then of determining themselves. But is not this every Man's Right
in respect of private Persons? Is it not better the Judgment and Determination
of a Man's own Actions for Example should rest in himself? It is true, I may
give my Judgment when desired, or asked, or where the defect of Ignorance or
Infirmity is manifest out of Friendship; but then with deferrence to the
Persons own Judgment and Determination at last. And this not carelessly and as
being displeased, because he follows not me; but with an acknowledgment of his
Right, and an Acquiescence therein. Every Man is a Prince and supreme
Moderatour to himself under God, in abundance of his Actions, most of his
External, such as Domestic ones, and Personal especially; and of his Internal,
as his willing, designing, Intentions, Opinions, and Judgments; and it is most
for the Public, or Universal good, it should be so. And Men should be left to
the exercise and use of their own Prudence and Liberty in many things, though
they should not so well use it altogether as they might: The one may be a
greater good, than the other an evil. Besides, It is most likely, every Person
should best know the Circumstances of his own, especially more private Actions,
and consequently what is fittest to be done, or not done: Or if any did better
know sometimes, and were better and more virtuous to direct; yet, How should it
be known when? And who would not pretend to it? So that there would be nothing
but Confusion, and every one would be every ones Lord and Master. And yet, I
dare say, it is to be observed, a most frequent piece of Injustice and Tyranny,
and running through all sorts of Men, and lodged even in the Beggars breast. Men
are not content Men should be Judges in any of their own affairs, even Private
and Personal; but they will be judging, directing, reproving, urging, and
forcing as much as they can, them to be, and do as they would have them,
lording and domineering over others; not seasonably, modestly, and friendly
advising only. This gratifies and increases Pride in us also, and this is that
in part which the Apostle reproves, in Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge
another Man's servant? Why would thou be Governor of another Man, and needs
have and force him, compel him to judge and do as thou judge; or else would
hate him, despise and blame him in words too, (I suppose) if he did not,
when as in this case, he is only subject to God?

Sect. II.
II. The evil Consequences of too much Proneness to judge on the worst side, (I
speak as to the effect only, though the Principle be not bad).

1. That it leads a Man to false Judgments, and to judge Persons worse than they
are.

2. That it consequently disposes a Man to Contemn, Undervalue; nay, Hate a
Person more than he deserves. Whence,

3. It begets Suspicions, and belief in others, that this his Judgment comes
from the worst principles, of Self-love, Hatred, Revenge, Pride, Envy,
Contempt, etc. when it really may not be so. Whence

4. It disposes and gives occasion, and is but too often an effectual
temptation, both in those whom he thus judges and others, to contempt, hatred,
and revenge toward him, and that by observing and marking, making known and
publishing his Faults and Infirmities too, which really are so; which otherwise
they neither would nor should have done; nay, by adding thereto, increasing
their number and greatness, and judging him worse than he is, as the former had
done by his Neighbor; whence further hatred and contempt reciprocally from
them to him, and more than he deserves too; hence again, it may be Hatred and
Revenge stirred up in him again, against them. So that now, behold what a crowd
and heap of Mischief there is on all hands, instead of mutual Charity and
Beneficence. Part of this is the Motive, our Savior Himself here subjoyns to
His Command, to abstain from Judging, viz. With what Judgment ye judge, ye shall
be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.
That is, If you judge Men otherwise than you ought, they will do so by you again,
they will pay you in your own Coin; Men do not use to be behind with one another
in these requitals: I conceive, That ye be not judged, is meant of Men; and so
in the next Verse, [ Ye shall be judged,] and not of God. For God will not judge
Men otherwise than is Right, and as ought to be; and therefore not as Men, who
judge one another otherwise than they ought. By the way, this Reason of our
Saviors, was an Adage or Wise-saying among the Jews. So in the Jerusalem
Targum, or Chaldee Paraphrase, (...) i. e. (...) With the same measure a Man
measures, shall it be measured to him again whether good or bad, Genesis 38. 24.
And again, (...) i. e. Measure for measure. So they feign Judah to have spoken
to himself, when Thamar his Daughter being condemned by him to be burnt, for
playing the Harlot, she produced the Signet, Bracelets and Staff, which he had
given her, and bid him discern whose those were, as a punishment for him, who
had fraudulently asked his Father Jacob the same question concerning Joseph's
Coat, whom he with his Brethren had thrown into the Pit, and made his Father
believe he was torn with wild Beasts. This by the bye.

Sect. III.
III. The ill-Consequences of rash Judgment, especially of Censure, are:

1. That it disposes, uses, and habituateth a Man thereto, both in his
Judgment concerning Persons, and every where else.

2. It renders a Man's Testimony very inconsiderable. For who will much heed
what that Man judges, who is known to judge any-how, without any regard to
Reason for what he judges, and consequently any sign of truth. It is time ill
spent to give such inconsiderate, and rash, slight precipitate Persons but the
hearing only.

3. It gives occasion to Men, of Anger, Wrath, Hatred, Contempt; they always
suspecting such unreasonable Judgments to come from worse Principles than mere
Vanity and Wilfulness, viz. from Malice or Envy against them; at least
concluding, and truly, that there wanted the Care and Love to their Neighbors
they should have had: For Men so well affected one to another, will rarely judge
without Reason, to each others disadvantage. Besides, what ever the Principle
be, the very ill effect will make Men ordinarily angry enough.

Sect. IV.
IV. The ill Consequences of false Judgment, are,

1. A Man's own Discredit and Disreputation, for carelessness, prejudice,
inability and weakness, to judge right and true; whence also a Man invalidates
his Testimony and Witness, and even then when he may judge well and true. He
that more often judges false than true, gives reason to any Man never to
believe him merely upon the account of his Testimony; and therefore not even
then when he may judge true. For it is more probable (considering merely the
Persons Testimony) that he that has more often judged falsely than truly
before, does judge amiss now.

2. The distribution of the Good or Evil that are in ones power, reward, or
punishment, (those of private Men I mean) such as are Praise or Dispraise,
charity of Alms, or Chastisement, good or bad Word, taking or commending to any
Employment or Office gainful or creditable, or refusing or discommending. I
say, the distribution of these to ill purpose, viz. Good things to the Bad, or
less deserving and neglectful, or Bad to the Good and Well-deserving.

Sect. V.
V. The ill Consequences or mischievous Effects of too much proneness, or
rashness, in declaring ones Judgment unseasonably, or doing it when it ought
not, Are,

1. It renders a Man contemptible, or somewhat distastful; Either because he
has not Discretion to distinguish between times, and to discern when it is
seasonable and of good effect, and when not, and it is better to refrain, to
hold ones tongue: Or, because he cannot govern himself, he cannot contain his
inclinations, whether from mere Talkativeness and Busie-bodiness, or from some
other worse Principle, he is Impotent: Or, lastly, Because he will not, but out
of hatred, Revenge, Wrath, or Envy, or Flattery, or the like, he chooses* to do
it, and readily takes all such occasions of mischieving another, by possessing
others with an ill or mean Opinion, and by stirring up the same passions and
affections in them against the Person, which were in himself.

2. Drawing others from their own Affairs or Business, whether it be the
Persons concerned in the Judgment, or others. Such Tatlers are like idle
Persons, who will not work themselves, not mind their own Business, nor let
others mind theirs: But with their stories concerning others wantonly divert
them, or concerning themselves fright them or accuse them, and force them to
neglect their work to answer them, defend themselves, or get them away.

3. Therefore mutual suspicion, distrust, hatred, animosities, slightings,
envyings, contempts, or foolish esteem, vain trust, (if the Judgment be on the
Advantageous side) too great and too general one of another: Nothing more
ordinary than for Men upon the Whisper, or Report of some ill quality, action,
imperfection or infirmity of another, to conceive presently too bad an opinion
in general of him, and too be too wrathfully, contemptuously, or enviously in
general affected toward him. And it were far better generally, that Men were
ignorant of one another faults and defects, than upon the occasion of their
discovery, to be so uncharitable and unjust, as they usually are. Besides,
these hasty Tatlers give no time for a Persons Amendment usually, if he has
been faulty once. But this effect is more certain, when that which is reported
concerning any one, particularly respects him to whom it is told: As when it is
said, I believe he is so or so ill affected toward you, or has done this or
that against you, to your prejudice. For Men here are presently more
Passionate, and sooner inflamed, as being in their own case, they are more
sensible and fond of their own good; and this too much and beyond Reason, what
ought to be, otherwise the Effect would not be bad.

There are few who have so much Charity and Humility, as to acknowledge their
fault or infirmity, when truly and out of good intent, or at least with no bad
one, it has been observed, spoken of, and mentioned by another; or heartily to
forgive, when it has falsely, foolishly, or maliciously been done. It is better
therefore generally (and these things are but so to be taken) to give Persons
no such occasions of anger, hatred, contempt and envy, by especially the
declaration of a Man's Judgment, or of what he knows of others to their
disadvantage, but to be very sparing in so doing; and in general never to do it
out of any worse Principle, than a general Charity to Men, and consequently
love to what is just and right; out of no selfishness, no hatred or contempt of
the Person in general, but of love rather to him; out of hatred or contempt of
the particular Vice, or Imperfection only; and one would be glad it were
otherwise. And then as to our Prudence never to do it, but when seeing the
necessity thereof, we are in Wisdom as well as Charity, obliged to it. Be not a
Witness against thy Neighbor without cause, i. e. Without some foreseen so
good an effect, as ought to be a cause thereof, Prove. 24. 28. And, ver. 17.
Rejoice not when thine Enemy falls: Nor let thy Heart be glad when he
stumbleth. And hitherto is referred the telling stories to one Person, of what
another Person has said of him, or done toward him behind his back, and again
to the latter, what the former has said of him. If this be frequent, it is
usually out of Talkativeness, Busibodiness, Hatred, or Flattery, either to do a
Person an ill turn, by ill disposing his Neighbor toward him, setting him
against him; or to do ones self a good turn, by getting the favor of the
Person to whom we report, as seeming so much concerned for his Credit and good
Reputation, or other Good. Though this may be done too sometimes out of a
hearty sincere Charity and Prudence, without any ultimate Self-end.

Where no Wood is (says the Wiseman) there the Fire goes out: So where there
is no Talebearer, the strife cease, Prove. 26. 20. As Wood is usually
conceived the cause of Fire, so such Stories or Reports, whether true or false
of one to another, are the cause of Strife and Contention. And, ver. 22. The
words of a Talebearer are as Wounds, and go down into the innermost parts of
the Belly. That is, Usually the stories of such Persons affect deeply their
Minds to whom they are told, with keen, smart, violent, and piercing Passions
of Vexation, Anger, Revenge. And, Prove. 16. 28. A froward Man sends forth
strife, and a Whisperer separateth chief Friends. Such a Person by his frequent
stories, if he be believed, puts Enmity not only between Strangers, but
Friends; not Friends only, but chief Friends; for so probably the Hebrew word
(...) may there signify, it otherwise signifying Excellency and Superiority. A
great many sayings you have in the Proverbs of the like nature.

Sect. VI.
VI. The ill Consequences of judging out of Hatred, Revenge, Pride, Envy,
Anger, Contempt, etc. Are,

1. The increase of these Passions, and their Principles in our selves by use,
and in others by our example, which in the degree, or so far forth as they
habitually possess our Souls, render us unworthy of Life or Being. For so far
forth we do as much Mischief as in us lies; and surely as far as we see, 'twere
better than in that respect that we were out of the World. And although
Self-love and Fear, may oft-times restrain and hinder us from being the Authors
of such Mischief to our Neighbor, whereby we may be Obnoxious to humane Laws;
yet there may be as much of these in our Hearts, as may render us detestable to
God, whose Knowledge and Punishment we can neither conceal our selves from, nor
escape. But there are infinite Mischiefs which we are capable of doing one to
another, which humane Laws cannot take notice of: In so much that a Place,
Company, or Society, may be weary of us, and yet cannot tell how to be rid of
us. These dispositions make us like Dragons and Basilisks, that where ever we
come, we kill, and and do mischief with our very Breaths and Eyes. These are
the Frenzy, the Plague of our Souls, which make every Body very reasonably
shun and run away from us. Finally, some make themselves hereby Enemies both to
God and Men, and fit company only for the Infernal Spirits, whom we are most
like; and by their being as bad as our selves, their company will be a very
suitable punishment for us. Further, one of the worst mischiefs of such
Principles and Tempers is, that by our example we infect others, and make
others like our selves; we make to our selves company of the like nature to us,
and to one another: We propagate it, we give occasion to, and stir up the same
Lusts and wicked Inclinations in others; we help to make them more common and
ordinary, and therefore the less shameful, and the less suspected and believed,
to be so bad as they are.

2. It exposes us to the Hatred, Anger, Revenge, and Contempt of others. If
these Qualities in us when but suspected (as in our Judgment sometimes of the
worst side) were the occasion thereof, how much more when they but too
evidently appear to be the principles of our Judgments? All prejudices of
Judgment concerning others from ultimate Self-love, render us generally
contemned or hated more or^ less, according to the degree thereof that appears;
at least pitied by the Best and Wisest. Nothing generally more hated than
Hatred it self, Ill Nature, Malignity, Pride, of which unreasonable and unjust
Contempt is one sort. I say, it exposes to their hatred and contempt sometimes
justly, when they judge truly of us, most-what unjustly and more than we
deserve. Men seldom observe due measures in these Passions, sometimes by way of
Justice, most what by way of Imitation, or mixture of both: And now when we are
thus affected to Men our selves, and they by our Example, and out of Justice,
or Ill Nature, or both, are so affected to us again, and to one another: How
innumerable are the Mischiefs which are consequent? viz. Just all that we see
in the World, Men are properly the Causes and Authors of one to another. All
Men's mischievous Wills and Intentions one toward another, proceed from want of
Charity, from Hatred in themselves, or from the same ill Qualities in others
really, or supposed and presumed; either because Men hate one another when it
is not deservedly, or when it is.

3. But a more particular mischief of our judging others out of Hatred, is,
their judging by way of Revenge untruly of us in general, of our Qualities,
Principles, or Actions: Whence our Example in any thing that is Good in us, is
rendered ineffectual, all our Actions though never so good, are either not taken
notice of, neglected, or interpreted in the worse sense; that is, those that
come from never so good Principles, and are very natural signs thereof, will be
deemed Signs of bad, or mere Signs and Hypocritical. It is true, this will
often happen through Persons ill nature, and aptness therefore to judge on the
worst side, when there is no occasion or cause on our part given, and then we
being not able to help it at all, or not without loss of time better spent, may
do well to glance a little Pity, and so neglect and take no further notice: But
when we our selves are the Cause, or give the occasion by our uncharitable, or
imprudent Judgments of others, we cannot spend time better than by removing
them, to take away the prejudice against the example of any thing that is Good
in our selves.

Sect. VII.
And thus we have run through some of the most considerable mischievous Effects
and Consequences, of these prohibited Judgments by our Savior; the avoiding of
all which ought to be so many Motives to the practicing of this Negative Duty:
Nor ought the contrary good Effects of abstaining therefrom to do less, viz.
The minding our own Affairs, the employing our selves about our own Business,
the keeping at Home, and applying our selves to our own proper Works and
Callings, the more accurate care of our own Principles and Prudence, Hearts and
Actions which we can best know and direct, mind and make use of; and not only
minding our own Affairs, but permitting others to mind theirs, and to be
Masters of their own Principles and Actions, to examine, judge, and determine
themselves, we only interposing our friendly Advice and neighbourly Counsel,
when asked or desired; or when we see our Neighbor fails in his Prudence or
Power in a matter of more considerable moment to him, than our time is to our
selves or others; then indeed not to be too intent to our own Business, and
through Surliness or Carelessness of our Neighbors concern, to refuse, or not
to mind, but to knock off a little from our own Business, and lend a
helping-hand; like as all Men are so good natured, as to leave their Shops, and
Trades, or Employments a while, to quench a Fire in another Man's House, though
there should be no danger to themselves, or to give a Lift to their Neighbors
Horse or Ass.

But otherwise not to be busy in meddling, or tyrannical in imposing on other
Men in their own Affairs, and usurping their Right. Moreover the securing of
our selves from a disadvantageous false Judgment, and an unreasonable contempt
undervaluing, nay, it may be hatred of Persons, to which that disposes us:
However, from a being suspected guilty of the worst of Principles of our
Judgments, and consequently from giving occasion and temptation to others of
dislike, Hatred, Contempt, Anger, or Revenge against us, and that by an
unreasonable severity in their judging of us, observing and proclaiming of our
Faults and Infirmities; nay, and more and greater than we were ever so unhappy
as to be guilty of, or overtaken with; which otherwise they would have taken no
notice of, concealed neighbourly, or excused. And then securing our selves from
reciprocal Anger and Wrath in our selves, against their so unjust and ill
principled Judgments, to which notwithstanding we our selves gave a needless
occasion, whence all manner of Mischief and mutual Injuries; Thy securing
therefore of the Innocence and Peace, mutual Good Will and Beneficence of each
other.

Again; the prevention of foolish, blind, unreasonable, precipitate and rash
Judgments. The preservation of the credit of our Testimony, and putting our
selves thereby in a capacity of, sometimes to the ease and convenience of our
Neighbors, determining or assisting to determine the Controversies or
Differences between them. The preservation at least of the Credit and Opinion
of our unprejudiced Charity, and care of our Neighbors Credit and Reputation;
of the want of which we give but too just Suspicion, by our rash and
inconsiderate Judgments, when on the worst side. Further still, the prevention
of Discredit and Disreputation to our selves, for our Carelessness, Inability,
or Weakness to judge, or for our wilful prejudices by our false Judgments; when
we were able to judge better, that is, truly; nay, when it is a thing always one
of the most in our Power of any thing in the World. For who cannot judge, and
say, that he knows not, if he be Ignorant, and has no probability more on one,
than the other side, or that it appears and seems to him, indeed, more probable?
In which he needs never to be mistaken, although the thing may prove contrary
to what appeared to him?

Further, The securing us from the Breach of the material part, at least of the
Ninth Commandment, viz. Of bearing false Witness against our Neighbor.

Moreover, principally the Just and Beneficial disposing of our Kindnesses and
Favors, and the withholding them according to the degrees of each ones Merit
or Demerit, the prudent and profitable dispensing our Praise or Dispraise, Good
or Bad word, Recommendation or Refusal, Charity or Chastisement: Not to
squander away foolishly, nay, to ill purpose, what Good is in our power to
bestow, and to withold it as unseasonably, when it would be to good Effect
laid out.

Further still; the prevention of our own being slighted or contemned, for want
of Discretion, or Self-government in the use of our Tongue and Conversation,
for unprofitable or hurtful Talkativeness and Busie-bodiness, and of being
grudged at for worse Principles (suspected or real) of our unseasonable and
lavish Declaration of our Judgments. But more considerable much is the
prevention of mutual Animosities, Grudges, Ill Will, Discords, Contentions,
Strifes between Men, usually arising from the suspicion, or certain knowledge of
one another ill words, actions, affections, and dispositions to, and
concerning each other. Which if they had been concealed, and not too hastily
been told or discovered, might have been repented of, and the Persons of
another mind, and so no need of giving warning thereof to the Persons
concerned, and Charity and Peace had been still preserved and maintained. The
Humility and Forgiveness of the World, is too little to bear the knowledge of
Men's few faults and miscarriages one to another, and therefore they had not
need be multiplied. The prevention therefore of all the mischiefs of
Tale-bearing. Yet further, the not drawing of others from their better
Employments, by disturbing them with false, untrue, or at least useless and
trivial judgments and Reports concerning them; which although they are easily
neglected, passed over, and slighted by those that are wiser and better, and
well provided in the World; yet they very sensibly touch, and much affect those
who are not so; of whose Good we ought, as good Neighbors and Christians, to
be justly tender. Finally, and above all, the prevention of the Increase and
Improvement in our selves (by using our selves to the wicked Principles of
Judging, so often named) of those hellish, wicked, and base Dispositions in us,
to name them now and no more, those of Hatred, Malice, Revenge, Pride, Envy,
Contempt, Anger and Wrath, Flattery; which if we have any degree of wise
Self-love, we shall more endeavor to secure our selves from, than from the
most loathsome, tormenting, and killing Diseases of our Bodies. The prevention
consequently of exposing our selves to the Hatred and Contempt of others, but
too justly deserved, and of the loss of all the benefits of mutual Good Will,
Friendship, and kind and loving Conversation. And lastly, The rendering our
Example effectual; that if there be any thing Good in us, it might not be at
all lost and do no Good; nay, our good Example be turned into a bad one by Men's
unjust, (but by us occasioned and provoked) bad Interpretations of what we are,
and do.

All these things and many more, which might be observed, of the like nature,
those Mischiefs of doing contrary to our Duty, and the advantages and good
Effects of the Practice of it in this particular of our Judgments concerning
others, ought reasonably to make us careful of our Principles and Prudence
therein, more than ordinary, viz. That we be not too Prone to judge others; much
less to Judge them on the worst side; to observe, accuse, and condemn them, even
in our Hearts; not to judge rashly, and without all Reason, but our Wills; not
to be Inconsiderate; not to judge falsely, but always when we judge, to do it
exactly, according to Truth as near as we can; not to babble out our Judgments
at any rate, not to be too prone to do that, but to do it out of Charity
always, and with Discretion and Prudence; never lastly to pass our Judgments
out of the worst of Dispositions, Self-pleasing by Activity, Curiosity, Hatred,
Pride, Revenge, Envy, affectation of Superiority, Contempt, Anger, Flattery,
etc.

CHAP. VI.
Sect. I.
WE are now come to the Remedies or Means to prevent those prohibited Judgings,
of which one of the most General, And

1. Shall be to remember and attend to the great number of mischievous Effects
and Consequences thereof, and then to the Causes of them. The first will
dispose our Wills to be averse therefrom, The second will direct us to some
means to effect our Wills. The first will make us willing to abstain therefrom.
The second able. Call to mind therefore, and think of, as often as thou may be
in danger, how much of that time spent in observing and judging of others,
might have been spent in Selfexamination, reflection and attention to thy own
Business and Affairs. How idly and unprofitably, to say no worse, I employ my
self there, in comparison to what I might do, if my thoughts were more at Home.
How much more uprightly and prudently might I carry, and demean my self in all
my Actions. Again, how troublesome and importunate it makes one Man to another,
to be too frequently Checking, Controlling, Determining them in their own
Affairs, to be Tyrannical and Injuring. How unreasonable and mischievous it is
to be disposed to Hate, Under-value, or Contemn Persons, more than in impartial
Judgments they deserve, and to be consequently the Causes of our selves being
Under-valued, Hated, Contemned there-for, and more than we deserve. Again, the
being occasions and causes of Sin and Trouble, both to our selves and others in
the World. How foolish is it to expose our selves to just censure for Folly,
Rashness, Inconsiderations, Weakness, Indiscretion and Partiality, and to be
neglected justly, and not to be fit to do any good to others by our Testimony?
The bearing false Witness against our Neighbor, how should it pinch and wring
us, and hurt us, as much as if we nip'd or cut our own Fingers, or gashed our
own Flesh? What a pitiable thing is it, and mischievous, to see a Man
mistakenly to stroke the Bad, and strike the Good, because he thinks well of
the one, and ill of the other; just clean contrary to what should be* and like
Madmen out of their Wits? Why should any Man call upon himself Contempt,
Hatred, Anger, or Revenge, for his weak, imprudent, peevish, or ill-natured
Tatling his Opinion of others? How hateful a thing is it, to be the Cause of
Hatred, Animosities, Grudgings, Illwills, Discords, Contentions, Wranglings and
Brawlings, and mischievous Actions between Men, to set the World on Fire, to be
a Firebrand? Consider, can any Man who wisely loves himself and the World, for
the good of which he is made, endure, to be the Author of mischief only, to be
better out of the World than in, consequently to see himself a constant Judge to
condemn, and Executioner too by his Hatred, Malice, Ill Nature, Enmity, Envy
and Spite, Revenge, Anger, Pride, affectation of Superiorioty in Judging, to be
a Pest and Bane to the World, and to improve these most Noxious qualities in
himself, by Exercise and Use, and in others by the imitation of his example,
and to banish kind and friendly Conversation? Is it not also brutish enough,
and a sign a Man has no Mind to get any Good quality, wherein he may be an
useful Example to others? Or if he has, he cares not whether any be the better
for it or no?

Consider, and attend to these and such like things, especially at those times
when you may have most need, when you find your selves most prone to offend in
this kind, or when upon Reflection on your selves at any time you find you have
so done. And as we shall do well thus to learn and inform our selves in, and
remember and call to mind these, or some of these ill Effects, both when we are
about to do amiss in this kind, and when we have done so, to prevent the like
for the future, by getting our Minds against it; so that we may know how to do
it, it will be useful to take notice of, and remember the Causes that we may
remove them.

Shun we therefore and avoid Idleness; let us choose and mind some Calling of
our own in particular, nor let us neglect our general Calling of serving God,
Self-examination and Reflection, occasional doing Good and Benificence. Have we
a care of Busiebodiness, and merely to be doing and talking, for doing and
talking sake, but always for some further good end. And so likewise have we a
care of Curiosity, or a humor and desire to observe and know every thing,
though most Remote from us, and Impertinent to any good use or design we put it
to, merely for the observation and knowledge sake; and it is no matter where the
things be never so small and trivial, and in others (as they will be for most
part) too, so it will gratify that Humor in us, and that is all we care for.
Secure we our selves from this Childish temper, and if we desire to observe and
know things, let them be Profitable and of Concernment, and those which we may
make best use of, and that is, be sure, what is in our selves. Let us have a
care also of that particular branch of Pride, viz. Affectation to know and
direct others in their own Affairs and Actions.

But most Industriously let us eschew and flee the gratification of our selves,
by the hatred of others and revenge. Far be this from us, and Pride and foolish
affectation of Superiority, and therefore envy, fury wrath and anger against
Persons in general, as also Contempt, the most common Causes of Detraction and
Slander. Let them not come near us, nor enter in the least within any the doors
of our Breasts. Flattery too and ultimate base fear of any ones displeasure, or
seeking of their favor, we must also despise and scorn, which does so much
betray us oft-times to Judgments on the worst side of some, that we might
please others; let us be sure to inform our selves as well as we can, when we
judge concerning others, and not do it ignorantly. And more particularly, let us
have a care we do not too generally conclude all Persons like our selves, nor
suffer our selves to be abused by public Report or Testimony, and judge all
true what we so receive; make always an allowance one way or another; at least
most generally suspect and doubt till further Examination, if it be worth the
while. Let us have a care of that kind of Partiality, whereby we observe and
take notice but of one sort of Qualities or Actions in Men, none but their
Good, or none but their Bad, as they are our Friends, or Foes, as we are well
or ill affected toward them; but let us be free and indifferent to see both
Faults and Imperfections in our Friends, and Virtue, and what is good and
laudable in our Enemies. Let us stir up and maintain always in our Minds a
strong habitual love of the Truth, which will be by and by a more particular
Instruction. Hardly any thing of more good effect in this business, than the
government of our Passions, to remove, calm, quiet them, if you intend to pass
any considerable Judgment as to Truth, viz. Love, Hatred, Admiration, Contempt,
Revenge, Anger, and the l^^e; suffer we not our Minds and Memories to be Bribed
by these, to admit only what can be said on one side, and not of another; nay,
more than can or onght to be said, and to thrust upon us what is not true, and
thrust out again what is or may be true, because against them; suffer we not
our Minds to be ruffled and confused by them, and not to be able, and willing
not to attend to the evidence of what we would not have to be True, or would
have to be False, though never so manifest: For what can be expected from us of
Truth and Justice in our judgments concerning others, when we are so affected?
And lastly, Let us seriously endeavor to Reform, Correct, Amend the
Corruptions and bad Inclinations of our Nature, that ultimate Selfishness,
seeking our own selves without any regard to the good of others, nay, with an
express contempt thereof, and by their mischief or hurt; as if their good were
not Good, as well as mine; hence consequently Hatred, Malice, Revenge, Pride,
affectation of Superiority, Envy, Contempt, causless Anger, Flattery: Seek we,
I say, to cure our Nature by Observation, Caution, Endeavor, and God's
Assistance. Thus if we take but heed to, and remember these and all other which
are the Causes of our too busy, disadvantageous, rash, selfish, false,
malicious, proud, enviours, wrathful, contemptuous, flattering Judgments of
others, and remove them, we shall certainly prevent the Effect.

But more particularly, I shall recommend to you some Remedies, which follow.

Sect. II.
2. And therefore secondly, But more particularly possess we our Hearts and
Minds thoroughly, with an universal Charity and Benignity to all, with a
proneness and readiness to do Good any where, but only where we see (and
therefore in some Circumstances, as where the thing concerns many, and is not
so soon known, to consider and deliberate) it will be necessarily the cause of
a greater Evil; which will in general extraordinarily secure us. Nor let us
suffer our selves to be beaten from this temper of Mind by any ill carriage,
misdemeanor, folly or injury of others. Let us still retain a true love of
Benevolence for the Person, whatever our Keenness be against the Vice or
Imperfection. Say still with thy self, what pity it is Persons should be so
much their own and others Enemies, as to be guilty of any voluntary Wickedness;
but if it be an Imperfection out of their power, then more need still to be
pitied and relieved by us, if we be not employed in things of greater
concernment. This will dispose us to diminish, abate, or connive at, and look
off the Infirmities or Imperfections of others, and therefore either judge
favorably, or not at all; except, where (as I have often said) our mutual,
Christian, common and universal Charity and Prudence, obliges and stirs us
up, provokes us to do otherwise.

Sect. III.
3. Rivet soundly into thy Mind the love of Truth; let nothing whatsoever cause
thee to be out of the Truth, scorn to feign, judge rashly or falsely concerning
the worst disposed and affected Man toward thee, i. e. Contemn this Quality,
but not out of a haughty Pride. i. e. Ultimately, because it is thine own
Imperfection: But out of an universal common Charity, i. e. Because of all the
Mischief, it is the cause of both to thy self and others. And, indeed, there is
some reason why here thou should less do this; because if he be faulty and
imperfect indeed, there is but too much true already, why should thou make an
addition?

Sect. IV.
4. And yet more particularly, ask thy self again and again, (especially in
Judgments of more Concern and Importance) whether or no thou be sure that thy
Judgment be true: Stay not till another ask thee how thou know. For then for
thy Credit and Reputation, lest thou should seem to have said any thing
rashly or untrue, or out of bad Principles, thou wilt be tempted to invent
somewhat falsely, and to feign and alledg somewhat, it may be, true, but
insufficient, and yet persuade thy self, or at least seems to him that asks
thee, that it is good proof. But do this privately, or tacitly thy self, when
thy Credit may not prejudice thee against the Truth, but engage thee to it. And
if it happen thou should have overshot thy self, be most ready to Retract it,
and acknowledge so much. Ask thy self I say, how thou provest it. And when thou
do, suppose, thy self before the most impartial person, who has no
particular respect to any person or persons, that is inconsistent with Truth
and Justice, one that loves thee and the person thou judge, and every body
else; (and some such it may be thou may have known in the World, be sure God
is so) whether thou think he would admit of the proof and evidence for what
thou affirmest or say as sufficient. Then again, suppose thy self in the
same case with the Person thou judge, and he in thine to judge thee: Whether
would thou be content he should judge so of thee, as thou do of him now?
Whether do thou think that if he had thy Proof only for what he said
concerning thee, thou would think it sufficient, and aquiesce, and grant that
he had good Reason for what he said? If thou should be afraid to remit the
censure of thy Judgment to an impartial Person, who neither hoped nor feared
any thing from thee, and was above that, but thou should suspect he would not
judge as thou do, if it were but for a small Wager, if thou wonldst not be
content thy Brother should judge of thee in the same manner, and for the like
reasons (and be sure either thou do not rashly say, and fiercely thou
would, when if it come to be done thou would not) if thou should find
this I say; this sure would put a check to thy Judgment, and make thee somewhat
ashamed thereof: But if thou did it in the greatest sincerity, then thou
might and would proceed to judge with more confidence and freedom, because
thou find thy self free from any ill Principles; and yet more particularly
that thou may try thy own sincerity.

Sect. V.
5. Ask thy self whether thou would not have true, what thou judge
concerning others, whether thou would as willingly it should be false; nay,
suppose it be on the worst side, thou art rather inclined it should not be
true, or that thou art (considering that absolutely without any further
respect) sorry it is true, and would alter the case if it were in thy power.
These things will principally serve to secure us from rash and false Judgments,
especially those of the worst side.

Sect. VI.
6. Use thy self much to dwell at Home, that is, to make thy self, or something
more immediately appertaining to thee, the Object of thy Observation; and
particularly then when thou do judge another, or art about to do it, cast a
quick eye back upon thy self, whether thou, it may be, art not guilty of that
which thou condemnest in another, or would not be if thou were in their
Circumstances, it may be more; for assuredly it is a very ordinary thing. As
for example, It is most frequent to judge and condemn others for Pride and
Covetousness, out of Pride and Covetousness; or reflect whether thou art not
guilty of as bad. Thus doing will oft-times find us more and better work at
Home in our selves, and so consequently will keep us from using our Observation
and Judgment abroad, which then is too much, when it might be better employed
nearer hand in our own selves. This will also restrain us from judging falsely
and rashly, and pronouncing our Judgment without necessary ends of Charity. For
we are generally inclined to be ashamed, when we attend to it, to do that in
another's case, which we would not have done in our own. Now when we observe
our own Faults or Imperfections, we find we are not very willing (at least not
gladly be sure) to look upon them, we are loath to acknowledge them, or judge our
selves guilty of them, we shift, we apologize, excuse, or if we can, deny; be
sure we'll have Reason and Truth evident (for the most part of us, I except
some discontented Persons with themselves) before we conclude against our
selves: Why then should we not so do by others, as we do by our selves? I know
no Reason but it is as just in one, as in the other case.

Sect. VII.
7. Have a special care of all Passions in Judgments, especially of Anger, the
most boisterous and rude one. Let these not precede, but always follow Reason,
that so they do not bribe, or prejudice, or deceive even Reason it self, as I
have heretofore more particularly told you how they may, and then that they do
not confound it. Passions, they either prejudice or blind our Judgments. The
experience of this is so frequent, that there is none but may have observed the
numerous miscarriages of Judgments from hence. And in order to this means, let
us keep our Minds sober and calm toward others, have a care of using them to
be affected with Passions immediately before Reason upon every occasion. Some
you may observe, whose Minds are like Tinder, or Gunpowder, which take fire
always at every spark. And in order hereto again, use we Temperance and
Sobriety, with moderate exercise, not too violent, fierce, and active, that our
bodily temper may be less subject to them, less confused, dull, and yet fierce.
Too much Drink especially, and violent and frequent bodily Exercise and Action
dispose much to Confusion, and Passions, and rash Actions, and consequently to
blind rash Judgments. We most-what see such Persons more Talkative, Meddling,
Opinionative, and Peremptory, and rudely and carelessly, or Proudly and
Huffingly say any thing of others, though never so innocent and their Betters,
and very uncivilly sullying their Names with their foul Breath. This will
secure you from rash and false Judgments.

Sect. VIII.
8. More particularly, be sparing most to give thy Judgment concerning a Person
thou find thy self inclined to hate or be angry with: Suspect thy self,
refrain, for thou will be prejudiced even undiscernedly to thy self. Or if
Circumstances should necessarily require thy Judgment, remember how thou art
affected, set thy self to shake off that prejudice; say all thou can for the
Person first in thy thoughts, and be passionated against those Passions and the
Prejudice of them, that thou should thereby be so cozened and deceived thy
self, and so unjust to others. This will give check always to the bad
Principles of our Judgments so often named, and prevent also many rash and
false Judgments.

Sect. IX.
9. Discourse more of Things than Persons. Thus we have suggested to you some
remedies to prevent or amend the Miscarriages in our judging concerning others.
I desire you would remember and make use of them, and try their Efficacies, and
consequently prevent the many great and frequent Mischiefs, of which they are
the Causes, and contribute considerably to the Peace and Innocence of the World.

CHAP. VII.
Sect. I.
WE are now in the last place to observe to you some few Rules to be made use
of in our Judging others, viz. generally, and for the most part. For it is rare
that any rule of Prudence, or the using any certain Means to obtain our due End
of Universal Charity, is Universal and never to be receded from.

1. Which cannot be too often named, and the most general is: Pass and declare
all thy Judgments out of Charity; that is, because thou see it better so to
do, and more good effects of it, than not to do it; not to thy self only, but
any where. Out of Charity, I say, in general to do more Good than thou see
Harm, let it light where it will, where ever thou see it. Which part of Good
effects may sometimes be more particularly received to thy self, as to expel
thy too much Indifferency and Coldness to the Good or Hurt of others, to the
love of Truth and Goodness, to use and exercise the good government and
direction of thy Judgment, of which as a Superior in some sort thou may
have more need, as of a necessary quality for thy place and duty, to imitate
what is Good, shun what thou observest Bad in others, etc. Part of these good
effects to the Person himself judged, to encourage him in any good Quality or
Action, to check or restrain him from what is bad, to advise him of his Error
or Fault, which but by a discreet and seasonable Judgment of him from some
other Person he would not have taken notice of. Men would want considerable
advantages to the knowledge and minding of their Faults and Duties, Perfections
and Imperfections, if they were, and did what they listed, and no body cared or
dared to observe, and pass their Judgments concerning them. It is better they
should know that others, and that wiser than themselves are Observers and
Spectators. And lastly, Part of them to others, to encourage them to follow or
imitate if they be commended, or to restrain them from Imitation, or being
drawn away, if we disapprove and discommend. We may see it for the good of
others often frankly and cheerfully to speak well of, and commend in their
hearing, and to reprove or disallow according to the greatness of the Fault or
Imperfection. And we may in some cases think our selves reasonably too cold and
indifferent or dull in observing and saying nothing of what is Good or Bad in
others. I say, let all our Judgments be with the foresight of, and being
affected with all those or the like Good effects, which we may see may follow.
And then be sure we may conclude, that such Judging out of such a Principle
will please God too. And then you have all the particulars of your one general
due End of all your Actions, viz. The greatest Good of the whole Universe. Here
therefore I exclude ultimate Self-love, that it be not to gratify our selves
only any of these ways before mentioned, by Activity, Curiosity, Hatred,
Revenge, Anger, Pride, Affectation of Superiority, Envy, Contempt, Flattery,
etc.

I exclude also all Ill Will or Contempt against the Person, but only against
the Vice and Imperfection of him; nay, I affirm we ought always to have a love
of benevolence to the Person. The Charity I speak of, must be an Universal and
Unlimited one to the whole, and therefore must comprehend and take in every
particular we see, and consequently the Person himself guilty of any Fault or
Imperfection. Now, because Men are often apt to deceive themselves and others by
their confident pretenses, some Signs when we do judge out of Charity, are these:

1. More readiness and willingness to judge every where on the Good side than on
the Bad. This is a sign we would have no Evil in the World if we could, not
without an absolute necessity for a greater Good, and consequently of a most
unlimited and universal Charity.

2. An excusing others, and saying all we can justly and truly for them, and
that such an Action, which often proceeds from some bad Principle, it might in
such a Person proceed from Ignorance, he might be mistaken, he might think so
or so, or he might do it by Surprise, or the forces of Temptation, the
Temptation might be strong, and consequently not argue a very small degree of
Goodness; and if it be in matter of Prudence, that the Person might consider
well, and otherwise than we do, or it may prove otherwise than we judge. In all
which, as we are to show our Charity thus by excusing or lessening what we
ought; so we are too to show it by a modest disapprobation of what is Imperfect
or Faulty in them sometimes, and not through Idleness, Laziness, Coldness, or
Flattery, and fear to Displease for the present, betray the faulty Person, or
others, into too good an Opinion of themselves, and to be content willingly to
be no better. This thus excusing is a sign, I say, that a Man would willingly
have as little, and as few Faults in the World any where, as might be, and
consequently of a very universal Charity.

3. A third sign is a frequent Judging of our selves, especially on the worst
side; that is, observing and condemning our selves for our own Faults, and
acknowledging our own Imperfections. The observation, judging and acknowledging
our own Faults and Imperfections, does not use (I speak for the most part,
these not being universal Signs) to proceed from any hatred of our selves, is
very consistent with men's love to themselves; for we do not see men hate
themselves so forwardly; they love themselves, and all they do mostwhat
proceeds therefrom. Wherefore ^t is more likely that such persons Judgments
concerning others, might proceed from a love of the persons judged too, and of
others in general; they deal by them, as they deal by themselves, and no worse*
But when we see men forward to observe and judge others, and never to mind
themselves, it is a sign this proceeds from busibodiness, or curiosity, or some
worse Principle: For if it proceeded from any charity to the person, why should
they not be as kind to themselves? Cannot they see it will do them as much good
to judge themselves, as it will do others to judge them? And so likewise, Is it
likely Men should see any more good come on it to the World to judge others, than
to judge themselves? Is it not rather suspected, nay, manifest to Men, that
there would be much better Consequences, if Men more betook themselves to
observe and judge themselves than others, at least equal? If therefore it
proceeds out of Charity to the World to observe and judge others, why should not
the same move us to do so by our selves?

4. A fourth sign is, when our Judgment is passed with Calmness and Modesty.
These are, first, Signs of the absence of all bad and unallowable Principles,
and therefore of the presence of a Good one (for some there must be.) Calmness
is a sign of, or rather is the absence of Passions, and more particularly of
Anger, Revenge, Hatred, of our Activity, Curiosity, and Busie-bodiness, and
consequently of Rashness, and other Prejudices. By Modesty, I mean, a not
Inordinately, and Immoderately affecting, nor assuming to ones self any
instances of his Perfection or Excellency, and among others, Superiority, great
Merits, whether truly or falsely. This therefore where and when it is, is a sign
that the Person's judgment comes not from Imperiousness, Pride, Affectation of
Superiority, Envy, one kind of that (for the more we depress others, the more
we make our selves superior to them) Contempt; nay, nor from flattery. For
Fear, affectation of Friendship or Favor, is a thing that the modest Man is
free from too. Now by how much these are signs of the absence of our bad
Principles, the several instances of Selfishness, so much are they the signs of
the presence of a good one (for some there is always) viz. of Charity.

Sect. II.
2. A second general Rule, which has been before mentioned in other places, is
always to judge truly. Here I would have it set down as a short Rule to be
easily remembered, and always ready at hand: But because I have already spoken
so much of this, I shall now add no more.

Sect. III.
3. Have a care of all Passions, but especially of Anger before Judgment. This
has been also mentioned before in the Means. Always judge before, and if the
Case require it, that is, if there is no way of removing the Evil but by a
desire of inflicting another less, then let thy Anger follow a clear and calm
Judgment: Some Reasons in brief are, because thou art in great danger of being
prejudiced, and that indiscernably, to judge rashly or falsely; and then thou
do no good to the person judged, if he hear, or hear of thy Judgment. For
he will be prejudiced against thy Jugdment, as being rash, or coming from pride,
or ill will against him; wherefore he will think he ought not, or on purpose, and
out of displeasure against thee, he will not believe what thou think and
say concerning him; He will have no regard thereto. Nor will others be the
better, for thou give a bad example. Nor do thou inform them; for they will
not trust thy Judgment, nor take thy Word and Testimony then; they will think thou
art partial, not an upright Judge. I say, this will be, when they see thee judge
with fierce passions without, and before any reason assigned. Otherwise, I
confess, when a thing first calmly appears true, and of concernment to be
judged and believed, and no other way will do but that way; then to appear
warm, and not too indifferent.

Sect. IV.
4. Declare not thy Judgment, when thou thy self art guilty. One reason is,
because that, as has been before said, the Person concerned and others, will
think it proceeds not from any Charity, but from Selfishness, Ill Will, Pride,
and so consequently they presently fly out against thee, and are displeased at
thee for that, and take no notice of thy Judgment, whether true or false. There
passions are more moved with, and they more attend to the principle of thy
Judgment, than the truth of it. The reason of which is again, that Men being
ultimate Selflovers, and Proud, would have reason to love themselves as much as
may be; whence they are more apt far presently to take more notice of others
Faults than their own; and consequently when any one passes Judgment
concerning them more presently to look at the fault, than the truth of his
Judgment. This is the reason we see every one fly presently in the face of the
guilty Judger, and ask him whether he be not as bad, and least of all bears his
Judgment or Censure; viz. They think it here more than ordinarily manifest,
that it proceeds not out of Love to them (for why then think they, should he
not love himself as well); but out of Envy, Pride, or the like. Every Man will
say to such a Man, Physician heal thy self. That he is an unskilful or
unfaithful Physician, that has some by-end, who goes about, or undertakes to
cure that in another Man, which he cannot or will not in himself.

Clodius accusat Maechos, Catilina Cethegum. Let us see thee Mend thy self
first, say they, and then we'll believe indeed, thou see reason to judge
another for it, and may do it out of Charity.

Sect. V.
5. Or if thou do judge when guilty, resolve to be Innocent for the future,
and condemn thy self in the first place, because more ready to take notice of
thy own faults than of others. This will give Men more assurance of thy
Circumspection, and Wisdom, and Charity, and consequently make them more attend
to thy Judgment, and believe it according to its Truth. When thou see (for
Example) any Person commit any thing which offends thee, and for which thou art
ready to blame or reproach him, and hear others do so: Before thou passest
thy Judgment, reflect upon thy self sincerely; say to thy self, Am not I guilty
of the same in some degree or other, and cannot or will not see that in my
self, which now I am about severely to reprehend in another, and it may be
deservedly in respect of the Offender, only it would come better out of my
mouth, if I my self were first Innocent or Penitent? Don't I see at least a
Beam in my Brother's eye, when I have as great an one or the same in my own?
There are Five Reasons among others, why a Man should first or equally take
notice of his own faults, accuse and condemn himself.

1. Every Man ought to love himself sure as well as his Neighbor, as he would
do another Person of the same qualities; and if it be good his Neighbors
faults should be observed and judged, that he might be advised and amended,
sure it is good his own should too.

2. A Man gives a very good Example to others, that they should do so by
themselves too; which is a thing so very rare, and yet of such extraordinary
use and benefit.

3. He renders his own Judgment concerning others, when he does pass it, more
effectual, by giving to understand it proceeds not from Imperiousness,
Domineering, Envy, Peevishness, or Busiebodiness, but from a wise Charity, out
of a prudent Love, he does by others as by himself, he spares not himself.

4. Every one knows most certainly the truth of his Judgment concerning
himself.

5. Here Men's care and zeal will be more successfully employed certainly; for
every Man has it more in his own power to mend and reform what he observes and
condemns in himself, than what he condemns in others.

Sect. VI.
6. For the most part it is most safe, that is, of more certain good effect not
to declare thy judgment than to do it. And therefore when at any time, or in
any particular case thou see no advantage of good consequence or effects on
either side to pass Judgment or hold thy Tongue, rather choose to refrain; do it
not till thou see some considerable advantage. And one reason is, because a
Man may (for the most part I say) pass his Judgment at another time, may have
opportunities enough to do it; but he cannot recall it when passed, he cannot
undo what he has done, Nescit vox missa reverti. And yet the practice of Men
is generally clean contrary; that is, if there be not something to affright or
deter them, they seldom refrain to spend their censures very freely.

Sect. VII.
7. Be more cautious and sparing in sometimes passing sometimes declaring thy
Judgment in these following Cases.

(1.) Concerning thy Superiors, especially on the worst side; and that
because, 1. As to their Principles they being far from our Observation, and
there being few or very uncertain signs thereof (for the most part) our
Judgments here will be very uncertain. And

2. As to their actual prudence and foresight in matters concerning their
Office, it is for the same reason to us (...), but yet far more likely (to
compare it with that of their Inferiors or other private Persons) to be more
and better than what is in them. For they make it more their Business to attend
to what is most for the general good of those who are under their care, when
Inferiors look only or principally at themselves. And then they generally have
better information what is so. And truly, it seems likely that if there were as
much assurance of the Integrity of Governors, or their sincere love to the
public Good, as there is of their knowledge, the Judgments of wise and honest
Men would generally with reason be for their honor and advantage; though with
rash and proud Men, of which always are too many, the most manifest Integrity
and Wisdom will not be sufficient to procure them Truth and Justice.

3. The contempt or undervaluing of them and their Authority (which follow upon
our Judgment) is of much worse effect than that of private Persons, as
generally Laws, public Advices and Sentiments, and Examples too sometimes are
of more use than private Opinions and Examples: They being, I say, generally
better, of more comprehensive and certain good effect, as done by a greater and
more generous Charity, with more of a public Spirit, and more Prudence and
Wisdom: Private Persons, especially still the more Vulgar, are generally more
Selfish and Foolish.

(2.) Be more sparing in declaring thy Judgment concerning Friends. For if thy
Judgment be on the good hand, it will be suspected Flattery or generally
Self-love. And therefore it is generally, when any one commends his Friend,
allowed for him, nay, expected he should interpose his excuse, that it is said
by him who might be suspected Partial, and more apt to speak somewhat beyond
the Truth. But if thy Judgment be on the worst side, thou will be esteemed
Ungrateful, and were it never so true, yet it should not have been said by
thee; and therefore in such Cases too we see Men Apologize and make an Excuse,
and alledg some more than ordinary reason, that obliges them to pass such a
Judgment on their very Friend.

(3.) Be more sparing in doing it of thine Enemy: the reason is, because thy
Judgment will be suspected and believed to proceed from Hatred and Illwill; I
say, be more sparing and cautious in these, and such like Cases. I do not say,
but that sometimes there may be sufficient reasons to do it; but then there is
more than ordinary Prudence to be used in such manner as I have now Instanced,
to prevent or remove the hinderance of its good effect.

Nay, I advise rather to take occasion to pass thy Judgment on the good side
here; that is, to commend him and speak well of him for what thou know good
and commendable in him; for then thy Judgment is believed, and consequently of
better effect to those who hear it for encouragement to Imitation. Thou give
also a good Example to others of thy Unprejudicedness, and being above and
untoucht by busy Passions of Hatred, Ill Will, or Revenge, and of being such a
generous lover of Truth and Goodness, as not to conceal, but willingly take
notice of, and approve what is really in the Person laudable, though thine
Adversary, it may be too altogether undeserved and without reason.

And lastly too, By this exercise and use thou really do procure and confirm
in thy self this Generosity, and Manliness, and Christianness (for nothing more
commended in Christian Religion) of Temper, and subduest Selfishness and the
rabble of it is Slaves, those inordinate and immoderate Appetites and Passions,
make them sneak and dare not to appear.

(4.) Be more sparing and cautious in declaring thy Judgment concerning a
Person generally Innocent or well Disposed, but once or rarely overtaken; and
that because it is most likely that he will do so no more, or mend without thy
judging him to himself or others. Nor is there much danger of others imitating
him in one single or very rare Action, when they know he generally does the
contrary; (only indeed if one should observe it who knows not the Man, he may
be informed that the Man was surprised and uses not so to do) and then what
needed the trouble or shame or discredit that thou gave him, it was
unnecessary: And no evil of Pain or Punishment must be admitted, but where it
is necessary for a greater good. And then it is an usual sign to others of some
ill nature and Pride, that is pleased too much in others Faults or Infirmities;
when Men are so ready to judge the first; and consequently is of bad Example to
them, and prejudicial to ones self. Or if thou do see reason to take notice
of such Fault or Infirmity, let it be very shortly, and presently seconded with
a Commendation of him for his general past Innocence or freedom therefrom; and
that thou doub^est not but that he himself the most disapproves of it, and will
not readily do so again. All which are signs of freedom from any Selfishness,
of Charity and Prudence, and consequently the more likely to have good effect
on the Person concerned, and others too.

(5.) Be sparing in declaring thy Judgment of wrathful and bashful Persons,
either to themselves or others. One reason is, because the wrathful and angry
Man will not and cannot bear it through Pride, and the bashful through Shame,
that is, Fear. To the wrathful Man it is at least to himself ineffectual; for
he will the more justify or defend himself, and do or be the same thing again
out of Revenge and Pride; it will give him occasion of wrath and attempting
Mischief; he will turn and rent thee. I say, this for the most part (as all other
Directions of this kind): For sometimes it may be requisite for his and others
Good, first calmly and softly (signs of Good Will to him by doing him good)
afterward shortly and smartly (that is, out of real Benevolence still, but by
some pain or evil to him) to pass Judgment concerning any Principle or Action
of his, let him take it how he will, and but too impatiently.

And as for the bashful Person, it is too great a punishment for him; less
would have done: And always do as little evil as thou can: A private Hint to
him would have been sufficient. Be not a Witness against thy Neighbor without
a cause, and deceive not with thy Lips, says the Wiseman, Prove. 24. 28. That
is, Do not pass nor make known thy Judgment either privately or publicly,
without sufficient reason.

(6.) Be sparing in declaring thy Judgment on the worst side before much
Company; especially Persons whose Favor or good Opinion is more considerable,
and who are in no great danger of Imitation.

One reason is, because most-what less Discredit or Disgrace would have
sufficed to the Mending or Correcting of the Person; if it had been before but
one or two, either before the Person himself concerned, or from whom it might
have been conveyed to him. The Faults or Imperfections had need be great or
frequent, and the Person or Persons very confident and presumptuous, obstinate
and conceited, and a danger of some general Infection, when they are so much
published and made known.

(7.) Be sparing in declaring thy Judgment on the worst side before Enemies, or
Adversaries, or ill-disposed.

One reason is, because they are, or are in danger of being prejudiced and
partial in their Judgments, concerning the Person to whom they are ill-affected
already; and thou by thy Judgment confirmest and increasest this their
Partiality. They are but too ready to catch at and take notice of any thing
spoken disadvantagiously, and to add to it too and aggravate it; and thou art
not to give them the occasion if there be no greater good to be had thereby,
not with a less Inconveniency to be procured. Those too that are of an ill
Temper, and apt to be Envious and Proud, will make ill use thereof, and
gratify and augment those Vices in themselves, and afterward be generally
contemptuous and ill-affected toward the Person thou discommendest. It is more
safely done, and very profitably oft-times before Persons of a benign and
generous Temper, and those who are Discreet, who make from thence profitable
Observation of the Causes the mischievous Effects of the Defects, Infirmities,
Faults and Vices of Humane Nature, to Direct, Govern, and Moderate themselves,
to Advise and Counsel others with Reason, and even the Person himself whose
faults are noted, if it comes fairly in their way: Not to contemn or despise
the Person in general, much less to hate him. Sometimes this may be done
unawares, but oft-times it proceeds from an ill will to the Person judged; and
therefore from an intent and design to exasperate and incense his Adversaries
against him more; knowing they are apt easily to take fire. Oft-times it comes
more from Flattery, to pick Thanks and ingratiate ones-self with him who is
enemy to the Person judged, whom they judge they please hereby, being willing to
hear of the others Faults and Infirmities, to gratify his Hatred or Pride, or
that he may have wherewithal to justify his being so disposed against him,
that he might seem to be his Enemy with more Reason. If it be not thus, yet
oft-times this will be suspected; a Man will incur the suspicion of an
ungenerous Revenge, or Hatred, or Illwill, or Flattery, or at least the
accusation of Imprudence.

That Is the 7th Rule, Be more sparing in thy Judgment, 1. Concerning Superiors.
2. Friends. 3. Enemies. 4. Once or rarely Surprised. 5. To and of wrathful and
bashful Persons. 6. Before much Company. 7. Before Enemies or Ill-dispos'd.

Sect. VIII.
8. Be apt and inclined rather to defer thy Judgment concerning others till
thou art desired; and that either by the Person himself, or others who may be
much necessarily concerned to know another Persons Qualities or Conditions; and
then not to refuse it. Some Reasons are, because that hereby thou accustomest
and usest thy self to Self-government and Direction, to Act for certain Ends,
and by certain Rules, particularly thou causest thy self to refrain thy self,
and to be free and averse from Busie-bodiness, and impertinent and profitable
meddling with other Men's Matters, and other bad Principles of Judgment, partly
by mere disuse, partly by attending to this Rule, and the good effects of it:
Again, thy Judgment is then more likely to be true. Further, Thou securest thy
self also from suspicion of Prejudice, and consequently thy Judgment is more
heeded, and it being more likely to be true, may be of good use to the Person
desiring, and the other concerning whom it is desired if known, to advise and
forewarn them of some Fault or Imperfection to be reformed or get rid of, which
otherwise would not have been minded or believed. Further, Thou do a very
good turn for, and gratifiest him that inquires of thee. It may be also an
occasion of a good Turn and of a Kindness to the other Person thou passest thy
Judgment of, to remove some unjust Suspicions or Opinions concerning him. It
may be he was believed or suspected worse than he was. Thou may rectify some
Mistakes.

Sect. IX.
9. Thou may then more freely and frequently declare thy Judgment concerning
one to another, or to more; when thou see them deficient in Ability or
Wisdom, to take care of themselves; and particularly when they are actually
Ignorant of something in another Person, which may be of great concernment to
them; or are deceived in their Opinion concerning him, whence some great
Detriment or Damage may arise from one to the other.

Thus for Example: If a Man knows or reasonably suspects a Man to be False and
Faithless, to be Fraudulent, or to be Poor and Insufficient, who yet would be
bargaining with, or borrowing of another, or getting some interest in his
Person or Estate, of which he may be Ignorant; or to persuade to some Actions
and Opinions which may be childish, foolish, or hurtful; a Man may advise the
Persons concerned, and give them his Judgment then unasked, not out out of any
Ill Will to the one; but of Good Will to and Care of the other: For a Man ought
to be a Friend to every Man, and a Brother, and not permit if he can any one to
be dammaged or mischieved, and to keep him from the commission of a Sin. A Man
may oft-times meet with Persons in the World who are innocent too and simple,
of no great prudence and foresight, who are also rash and precipitate, or dull
and inapprehensive, who therefore may be easily imposed upon by others, and
made a Prey of by them. Here it is a prudent piece of Charity to advise and
fore-warn and to discover the Designs and Qualities of those who would and do
abuse their Simplicity, and imprudent well-meaning Honesty.

Some Reasons of this are the same with the former. It is an exercise of Virtue
and Prudence in our selves. It is an act of more than ordinary Charity to the
Person in danger to be deceived, to lend him thus the use of thine Eyes for his
safety and good. It is a very seasonable making use of thy Judging; that is, it
will do most good now, when at another time perhaps it would do none atall, or
not so much. Here in this case when a Man desires thy Opinion or Judgment, thou
removest his Solicitude, and satisfiest him perhaps, if he be Ignorant thou
informest him; whereas if thou give thy Judgment unasked, before thou art
desired, and where the Man is sufficient himself, thou will do them no
kindness, nor will they so much mind thee, nor thank thee for it; for it may be
they have none, or not such need of thy Judgment just then; and thou will be
more suspected too of Busie-bodiness or Ill Will. So also where thou art not
desired by one Person to give thy Judgment concerning another Person, but
unasked because of the Persons Insufficiency, out of Charity thou do it, the
effects most-what are very good, and if therefore thou do it, thou art no
less prudent than charitable. And these are the most considerable Rules I have
now thought of, for the Mannagement and Government of our selves in judging
others; which in very few words for Memory sake, I will reckon up again.

1. Be sure it be never inconsistent with Charity, but always done out of the
prospect of some good end.

2. With the exactest truth.

3. Beware of all Passions before Judgment.

4. Declare not thy Judgment when thou thy self art guilty. Or

5. If thou do, first accuse and condemn thy self.

6. It is better and safer generally, not to declare thy Judgment of Persons.

7. Be sparing in judging and declaring thy Judgment on the worst side
concerning Superiors, Friends, Enemies, Surprised, Wrathful and Bashful
Persons, before much Company, before Enemies and Ill-disposed.

8. Defer thy Judging much, till thou art desired or asked.

9. Interpose it to them whom thou see defective in their Ability or Care for
themselves. Many more by Experience may be taken notice of and observed.

Sect. X.
10. I have nothing more to do in this Argument now, but only to remind you of
the two general things I intended and aimed at in this Discourse principally to
recommend to you, and that is Charity and Prudence, in a business that is very
frequent, and takes up a very considerable part of our Lives. For it is very
obvious and easy to observe, that a great part of our Actions of Life, are the
thinking and judging, and talking and discoursing of other Persons, their
Qualities and Actions. The Charity is in the last of the six Particulars. The
contrary of which I here think principally prohibited, which was to judge out of
any nltimate Selfishness, and therefore not out of Busi-bodiness, Hatred,
Revenge, Pride, Affectation of Superiority, Envy, Contempt, Anger, Flattery, or
the like. But if this bad Principle be prohibited, than if ever Judging be
permitted in any Case (as sure it is) the contrary of Charity is commanded; for
one of those Ends and Principles must be our Prudence, is concerned in the
other five prohibited Judgments, viz. to be too prone to judge in general, to be
too much inclined to judge on the worst side, to judge rashly, to judge falsely,
to be too forward in declaring our Judgments. All the Causes, Consequences,
Remedies and Rules I have mentioned, are but more particulary Motives and
Incentives to our Charity, or Directions for our Prudence. And now therefore I
heartily exhort you to the Practice of what has been spoken. That you would
adorn this part of your Conversation with the two most excellent Ornaments, not
only of our Souls, but of the Divine Nature it self. For our Charity and
Prudence are but little imitations of God's infinite Wisdom and Goodness. How
beautiful, lovely, and pleasant a thing it is to see each one discreetly tender
of his Neighbors good Name, Reputution, Interest, or Concern? How lovely a
thing is generous Love? And what a reverend thing is unaffected Prudence in all
our Conversation, and particularly here? What unhandsome things are Rashness
and Falsehood? How ugly and contemptible Selfishness, Hatred, Malice, Pride,
Envy, Contemptuousness, unguided Anger, Busie-bodiness, vain Curiosity,
Flattery? etc.

Finally, remember we are Christians, and who it is, viz. Our Master and
Savior Himself, who has here expressly forbidden these things ( Judge not that
ye be not judged.) The same our Master and Savior send down His gracious
Influence to help us, to do what He has taught and commanded us,

Amen.
FINIS.

