A BRIEF And Full ACCOUNT OF Mr. Tate's and Mr. Brady's New VERSION OF THE
PSALMS.

By a true Son of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Elephant at Charing Cross, M DC XCVIII.

TO All the Learned and Pious PATRONS AND PROMOTERS OF THE New VERSION OF THE
PSALMS, This small TREATISE SHOWING
That the Use of them in Churches, Chapels, and Congregations, Having the
Royal Allowance of His Majesty in Council, and the Recommendation of several of
the Bishops, is agreeable to the Constitutions of the Church of England, and
the Authority of Convocations.

Is Humbly Dedicated by

Their Most obedient Servant,

A Modest Vindication OF THE New VERSION OF THE PSALMS.
THE fond Affection which Men retain for ancient Customs, is generally so very
powerful and prevailing, that a Reformation even from the most prejudicial of
them is hardly obtained, without putting an ungrateful task upon Humane Nature;
for by long^ acquaintance they insinuate themselves so insensibly into our Love
and Esteem, that they frequently blind our Reason, inslave and captivate our
Inclinations, and we can never release our selves from their Tyranny, without
mighty Struggling and Reluctance. It Is to these prejudices mainly, that the
various false Religions in the World owe their maintenance and support; and to
these likewise must be ascribed all those several Heats and Contests, which so
grievoufly disturbed these Nations at the time of our Reformation from the
gross Errors of the Church of Rome. And to what else but these can we more
heartily impute those unexpected Endeavors that have been used against the New
Version of the Psalms? Which designed to retreive that part of our Devotion
from the many palpable Absurdities which were in the Old Translation, and has
been so lasting a reproach to the Honor of our Church.

However, it is hoped that this unhappy Objection may at length be taken off,
and nothing retained in our public Service, which may be matter of just
offense to any; and that therefore we shall not indulge any Error, when we have
so fair an opportunity of seeing it Corrected. And that I may vindicate our
Church from such as asperse her in this particular, and are willing to impeach
her Credit, and impair her Reputation by alleging that the Anciens Psalms of
Sternhold and Hopkins were enjoined as part of her public Devotion, I must
crave leave to correct this great Mistake, and do acquaint them that the Old
Version never had any particular Recommendation either from the King, or
Bishops, or Convocation; and that this New Translation is that which has
obtained both the Allowance and Recommendation of Authority. And after I have
given them a short account of its Rise and Prog^ress, will endeavor to let
them see that the public use of it in our Churches is agreeable to Reason,
conformable to the Constitutions of our Church, and the Authority of
Convocations, and subservient to the Advancement and Increase of Piety. And
therefore that this fmall Tract does hereupon humbly presume to bespeak the
Favor of all such persons as have any regard for Reason, or Devotion, or the
Government in Church or State. But

First, I will endeavor to give some account of the Rise and Progress of this
New Version; which has been thought by some of the greatest Men of the times to
be a Work so well performed, and so favorable a Providence has all along
attended it, that they seem to promise it a very kind Reception and
Encouragement in the World; and it has already met with considerable
Encouragement. The Undertakers at first proposed this pious Design between
themselves, but in a little time it was Communicated, and as speedily Received
and Nourished by Persons of the Highest Rank, and principal Authority in the
Nation, both in Church and State. Whose Abilities being agreeable to the
Eminence of their Quality, gave them an advantageous prospect into all the
convenience and necessity of so good a Work, and what a dissusive and opportune
Blessing it was likely to prove to the Reformed Church of these Dominions,
particularly in removing those daily Exceptions which are made against this
part of our public Devotion. Whereupon the late Queen of Blessed and Immortal
Memory, was pleased to promise it Her Royal Countenance. And the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, whose excellent Endowments were so suitable to the
Dignity of his Station; did freely acquaint the Translators, That he was glad
so useful a Work was carrying on in his Days.

After the Kingdom had sustained so considerable a loss by the Death of those
two Eminent Persons, who were such Ornaments to the Nation, the present Arch
Bishop, who was chosen to succeed in the Sea of Canterbury, and acquits himself
so well in that weighty Charge which he has in the Church, was pleased to look
favorably upon this Religious Design, and support that Patronage which they
had promised it. And many more of the learned and judicious Prelates, who were
unwilling that a Design so Pious and Useful should meet with any Obstruction,
gave it likewise their Encouragement. Besides these, Sir John Summers, now Lord
High-Chancelour of England, the Earl of Pembroke, Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of
Dorset and Middlesex, and the Right Honorable Charles Mountague Chancellor of
the Exchequer, all Persons of singular and shining Parts; were the great
support of the Undertaking, and the mighty Patrons and Promoters of this
difficult and Religious Work. Among whom there are not wanting Persons of such
accurate Judgment in all Poetic excellence, and of such skill in that Language
wherein the Psalms were originally writ, that the very mention of their Names
in such a Work as this, is sufficient to Recommend it effectually to all this
part of the Ingenious World, and their Stamp upon it, to make it pass current
for Standard Verse, with all the best Masters of Poetry among us, The
Translators, who attempted it, were sufficiently known to them for their
Qualifications and Abilities, who were neither Ignorant of the Nature and
Genius of true Poetry, nor Strangers to the Learned Languages. And such as are
absolute Judges in this matter, do justly own the near Relation there is
between the English and the Original.

When the Work was finished, and had passed the Censure of his Grace the
Archbishop, and several more of his Brethern the Right Reverend Prelates, who
vouchsafed to peruse it, and give in their Alterations and Remarks; a Petition
was presented to His Majesty in Council for allowing the liberty of a public
Reception of it in all Churches, Chapels, and Congregations; which was
accordingly granted, and is now Printed before the Book, and runs thus, At the
Court at KENSINGTON. December, 3. 1696. Present, The King's Most Excellent
Majesty in COUNCIL.
UPON the humble Petition of Nicholas Brady, and Nahum Tate, this Day read at
the Board, setting forth, that the Peti'ioners have, with their utmost Care and
Industry, completed A New Version of the Psalms of David, in English Meter,
fitted for Public Use; and humbly praying His Majesty's Royal Allowance that
the said Version may be used in such Congregations as shall think fit to
receive it.

His Majesty taking the same into His Royal Consideration, is pleased to Order
in Council, That the said New Version of the Psalms in English Merre be, and
the same is hereby Allowed and Permitted to be Used in all Churches, Chapels,
and Congregations, as shall think fit to receive the same.

W. Bridgman.



And because a matter of this Universal Moment and Concern required all
imaginable Care and Industry for qualifying it for so public an End as it was
Designed for; and that no caution might be omitted for bringing this Work to
full Maturity and Pertection, the Translators invited all their Friends been in
City and Country to supervise and correct what was amiss, fearing least an
overweening partiality to their own Endeavors might bribe their Judgments, and
warp their Sentiments into too favorable an Opinion of their own Performances,
for knowing the variety of Humors it was to struggle with, and the great
difficulty of suiting a Poem to every Temper which this was to engage, they
thought of no Method so likely for mastering this Discouragement, as to try the
Bent of every Genius; what Thoughts and Apprehensions they had of it, before it
was permitted to venture abroad. Transcribing herein that excellent Rule of
Horace in his Book de Art Poetica, wherein he advises us to submit our
Performance to the severest Censure.

-- -- Si quid tamem olim
Scripseris, in Meci descendat Judicis aures.
Yet if it ever be your Fate to write,
Let your Productions pass tbe strictest hand.
Roscom. Transl. Which is a Method whereby any Author may give a remarkable
Instance of his Wisdom and Humility, tho he cannot always of his Ingenuity.

After it had been thus Corrected by the Bishops, and the Translators friends,
and the Work it self, with the usefulnes of it, had been so fairly represented
to His Majesty in Council, by his Grace the Lord Arch bishop of Canterbury and
others, that it gained a public Approbation by His Majesty's Royal Indulgence:
The Lord Bishop of London thought fit to send out his circular Letters of
Recommendation to all his Clergy within his Diocese: For that worthy Prelate
did in this case nothing deviate either from his Native or additional Honor;
but after the very first time that he promised this Version his Favor, he was
so cautious of giving the least Umbrage of suspicion that he was unmindful of
his Word, that he spread it, as much as lay in him, universally. And at the
same time gave an Instance of that Respect which was due both to his Sovereign
and himself, and showed that he was as little capable of neglecting so
reasonable a thing, which his Prince had countenane'd, as he was of violating
his own voluntary Obligation. And no sooner came his Lordships Letter abroad,
but it was cheerfully received by several of his Clergy within the City; but no
where sooner, as I am informed, than in that learned Auditory in Sergeants Inn
in Fleetstreet, where it was very much approved of, but more especially by the
Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice Treby, whose Judgment and Ingenuity are
so unquestionable.

Much about the same time the Grave and Judicious Members of Lincoln's Inn,
appointed it to be Sung in their Chapel the following Term, as a Mark of the
public Approbation of that Honorable Society. And several of the Bishops
reading my Lord of London's Letter, found it a thing so thoroughly weighed, and
such excellent Reasons given for the dispersing it universally, that without
any further Hesitation, they resolved to make that the Original for them to
Copy after, and the Standard of their Direction; and therefore transcribed it
without any alteration but that of their Names, and afterward scattered it
throughout their respective Diocesses.

Upon which his Grace the Lord Archbishop of York, whom all Mankind so justly
Respect and Honor, acquainted the Authors of this Version, by a Letter which
he sent up to his Brother in the City, that he was then going his Visitation,
and would recommend it to all his Clergy as he went along; and that already
some of them, pleased with so pious a Proposal, had sent to the City for Books
for their Congregations: For his Grace was pleased to acquaint the Tranflators
some time ago, that whenever they could obtain any Encouragement from the
Government, he would endeavor to disperse it throughout his Province.

Having proceeded thus far in the History of this New Translation, and declared
its Original, and that favor able Entertainment it has met with from Persons
of such Unquestionable Judgment and Authority, of such Eminent Piety and
Learning, by whose Kindness and Encouragement it has made such Steps and
Progress not only in this famed Metropolis, but in some of the remotest parts
of the Nation; I will now proceed to give some Reasons for the Vindication of
that Encouragement which it has already met with, or hereafter may receive, and
endeavor likewise to answer such Objections as may be made, either against the
Patrons or Promoters of this Work. Not that I can mistrust the Reception of it
in an Age so Religious and refined as This, but only because some persons, who
can endure nothing but what is Old, may be startled at its Novelty; and look
upon it, as some do upon New Fashions, which though never so decent, and proper,
and convenient for us to use, yet they cannot bear the sight of them, because
neither they, nor their Forefathers were ever accustomed to them. And that it
is only this unreasonable prejudice which thus imposes upon them, and so
inslaves them to Antiquity in this matter, this very Argument will I hope make
evident, which is, that if this New Version had been so long entertained in our
Churches, as the Old One has been, and Sternhold and Hopkins had now offered
their Compositions instead of it, they would certainly be rejected by all
degrees of Men, with the utmost contempt.

But I will hasten to the Arguments which as I told you I designed to make use
of, to promote a general Reception of this Translation; which we e the
agreeableness of this Design with Reason; the Conformity of it with the
Constitutions of our Church, and the Authority of Convecations; and its
subserviency to the Advancement and Increase of Piety. By all which I will
endeavor fairly to represent the Usefulness of this Pious and Laborious Work,
friendly to remove those prejudices that may be rashly taken up against either
the Design it self, or the Favorers of it, and amicably to reconcile the
unbias'd Reader to a candid and kind Opinion of it. For I think the best
Argument loses ground, when it looks ill natured or severe.

First therefore, I will endeavor to let you see the Agreableness of this
Design with Reason. And both this, and the other Arguments which I have chosen
to insist upon are plainly intimated in the Letter of the Bishops, which is
this,

HIS Majesty having allowed and permitted the Use of a New Version of the
Psalms of David, by Mr. Brady and Mr. Tate, in all Churches, Chapels and
Congregations; I cannot do less, than wish a Good Success to this Royal
Indulgence: For I find it a Work done with so much Judgment and Ingenuity, that
I am persuaded, it may take off that unhappy Objection, which has hitherto lain
against the Singing Psalms; and dispose that part of Divine Service to much
more Devotion. And I do heartily Recommend the Use of This Version, to all my
Brethren within My Diocese.

Now in this Letter there are three Reasons given, why their Lordships were
induced to Recommend so cordially this Translation to their several Ministers.
The first is the Respect they bore to His Sacred Majesty, as the Supreme Head
and Governor of this Church, who having the (...) fullness and Convenience of
this Religious Performance, and the necessity of introducing it into the
Church, represented to him by the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council,
was pleased by the Authority with which he is Vested in these Matters, to grant
it forthwith His Royal Allowance.

Upon which, the Bishops finding how much His Majesty's Care for the welfare
of of the Church was interested in this Case, thought that their Zeal and
Concern ought to be no less, and therefore they seconded his Indulgence with
their own hearty Recommendation. And because upon this, some scandalous Libels
were published in the City, in derogation of this Laudible Undertaking, and
contempt of that Authority which was pleased to appear in its Approbation;
Therefore his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, with others of their
Excellences the Lords Justices, thinking not fit that a Work so beneficial to
the Public should be obstructed in its Progress; or that the saucy Reflections
upon that Encouragement which it had from Authority, should pass unpunished,
ordered a Messenger of the Press to search out the Authors and Prinsers of the
Libels, that they might be proceeded against according to Law.

The next Reason taken notice of by the Bishops in their Letter is the Judgment
and Ingenuity of the Work, which appearing not only to their Lordships, but to
others of the most refined Parts of the Age, I suppose this Argument is
unquestionable, especially with Men of Candor and Judgment. And for such whose
capacities are too low to find out those Perfections, they ought to acquiesce
in the Sentiments of such as are qualified for it; since nothing is so true a
Judge of Sense, as Sense.

The third and last Reason which is mentioned in this Letter, is, that the use
of this Version (as they own they are persuaded) may take off that unhappy
Objection which has hitherto lain against the Singing Psalms, and dispose that
part of Divine Service to much more Devotion. But of this I shall speak nothing
at present, but refer it to the last particular of this Discourse, where it
more porperly falls in, because it is an Argument drawn from Piety and Devotion.

And now for the Reason of using this New Version, which is so well approved
of; I think nothing more equitable, and therefore more rational than that this
Translation should be favorably received, since, it has been so publicly
allowed of, and with good Authority recommended, merely upon the account of
that civil Observance and Respect which is due to our Superiors, both in Church
and State. For unless some deference be paid to their Judgments, and that
Authority which they have over us, even in those things wherein they do not
interpose an Absolute Command, we shall never show so much Ingenuity, as to
conform to their Counsels and Advice freely, but put them always upon the
uneasiness of dragging us to our Duty, and making use of their coercive Power
over us, because we will do nothing but by constraint. And what thanks is due
to my Obedience, when I find I cannot help it, if I resisted the Authority as
long as I was able, and would have baffled it if I could? For,

Certainly were my love and respect to my Superiors as cordial as they ought to
be; Obedience to their Advice, would be my true satisfaction, and compliance
with their Counsels, my great Delight; I should be so far from disputing, or
opposing their pious Admonitions, that I should constantly hearken to them
cheerfully, and obey them with a ready Mind. Nay, should think it my Duty to
comport my self quietly and respectfully toward every one in that Order and
Degree wherein they are placed; and not lessen their Authority by obstructing
their Directions, or interrupting the Progress of their reasonable and pious
Designs; for he that practices the contrary, and disputes each punctilio of
Advice with his Superiors, is rather a Disturbance than a Blessing to either
Public, or Domestic Societies; and by a perverse and litigious temper does as
much as in him lies to weaken the reins of Government, eclipse that Respect
which is due to Power, and turn that Civility which should be paid to the
mature Advice of our Superiors out of the World.

And certainly would Men but make this Case their own, and consider with what
Patience and Equanimity they themselves would bear such usage as this from
their Inferiors, what a derogation it would be to their Authority to have it
slighted and overlooked, by such as Nature of Providence had placed under them?
They would not be so easily induced to transgress in this particular, nor
openly infringe the natural Rights of Superiority, which are Laws of common
Justice betwixt Man and Man. As for Instance,

Would any Master of a Family think it proper in a Servant to choose out his
own Task, and prescribe to himself his own Work, when he had directed him to
the contrary? Would any Tutor be pleased with his Pupil for reading such Books
as humored his own Fancy, when he had advised him to such as were much more
instructive and beneficial? And would it not be extremely indecent, and apt to
grieve and incense an Indulgent Parent, to see his Child refractory to his
Admonitions, and advance his own Opinion in direct opposition to his wise and
kind Advices?

It Is certain that all Men in these circumstances do expect both Love and
Obedience, both Duty and Respect to be paid them by their Inferiors. What
Reason therefore is there that they should not show as willing a Mind to give,
as receive this Observance and Veneration, in all matters that are equitable
and just? And I am persuaded that there are few of those Persons who would
evade a compliance with the Advice of their Superiors in this particular, but
would be apt to resent the like repulse from other Men, were they advanced to
so high a Station as would qualify them for recommending it themselves. They
would I believe be apt to think that there was but little either of Modesty,
Justice, or Ingenuity in such behavior toward them; as little indeed as if
the Dean of a Cathedral should acquaint his Quire, that such a New Anthem he
thought might very properly be Sung, and they, notwithstanding, should Tune
their Voices to an old One, and tell him that they thought themselves more
capable of judging what was fit to be Sung than he. Nor can I think that the
Patrons of this Work are any more culpable for encourageing it, than a Dean
would be for Designing a New Anthem; nor the Promoters of it any more to blame,
than the Quire would be had they cheerfully obeyed him.

For these Reasons it was that a person of Honor in this Nation, living in a
Parish where the Bishops Recommendation came to the Minister, and finding it
neglected, spoke to his Pastor to this effect. Sir, How can you expect that
your Parishioners should pay a due respect to you; when you pay so little to
your King, and your Diocesan? Or, readily comply with that Advice that you
give, when you hearken so little to that which is sent you by your Superiors?
And for this Reason it is that so many Reverend and Devout Persons are heartily
disposed toward the promoting this Design, because they are loath to expose
the Authority of their Superiors to contempt, which they judge they must incur
by a careless or violent Opposition to it. And which they sancy would amount to
little less than this, viz.

When their Lordships tell them, they cannot do no less than wish a good
Success to this Royal Indulgence; should they contemn it, it would be in effect
to tell their Lordships, nor we do less than wish it no Success at all When
their Lordships say, they sind it a Work done with so much Judgment and
Ingenuity. Should these decry and run it down, it would look as if they should
answer, we could never find out where either the Judgment or Ingenuity lay. And
when the Bishops affirm, that they are persuaded it may take off that unhappy
Objection which has hitherto lain against the Singing Psalms. Should these Men
after this make use of the Old Ones, would it not be to tell the World, that
they think the Objection is very frivolous, and the Old Psalms are a laudable
part of our Devotion?

Thus they argue for their just compliance, and should they be of a contrary
Opinion, this would be to magnify their own Judgment in Opposition to that of
their Superiors. Whereas the tender Regard and Veneration they have for the
Reputation and Advice of their Ecclesiastical Governors, and the fear of
exposing their Counsels to contempt, especially in an Age so licentious and
wild as this, binds them within the Rules of a filial Obedience, and ingages
them not to be too remiss in paying Honor, to whom such Honor is due. This
therefore shall serve for the first Argument I have chosen for the Use of these
Psalms, being drawn from Reason, which is always willing to support Government,
to pay a due respect to Superiors, and a cheerful compliance to their good
Advice.

The Second Argument I proposed to insist upon, for Vindicating the Design of
the Patrons and Promoters of this Work of introducing it into the Churches, was
derived from the Conformity of it to the Constitutions of our Church, and the
Authorit of Convocations. And so it plainly appears as much as it is allowed of
by the King and recommeded by the Bishops. For in the Rubric before the
Sentence at the Offertory are these Words; And nothing shall be proclaimed, or
published in the Church during the time of Divine Service, but by the Minister;
nor by him any thing, but what is prescribed in the Rules of this Book, or
enjoined by the King, or the Ordinary of the place. Where by the way, thus much
we may observe, that no Clark of a Parish can Sing in the Church, but as he is
directed by his Minister, and as he Acts as his Deputy.

But against the strength of this Rubric I foresee you may thus argue; That
this New Version is neither enjoined by the King, nor the Ordinary of the
Place, as the Rubric specifies, and therefore it can receive no Countenance or
Authority from thence. And so far I confess the Objection seems to be valid;
but yet, though neither the King, nor the Ordinary literally enjoin, yet they
allow and recommend these Psalms, and that Rubric which impowers them to
enjoin, does much more empower them to allow and recommend; for, Omne majus in
this case includit minus. And though it is true, I confess, that by this Authority
these Psalms are not enjoined to be Sung. Yet by the Authority of this Rubric
none else can be Sung, because none else are expressly allowed of and
recommended by the King, and the Ordinary.

Now we must remember that the Rubric contains in it the Power and Force both
of a Convocation and an Act of Parliament, because it is Established by both
their Authorities. And though in its Original it was only a Canon, yet was it
confirmed as a Law: And therefore this Version coming abroad, recommended by
the Anthority of this Rubric, which impowers both the King and the Ordinary
not only to enjoin, but much more to allow and recommend, comes abroad stamped
with the Approbation both of Convocation and Act of Parliament. And he seems to
vacat both their Authorities who opposes that Encouragement which it has
already received from His Majesty and the Bishops; and endeavors to enervate
all their Efficacy and Strength by rendering them useless and insignificant. And
since it has been thought fit that the Persons Constituting that Learned Body
of the Convocation should have their Vote for approving at least what was sit
to be used in the several Parts of the Public Service; and since this very
Society, have by their own voluntary Consent allowed that the King or the
Bishops, may enjoin, or recommend what is fit, or decent upon occasion; whoever
therefore it is that contradicts this Authority which they have freely
consented should be vested in the King and the Bishops, seems directly to
oppose the Power of that Sacred Body, and to be a direct Enemy to the Rights
and Privileges of a Convocation. Besides,

By virtue of that Authority which is vested in our Kings, K. James the I.
Issued out his Royal Commission for that New Translation of the Bible, which is
now daily read in Churches. Nor can I find that ever any Convocation since that
time have thought that Commission an Infringement of their Rights and
Liberties, but rather an Allowance and a sign of the Ratification of them. And
certainly it is none of the least Honors and Felicities that our Convocations
have reason to boast of, when Kings are pleased thus to act by their Canons,
and to be directed by their Constitutions; so making good the Prophetic
Character given of them, that they should be nursing Fathers of the Church,
Isa. 49. 23. If then the present Version of the Bible be thought sit to be used
upon all occasions in our Churches, Chapels, and Congregatious, by the
Authority of the King which is backed by that of Act of Parliament and
Convocation; I can see no reason why the same Authority should not interpose,
and be allowed of, which has appeared in the Approbation of this New
Translation of the Psalms. And as for that Version which has hitherto been
used, it never found that Encouragement from any persons legally vested with
Authority in spirituals, that this new one has been favored with, no not from
a Convocation it self, and sor the rest of the late ones they cannot pretend to
it. And the silence of so many Convocations since the Reformation is so far
from being an Argument for the Old One, that on the contrary it is a
presumptive Evidence, that that Religious Assembly thought it their Prudence
not to interpose their Influences, in encouraging such a thing as in their
Opinion did not deserve it. Whoever therefore it is that opposes that Authority
which the New Translation has obtained, seems plainly to deprive the
Convocation of those Signal Honors and Immunities appertaining to them, which
the Parliament has been pleased to confirm, and the King and the Bishops are
pleased to Act by, who have the executive Power, of those Laws and
Constitutions which the other framed, conferred on them. As appears in that
Order which was given by King Charles II. for using the three Forms of Prayer,
which are annexed to the Common Prayer Book.

CHARLES R.

Our Will and Pleasure is, That these three Forms of Prayer, and Service made
for the 5th. of November, the 30th. of January, and the 29th. of May, be
faithfully Printed and Published, and for the future annexed to the Book of
Common Prayer, and Liturgy of the Church of England, to be used yearly on the
said Days in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, in all
Chapels, Colleges and Halls within both our Universities, and of our Colleges
of Eaton and Winchester, and in all Parish Churches and Chapels, within our
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 2d day of May, in the 14th Year of our
Reign. By His Majesty's Command. Edw. Nicholas.


And what is more observable, these very Forms were, with such Alterations as
were then necessary, received and used in the Church, by virtue of a like Order
from the late Queen of ever blessed Memory. For the Right that is attributed by
our Laws to our Kings, is lodged in the Constitution of our common Laws, and is
an Original Contract between the King and the Estates of this Realm, and that
upon a civil Incorporation of the Church, and its Powers and Ordinances into
the Civil State and Secular Authority Municip. Eccles. p. 136.

But still you will say, that though by this Rubric, which I lately mentioned, the
Use of any Psalms but the New Ones is forbid, because they only are approved
of, and by Authority recommended; yet are we not enjoined to Sing these
publicly, and there fore it is at our liberty to forbear in our Churches all
Psalmody, if we please. But in Answer to this, I only desire that that solemn
Engagement which was made to the Bishop at the Time of Ordination may be
considered. For then the Bishop asks the Person that is to be ordained Priest
this Question. Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief
Ministers, unto whom is committed the Charge and Government over you; following
with a good Mind and Will their godly Admonitions, and submitting your self to
their godly Judgments? Answ. I will do so, God being my helper. Where it is
plain, that the Priest obliges himself by a Solemn and formal Promise,
reverently to obey his Ordinary, and submit himself to his godly Judgment.
therefore if any one reject this New Translation of the Psalms recommended to
him by his Bishop, I cannot see how he can avoid the Censure of casting a
scandalous Reproach upon the godly Judgment of his Ordinary and palpably
violating that religious obligation which he solemnly entered into at the time
of his Ordination, before the Bishop, the Priests, and all the Congregation.
But I fancy the Persons are but few who will be so hardy against their own
Conscience, and cancel all that Veneration which is due both to their Diocesan
and themselves, if they hope that God should be their Helper.

However it is apparent that the Use of this New Version is conformable to the
Constitution of our Church, which lays upon all her Sons a very strict
Engagement of acting suitably to her pious Intentions. And therefore those that
encourage and promote it, tell us this in their own vindication; that till a
civil compliance with our Governors must pass for an instance of factious
Obedience, and the Observance of the Constitutions of the Church, and the
Authority of Convocations in a thing lawful and commendable, is Vncanonical.
Till it be proved that the Governors in Church and State, have countenanced a
thing impious or unlawful, or have recommended a thing for which they had no
just Authority, this New Translation cannot easily be rejected by them.

2. And they justly think it cannot be inveterately opposed by any, unless it
be by some few persons who may envy the production, because it is not their
own, or because it has met with such good Success; or those that are prejudiced
against the Royal Allowance, because William R. is on the Front of it; or such
as look upon the recommendatory Letter of a Diocesan, as only a mere matter of
Form; or lastly those who are such zealous Admirers of Antiquity, that they
will object against any thing, barely for its being New.

The third Argument for the reception of the New Psalms, is, That they are
subservient to the advancement of Piety and Devotion. And this arises from the
genuine Excellence and Composure of this New Version, which by many degrees
surpasses the Old. But if any will vindicate the Old, and think them preferable
to these, their Judgment, it seems, runs quite counter to that of the
Government, which would never have thought fit to encourage this New Version,
had it not esteemed it far Superior. And that the Wisdom of the Government was
not herein, if any one imagine it, mistaken, I appeal to the Sense of all
Mankind, who will please (as the Patrons and Promoters of this Version have
done) impartially to peruse and compare them; and I could easily make appear by
several Instances taken from such Old Psalms as are esteemed the most
unexceptionable among them: But I rather choose to cast a Veil upon their
Infirmities, and since they formerly lived in some Repute, to let them die
without exposing their weaknesses.

Whereas in the Translation which is recommended, we commonly find such devout
and shining Sense, as makes them fit to be Sung in the Beauty of Holiness; such
heavenly Expressions, as are apt to inflame and inspire the Soul, and raise it
to David's seraphick pitch; and with such a mixture of Majestic Gravity, as
fully represents the sacred Genius of the Royal Prophet. And certainly such a
spirit of Piety, and admirable variety of pathetick Devotion runs through the
Body of these Psalms, that though they were not hallowed by a solemn Dedication
to the Use and Service of the Church, yet would they demand a very religious
veneration from us upon the account of that abundant Matter which they
plentifully supply for all the Exigences and Occasions of a Family, or a Closet
Devotion. However, as the best of Men are not free from obloquy and aspersion;
so neither are the best performances exempt from Cavils and Objections. And
therefore notwithstanding all the Encouragement and Applause which this Version
has met with from so many persons eminent for their Learning, Piety, and
Ingenuity, yet still there are some few scruples raised against it, which I
intend in the next place to consider.

First, they say, These New Psalms are too Poetical, and yet I am certain that
none of them are more Poetical, than the Original or have bolder Expressions,
or more lofty and exalted Metaphors, or more lively Flights of Fancy than those
of David; as for Instance,

Psa. 18. v. 10. (...) he did fly upon the Wings of the Wind.

Ps. 65. v. 14. (...) the Valleys also are covered over with corn, they shout
for joy, they also Sing.

Psa. 98. v. 8. (...) let the Floods clap their hands, in the Greek it is
(...), let the Sea be moved.

Ps. 114. v. 3. (...) the Sea saw and fled. v. 4. (...) the Mountains skipped
like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs; or as the Septuagint Version has
it, (...), as the Lambs of Sheep; which indeed comes nearer the Hebraism the
Children of Sheep.

The next Objection is, That the common People do not understand them. But
certainly they are as intelligible as the obsolete and improper expressions of
Sternhold and Hopkins. And if some Parts are obscure, is not the Prose
Translation so too? Otherwise what need was there of so many learned
Commentators to explain it? And yet, this I am sure of, that this new Version
is in many Places more intelligible than the Prose, and may serve for a good
Comment upon it. As for Instance, Ps. 119. ver. 83. in the Prose it is, I am
become like a bottle the Smoke. In the Version, My Skin like shrivel'd
Parchment shows,
which long in Smoke is set.


Because in the Eastern Countries, before the Invention of Glass, their Bottles
were made of Skins, and dried in the Smoke. Ps. 12. v. 8. The Prose is thus,
The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. Which the
Version renders much more intelligible in explaining the walking aside of the
wicked men, by [not knowing which way to fly] and the vilest men, by [such as
they despised and Vexed.] Then shall the Wicked be perplexed,
Nor know which way to fly;
When those whom they despised and vexed,
Shall be advanced on high.


Psa. 108. V. 9. The Prose runs thus, Moab is my Washpot over Edom will I cast
out my Shoe. Upon which the Version is a clear Comment in these words, Moab
I Will make my servile Drudge,
On vanquished Edom tread.


And in several places where the Sense in the Prose is very obscure by seeming
broken and unconnected, this takes care to render it more plain, by maintaining
the Connection. And if any one will argue either that the Old Psalms express the
Difficulties more clearly than these, or that in the main they come nearer to
the Original, I am certain that the Original must then abound with great
Improprieties of Speech, and in many places with very little Sense.

But if the Vulgar must needs decide in this matter, and the Affairs in this
World must be absolutely regulated by them, is not this to Vote for the Feet
that they should dictate to the Head? To make a Man's self a Servant to those
who should look upon him to be their Master, Is not not this to appoint
Ignorance the Judge of Sciences? And to comply with the unreasonable Demands of
Inferiors, the better to evade those just Regards which we owe to our
Superiors.

Psalmody, when it is celebrated with that Decency both in Words and Actions,
which so solemn a Part of Worship does require, is in it self very heavenly;
and as it is fed with that Celestial Fire which is darted from above, so it is
always restless and impatient till it ascends thither again. Upon this Account
it has ingratiated it self so much with the Reformation, not only here in
England, but in France, as that the French King jealous of that Piety and
Devotion which it fostered in the Hugonots, published a Prohibition of it (as I
am informed) with very severe Penalties. Nay, to show what Influence this
Psalmody daily had upon his other Subjects the Romanists, he was forced to
countenance and encourage the Use of profane Songs and Ballads, the better to
countermine that noble and heavenly Exercise. And therefore notwithstanding the
Weakness and Imperfection of the old Version, the Benefits which formerly rose
to the Church from it, have been, I consess, considerable.

But since the numerous Defects of it are now grown so obvious that they are
discovered by every weak Eye, and disliked by the most common Judgment: Since
the most ordinary Capacity can discern them, and the Vulgar themselves have now
found out the Meanness of the Expressions, and converted them into Proverbs of
Contempt to our Service, methinks we should scarce be so tenacious of them,
were we truly tender of the Honor of our Church, and considered with what
singular Veneration, and profound Respect the awful Majesty of Heaven and Earth
should be approached.

For this Reason it was that the Reverend Dr. Burnet, now Lord Bishop of
Salisbury, speaking of the Old Version, gives it this Character in his History
of the Reformation. But as the Poetry then was low, and not raised to that
justness to which it is now brought; so this Work, which then might pass for a
tolerable Composure, has not been since that time so reviewed or changed, as
perhaps the thing required: Hence it is that this part of Divine Worship, by
the meanness of the Verse, has not maintained its due Esteem.

From whence we may observe how this Judicious Historian (though so long ago)
agreed with his Brethren the Reverend Bishops, that there was a necessity of a
New and better Version, in order to rescue that part of Divine Service from
that contempt which in the Opinion of this Learned Prelate it then lay under.

From hence likewise it is, that several Ingenious Persons, who are well
disposed to the Liturgy of our Church, yet frequently absent themselves from
it, in Honor to Almighty God, because it is rather a Contempt, they say, than
a Respect, to pay their Homage, directly contrary to what his Holy Word
prescribes, both in Psalm 47. 7. Sing ye praises with understanding. And 1 Cor.
14. 15. I will Sing with the Spirit, and I will Sing with the Understanding
also. So that if our Zeal be never so warm, and our Spirits be never so active
in Devotion, yet if this noble part the Understanding be wanting, the sacrifice
will be very lame and imperfect, and unacceptable unto him, who requires the
Homage, not only of the Heart, but of the Head too.

And hence likewise it is, that several sensible Persons are awed into Silence
at the singing such Expressions in the old Psalms, as would directly lead them
into that Error which Solomon warns them to avoid in the of God, and would
cause them to give the Sacrifice of Fools. Eccles. 5. 1. Which how rashly
soever other ignorant Persons pronounce, and make bold with the Almighty, by
such improper and foolish Phrases; yet they infallibly incurr his Displeasure
by it, they affront him to his very Face, and consider not that they do evil,
as the Wise Man tells them in the same Place. And I am confident that should
any Minister address himself to his Congregation in such Language as may be met
with in the old Version, which I am too tender to instance in, that the
Auditors would not only think it time ill spent to hearken to him, but likewise
conclude that his Design was nothing else but plain Abuse.

And is it fit that this should be retained as a proper Oblation to the
Almighty Majesty of Heaven and Earth? Must the meanest of our Services be
grateful unto him, who requires the very choicest from us? And will he be so
tame and weak, as to delight in that, which any Man of common Ingenuity would
contemn? But offer it unto thy Governor, and see whether he will accept of it;
as the Prophet very fitly expostulated upon such an Occasion, Mal. 1. 8. And if
ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and
sick, is it not evil? Offer it now to thy Governor, will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of Hosts? Nothing less than the most
perfect Oblations that we have to offer are valuable in the Sight of this
Universal and Omnipresent Sovereign, and he that offers him the Affection of
the Heart, and retains the bright Faculty of the Understanding, offers him the
blind in the very worst Sense.

But besides the many obvious Absurdities, there is another great Error in
Sternhold and Hopkins, which no Art can rectify, unless by a wonderful
Metempsychosis a new Soul and Spirit were diffused throughout the whole
Composure; And it is this; the very same low Style and Genius runs throughout
the whole Work, and are no more raised at a Psalm of Triumph and Exultation,
than they are at a Psalm of Mourning and Distress. And both the 18 and 51, the
89 and the 119 Psalms, with many more, which are so vastly different in their
Majesty and Humility, are writ in the very same poor and lifeless Strains in
the old Translation. And yet these Psalms in the Original are composed in as
various a Style, and Diversity of Thought, as the lofty Expressions of the
Prophet Isaiah, and the plain ones of the Prophet Amos. And therefore, to dress
these Psalms in the same common Garb of Speech, is altogether as absurd, as for
a Painter, who designed to give us a Portraiture of King David, to represent
him in the same mean Appearance, when he was seated upon the Throne of Israel,
as when he was feeding his Father's Sheep. This would be as absurd, as to
confound the Scepter and the Pastoral Crook, his Shepherd's Garments and his
Robes of State. Which Incongruities, as they are none of the least, so the New
Translators have endeavored to avoid them; and as for such Psalms as relate
the Prosperity of the Church or State, those they have attempted to fill with
Life and Spirit, and have given them an Air of Joy and Triumph. But such as
were composed on Occasions of any public or private Calamities, or are Matter
of plain Precept, there their Expressions are familiar and decent, and the
Lines are tempered with doleful Words and melancholy Accents, which is a noble
and difficult Piece of Work, that none but a perfect Master of Verse can
conquer and accomplish. And, without which, none can ever pretend to a just
Translation of David's Psalms.

Since then the Reason of the thing, and the Rubric of our Church, encourage
the Use of this new Version; since the highest Powers in Church and State
acknowledge the Usefulness of it in Public, and the solemn Engagement of
obeying the godly Admonition of the Diocesan, loudly calls for a Compliance
herein; if People will still refuse to conform under all these Engagements,
what a mighty Scandal may it prove to the pious and ingenious Dissenter! And
how may it seem to justify his not conforming with us! who being well
convinced of the usefulness of Psalmody, might otherwise perhaps be brought to
join with us in this part of our Devotion, if he found that performed as our
reasonable Service, and our selves conformable to the pious Judgment of our
Superiors.

And then as to the profane and profligate Part of this World, how can we
expect from them a Reformation in their Morals, when they see us so loath to
make the least Reformation in our Sense? How can we blame them for their ill
Customs, when they find us so tenacious of ours.

Till therefore the Nature of our Language is tarnished again with its ancient
Barbarities, and the Politeness of the Age is sullied with an untractable
Obstinacy and Perverseness; till Men have unlearnt their Sentiments of good
Sense, and lost their Affections for fit and decent Expressions in God's
Service, the Old Translation, though formerly they may have well deserved, may
take their Repose, and then be allowed to flourish again.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Certainty of a Futur State, or, an Occasional Letter concerning
Apparitions. By J. Roe. A. M. And Chaplain to the Right Honorable Charles Earl
of Burlington. The Second Edition. Price sticht 1 s.

The Useful and easy double List, containing the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the last Parliament, begun at Westminster, Nov. the 22d. 1695. and
of this Present Parliament, begun the 24th of August, School. In a New and ready
Mtehod; showing Alphabetically the Names of all those Members of the late
Parliament now left out of this. Price 2 d.

Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Elephant at Charing Cross: Where may be had
the New Psalms ready bound any manner of way.


