A BRIEF and PLAIN DISCOURSE UPON THE Decrees of God. WHEREIN Mr. Grantham's
Query IS Considered and Answered.

WITH Some short Reflections upon a few Expressions in his Book, etc.

Job 6.25. How forcible are right words? But what does your arguing reprove?

Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather your selves together, etc. Before the Decree Bring forth,
etc.

Decretum Dei est Definitiva ejus Sententia, de Rebus Omnibus per Omnipotentiam
and Secundum Consilium suum efficiendi.

Ames Medulla Theol. LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Edw. Giles Bookseller in
Norwich, near the Market Place. 1692.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. Grantham's Question, Which he was pleased to propound to all
Rigid Calvinists, as he calls them, viz. Quest. Whether our Gracious God did
from all Eternity, freely and unchangeably Decree, that Mr. Toathby and Mr.
Willet, should come to the City of Norwich, and slander me and others, by such
horrid Lies and Forgeries.
Mr. Grantham,
I was much concerned when I saw your Book, in which you propound a Question,
to all the Rigid Calvinists (as you are pleased to call us, in Norwich and
elsewhere) and being much troubled at it, thought it my duty to make some
answer to it (as I am able, through the help and assistance of Gods Grace) and
accordingly have so done in this Paper.

I do much wonder, that such a wise man (as you pretend to be) should propound
such a question as this is, in which you speak slightly of God and his Decrees.
Had you that sense and reverence of God, and of the greatness of his Majesty
and Sovereignty, (who may do what he will with us his Creatures) I say had you
this upon your Heart, (which I fear you have not) you would not Quarrel with
God, and speak so slightly of his Decrees as you do. The Lord humble you, and
give you repentance for it: and also Wisdom to do so no more.

There are three things that I would offer to consideration about the Decrees
of God. Viz.

1. What the Decree of God is, which you speak so slightly of. 2. What are the
Properties of Gods Decrees. And 3. Speak something of the Execution of it.
For the first, What are the Decrees of God?

Answ. 1. The Word Decree, is a Speech that is taken from the affairs of men,
but especially, of such men as are in Authority; in their determinations of
Causes between such as are at variance: whose Sentence accordingly is called a
Decree.

2. For God to Decree, is Eternally to purpose; fore-ordain, determine, and
appoint what things shall be, and come to pass, etc. Now the manner of Gods
decreeing all things* Is according to the Counsel of his own Will: And being
according to his Will, it is most freely, and according, to his Counsel
therefore most Wisely: So that God has Freely and Wifely decreed all things
that come to pass; and let us but think of this, that what God does he does
well and wisely, after the Counsel of his own Will, as the Apostle, speak, Ephesians.
1.11, 12. then we shall be silent and not quarrel so with God, (about his
decreeing all things before time, that come to pass in time) as we are apt to
do, and let us well remember this. Wherefore God has Decreed all things that
come to pass, viz. for his own Praise and Glory, as appears, Psalm. 33.11, 12.
Romans 9.22, 23. and Ephesians. 1.4, and 11. etc.

3. So then the Decrees of God are defined to be the Wise; Free, and Holy Acts
of the Counsel of Gods Will, who works all things after the Counsel of his
Holy Will, which is the Rule of Perfection Ephesians. 1.11. Romans 11.33. whereby for
his own Glory, God has unchangeably determined whatsoever* comes to pass,
especially concerning his reasonable Creatures viz. Angels and Men, Mr. Leigh
in his Body of Divinity, says That the Decree of God is that whereby the Lord,
according to the Counsel of his own Will, has determined with himself what he
will do, command, forbid, permit or hinder, together with the Circumstances of
the same, Act. 2.23. and 4.28. Luke 22.22. It is, says he, an Eternal
determining of all things which have been, or shall be: So as himself saw
fittest to have them, for Good Reasons best known to himself, tho not to us.
Therefore let us not Quarrel with God about his doings, and determining all
things, etc. Seeing he does all he does most wisely, and for good reasons known
to himself: Let us be silent, seeing his ways are in the Deep, and beyond our
shallow Capacity, and say as Paul in Romans 11.33. Oh! the Depth, etc. Thus much
may suffice for the first thing. We shall now come to the second.

2. To show what are the Properties of Gods Decrees: and this (through Gods
help) I shall do in these following particulars. Pray mind them well.

First, The Decree of God is Complete, i. e. that it does comprehend the
determining of all things, from all Eternity, that do or shall come to pass,
which might be evidenced from many Arguments grounded upon the Word of God,
which we must give Credit to, unless we do believe the Scripture only to be the
Invention of men, and not indeed the Pure and Holy Word of God, as in truth it
is. The Arguments are these, viz. I Will Just name them.

Arg. 1. Consider it well, the smallest and most Casual things, Decreed by God:
As the lighting of a Sparrow upon the Ground, and the falling of a Hair from
our Heads. This I say, is not without the fore-appointment of the Wise and Holy
God, as you may see plainly in the Words of Christ, Mat. 10 28, 29, 30, 31.
Read and Mind this place well, and you will find it True. The very Drops that fall
from Heaven, and the Grass that grows upon the Earth, is from the Appointment
of God from Eternity. See and consider well these Scriptures: And the Lord give
you to understand them aright, and all of us, which is his gift, Prove. 16.32,
33. Jer. 14.22. Jonah 1.6, Matt 6.28, 29. The Words of Christ, etc.

Arg. 2. Seeing none of these things does come to pass without the Appointment
of God, what do you think, Mr. Grantham, concerning the Angels? Don't you
believe that some of them fell, and the rest stood, according as God did ordain
and appoint, as to be sure they did. 1 Timothy 5.21, 22. and I suppose you believe
it, for you in your Book speak of Elect Angels; and pray Answer me this, Why
may not God as well Choose and Elect some men, to Eternal Life and let others
alone to go on in sin and perish? as to Chufe and Elect some Angels, and pass
the other by, seeing they are all the Workmanship of his hands? etc. And he may
dispose of them, and do with them as he pleases, Romans 9.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. But,

Arg. 3. All things concerning men, as to their Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal Estate, are Decreed by God, and there is nothing can be found that Gods
Decree does not reach, which argues, that God has decreed all things
whatsoever; see and read these following Scriptures, for the proof of this
third Argument, viz. Matt. 22, from the 10, to the 16. and the 20.15, 16. Act.
13.48. Job 14.5. Act. 17.26. Psalm. 139.15, 16. 1. These. 3.3, 4. and 5.9. all
which places show that all things concerning men, as to their Temporal,
Spiritual, and Eternal Estate are Determined and Decreed by God, Heb. 9.29. But
to proceed.

Secondly, God's Decree is most wise, and therefore it is called the Counsel of
his Will, and that because his Will does determine all things according to that
Counsel, see Ephesians. 1.11, 12. 1 Timothy 1.17. Romans 11.33. In decretis sapientum
nulla litura.

Thirdly, It is most Just, for God is Just and Righteous in all he does, and
there is no unrighteousness in God at all. Romans 9.13, 14, 15, 16. Shall not the
Judge of all the Earth do right? Yes surely, for he can do no otherwise,
Genesis 18.25.

Fourthly, Free, because nothing moved the Decrees of God without or beyond
himself, his Grace and Mercy says Christ, Matt. 11.26. Even so, oh Father! For
it seems Good in thy fight, or it pleases thee.

Fifthly, It is certain, firm, and unchangeable, as appears, Matt. 18.14. Jo.
23.13. Psalm. 33.10, 11, 12. 2 Timothy 19.6. Heb. 17. not but that men ought to
repent, mortify sin, believe, and be holy, for he who has appointed to the
end, viz. Eternal Life, has also appointed to the means, which tend to the
end, viz. Hearing and Reading the Word, Praying, Repenting, and Believing in
Christ, and the like, Ephesians. 1.4. 2 These. 2.12, 13.

Sixthly, Gods Decree is Eternal, or else he would be changeable, contrary to
that of Mal. 3.6, 7. Jam. 1.17. That it is Eternal (I mean Gods Decree) see and
read, Act. 1.15. 18. Ephesians. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. Zech. 6.1, 2. Mountains of
Brass, i. e. Stable and Eternal Decrees, etc. So much for the Properties of
Gods Decrees.

3. I shall now speak a word or two in the third place, to the Execution of
Gods Decrees: and so shall answer directly to your Question that you
propounded. as the Lord by his Spirit shall help and assist me.

Now as to the Execution of Gods Note that Gods Decrees, what he would do, in
the disposing of things for his own Glory, were from all Eternity; But the
Execution of them are in time.
Decree, it is twofold, as first, more General, secondly, more Special.

It is more Common or General viz. In his works of Creation and Providence, for
as Gods Decree is General, which concerns all his Creatures, so the Execution
of it is the same, as I might largely show, so that nothing comes to pass
unawares, but what was ordered by the Eternal Decree, etc. and this Execution
of Gods Decree, is an action of God effectually working all things in their
time, according to his Decree, Act. 4. Act. 28. and the parts of it, as I said
before, are Creation and Providence, see Psalm. 33.6, to the 11. Jer. 10.11, 12.
Psalm. 146.6, 7, 8, 9.

2. It is more Special, which belongs to the reasonable Creatures, viz. Angels
and Men, and so the Execution is in Angels and Men, which I might have shown
largely, had I handled the Special Decree of Election and Reprobation, which I
design not now to meddle with, only set down a few Scriptures to prove that
there is an Election and Reprobation. That there is an Election, see these
places, viz. Matt. 20.15, 16. John 15.16. and 10.16. Act. 18.10. and 13.44.
Ephesians. 4.5. Romans 2.30. and 11.5, 6. 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. Ephesians. 1^ 4, 5, 6. 2 Timothy 1.9.
Romans 9.16, 18. Titus 3.5. and Reprobation, see also Matt. 13.11. Romans 9.22, 23.
Matt. 11.25, 26. Luke 8.10, 11. Prove. 16, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2.8, 9, 10. John. 10.26.
Jude 4. Now in as much as these Scriptures do plainly prove an Election and
Reprobation, we ought to believe it, and to set to it our Seal: that it is
true, because the Scripture says it. And the Lord of his Mercy grant that we
may believe his Word, which is Pure and Holy, and an unerring rule for us to
walk by, Gal. 6.16. Thus I have run over the three things that I propounded for
to do.

I shall now say something (through the Lords help) to your Question, which is
this, viz.

Quest. Whether our Gracious God did from all Eternity, freely and unchangeably
Decree, that Mr. Toathby and Mr. Willet should cone to the, City of Norwich,
and slander me and other's by such horrid Lies and Forgeries?

Answ. 1. That God has freely and unchangeably decreed all things that have,
do, or shall come to pass, has already been proved: and deny it if you can: If
you do, you must deny the Scriptures to be true, and so not to be the Word of
God, who is Truth it self, and cannot Lie, therefore his Word must be true, and
so not to be contradicted nor objected against by you, Mr. Grantham.

Object. But may be you will say that hereby we do make God to be the Author of
all the sins of Men and Devils, (as you have already Branded us in Print)
because we say as the Scriptures affirm, that God has unchangeably decreed
before time, what does or shall come to pass in time, etc.

Answ. For the Answer to this Objection or Cavil, I have set down before you
here, what the reverend Bishop Usher in his Body of Divinity, page 93. says,
in answer to the same thing that is here objected by you and others of your
Judgment, pray mind it well and judge rightly, for he spoke solidly, his words
are these, viz. God (says he) is not the cause of sin and evil, which he
forbids and condemns, but Satan and Men, yet God in his secret will has
justly Decreed the evil works of the wicked (for if it had not pleased him they
had never been at all) for most holy ends, both for his Glory and their
punishment, as may be seen in the Jews Crucifying of Christ, Act. 2.23. and
Joseph's selling into Egypt, Genesis 45.7. and the 50.20 for the thing that in its
self, by reason of Gods prohibiting of it, is sin; in respect of Gods decreeing
of it for a Holy end, comes in the place of a good thing, as being some
occasion or way to manifest the Glory of God in his Justice and Mercy, for
there is nothing sin as God decrees it, or commands it, neither is there any
thing of it self absolutely evil, 1 Pet. 3.17. but because God has forbidden
it: therefore is it evil, and only unto them unto whom God has forbidden it:
as Abraham killing of Isaac, being commanded of God was to be obeyed, and sin
it were to have disobeyed it, which otherwise by Gods Commandment, forbidding
to Kill was a sin, for God forbids not things because they are of themselves
at first Evil. but therefore are they to man evil, because God has forbidden
them, for all sin is a transgression of the Law: and God does in Heaven and
Earth whatsoever pleases him: neither is there any Greater than he to command
him.] Thus far Bishop Usher. Now answer this if you can; I know you may make A
Reply to it in some few Cavilling words, being nothing to the purpose; I might
say something more to the answering this Objection: But what has been said
shall suffice, as believing it is more than you truly can answer, etc.

Secondly, As to the other part of your Question, viz. Whether God did from
Eternity Decree, that Mr. Toathby and Mr. Willet, should come to Norwich, to
slander and abuse you and others, as they have done, by those horrid Lies and
Forgeries?

I answer, 1. That there thus vilifying and reproaching of you, by such
Wretched Lies and Forgeries of their inventing, was their great sin and
wickedness, Lev. 6.2, 3. Prove. 12.22. Mat. 12.36, 37. Rev. 22.15, 16.
and they will see it to be so, sooner or later: I do wish they might see it in
Time, that they may repent of this and other their sins, before to be too late.

2. I say that God decreed to permit it, but not as it is a sin, but a
Punishment or Correction to you for some sin: tho God decreed sin, yet we say
he did not Decree it as sin, but as a means of the manifestation of his Justice
on the Wicked, and his Grace on the Saints: his Justice in punishing the one,
and his Mercy in Pardoning and saving the other, Act. 2.23. and 4.28. 1 Cor.
10.13, 14. Ephesians. 1.4. and also we say that God is not the Author of sin, Jam.
1.14, 15. tho he is a wise permitter of it, and the Powerful Disposer, and
Eternal Avenger of sin: yet in no ways the Cause and Author of it. But the
proper and only cause of sin, is the Will of Devils and Men, whereby they fell
from God, etc. Joh. 8.44. 1 John 3.8. Jude 4. There is by Gods Decree, no
violence offered to the Will of his Creatures, but men go on, as freely and
willingly in their sins, as if there were no Decree of God to give them leave,
Reverend Mr. Finch.
etc. to be sure this we may and ought to hold and believe, that God does no
sin at all, tho he permit it to be done, (or else it could not be in the World)
and also, that he has a providence about it, but for the manner how it is hard
for to find but and determine; you know it is said, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. That God
bid Shimei to Curse David, we must not understand, as if God did expressly
Command Shimei out of his good Word so to do, for this was an improper command:
and implies only, that God did make use of Shimei's Tongue as a Whip to scourge
David for his sins, and thus far God did Decree to permit it as a punishment or
correction to David for his Iniquities against God. punishment you know is
counted a Mortal good, in that it is the part of a Just Judge to punish sin:
and thus says Reverend Bishop Usher, p. 112, and 113. In his Body of Divinity,
p. 112, 113.
God Wills the sin of the Wicked for their Punishment, and this without sin
in himself, Romans 2.26.3. and the last. And he says farther. That that which is
evil, has some respect of goodness with God, and that,

1. As it is a mere Action; God being the Author of every Action, Act. 17.28.
But the Devil and our Concupiscence of the Evil in it: and he gives this
comparison, that he which Rides upon a Lame Horse, causes the Horse to stir,
but he is not the Cause of his Halting: See also the same in Mr. Perkin's Order
of Causes, chapter the 6. p. the 16.
So that tho God has a Hand in mere Actions: Yet he is in no wise the Cause of
the Evil in any actions: But the Devil and our selves are the cause of it.

2. As it is a Punishment of, and for sin, but this I hinted before: as you may
find, if you look a little back.

3. As it is Chastisement; a Trial of Faith, as Martyrdom, or Propitiation for
sin, as the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, Act. 2.23. and 4.27, 28. where
says he, Acts 4.24.
although the giving of Christ to the death of the Cross, be attributed in the
same words to God and Christ, to Judas, Pilate, and the Jews, yet diversely and
in several respects, they are declared to meet in one and the same action,
whereby there appears no less difference between God and Christ's purpose, and
theirs, than between Light and Darkness, and he farther declares, how God has
a hand in the things before named, and yet be free from sin, but let this
suffice that has been already named; I shall need say no more to your
Question, only this, (which I hinted before) that as this is a Punishment or
Correction, God did Will, or Decree, to permit it, that it might be as a Whip
to scourge you with for your sins: and I hope you look upon it as such: it is a
mercy to be kept from the strife of Tongues, and it is the Promise of God (if
we hearken and be obedient to him) to keep and hide us from it, see it in Job
5.21, 22. now whatever afflictions we meet withal, and undergo, if it be not as
an evil doer, but for well doing then happy are we, 1 Pet. 3.19, 20, 21. and
the 4. from 13. to the end, and says Christ, Matt. 5.10, 11. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, Why? for great is your reward in Heaven, etc. Now the Lord of
his Mercy grant, that whatsoever we suffer in this World from the wicked, we
may suffer it for Christ's and the Gospels sake. And thus I have done with your
Question: Matt. 5.10, 11.
The Lord grant that you may not Quarrel with the Truth any longer, for you
have fought against it with foolish Notions to long.

There are a few expressions in your Book, that I shall a little take notice
of, and so conclude this discourse with a short word of Caution to the Reader.

First, Your silly or rather wicked expressions, are these, viz You call us
Rigid Calvinists who oppose those that Preach Gods Love to Mankind.

They are Rigid indeed, that set themselves to oppose the Truth as it is in
Jesus, but I hope we are so far from opposing those that Preach Gods Love to
Mankind, as that we rejoice in it, and desire to do it our selves, tho may be,
not as you would have us, viz. that God has the same Love to all Mankind as he
has for some of them, if he has, Why are not all Saved? Surely, that love
that saves some may save all, if it be alike to all; but (oh! Mr. Grantham) let
You and I leave God to do what he will with his Creatures that he has made: And
let us Preach the Word to all, as we desire to do, and must do, because we do
not know who they be that God will save, and who they are that God will
glorify his Justice in their Damnation: We must call all to come, but God may
give Pardon, Grace, and Glory to whom he will: Shall not God do what he will
with his own? Yes surely. Are not you rather, Rigid? (Mr. Grantham) That tell
the People God has the same Love to all as to some, and also that Christ Died
for all and every Individual Man and Woman in the World? And yet declares that
the greatest part of the World (tho Christ died for them) shall perish? Oh!
horrible and wicked, that you should speak thus of Christ, and undervalue his
Death and Merits at such a rate: Repent of this your wickedness, and pray God
to forgive you: And utterly explode such a base opinion, for what comfort can
there be, in this your General Notion: That Christ died for all, and yet most
of these may perish and be damned: I say abhor this opinion, and pray God to
give you a Heart to believe, that all that Christ died for in truth,
Intentionally for to save, shall all of them be saved, John 6.37, 38, 39. and
10.16.

Secondly, You bid us explode and abhor that wretched Article of the Assembly
of Divines, where they say that God did from all Eternity, freely and
unchangeably Decree, whatsoever comes to pass.

1. Were you any thing of a sound man, and did understand Gods Word aright, you
would not object against this Article, that is so plainly proved in the
Scripture. But oh! how Ignorant are you, or make your self so, of Gods holy
Word?

2. Don't, you think (If you don't you may) that you are a wretched man for
Quarrelling with the Truth? Oh! tremble before the Lord for Quarrelling with
his pure unerring word: and do so no more, but submit to the Truth, and receive
it in the Love of it: And maintain Errors no longer: The Lord grant, you may do
so: And become a Lover of the Truth in sincerity.

I shall now conclude all with a short word of caution to the Christian Reader.

I do heartily in the name of the Lord admonish thee to have a care of Errors,
and of all those that do hold and maintain them. Take the Apostles advice, 1
John 1.1, 2. Not to believe every Spirit, but try every Spirit, whether they be
of God or no, and the way to do this is, by the Holy Word of God, with Care and
Diligence, John 5.39. Acts 17.11. 1 These. 5.21, 22. and Rev. 2.2, 3.

Now the good Lord teach you, and guide you in the way of Holiness, which shall
be my Prayer to God for you whilst I Live. The Lord give you understanding in
all things.

FINIS.
Words Preached by Thomas Grantham in his Meeting Place, in the City of
Norwich, and attested by John Pitcher, of the said City; which are as
follows, viz.

Imprimis, That every Man fell in Adam, this is true, and Christ died to Redeem
every individual Man and Woman in the World; and if not so, we were lest in a
worse condition than tho Devil, and if all have not benefit by his Death, then
they whom he died not for, have as little reason to thanks God, as the Beast
has the Grazier that seeds him up to the Slaughter, etc.

Reader,
THese few Lines were thought fit by some Persons of Note, to be published,
which accordingly are: and I do heartily wish that Mr. Grantham would learn
more Wisdom for time come, and not speak so wickedly (I can call it no other)
as he has done, for he speaks quite contrary to the current of the Holy
Scriptures, be they compared one with another, which indeed is the way to
understand them, etc. I am also credibly told, that you called the. Doctrine of
Election and Reprobation (in your Pulpit) damnable Doctrine, etc. and one that
heard you, came to your house, to tell you of it, being troubled about it, and
you denied it? which he then made manifest to your Face, and then you said
these words, viz. between You and I, I do say it is Damnable Doctrine, etc.

Oh horrible! that ever you should speak such a word as this is: the Lord help
you now to amend (and all of us) what we have done amiss in any kind, and to do
better for time to come: My Prayer shall be to God for you, to give you true
wisdom in the Mysteries of his Will, contained in his Holy Word.

Vale. Testes. Mich. Hosbun. John Fenn. Miles Matthews.


A Catalogue of Books, Printed for, and are to be Sold by Edward Giles,
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence. A word in Season. Defensive
Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts. Sermons upon the whole first
and second Chapter of Canticles. Thirteen Sermons upon several useful Subjects:
All published by John Collins D. D. of Norwich. The way of the Spirit in
bringing Souls to Christ. The Glory of Christ set forth, with the necessity of
Faith, in several Sermons: Both by Mr. Thomas Allen, late Pastor of a Church at
Norwich. Enoch's Walk with God and Christ, a Christians Gain: by Mr, Timothy
Armitage, late Minister at Norwich. A Discourse of the preciousness of Christ,
and of the preciousness of Faith. Precious Promises the Portion of Overcomers.
Sermons on the five several useful Subjects; all by Mr. John Lougher, Minister
in Norfolk. The Saints Ebenezer, by Mr. Francis English, late Minister in
Norwich. Directions to spell English right. The History of the Protestant
Reformation, as it was begun by Luther. The Dead Saints speaking; being a
Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr. Newcomb of Deadham in Essex. The English
Presbyterian. The Miracles of Christ. The ordinary matter of Prayer, drawn into
Questions and Answers. Two Treatises, the first, of Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus
in all Cases and Conditions: The second of a Christians Hope in Heaven, and
Freedom from Condemnation by Christ: both by Robert Asty, late Minister of
Jesus Christ in Norwich. Obedience to Magistrates, recommended in a Sermon
preached September the 9th 1683. being the thanksgiving Day for his Majesty's
Deliverance: By Jonathan Clapham, Rector of ^ramplingham in Norfolk. Infant
Baptism of Chist's Appointment: By Mr. Samuel Peito, Minister of the Gospel in
Sudbury in Suffolk. Of the Conversion of Sinners to God in Christ, the
necessity, nature, means, and signs of it, with a concluding Speech to the
Unconverted: An Answer to Mr. Thomas Grantham's Book, called a Dialogue between
the Baptist and Presbyterian. Both by Martin Finch, Pastor of a Church of
Christ in Norwich. Sincerity, or the Upright Man's Walk to Heaven: Delivered in
several Sermons in the Parish Church of St. Michael in Long-stratten in
Norfolk, By James Oldfield, late Minister there. Alexipharmacon Spirituale:
Being a Defensative against the Poison and Sting of Death: Or, The Great
Expedient how to make the Bed of the Grave so easy, that we may lie down in
Peace, and take our Rest. By Samuel Snowden, Minister of the Gospel at Newton
in Norfolk. Christ set forth: In several Sermons upon the 17th Chapter to the
Hebrews. By Mr. Robert Ottee, late Pastor to a Congregation Beckles in Suffolk.
Sacramental Discourses on several select Subjects. To which is added, A
Discourse of the Life of Faith. By Christopher Amarett, Minister of the Gospel
in Norfolk. A Discovery of Audacious Insolence against the Doctrine of the
Church of England, vented in a malicious Pamphlet, published against the
Presbyterians, by Thomas Grantham: Together with a Poem thereon. And a
Postscript, wherein some of the Citizens of Norwich are more particularly
concerned and cautioned. A Practical Discourse upon the 8th of the Romans 37.
verse: Wherein it is shown and proved, that true Believers in Christ are more
than Conquerors, in their sufferings and afflictions here: And it shall appear
that they are such indeed at the appearing of Christ the Captain of their
Salvation.
FINIS.

