A BRIEF SURVEY OF THE Growth of Usury IN ENGLAND. With the Mischiefs
attending it.

London Printed in the Year 1671.

A brief SVRVEY of the growth of VSVRY in ENGLAND, with the MISCHIEFS attending
it.
IT is by all consest, That from the first planting of Christianity in this
Island, the practice of Usury was not only branded with Church Censures, but
exposed to grievous Penalties besies public Infamy: For by the Statute 3 H. 7.
even the Brokers of Usurious Bargains were to stand in the Pillory. The Act 35
H. 8. (limiting it to ten per Cent.) was the first Law that gave it any
protection, though without any Color of Allowance in point of Conscience;
Nevertheless, the Papists with open mouth then cried shame of it; And it grew
to a Proverb, That Usury was the Brat of Heresy. Anno 5. E. 6. the said
Statute was repealed, and Usury again condemned, whereby that Reproach for the
time was silenced. The growht of Trade, and improvement after the dissolution
of Monasteries, caused much more borrowing than in former times: And as the
Usurers of that Age, did by their very practice declare how little they valued
Conscience or Credit, (being ipso facto excommunicated) so were their terms of
lending most exorbitant: Whereupon the Statute 35 H. 8. was 13 Eliz. seasonably
revived and reinforced, and their boundless Extortions again limited to ten per
cent. A Rate at that time judged not to be inconsistent with Improvements; But
with how little Countenance to Usurers, the Act it self will witness by this
Preamble; Forasmuch as all Usury being against the Law of God, is sinful and
detestable, etc. The Papists however renewed their Clamours, not otherwise
answered then by recriminating them with the allowance of Fornication at Rome,
which when they alleged, That they did by no means allow but rather regulate,
for that they could not suppress it. The Protestant then replied, that no more
did they in the Case of Usury. That such was the sense of our first Reformers,
appears not only by the last recited Act, but diverse learned Treatises, and
pious Sermons of that time, especially of those of Renowned Bishop Jewel, and
Bishop Downham, who from their jealousy of our Churches honor could not brook
the Calumny of an Usurers Reformation, wherein none were more generous, than
many honest Puritans, such as Whitaker, Smith, Rogers, etc. who scorned to come
behind the best, in decrying Sin, or clearing Scandal: Nay we read of a samous
Sect of Precifians about that time, who allowing Infant Baptism, yet denied it
to the Children of notorious Libertines and Usurers.

One would now marvel, how a Practice so generally and notably exploded, should
so suddenly gain such Allowance, for in a slender interval of time, we find it
creditably asserted faintly disputed; This Mystery may be worth unfolding.
Certain it is, the Puritans of that Age, were at first highly confident of
their Interest in the State, and hoped, if not to Engross, yet at least to
Share the Government: The notable proofs they had newly given of their
Constancy in Queen Mary's time, with the Turks, recommended by the Example of
diverse zealous Ministers, who themselves desired to pass for Orphans of the
first Rank, swallowed without chewing, by their credulous Disciples, who never
suspected poison having such tasters: From them easily dispersed, not more by
the credit of its affectors, then its own allurements and singular convenience,
to persons purely contemplative and men of profession: Thus Usury entered like a
flood upon a breach, and With continual success carries all before it.

For by this single stratagem, they avoid all contribution of Tithes and Taxes
to the King, Church, Poor, etc. (A sovereign Cordial to tender Consciences;)
they decline all services and offices of burden incident to visible Estates;
They escape all Oaths, and Ties of public Allegiance or private Fealty; They
little regard forfeitures or Penal Laws; They wave all manner of Hospitablity
or honest expense; They sculk, yet swarm in Cities and good Towns; with no care
or trouble, little notice, much leisure, and rare opportunity of running to
Lectures and Conventicles, They enjoy both the secular applause of prudent
conduct, and withal, the spiritual comfort of thriving easily and devourly, (no
doubt by special privilege, for so most part of the Worldlings are observed
not to do) leaving their Adversaries the censure of improvidence, together with
the misery of Decay: They keep many of the Nobility and Gentry in perfect
Vassalage, (as their poor Coppy-holders) which eclipses Honor, enervates
Justice, and ost times protects them in their boldest contempts: By engrossing
Cash and Credit, they in effect give the price to Land, and Law to Markets: By
commanding ready money, they likewise command such Offices as they wisely
affect, ( viz.) of little Noise or Dignity, but great Profit and Influence:
They undermine their Adversaries Estates, and weaken their Interests, but
seather and enlarge their own Nests, the Corporations: They give vast Portions
with their Daughters, which not only recommonds them to powerful Alliances, but
sets the Dice upon the Nobility and Gentry, to the greater ruin and eclipse of
Noble and Loyal Families. Lastly, they are perfectly weather-wise, and by the
help of their Sentinels and perspectives, can upon timely foresight of a Storm,
by cleanly conveyance, readily dispose of their Affairs, and shist their
Country: For what is London more to them than Amsterdam, or Old-England than
New? A Doctrine of such accommodation to the Godly, must needs be revealed from
above, and who would not then be their Proselyte?

The Result of my discourse is this, That as the Doctrine of allowing Usury for
a Calling or Livelihood, is altogether new, so the present general practice is
dangerous, the contrivance subtle and deep, That the concealment of great
Estates thereby, (perhaps to near half the Capital Stock and real value of this
Kingdom) has long been, and now more than ever is the Canker of Loyalty, and
Nurse of Disobedience Inhumane: The Discovery, Taxing, Reducement, or any other
Curb of Usury, is in effect the Discovery, Taxing, Reducement, and Curb of
Faction, the prefervative of the sound, and Corrosive of the unsound, So as it
were hard to say, whether it more immediately concern the good of the Prople,
or safety of the Crown, timely to provide for it.

FINIS.

