A Brief Representation OF THE PROTESTANT CAUSE IN GERMANY. In what case it
has been, since the Peace of MUNSTER; and how it now stands.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1658.

A BRIEF REPRESENTATION OF THE Protestant Cause in Germany.
In what case it has been, since the Peace of MUNSTER; and how it now stands.
THe Justice of the last civil wars in Germany, which were composed at the
Peace concluded in Munster and Osnabrugge in the year 1648: was grounded upon
this. That the Protestants were necessitated to enter into a league or mutual
union together, for the maintaining of their fights and privileges in the
Empire, against the infractions thereof, and manifold disturbances of their
profession, which contrary to former agreements at Imperial Dyets did befall
unto them in many places by the Popish and Jesuices practices, whereof they
could obtain no redress by any peaceable Treaties. Therefore finding that there
was a design formed in the Conclave, and by the house of Austria, to be put in
execution, tending by little and little to wear out and deprive them of their
liberties; they formed an union among themselves, to stand upon the defense of
their rights, and to oppose the power of the house of Austria, by whose means,
both in Germany and in Bohemia, the Jesuits did drive the design of rooting
out Protestants. The head of this union (who by his place was bound to appear
in it) was the Elector Palatine: but he being a soft man, of no experience in
war, and beset in his Counsels and enterprises with such as did betray him, the
cause was soon overthrown; and by his overthrow, the intended persecution
against Protestants to root them out, what by power, and what by policy, was
openly carried on by the house of Austria; which moved the King of Denmark
Christian the IV. and after him the King of Sweden, to come upon the Stage: the
Dane was soon overthrown, but God gave such success unto the Swedes, to the
Landgrave of Hessen their associate, and to the French; (who joined with them
to balance the power of Austria, after the Elector of Saxony had made his
peace at Prague with the Emperor, and deserted the Protestant interest): that
from the death of King Gustavus, they continued the war with various successes
till the year 1648 at which time the Swedish being masters in Bohemia, and the
Emperor brought so low, that he saw little hopes to recover his strength
without a Peace, he yielded to the conditions which the Protestants and the
French stood upon. The Swedish stood upon their satisfaction and to keep a foot
in the Empire, to be able upon all occasions to secure or help the Protestant
party; And the Protestant Princes they stood upon the settling of all things
and of themselves in their former rights and possessions, as before the war,
and chiefly upon this point the reformed party and the Landgrave of Hessen, who
headed them stood, that thence forward the reformed Protestants ( alias called
Calvinists) should have equal freedom and liberty of conscience, for the
exercise of their profession in the Empire, with the Papists and Lutherans.
This condition being obtained, and a way determined to give the agrieved
parties in point of damage further satisfaction, Armies were dismissed, a new
convention of States was held at Nurenberg, to settle the remaining matters
within the Empire, which at Munster and Osnabrugge could not well be handled,
by reason of the Treaty with foreign States, and afterward a Diet was called
at Ratisbon, to confirm all what formerly had been treated on and concluded,
and to put the remainder of grievances in a way to be rectified: To which
effect at the dissolution or rather adjournment of the imperial Diet at
Ratisbon, a Committee of Deputies from all the States of the Empire, of equal
number of both parties, (that is, so many of the Protestants as of the Popish
party) were named to meet at Franckford, and prepare (by way of disquiry of
rights) the matters then remaining undecided, that at the next Session of the
Diet there might be a full decision and determination of them, but before these
Delegates did meet, the Elector of Mentz did broach a new quarrel with the
Elector Palatine, tending to abridge him of much of his right, and to make him
inconsiderable to the Protestant party; But the King of Sweden his cousin (for
he is a younger Brothers son of the house Palatine) and the Landgrave of Hessen
his Brother in law, did appear for him so far, that the Emperor and the Elector
of Mentz fearing a new breach on his behalf, did leave him unmolested. Soon
after the composure of this quarrel, the Committee of imperial Deputies, met
according to the appointment of the last Diet at Ratisbon, and they have
continued at Franckford, debating and disputing one with another, concerning
their respective right, in the several cases, which remained undetermined. This
meeting of Deputies has agitated matters in the years 1655 -- 56 -- 57. till
these new affairs are come into consideration, which the King of Sweden his war
with Poland has occasioned: for from that time that he went into Poland and
prospered there, the Deputies although they did not dissolve their meeting, yet
did in a manner alter the course of their treating one with another, as looking
much upon the event of that war, till the death of the late Emperor, has
altered the Scene, and a Diet for the election of a new Emperor has been
called.

The King of Swedens war with Poland, did alarm the Popish party in Germany,
and the house of Austria extremely; and did terrify the States of the
Low Countries, lest if he should be master of the Baltic Sea, their Trade
should be thenceforward under his power, with whom they had no friendly
correspondence, by reason of some reciprocally conceived injuries, for which
they could not trust him. This moved those of Holland who are the chief traders
in those Seas, to stirrup enemies against him, and openly to appear for, and
correspond with Dantzick to oppose him: and it is known to the Swedish, that
they have dealt underhand with the Moscovite, with the Polish King, with the
Austrians, and above board with the King of Denmark, to combine against him; by
which means after that he had conquered Poland, his forces were distracted,
first to oppose the Moscovite in Livonia, who besieged Riga; and afterward to
put himself in a defensive posture against the Austrians, who came to the
assistance of the King of Poland; and lastly, to retire from Poland into
Germany, to oppose the Danish forces, who had invaded his Territories of
Bremen. Being come into Germany upon this design, he did conquer from the King
of Denmark the last Summer all Holstein and Jutland, and although by these
conquests he was able to live in his quarters in the Winter: yet his enemies
being round about him on all hands, and he having neither money, nor convenient
places to recruit his Army, it was expected, that in the Spring the Combination
of his enemies who compassed him about, would have swallowed him up: but God
was pleased to appear for him, and direct him in a way to escape and overcome
these difficulties: For in January last, he formed his design to assault the
other Territories of the Danish King; namely the Islands which lie between
Germany and the Continent of Sweden, and to that effect had prepared his men to
march over into Fuenen, either by a bridge of Ships if the Sea were not frozen
so as to bear: or over the Ice, if it should be strong enough: having then
notice gotten, that toward the latter end of January the Ice did bear, he took
of horse and foot, not above 6 or 7 thousand, and therewith did march over the
Sea into Funen, where the Danish King had placed his chief forces to defend the
place. And although some dangerous and dreadful accidents did befall him in
that his march over the Sea, yet he went on and fought the Danish forces more
in number then he had with him, which on firm land stood in a readiness to
receive him, and beat them, took the chief Commanders prisoners, and the spoil
of the Island, which is one of the richest that belongs to that Kingdom. Having
made himself Master of that Island, he went forward to the next Island, over
the Sea, called Langland, where he found a body of 500 men to resist him, but
being charged, they were instantly defeated, so he went from thene to the next
called Laland, and from thence to Falster, and from Falster to Zealand, the
frost still continuing to make a bridge for him in all these marches. And from
the time he came into Funen, till he entered Zealand, he spent only five or fix
days. In Zealand (where the King of Denmark was at Coppenhagen) M. Medows, the
public Minister of the State, sent from thence to reside with the King of
Denmark) came to him, and desired him to admit the King of Denmark to a
Treaty, this he condescended unto, and by the interposition of M Medows and of
the French Ambassador (for he would not admit the Hollands Ambassador to be a
Mediator) the peace was concluded about the 20 of February, after twelve days
treaty. The conditions are, that he restores to the King of Denmark all what
he had taken from him in Germany, namely Holstein, and Jutland, and the Islands
of Fuenen, Langland, Laland, Falster and Zealand; and in lieu thereof the King
of Denmark quitts unto him all his rights in the Provinces of Haland and
Schonen, and of Blieken, which are the Continent of Sweden, on the North side
of the Sound; and does moreover surrender unto him the bland of Bornholm, and
the Lordships of Bahusen, and of Drunthen in Norway, which lie most convenient
to cause the Trade of Sweden to flourish. Some other conditions there are, but
less considerable. The peace being concluded and ratified by both Kings, the
King of Denmark feasted the King of Sweden for certain days, and at several
times both Kings were together alone, for the space of two or three hours at a
time, whereby it is conceived that they have contracted a nearer and stricter
alliance together, then the Public Treaty can mention. This being done, the
King of Sweden went into his own Country; and has convocated the States of his
Kingdom at Gottenborg, to dispose of his affairs with their advice, and to take
up further resolutions in time to come.

This unexpected and miraculous success of the Swedish Kings enterprise, has
disappointed all the Counsels and plots of his adversaries against him, for
which he is obliged to none but unto God alone: and from hence his friends have
just cause to gather, that God has raised him out of his straits, and
redoubled his strength to make further use of him toward the advancement of
the common cause of Protestants, in whose behalf he concluded the peace at
Munster, and which he thinks himself in conscience and honor obliged to see
maintained for the Protestant interest; tanquam altera pars paciscens, as in a
letter of his to the Emperor, he did express himself. So that it seems the
Protestant cause in Germany will find in him a Protector of so much courage and
resolution, and conduct, as any that could be expected or desired: And it is
known to all that know him, that he is earnestly bent to take away the
differences, and advance the reconcilement of Protestants within themselves:
and that he makes no difference between Lutherans (as they are called) and
Calvinists, but makes use of both a like, according to their abilities, as be
finds them fitted for employment in foreign affairs: for within the Kingdom
of Sweden, no foreigners, and none but Lutherans, are to be admitted to the
civil charges of trust; others are employed in military charges, both there
and elsewhere, according to their deserts.

What his present posture does work upon the minds of his enemies, is not
difficult to be seen: and what this advantage which he has gotten against his
secret and open adversaries, may produce at this juncture of time in the
Empire, time will show: In the mean time, it is to be wished, that all
Protestants would unite to maintain with one consent a true Gospel-Interest; in
the prosecution of which, they may confidently expect a singular blessing from
God, in all other enterprises, and without which there is no hope, that any
thing will prosper, which will be undertaken: And whosoever does pretend to the
profession of the Gospel, and does not in his place what he can, toward the
the healing of the breaches of Protestants by spiritual means in a Gospel-way;
let his pretenses be what they will, he will be found at the end, but an
unprofitable servant to his Master, and one that has deserted his cause, when
it stood most in need of assistance, and when it was most seasonable to give
it, which is now at this juncture of time, if ever.

FINIS.

