A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE PRESENT Declining State OF THE WEST INDIES: In
Reference to Its TRADE; And in Particular, That of the BARBADOS.

AS ALSO Somewhat Offered for its RELIEF.

By a WEST INDIA MERCHANT.

LONDON: Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow in the Poultry. 1695.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE PRESENT Declining State OF THE West Indies, etc.
THe Many and Great Advantages that England Receives from the West Indies, in
Respect of the Revenue, Navigation and Trade, do Abundantly Recommend their
Worth, Obliging the Government thereupon to their utmost Care, so as to ease
them under those Insupportable Weights which have and does befall them; and to
the Removing those Feared Evils which they are so much possessed with the dread
of; it being one great Maxim of Trade, according to its Advantage, more or
less, to proportion a due Regard thereto: It is not my design to Discuss all
the particular Advantages Accruing to this Nation, from the West India Trade;
yet I shall Reflect on such of them, as may tender their Calamities the more
Affecting; The Vast Quantities of our Home Manufactories almost of all kinds,
thither Exported; the Islands making frequent Visits to our Shops of all sorts
almost, to supply their Constant and Repeated Wants; likewise how Great we are,
and how much Depended upon, for their Great Produce; Holland, Hambrough, and
sundry parts of Germany being abundantly Supplied from thence; and also what
great numbers of our own Subjects are employed in the Manufacturing, especially
of their Sugars and Cotton: These must be allowed to be weighty Considerations,
and will assuredly appear so, when we do on the other hand, reflect on the
Consumptive and Dying State of these Islands, and those Unaccountable Mischiefs
this Nation must share in, from the want of the aforementioned Benefits
resulting from the West India Trade; a Trade that has been far more remarkably
and dismally Wounded, than of any othet parts we Negotiate with, so as even
Barbados has Lost in about eight Months time, Fifty Sail of Laden Ships,
besides their present Loss, of Six parts of their Fleet out of Eight; their
Losses have been indeed successive, that is most evident, from great numbers of
Laden Fleets, as well as single Ships that have been frequently Lost; not only
from the mere events of War, but from their being Detained by the Government,
in Sailing Outward and Homewards; that they have not gone at a proper Season
of the Year; but on the contrary, in the Fatal Winter Season to Return; then
having great numbers of Privateers to be exposed to also, so as Convoys at that
time have not been Secure, though most Useful in Summer Season; indeed thus
Mis-Timing of our Ships, in their Outward, and consequently, in their Home
Voyages, is, and has been, the chief cause of our most Melancholy Losses;
besides the Mischiefs our Perishable Goods meet with from such dilatoriness, as
they have been worthless on their Arrival; and the Vast Charge Owners of Ships
are at, not to be omitted, besides the Ships themselves being greatly injured
both here and in Barbados, as mightily Fouled; eaten by the Worms, and weakened
by their lying long Laden; for as they load Deep, so they ought to have the
most dispatch, and the best season of the Year to move in, which they have
missed of; so that here is the source of our Losses, that have been so
stupendiously Great, so Great of Late, that some single Merchants, have lost,
within the Compass of Twelve Months, nigh Thirty Thousand Pounds value in their
Consignments; and so rendered incapable to Pay the Planters Bills of Exchange,
that will issue at length to their utter Ruin, both in their Credit and
Estates; they being not Worth so much as they were before the War, by a Third
Part.

Now for our Remedy, these following Considerations, are with submission
Proposed.

1. That the Government Allow one Large Fleet of Ships for Barbados, so many
as may bring all the Crop almost away once a Year, that they depart hence in
December at furthest, Casualties excepted, they may Arrive at the time of their
Crop; being Laden, that they Sail the beginning of May with a Convoy, and what
Ships may drop in from Guiney, New England, or other parts, will Load in about
Six Weeks, that they Sail after the former Fleet with Convoy also, as soon as
Laden; that there be timely notice given to the Concerned, both here and in
Barbados hereof; by this means we may on good grounds be safe in our Trade;
and their so coming in Summer time, the Seamen will be more ready for the
Governments use than they have yet been, and at such times when they are most
wanted.

2. That no single Ship be permitted to Sail either Outward or Homewards,
after the Departure of the said Fleets, except those belonging to the
Guiney-Trade: If any Ship should drop into Barbados, they should not be
Allowed to Load for England, after the Fleets for England are gone, but stay the
opportunity of the next Fleets Motion; by this means what Sugar is left of the
Crop, will be principally Loaded on these two Fleets; what Remains, to be kept
till the opportunity of the next Fleet; herein the Planter will be greatly
Accommodated, when he knows the time of the Fleets Arrival there, to have two
such Fleets so dispatched; for after that the season for Planting approaches,
and many times the Rains then comes in, so that their time is chiefly swallowed
up on that account; whereas otherways they would be exposed to great Hurries
and Fatigues.

If any Object, That to Disallow Ships to go alone at pleasure, is an
Unreasonable Imposition on Trade; and that great Quantities of Goods, either
Exported or Imported, lessens their Value by Cloging the Market.

Answ. That our Losses have proceeded from single Ships, whereof scarce One in
Eight have escaped, thereby strengthening the Enemy, and weakening our Selves;
besides, it must be more advantageous to the Planters, when their Goods comes
in Fleets, though Sold Twenty per. Cent. Cheaper; the great Risque they run
being considered on single Ships; it must be also Allowed, that for the
Preservation of the whole, particular interests ought to surrender thereto;
hence is it, that our Trade to the Canaries, Virginia, the East-Countrey, and
to other parts, have been so safe, while they Sailed in and out in Fleets, with
a Convoy, and in a seasonable time of the Year; when as others going in single
Ships, they have suffered on that account, as well as the West Indies.

3. That Advice-Friggots be appointed to go to and from the West Indies, not
permitted to take in any Goods; hereby the great point of Intelligence, a
valuable thing, especially in time of War, would be secured, for the great
benefit both of the Government and Traders; the want hereof having been so
mischievous to Trade, and may endanger the Islands, as it had nigh occasioned
the loss of Jamaica about a Year ago.

4. That there be a sufficient number of Ships appointed as a Constant standing
Guard to the Islands, they staying till the Convoy of the next Fleet arrives,
which Convoy should be in their post, and the Guard-ships return in their room
as a Convoy to the laden homeward bound Fleets, hereby the Islands would be
preserved in their Trading one with another, which they have suffered in by
small Pickaroons of the French, and even the Islands themselves secure, for how
easy is it for our Enemies (unless they be so guarded as above expressed) with
four or five of rheir Ships of War, not only to harrass the Islands as they may
do Barbados, hovering round about that Island from one part to another, so
allarming them that what through the heat of the Country, the dismal fatigues
of their small Force from their frequent Marching from place to place; and the
sweeping distemper of the Country, to be so attacqued will be of sad
Consequence.

5. That our Ships be not exposed to such wonted dangers as they have been,
their Men having been Impressed by our Men of War in the Islands, to such a
degree that have rendered them defenseless and extreme weak in their Voyages
homewards, very often on this very account issiuing in their utter loss,

To conclude, The Islands expecting and craving relief in this their suffering
state, their Eyes being upon the Government, what can be done but a speedy
application of such Remedies as have been proposed here? As these are more or
less executed, such will our success in Trade be; and its great pity that these
Islands so Serviceble and Beneficial to this Nation, on so many accounts,
should lie ^s Languishing, and we no more apprehensive of it: To conside^ w^^^
a worth Foreigners put on their Sugar Plantations, how the Portuguese did raise
themselves from theirs, and is now the chief of their Trade; and what a value
the French and Hollander put on theirs, and how much our Islands exceed them
all in their produce, and capacity to be improved yet, and also and in the vast
number of Ships employed, and Seamen thereby nursed up: It must therefore be
owned that we ought to exert our selves to the utmost for their preservation,
and to the restoring them to their former Flourishing State; for otherwise if
they continue thus bleeding in their Trade, it will issue in Death without
speedy Redress, by producing an utter Cessation in Trade. Hence it is that
those vast Sums of Money that use to move to and fro on the Ocean, are
withdrawn and lodged within our selves, with little or no circulation;
sufficiently evident in their readiness to subscribe to the Banks, arising not
only from their forwardness to serve the Government, but also seek that safety
in the remaining of their estates there, that they have woefully experienced
they could not find abroad. Therefore upon the whole, as much bleeding, or no
Circulation, weakness the body Humane, so it will equally affect the body
Politic in its Trade.

FINIS.

