A Brief RELATION OF THE Present State OF TANGIER, And of the Advantages which
his Excellence the EARL of TIVEOT Has Obtained against GAYLAND.

Published with Privilege.

London, Printed by T. Mabb on St. Paul's Wharff. 1664.

A Brief Relation of the Present State of Tangier, etc.
HIS Excellence, the Earl of Tiveot Arrived here safe upon Jun. the 14th.
(being eight days before the expiration of the Truce with Gayland) where he
found that the Deputy Governor had obtained a continuance of the Truce for Two
Months longer, according to the Tenor of the former Articles; which Gayland
assured him was done in Civility and Respect to his Excellence: for which his
Excellence sent Gayland Thanks, Notifying withal, that it was not in his Power
to continue the Truce, unless permitted to Fortify the Town: having expressed
Orders from the King his Master for so doing: But however, that in Honor to
Colonel Fitz Gerrards Treaty, and to show his Thankfulness to Gayland, he was
Content to stick to every point of the Truce which was for Gaylands Advantage;
And yet upon the mayn he was enforced to break immediately. Whereupon Gayland
asked Fifteen Days to Consult with his Grandees, allowing that in the mean
time his Excellence might Fortify the Places next the Town, which was done
accordingly. The prefixed time being Expired, Gayland sent the Sheck of Anger
as Son, to have a Conference with his Excellence, wherein he made appear that
the Mohammedan Law, prohibited them to suffer the Christians to build any
Fortifications in Africa: But that they were contented to make a War, and to
give good Quarter; whereupon his Excellence Replied, that The Sword should
decyde, whether the Mohammedan Law, or his Masters Orders were of Greater Force.
That he would neither take, nor give Quarter; withal, that he was Gaylands
Humble Servant, desiring them to send immediately, for the Powder that was
Stipulated for by the Deputy Governor.

Next day, was the Foundation laid of a Horn-work Strong in the Walls; being
Canon-proof; strong in the Situation, being on the Castle-Hill, every way
Advantageous, and Important, because it covers the Castle, Fenceth above 600.
Akers of Ground; discovers the Enemy at a great distance; and makes the
place Comfortable: Securing the whole Hill for our Walk, and Use. (being, 600.
yards from the Castle) Our other Lines and Trenches were in a few days brought
to that Perfection, that the Enemy durst not Attaque us. The great Advantage
hereof we have Experienced in several Disputes with the Moors, who on the
last of Feb. betwixt 11. and 12. appeared with their whole Army, and took up
their Posts; The greatest Forces coming upon the West part, toward the Sea;
where they continued Pelting for some hours till they were forced off, with
considerable loss, and not one of our Men Killed, or Wounded.

The very next day following, and about the same hour, they came on again, but
with greater Number, and Courage; and took up their Posts as before; pressing
toward the New Fort, which was then a Half-Bastion: (built while Gayland and
his Army, Consisting of about, 8000. Men, looked on) and for a long time
continued Shooting, yet killed us but One Man. Their Maine Body stood upon a
Hill, hard by us; whence they continually sent Relief: But at last, His
Excellence, taking a fit opportunity, Ordered a Party of Horse, (Commanded by
Captain Witham,) to Sally out, and bring in their Red Standard, which was
Pitched near our Works: This succeeded according to Wish, for the Horse brought
off the Standard, Killed the Bearer, with many more, and put the Rest to
Flight, without Suffering any Damage at all. Instantly, His Excellence
Commanded the Standard to be Displayed, upon that part of the Fort that was
Built: which being seen by the Enemy, they drew off in trouble, concluding the
loss of their Standard to be Ominous, the like not having been done before.
Since this happened, they have not appeared in such great Bodies as formerly,
coming now only in Loose Parties, and Working by Ambuscades; whereof the most
considrable, were those of the 13th. and 17th. of March, the former was very
strong, consisting of choice Men, and the Chief Leaders; which on the sudden
Encountered our Hourse, and great Courage was Expressed on both sides. We lost
One man, and Two wounded; but very many of the Moors were Killed and Wounded,
and the rest compelled to Retreat. The Second, ( March, 27th.) (being Sunday
morning) was a strong Ambush, both of Horse and Foot, Planted near Us; But
after a Short, and Hott Dispute, the Moors ran; Our Horse fell in among Them,
and Slew several, and had done a far greater Execution, but for the Rocks and
disadvantages of the Ground. Here we had only One Man shot through the Hand,
while many of the Enemy were Killed: Two of their dead, His Excellence
Commanded to be brought off by our men, whereof one by several things found
about him, appeared to be a Person of Quality. That which makes this Action
more Remarkable, was the Signal Humanity which his Excellence expressed toward
the Dead Bodies; for after Divine Service Celebrated, (it being Sunday) and
Sermon ended in the Camp; His Excellence Commanded them to be washed, while
himself stood by; and Two Bieres to be made, and the Dead to be Shrouded in
white Linen, and laid thereon, and strewed with Flowers with all prudentiall
decency: appointing afterward a White Flagg to be carried before the Bodies,
after which, Marched his Excellence on Horseback, all the Troops attending in
Squadrons, with Excellent Order and Modesty; and thus they passed to the utmost
of the Bounds assigned us in time of Peace; where the Moors met the Bodies
with a White Flagg, and received them with great Expressions of Satisfaction;
taking off their Caps and Shashes from their Heads, (a Ceremony not used in
their Adorations,) in token of their Respect and Gratitude to his Excellence;
much amazed at this unexpected Civility; (which upbraided their former
Barbarous behavior toward those of ours, which have at any time fallen into
their hands.) This was done with satisfaction to both sides, and without the
least appearance of Enmity, or ill will: and further to confirm their opinion
of his Excellencies Honor and Goodness. This Truce was continued till they
sought and carried off their Dead Men.

Frequent Alarmes we have had; notwithstanding which, his Excellence has not at
all omitted to prosecute the Fortifications; and it is a great Comfort to see
how Cheerfully, from the Highest to the Lowest, every man here puts his hands
to the Work, in gathering, and bearing Stones, and assisting in all sorts of
Labor, and Hazard, toward the perfecting thereof; out of a Generous and Loyal
Emulation, to Imitate his Excellence; who Works, Eats, and Lodges in the
Field, and has scarce been in Bed since the Expiration of the Truce. It is not
to be Expressed with what Zeal, and Alacrity every man here does his Duty,
under so Exemplary a Governor.

Neither are the Moors themselves less Moved, with the Frank and open Candor
of his Behavior, then they are Amazed at the Irresistible Course of his
Success: To see him carry on his Fortifications and beat them too, at the same
time; making it, but the one half of his Business to overthrow them; Even
when Gayland was with his whole Army in the Field, to take away their Standard
from before their Eyes! To Kill many of their Valiantest Leaders, and Rout them
upon all Encounters; and last of all, to Conquer them by Humanity, as well as
by Force. Briefly, the Miracles, which his Lordship has done, have given these
Barbarians a strange Superstition concerning him; Some supposing him to Act by
the Devil; or however persuading themselves, that assuredly he is more then
Man: Others have taken up a report, that he has made Flying Ships, and Great
Guns to run alone, that he never sleeps but leaning against some part of the
Works; and that having escaped so many Dangers, and for his whole Life been so
Fortunate in Arms, it is in vain to Resist, and Impossible to Worst him: And
one thing more there is, that keeps them at a Distance, which is, their
opinion, that the Approaches to this Place are all Mined, and that they cannot
any where make an Attaque, without danger of being Blown up.

Postscript.
I have just now Received News of a Piece of Moorish Valor, which says, that
an Ambuscade of some Hundreds of brave Horse, being Lodged to watch for some of
our Scouts; missing of their Aim, fell upon a Couple of our Dogs, as they were
ranging their wonted Rounds, cut them off, and so Retreated to their Body.

FINIS.

