A Brief RELATION Of The MARCH Of the Imperial Army under the Command of Count
Lesly: The Taking of the Town of Esseck, and Setting Fire to the Bridge, And
the Consternation of the Infidels upon That Action.
COunt Lesly, in pursuance of the Orders of his Imperial Majesty, made a Review
of his Army upon the Borders of Croatia, the Twenty sixth of July, at
Geszki-Sigeth near the Drove; And so drew toward Canisia, where he set fire to
the Suburbs; And several Villages and Castles, for Four Leagues about; And
after that, Marched on, to Execute his Design upon the Bridge of Esseck: The
Generals of the Militia of Croatia being in the mean time, to give the Turks a
Diversion on the Other side; upon Agreement with the Venetian Generals. Upon
the Third of August he Arrived at Babosca, with Ten Regiments of Good Men, and
was Joined upon the Fourth, by Three thousand Croats; Where he Caused his
Cannon, Baggage, and Provisions to be Embarked, that he might March with the
more Expedition. He Departed from thence on the Fifth; And got within a League
of the Bridge of Esseck upon the Fourteenth, without being taken Notice of, or
Any sort of Alarm: He Disposed his Troops, at the same time, for the Attaque
that he intended the Morning following, by break of day, which was Executed
with Great Bravery, and Success, by Four thousand Men: Insomuch that they
Routed Seven hundr'd Janissaries, that Interposed to Hinder them in their
Enterprise; And having Gained the Point, they Charged Five hundred of them,
that they found in the Marshes, and not One of them Escaped. They began then to
put Fire to the Bridge; And in an Instant put Twelve hundred Paces of it into a
Flame; The rest of the Enemy that had fled, and now Gathered together under
Three Bassas to the Number of Three thousand Men, were so scattered, that they
fled toward Belgrade, and not Fifty in a Company. General Lesly, at the same
Time, made himself Master of the Town of Esseck, and put all to the Sword that
they found there: And after the Pillaging of the Place, blew up the Magazine,
and the Arcenal with Great Quantities of Provision both for the War, and the
Mouth, and laid it all in Ashes.

The Consternation of the People, and the Neighboring Towns, under the Ottoman
Power, was so Great, that it is not possible to Express it. The Town of Walpo
was likewise Taken and sacked: And it is Believed that the Army is now Marching
toward the Five Churches, some Four Leagues from the Famous Town of Zigeth. The
Christians lost not above Fifty Men in this Great Action; Among which, was the
Sieur Patroshi, a Captain of Horse, who is much Lamented. The Prince of
Diedrichslein brought the News of This Great Victory to his Imperial Majesty
and Presented him with Five Colors taken from the Enemy.

His Imperial Majesty has also Advice, that the Duke of Lorrain had sent a
Detachment of some Thousands of Men, under the Command of Colonel Heusler,
which he Caused to Pass over his New Bridges upon the Danube, near Gran, to
learn how it stood with the Fortress of Novigrad; Which they found Quitted by
the Garrison, the Magazines taking fire by Thunder, and Lightning, upon the
same Day of the Action before Gran^^ and the taking of the Bridge of Esseck.
This Accident Ruined a Great Part of the Town, with the Tower, and made a Great
Breach in the Rampards, which they Resolved to Repair, and to Garrison That
Post for a Passage to the Conquest that they Designed the Rest of this Campaign.

There are Letters that speak Confidently of the taking of Esperies, by General
Scultz; But the Particulars not being come, we must wait for the Confirmation.
It is Current however, That General Scultz having had Advice of the March of
Six hundred Janissaries for the succor of this Place, sent Eight hundred Horse
to Intercept them, Who fell upon them, and gave them so Entire a Defeat, that
scare Twenty of them 'scap'd, to Carry the News from Agria, whence they came.

From the Bruxell's Copy.

Licensed Sept. the 7th

To. L'Estrange.

London, Printed for H. Hills, and are Sold by Ran. Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall. 1685.


