A BRIEF RELATION Of several Passages of the LIFE and DEATH OF WILLIAM BARTON
OF SHREWSBURY, In October, 1661.

Wherein may be seen much Wickedness against great Workings of God in him; As
also God's most just Anger, and wondrous Mercy (as is hoped) toward him.

Published by a Relation of his, and intended chiefly for the good of such as
knew him in Shrewsbury: many of whom can testify the truth of these things.

Stand in awe, and sin not.
Behold the goodness and severity of God.
London, Printed for John Allen, at the Rising Sun in Little Britain, 1664.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
SInce it was the earnest desire of my poor unworthy Brother, whom
notwithstanding (we hope) God was graciously pleased to own and love, to honor
God some way, to shame Sin, and to betray the deceits of the Devil, that God's
hand upon him might do good to some. Since this was his desire, and should be
the endeavor and design of all those that love God, I have therefore, by the
advice of some Friends, thought fit to present unto your consideration several
Passages, which through the blessing of God may tend thereunto. The Method of
this Discourse you must not expect to be orderly, being penned by one that is
unskilful in such work. If therefore you shall think any of the Passages
therein impertinent, or rudely brought in, impute it not to him of whom the
Discourse is, but rather unto the unskilfulness of the Penner, in ordering of
it: For sure I am, for my own part, I never did see any man more sensibly
appear to be affected with what he spoke, than he was during the time of this
his visitation which was about the space of seven weeks: And although his
Speeches, and those Passages which have relation to this Providence, as they
are related by me, may not affect you, yet sure I am, if you had seen that
seriousness, deep sense and suitable affections, which accompanied those
passages in him, you could not but have been affected therewith. Many choice
things (judged perhaps by diverse to be better than these) were spoke by him at
several times, which I am not able to set down. I have given you, as near as I
could, his own words, omitting, as much as I thought I might, the discourse of
others which occasioned them; And although but very briefly and brokenly on my
part, yet I hope out of this confused heap, you may pick something which may
sometime or other do you good: for which hope-sake I am encouraged to publish
the same, although I often feared, and do fear that I shall thereby purchase
the scorns of some: yet knowing that wise men will take that well which was
well intended, passing by small faults; or, with the Be, gather Honey, though
from a Weed, I am thereby encouraged, and must venture the displeasure of
others.

A brief Relation of several Passages of the Life and Death of William Barton,
etc.
FIrst, let me beg your patience whilst I give you a description of his
Disposition and manner of Life, to the end you may the better judge of the
whole Discourse.

He was a Young Man, not above twenty eight years of age, born and educated in
the Town of Shrewsbury, of honest Parents; the Trade he followed was a Butcher.
He was from a Child well educated; he learned many Chapters and Psalms in the
Bible by heart; from a Child would remember much of a Sermon, and would often
be teaching those brothers and sisters of his, who were younger than himself;
seemed the hopefullest and the forwardest to good, of any of his brethren, and
very forward to teach others: Yet in one thing he was many times faulty from a
Child, which was, a great aptness to speak lies, usually hiding his fault by a
lie, for fear of punishment, and was much given to talk and brag.

He was one that would take a great deal of pains in his Calling, and was very
diligent in whatsoever he went about: He was also of a loving and pitiful
disposition, very ready to forgive any injury, even to his greatest enemies;
very pitiful and charitable to the poor, for many times he would give (though
he had but little in the house) very freely to them: When he had but half a
loaf in his house, seeing a poor woman go by, his heart pitied her, and he
called her back, and gave her half of it: He was very glad to see others good,
and rejoiced when he saw reformation in any that had been formerly more loose.
When he was told that one in the Town that had been very loose, was become a
changed man, and followed that which was good, he wept for joy, and said,
Methinks I feel my heart love him; nay, he would often weep for joy at the good
he heard or saw in others, especially in his relations. He would give very good
counsel to any he thought needed it, although he lost their love by it, and
though he himself did follow it but poorly, being too much the servant of sin.
He had always a love to good Ministers, and he would often say that he would
venture his life for them; Yet he was many times a companion of vain persons,
spending his time with them in the Alehouse; yet among them, as occasion was
given, he would speak for God and his People, so that it was observed that he
had not their love, with whom he spent so much of his time and money. He was
much given to vain glory, so that a little praise, or expression of love, would
win his heart, and easily draw him any way: yet he oft-times loved to read,
and used to pray in his Family, and sometimes in secret, though, as he after
complained, very seldom. Oft-times (after he had broken out) he would be very
sad, from the consideration of his life, and as he confessed afterward, his
sins seemed so horrible to him that they almost overwhelmed him, and would make
him think there was no hope for him, so that he was fain to stifle all those
workings, and bussle through them with some kind of hope of amendment, yet at
such times he would conceal the cause of his trouble. After, upon some
discontent with his wife, and through the poverty which he had brought upon
himself by his evil courses, he went into Scotland, where it pleased God to
visit him with a great fit of sickness, and to lay before him his life in such
a manner, as was horrible to him; so that when he looked back upon his ways,
he was even overwhelmed; but when he looked forward, he saw some hope, and was
full of resolutions of a new life; and when he was recovered, he lived in a
stricter manner for a while, and found much comfort and refreshment from God,
and such sweetness in that short time of obedience and resolu^ion, as he never
had found in any thing in the world; yet after his returning into England he
grew to the same pass again, lived after the same rate, and was in many things
worse, and ran into some sins he had never committed before, By his evil ways,
as gaming, and company-keeping, he grew in debt, and always for the space of
the last half-year was in danger of arresting. He would often defend himself
from them with threatening words, such as these: Keep off me, you know not what
I may do; do not come near me, lest I set you to sleep with your fathers,
having often his knife in his hand. These and such words he spoke with as
daunting a carriage as he could, and by this means he kept himself almost the
space of half a year out of their hands, absenting himself also sometimes out
of the Town, and taking such courses as he ought not. But one time above all,
being full of drink, and fearless (as at such times he used to be) a young man
who was an Apprentice to an Officer in the Town, who had a great hatred to him,
and had often threatened to take him either dead or alive, (which the said
William Barton knew not of, until it was proved at his trial) This young man
came one morning, accompanied with another, seeking to take him; but at that
time, he having his knife in his hand, and speaking great words, kept himself
out of their hands: yet in the evening the young man watching for him about the
house, came running upon him as he stood at his Mothers Shop, and he having his
knife in his hand, the man holding him by the back (for he turned himself to go
in) he struck his hand behind him, which went straight upon the man's heart, so
that he run but about thirty yards, crying, Stop him, he has murdered me, and
so fell down and dyed: And he being taken, would not believe he had hurt the
man, but that they intended to afright him. About an hour before, he was
counseled by one of his friends, not to threaten, or to draw his knife, lest
God should leave him to himself, to do that which he intended not to do. His
answer was; I will hurt no body I Will warrant you; let me alone; Do you think I
have no care of my self? But he was never the safer for all his
self-confidence. He had been more fase if he had feared more.

Being put into Prison, he was so full of drink, that immediately he slept very
soundly for a time; but coming to him the next morning, we found him mightily
awakened with the apprehension of his guilt, and of God's severity against sin,
with a dejected countenance full of horror and tears, thus he said: O the
blood of this poor innocent man, which I have sent away in his sins! I am
afraid his blood cries against me, it lies at my heart, here it lies, it cannot
be washed away: O nothing is before me but guilt, and an angry God, and Death
and Hell, who shall dwell with everlasting burnings! This Scripture terrified
him often, Because I have called, and ye refused, I will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes: but I will justify God, though it be
to my destruction: he has not been wanting to me, but I have been wanting to
my self: mine own iniquity has taken me, and I am held in the cords of mine
own sin. O pray for me, every one that has an interest in God; pray for me,
for I cannot pray for my self: my mouth is stopped, my works sink me. Thus he
continued full of horror, crying out because of the innocent blood that was
shed by his hand; and multiplying Scriptures against himself, these and such
like: He that being often reproved and hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed and that without remedy. Woe be to the wicked, it shall be ill with
him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him, he shall eat of the fruit
of his own ways, and be filled with his own devices.

On the second day some of his relations coming to him, found him lying upon
the straw, and, as formerly, crying out because of the guilt and horror of his
sin. His first words to his relations were, Am I not cast out of your hearts?
who told him that he was not, forasmuch as he was yet alive; and there was some
hopes, for there is an earnest spirit of prayer upon many good people that know
you, and that hear of you; and they told him also, that his Sister Mary on her
Deathbed, spoke these words to the honor of God, and to encourage us to seek,
That she never did earnestly beg any thing of God, which she could or durst
pray absolutely for, that she was denied: and she further said, That she had
some hope concerning William, that poor Lad, that there are some prayers put up
for him that will not be denied.

But did she say so (said he) O now I have some hope: I thought I had been
quite out of her heart, that I was bound as to her, but I was not. O set all
the Town to pray for me; every one that has any interest in God. When I come
to pray I dare not, my mouth is stopped, I have hid my sins with lying, and I was
hypocritical: O I have deceived my self. I dare not look behind me, for my
works sink me into Hell, and I can see nothing before me but an angry God, and
Death and Hell, and Eternity. O for one smile from Heaven; one smile from
Heaven would be worth all: One drop of Faith and true Repentance is worth all
the world. Now come unto me over these mountains, and over these hills. It were
just with God that I should have the hope of the Hypocrite, but O that it might
not be so. I have no hope, but that I am yet out of Hell. A living Dog is
better than a dead Lion. O every one that sees me, take heed of sin. This is
the condition that sin has brought me into: now I must receive my wages: this
is my due wages, I have been working for it all my life. O poor Brother Thomas,
walk softly in the world, do not be too busy in it: my Companions cannot
deliver me.

One of the Beholders that stood by, told him that Gods mercy is above all his
works, and that in the midst of judgment he remembers mercy; and he has done
so to you; for you might have been suddenly snatched away, as this poor man that
is gone. Then said he, I can see it to be a mercy, for then I had been sure in
Hell, deep in Hell; and I have seen mercy in God's dealing to me formerly, in
that my way was hedged up, and that I did not prosper in my evil way as others
did; and when I sought the favor of men, and should have sitten down contented
with it, I always lost it: for if I should but have been well thought of in
the world, and have had the favor of men, I should never have looked further:
But Oh if I should waken thus as I am now, in another world, I were utterly
undone, all this would but torment me. I have a great work to do, and I know
not which way to begin; I can do nothing toward it, and I have but a little
time: O thou Son of David, have mercy on me: O thou Son of David, look back and
pity me, I would follow thee and cry after thee, O that I might not be stopped;
I would not let thee alone till thou bless me: Hear the Prayers that are put up
for me; Let the Blood of Christ that speaks better things than the Blood of
Abel, outcry the cry of my sins: Pray for me (said he) that God would not give
me into the Devils hands this night, nor let him come to me; God justly might:
But pray for me, your prayers may do me good, it may be God will hear your
prayers for me: O that iniquity might not be my ruin.

Coming to him the third day, and mentioning some Scriptures unto him, which
make known God's good will toward men, and his readiness to forgive, he
answered thus: I do believe that if I did hate my sin as it is sin, and is
against God, that I should be forgiven; but I am afraid that I do not hate sin
as it is sin, and is against God; for I do not see the rest of the sins of my
life as I do this; this I can see to be horrible and filthy, and it lies heavy
upon me; whether it be because this is more odious in the sight of the world,
or whether it be because this makes me liable to punishment from men, or brings
me to open shame, I cannot tell whether this may be the cause; but the rest of
my sins I cannot feel stick so upon me, as this does, and they should; for when
I think of their aggravations, they are as bad or worse; and therefore I am
afraid I do not hate sin as it is against God. But how should I do that I may
see the rest of my sins as they be; should I not confess all those sins which I
have hid; I think I should; and I see the truth of that, He that hides his
sins shall not prosper. His friends there present, encouraged him to go on with
his purpose in making an ingenious confession without any hiding or sparing of
himself, and that he would be sure, when he should meet with any hiding or
sparing of himself, and that he would be sure, when he should meet with any
secret temptation to hide or lessen any sin, 02 that he would be sure to thwart
that temptation, by making a fuller confession of every circumstance and
aggravation thereof, that so he might shame himself the more, and betray that
deceitful heart that otherwise would betray him: And we do believe by his
ingenious confestions, that he followed this resolution of his, in confessing
all, and not hiding any thing, though it might tend much to further his shame:
And when Children or others stood to gaze on him, and were about to be hindered
by the Keeper of the Door or others, he would entreat that they might not,
saying, Let them alone to look upon me, and see the fruits of sin; and would
put forth his legs to show them his Chains, saying, Children, it is sin that
has bound me with these Chains, mine own iniquity has taken me; hearken to
the good counsel of your Parents; I began with running from counsel, and now it
has brought me to this; and spoke the truth always; when I had done evil, I
would think to hide it by lying, and now God has discovered me; I hid my sins,
and therefore I did not prosper.

Another time some of his relations and neighbors coming to him, and after
much discourse, which was savory from him, he burst out into extreme tears, and
said, O I lie under an hard heart; and if it be hard now I am undone for ever;
sin has hardened my heart. The company then going forth of the 100m, thus he
spoke, Dear Neighbors, this one thing I would have you do, whenever you commit
any sin that you know of, go and confess it quickly to God, and to some
faithful friend, and pray them to pray for you, that your sin may be forgiven;
for I went on in sin unconfest and unforgiven, till I was as full of sin as I
could hold, and then this brake out, and now all my sin is become a debt.

And coming to him the next day, and finding him very sad and comfortless, even
quite without hope, we sought to comfort him, but could not, for thus he cried
out, God's Word is against me; I can scarce turn to any place but it is against
me; my works are against me; I am thy works, and I will follow thee: O if my
works follow me, I am undone; Ah shall lying follow me, and cozening follow me,
and dissembling follow me, and blood follow me: Ah I am afraid there is no
hope; but I will hope against hope.

And thus he spoke to his mother and his relations then by; Dear Mother, what a
Son have I been to you, my dear Mother, what a Son have I been to you! what a
brother have I been to you all! but mother, they are not all such as I; you
have some good Children, be thankful for those; they might have been all such
as I. After a little silence he began again to cry out; O that I could honor
God some way before I go out of the world! What a scandal have I been to
Religion? What a savor shall I leave behind me? Ah! what an example have I
given in the world; O that I might live to give a better example; I would fain
live that I might be an enemy to sin: O that poor souls might not be taken in
those snares that I have been taken in. Methinks I would not live if I should
live as I have done; I would rather dye now, than live to dishonor God again;
If I should live, I would not live as I have done, sure I should not, methinks
I should not: I think I should scarce get time, to get my daily bread, but that
I must, for it were my duty; but if I should again live as I have done,
methinks Hell it self would be too narrow for me.

One of his Acquaintance which he had spent much time with, came to see him; Ah
(said he) you and I have cause to be humbled for the precious time that we have
spent together vainly and sinfully; you may be an honest woman for ought I
know, but you have cause to be humbled, I have I am sure, yea and you too;
Spend no more time as you spent it with me: Oh the sin that accompanied our
mispending of time! Ask God forgiveness, and take heed of sin, you have time
yet. Some men's sins go before to judgment, and some men's follow after; I am
picked out to be made an example that you might take heed.

Another time some of his Friends coming and finding him bemoaning himself
because of sin, they began to comfort him, and told him, that they did hope and
believe, that this was the way that God would make use of to bring him home to
himself, by making him a true penitent; and since it has pleased God to give
you thus much time, we do hope he will hear the Prayers that are and have been
put up for you, For he never said to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in
vain, and you have been a Son of many Prayers. Never, said he, seek ye me in
vain; Never (said he) nay, then not in this condition: Blessed be his Name, if
this be thy way, for ever blessed be thy Name; this is a strange way, must I go
through Hell to Heaven? But O if this be the way, blessed be God; my tongue
shall sing aloud of his Righteousness, though it should be upon a Gallows;
wonderful Mercy to me, to such a sinful Creature as me: if this shall be the
way, then he has punished me less then mine iniquities deserve.

Another time some of his Neighbors being with him, he began to confess his
own guilt, and that he was hypocritical, and lived to himself, and that he
sought the favor of men; nay, and that sometimes he had not stuck at a lie,
when he thought it might further that design. Some of the company then by,
said, William, you were not so bad as you make your self now, nor so bad an
hypocrite as you think you are, for of our knowledge, you always loved the
best People, and loved the Ministers, and would take their part, though you
were hated for it, and heard Gods Word constantly, and would remember a great
deal of it, and loved to read good, Books, and therefore you were not so bad as
you make your self to be. All this (said he) does but aggravate my sins, I did
but enough to leave me inexcusable, and make against me; and that you may not
be taken in the same snares that I have been taken in, I will make a relation
of my condition; I did delight to hear good Sermons, and longed for the
Sabbath Day, and loved it when it did come, And when those Psalms were sung
that were promises to the Saints, that they should be satisfied with the
fatness of God's House, and filled with the Rivers of Delight, and such Psalms
as set out the amiableness of Gods Tabernacle, and that Scripture where it is
said, The work of Righteousness shall be peace, and the effect quietness and
assurance for ever, I should be much affected, and could not but weep, when I
sung such places: and when my conscience told me that I was not right, and that
my works were naught, and that if I went on as I did, it would be sad with me,
it would make me very sad, and I would then resolve that I would be otherwise;
I would verily think that I should be better, and would resolve as well (I
thought) as any one could resolve, but when Monday came, and those thoughts
were gone of me, I should make little or nothing of my former promise, but
should break through all as if I had never resolved; and if any one did but
call me, I had no power but to go, and if any thought should come in my mind
that might hinder me, I would do the best I could to hinder such a thought,
because I had a mind to go; and sometimes I have sought temptations, and though
my Conscience and God's Word, would keep me a great while, yet at the last I
shoul'd break through all, and so I loved a little Ale better than God, and
better than my self; and when I had broken my resolutions time after time, I
had no heart to resolve, and thought it was to no purpose, and then I went on
without any gage; but I found that when I did resolve, it was better then when
I did not, for sometimes it would keep me; but when I resolved not, then I was
drove any way; And I would think sometimes what might be the reason, that my
resolutions never held me as well as other people; others I could see, could
resolve and keep their resolutions, and I always broke mine; and I do think
that the cause was, that there was something left behind, something there was
that my conscience put me on to do, that I would not do; sin lay in the bottom
hid, and unconfest, and I would not go through the shame of confessing that:
and though I resolved against every sin, yet alas that I would never resolve
on; and so the sin of hiding my sin, was left behind; and now I can see that
the first thing that I should have done, should have been to have confessed those
sins, which I had kept close all my life, and because I would not part with
that, therefore all my resolutions were as good as nothing; for that sin which
caused me to leave out that, caused me to break over all my promises. Another
cause was, because I neglected secret prayer; and that sin kept me from
praying, and stopped my prayers; I could not ask God for strength to do what I
could not, because sin lay hid in my heart, which I should have discovered, and
I would not. I hid my sin by lying, and many a time when my mother would ask me
what I had spent, I have said, indeed mother but two pence, when I had spent a
great deal more; and though I thought I would be better for the time to come,
yet I had no power: the same evil that kept me from discovering that sin, made
me still run further into sin: Therefore let every one speak always truth, and
that which is in their heart, and if they shall at any time chance to speak
that which is not so, let them go and undo it the first thing that they do, and
tell them that they spoke that which was not truth; and then go quickly and beg
of God to forgive you, and then you will have more power over your self at
another time; for if I could but have parted with that one sin, I do think that
I should have had power over the rest; and I have thought so then, and have
been convinced that that must be done before I should have any more power given
me, and yet I would never be willing to it; When I would think of going about
it, the matter was so bad, and I thought I should appear to be so odious, that
no one would abide me: and then I thought of some good folks that did love me,
and I thought that they did not love me, but because they thought me to be
pretty good, and for somewhat good in me; and I would think, that if they
should know what an one I was, they would never abide me again; and such
reasons as these, or something or other, still kept me off; And sometimes I
would put it off with reasoning, that it was not necessary to confess it to
men, if I confessed it to God, I thought it would serve the turn. Thus I went on
running out of one sin into another, till I was as full of sin as I could hold,
till I was become all sin: and I did think that my sins were even ripe, and
that some great thing must befall me some way or other very shortly; and when I
thought of what I deserved, I was afraid it would be some great judgment; and
for about a month or six weeks before this brake out, I had no power to read
Gods Word, but when I would take the Bible, thinking to read, I would turn it
and turn it, and methoughts I would fain find some new thing; nothing would
serve but something that was new; I could begin to read no where, but it was
that which I knew before; I thought I knew it all already, and so I would lay
it down and never read: therefore when you have no mind to read God's Word, and
no mind to pray secretly, then be sure the Devil has you in a great snare;
take heed, for if the Devil keep you in that snare, you cannot rest there, but
will be hurried further into sin: if you will give way to that one sin, you
cannot stay long there, but will be like a troubled Sea, still casting forth
mire and dirt: And so it was with me, for I could not stop where I would,
though I fain would at many things which I have done. That which at the first
thought has appeared so odious unto me, that I could not abide to think of it,
yet I have never rested, till I have been hurried to that very sin; and I have
sometimes afterward wondered at my self, how I could ever be brought to commit
such wickedness, and have hated my self for it, and hated that sin worse then
than ever, and could not rest, or have any quietness in my condition, till I
had fallen down before God to ask forgiveness; and yet after a while, by
running into the way of that sin, I have been taken in that very snare, to
commit that same sin, which a little before I have thought, I could never have
been driven to. I thought I could stop where I would, but I could not: How true
is that Scripture, where it is said, that the wicked are like a troubled Sea,
which cannot rest, but is still casting forth mire and dirt. One reason which
the Devil (transforming himself into an Angel of Light) sought to hinder and
deceive him by, was by putting into his mind, that if he that had professed
Religion, should be known to be such a liar, and so bad, it would be a great
discredit to Religion, and wicked men would think that if all Professors were
known, they were all such; and this, he said, was one reason that kept him
back, and I had like to have omitted it, but rather than I would omit it I have
brought it in here.

One thing that I heard him speak before his Trial; When one was counselling
him not to be earnestly set for life, for he was like to find as little favor
from men as almost any, he was a man so much hated by many, yet that he and
they were in the hands of God. Thus he answered; It often comforts me that I am
in the hands of God: When I look upon my self as in the hands of men it
terrifies me, and makes me restless; but when I remember I am in the hands of
God, that quiets me; and when I think they shall do nothing but that which God
will have done: for methinks if God would not have me live, I would not desire
to live; and if he will have me live, he can turn their hearts contrary to
their purposes, and this quiets my heart. I think sometimes if I should live,
it may be sin would be encouraged, if God should not manifest his displeasure
against sin, by not letting me live; therefore I know not what to pray for in
this matter, I know not what I would have, but I would have God to give me that
which he sees best for me. After a little silence his eyes began to fill with
tears, and he burst out with these expressions; O I must be punished for my
sin, I must be punished more than this. This is not a punishment, I have not
been punished enough yet, I must not think to escape thus, I do expect nothing
but death: But O if I could honor God before I go out of this world, I would
not care, but be willing to dye. These words came from him, accompanied with
much weeping. And he further said: God gave me a pitiful disposition, but I
marred it, and was cruel with it. I have been cruel to Horses, in making them
do more than they were able; and cruel I have been to Men; when I have borrowed
money, I have not been careful to pay it again as I was to borrow it. O how
like Judas have I dealt with some, when I have given them fair words! God gave
me knowledge and parts, and a fine disposition, that I might do good, and I
have turned all the wrong way: O! how unkindly have I dealt with God: that
which he gave me in mercy, I have provoked him with, and sinned against him
with.

When he came to his Trial, being asked after the Indictment was read, Whether
guilty, or not guilty? he answered, Not guilty of Wilful Murder; for (as in the
presence of God I speak it) I had no more intention or thoughts to kill him,
than I had to kill my own Brother; whatever words I might speak it was with an
intention to keep them from taking me, because I was a poor man, and had
nothing to pay, thinking that if I went to prison I should never get out; but I
never had any intention or thoughts to kill him: but it was carried against
him; it was the will of God that so it should be.

After the Sentence was given, and he brought to the Jaylors house, his Mother
went to see him, but not being admitted, she spoke unto him through the door,
and he told her that he was more composed in his spirit, and better resolved
than he had been a great while, and said, It is God's Will that is done, and I
would have you all to be cheerful, for I hope that I shall find Jesus Christ a
sufficient Savior to me; I can have none other hope: my sins stick a little
heavily sometimes, but I hope I shall get above them; I have hope because of
Gods own goodness, that Christ Jesus will be a sufficient Savior to me, I can
have none other hope.

At another time, his Brother and Sister being with him, he began to justify
God in taking him away, and was clear in owning God's Justice and the truth of
his Word: Yet as to some men he said he was not satisfied concerning their
dealings, though he had sought in his thoughts to justify them.

The second day after he was condemned, as he lay upon a Bed, in the night, in
his chamber, he was much refreshed and cheared, through a very sensible dream,
wherein these words were very plainly, and sensibly as might be, spoken to him:
Awake thou that sleep; and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
life: and being awaked, he began to be much affected with those words which
were so plainly spoken to him; and as he rehearsed them to me, and several
others, these were his thoughts upon them: [Awake thou that sleep.] This is
sure spoken to me thought he, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead; I was sleeping upon the very brink of eternity, and have been sleeping in
sin for a long time, and now Christ awakeneth me; this is a call from Christ:
and I did believe that the rest was said to me, [and he shall give thee life.]
And these and such like thoughts of Christ made my heart yearn with dear
thoughts of Christ, and thankful thoughts for Christ: and I longed to pray, and
was earnestly stirred up to prayer, and never longed so to pray as I did then;
so up I got off the Bed I was lying on, and there I fell down upon my knees
before God, and me-thought then I felt my heart grow softer: it was hard
before; I could scarce tell what I should pray for, or how; But O then, I found
a freeness, a fountain of tears came then, it was a call from God; I was sure
then that it was so: and when I would have called to mind whereabout this
Scripture should be, or where I might find it, I could not remember that ever I
had read it, nor knew whereabout to find it: but I was sure it was the Word of
God, and somewhere in the Bible, and that I had heard it sometimes. I do
believe that it was a call from God, for I found my heart softer then. O now
pray, if ever, dear friends, but two days now, and no more prayers will be
heard for me.

He was for the most part after this time pretty well composed in his mind, and
had a pretty good measure of cheerfulness; not without hope, though full of the
sense of his guilt, grieving much for his sin, and that he had dealt so
unkindly with God. And to most of the company that came in, he still continued
to order his speech with as much wisdom as he could, showing much affection
toward them, with an earnest desire of their good. And thus he would express
himself; O that you would not be taken in those snares that I have been taken
in! And this was some counsel that scarce any could go without, That they would
be sure always to speak the truth, and that which was in their hearts; and if
at any time you shall have spoken that which you think was not so, go quickly
and unsay it; say, I spoke that which was not truth; and do not stick at shame,
for I was often hindered thereby: do not rest till you have confessed it to God,
and to some faithful friends, and pray them to pray for you, that so it might
be forgiven you: and so you might have more power against another time: And do
not delay, but go quickly, whilst your conscience puts you upon it; for if you
delay, it is very likely you will be hindered and never do it, though you put it
off, thinking to do it another time: for when that time came wherein I purposed
to do it, I had less power and less heart.

At another time his Sister-in-law coming to see him, thus he expressed his
affection, with a smiling countenance, and tears: My dear Sister, my poor
Sister, my heart yerns upon you: I did not love you, because I thought you did
not love me, but I did ill: But O now it is otherwise with me; for now I love
you, I would fain have you better for that which has befallen me: Oh! that
since God is now distributing his mercy, every one might have some, and you
might have some. Some who have come to me, are bettered by that which has
befallen me, and it makes me glad when I think that others will be afraid of
sin, and bettered by this which is befallen me.

When his Links were in the knocking of, and he was hurt thereby; thus he said,
I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him:
Thou art just, and I have sinned; why should the living man complain, a man for
the punishment of his sin? O the Justice of God, he will not let sin go
unpunished. O do not this abominable sin that Gods soul h^tes. If thy children
transgress thy Laws, thou will visit their sin with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes; but his loving kindness will he not utterly take from them, nor
alter the thing that has gone out of his mouth. These, with many other
expressions he often used also at other times. His countenance growing more and
more cheerful, and being in such an ecstasy of joy, as though his body could
not then have contained his soul, these were some of the expressions he then
uttered; Sister, I do verily believe that I am now going to Heaven; all those
clouds that were upon me are all blown away, his own Arm has brought
Salvation: He is my Glory, my Deliverer, in Him will I trust; He only is my
Rock and my Fortress; He is my Defense, I shall not utterly be moved. I will
sing of Mercy and Judgment, unto thee, O God, will I sing. O that I had seen
what a God I have sinned against! O do not sin against God, do not that
abominable thing which his soul hates. You cannot know his goodness. I sought
the Lord, and he heard me. God is in this Town: God is amongst his People, he
has heard your prayers: tell them he has heard them for me. Now I would not
live if I might: I hope I should not be flattered: I would fain have lived that
I might have honored God, whom I have dishonored, but he knows what I am, and
what I should be, better than I do. Blind that I was, to sin against such a
God, to do that which his soul hates. He was all this while in such a deep
rapture of joy, and spoke with such force, as though his heart would have come
out to have spoken.

His Chains being almost off, these were some of his expressions; O happy
Chains, that held me till I had the Favor of God! I would have overrun thine
hand, but I could not if I would; O the Patience of God! O boundless Mercy to
such a wretch as I; an Iron Heart and Iron Chains gone together; O boundless
unlimitable Mercy! What shall I do for God? O that I could honor God! Parting
with his Wife, he thus expressed himself; Poor Wife I have nothing to leave thee,
but O that thou may have the loving Favor of God, any thing, any thing with
the Loving-Favour of God. We did not honor God with what He gave us, but lived
unthankfully, and unquietly; we sinned against God with his own Mercies: Why
should they live together unthankfully and unquietly, and sin against me with
mine own Mercies? Part them, part them: O how just is it that we should be
parted! Seeing his Relations, he thus began to pity them; O poor wretches that
must be left to struggle with this sinful world, full of snares on every side,
my heart pitties you; O poor wretches I am afraid to think how you should get
through the Snares round about you; Lord keep you by his Mighty Power through
Faith unto Salvation. What a stir does the Devil and the World make to destroy
one poor soul? your very griefs are folly in respect of God.

Not long after being alone, his Brother and Sister went to him, who found him
sitting down with his eyes shut, his face looking yellow, and his countenance
as if he had not been the same man: They asked him how it was with him; and
told him that God had put away his sins and would never look at them any more,
and that it was the Devil that threw his sins in his face; but he answered; All
is gone now, I am in the dark, I cannot see which is the way, but I would hope
against hope; And again he said, Though He kill me, yet will I trust in him.
Some of the standers-by told him that the Devil would do the worst he could
against him, Because he loved God and hated sin, and would fain destroy the
kingdom of the Devil, but Jesus Christ has prayed for him that his Faith fail
not: They mentioned that Scripture also where it is said, When the Enemy shall
come in like a Flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against
him, which Scripture much refreshed him. Then said he, These are comfortable
Scriptures indeed, Lord keep me from Temptation, suffer me not to be tempted
above what I am able; Keep me by thy mighty Power through Faith unto Salvation.
And being come to his former Rapture of Joy, thus he expressed it; Justice and
Mercy are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other,
Christ's Righteousness and Peace to my poor Soul. He began again to pity us
who were left behind, and said, I am glad to dye, because I shall be freed from
sin; and glad to dye, because sin shall be shamed; I shall have the same nature
about me if I live.

As he was going toward the Execution, thus he said; Thou do not willingly
afflict nor greive the children of men; if lesser strokes would have done it,
this should not have been: Oh how many precious Sacraments have I abused! Oh
the Patience of God to such a sinful Creature as I! O that I could honor God,
whom I have sinned against; I would fain honor thee; Lord help me: honor thy
self, O Lord. Cheerfully looking upon the multitude, he said; All these are to
see sin shamed. When the Officers bad them stand off him, he said, O do not
keep God's People from me this little moment that I am to be in this World,
they are my delight, and my comfort. As he went, he often expressed great
admiration of God's wonderful, boundless, and unlimited Mercy to him, and an
earnest desire of honoring God: And when some good People that he prized as
those that feared God, came to him as he was going, and expressed their
affection, and thankfulness to God for him, he seemed to be much cheared by it,
and thus he said with a smiling countenance, I am gathered, I am gathered, they
have gathered me; Sin is going to be executed; our Kingdom will be the
greatest. A Friend going with him, cheared him up with the words of Dr. Tailor
of Hadley, going to his Martyrdom; It is but one stepped to my Fathers House; but
his countenance grew very dejected and sad thereupon, and thus he said, Ah! but
I am not such an one: Immediately growing more cheerful, he said, But some he
saves as firebrarnds out of the fire; and so me: In the midst of Judgment,
thou remembrest Mercy. Will God accept of me to honor his Truth? I fain would.
I hope God will help me: I shall honor his Truth. How truly is his Word
fulfilled on me. And being come to the place of Execution, after he had kneeled
down, and prayed very pertinently and well, he concluded with these words; Now
Lord help me to honor Thee.

Then he directed his Speech to the People to this purpose.

My dear Friends and Neighbors, you are come hither not only to see a poor
Sinner hanged, here is something that is spiritual to be taken notice of; O
that you might not let that slip; O that you might not let it slip. Here is the
truth of God's Word to be made appear upon me; Heaven and Earth shall fail, but
not one jot of God's Word shall fail, but shall all be fulfilled. The truth of
God's Word will be made good upon all you that are here present, sooner or
later. And first let me tell you, how true it has been upon me. I was born of
Parents that served God: I had a Father that feared God, and a Mother and other
Relations that are here present; Brothers and Sisters that served God, who
followed me with their counsel, and their tears; but because I did not receive
their good Counsel, nor follow it, I began at the length to be weary of it, and
not to love it; I did not love the very house sometimes, and cared not how
little I came to it, because I could not be quiet in it, but they would be
counselling me for my good. Oh! what shall I say? I have been a Son of many
reproofs, but I hardened my neck; And how is God's Word made good upon me in
this? He that being often reproved, and hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed. My sin has always been running from Counsel; for had I hearkened
to faithful Counsel, and followed that, it had been otherwise with me, I think;
and just it was with God that I should be taken, in running away from Counsel:
For I think if my wife had not bidden me stay within, I should not have gone
out; but because she bad me, and I having a readiness to do contrary, out I
went, and some such words as these I used to my wife; Do thou think that I
will be afraid to go about my business for fear of an Apprentice-boy! I was no
sooner out, but I knew I had done ill, and had a mind to go in, but I had no
power then, I should have stopped sooner. O let every one hearken to Counsel. I
had an aptness to do contrary, and so I was left to my self, that if I needs
would run from Counsel, I might see what would come of it, and see whither it
brought me. O let every one take heed of sin, stop sin in the beginning, for
you cannot stop when you will, if once you give way to sin. When my Mother or
some others would deal faithfully with me, I did for the most part believe that
they spoke to me out of true love, and could see it to be right counsel, and
such as I had need of, and yet there was that in me that put me upon doing
contrary; though I thought it was such as I had great need of, and that which I
thought I would sure follow, yet there was that in me that did not love it, and
would rather have been without it: And although I longed for Sabbath days, and
loved them when they were come, and delighted to hear good Sermons, and was
thereby convinced of some things that were then amiss in me, and should then
purpose against them; so that I should think it would sure be otherwise; yet
when Monday came, and I was as it were turned into the world again, I was the
same as before, as though I had never purposed or been convinced: for if any
one had but called me, I must needs go, and though there was that in me, that
did resist, and would have hindered me, and the victory should have been on
God's side, yet it seldom was, but was for the most part still born down. The
victory should have been on God's side and his Words side: my resolutions
should have held me; and though God's Word and my resolutions would hold me
sometimes, and for a great while, yet at the last I should break through all,
though they were strong bonds, such as I thought I never durst nor would break
over: yet after a while, when I thought I was safe, if one that I had used to
go with, had but come to my shop, I must presently go with him; that which
before held me, would then seem little, and I could then break through it all
easily; and thus I loved a little Ale better than God, and better than his
Word. Take heed of Company, and loving Ale too well, for there is more evil in
it, than you are aware of; for when I had kept my self from that, I was like
another man; but when I had taken too much of that, it would take al fear from
me, so that I should not care what I said or did, my tongue would then run at
no gage. I had an aptness always to speak untruths, but specially at such
times. I was a man full of words; and can a man full of words be justified? In
the multitude of words there wants not iniquity. O that good creature that I
abused by pouring in too much of, and made my self unfit to do any thing that
was good by it: if some poor body that wanted it, had had some of that, which I
might have spared, and have been better without, it would have made their heart
glad, they would have blessed God for it, and God should have had honor by it:
but I did not so, my belly devoured all: Meat is for the belly, and the belly
for meat, but God shall destroy both it and them. I was full of Ale when this
fell out that I am brought hither for; Ale had made me fearless and confident,
or else I should have been afraid, and careful to have kept out of their way,
as at other times; that fear which should then have kept me, was then wanting:
O sure if I had known what would have followed, and that I should have done
such a thing, I should have been afraid of every cup, and nothing could have
forced me to have taken more than was needful: but though I did not know what
would follow, yet I might have been afraid: for what may not a man do when he
is not himself, but is fearless, and has not his understanding about him? Oh,
no life is safe, but a fearing, watching, self-denying life; let me say this
again, No life but a fearing, watching, self-denying life, is a safe life. And
as concerning this young man, I had no more thoughts or intention to kill him,
then I had to kill mine own brother; and when any one would speak to me to take
heed lest any such thing should follow, I should disdain in my heart that any
one should have such thoughts of me, as once to fear lest I should kill any
one, for my nature, I thought, could never be so cruel; and again I thought
that I had knowledge, and that I, of any one in the Town, should never commit
that sin, because I knew more against it than many others did, I thought, and
had better education; but I should have been afraid of my self, and was not; I
hid my sins, and therefore did not prosper: How true is God's Word made good
upon me in this thing also: for I always sought the favor of men, and if I
should but have had that, I should have looked no further, but have sat down
contented with it, yet it always fled from me: I have sometimes spoken that
which was not so, when I thought it might further that design; but always that
very thing, wherein I went out of my way, and did evil, thinking to gain more
favor thereby, was usually a means to make me lose that favor, and room in
their hearts, which I had before: But it was better for me that I had it not;
for if I could have gotten men to think well of me, I think I should have
thought well of my self, and should have sitten down contented without looking
any further. God ordered it otherwise for me, and it was better for me, blessed
be God: and was not I met with in this, for had I the favor of men? had I? you
all know how it has been. But O why should I speak? God is just, very just:
for Oh what a life have I lived; sure if I were to live again, I would not live
as I have done: but I had time, and I did not improve it: I should have
honored God with that precious time that he gave me, but I did not, but sought
the favor of men with it, and sinned against God with it: I did not make that
use of my time that it was given me for, and because I did not, therefore I
must have no more; I had time once, but whilst I had it, I lived to my self
with it. God gave it me, but I did not honor him with it who gave it me, but
other things had my time, and other things had my heart; and since I made such
use of it, Why should I have any more? I must have no more; I brought forth
fruit to my felf: an empty Vine: God gave me time that I might lay it out as he
would have me, but I did not: a fruitless tree: Cut it down, why cumbreth it
the ground any longer? O you that have time before you yet, prize it, and
improve it, for it will not last always: do not lose one jot of it, by idling
it away and by sinning it away; all the time you have is little enough to do
that work which God has given you to do in it. I had time but now I must have
no more, and your time, will be gone shortly.

O let no body presume because of me, for one of a thousand is not snatched out
of the jaws of the Devil as I am: O what shall I say! for the Lord's sake take
heed of sin; O do not that abominable thing that his Soul hates. If his
Children transgress and forsake his Way, He will visit their iniquity with the
Rod. Believe me for I am a dying man, the truth of God's Word will be made good
upon all sooner or later; what he spoke with his Mouth he has fulfilled with
his Hand, as you will see upon me this day. I being often reproved hardened my
neck, and now I must suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy as to my
body; but to the honor of his Mercy I have hope in him: He has forgiven me my
great debt: Forasmuch as I had nothing to pay, thou forgavest the debt: O
unlimited Mercy, what a God art thou, that when all refuge failed and I had no
whither else to go, that then thou should accept of me, when I was cast out
even to the loathing of my person: O blessed be thy Name for ever: O that I had
known thee better and served thee better! O what manner of forgiveness must I
be saved by? Mighty Forgiveness, Lord help me to forgive as I would be
forgiven. If any of you here present did plot or contrive that which is now
come to pass, the taking away of my life, I do freely forgive you, and I would
have you pray unto God that he would forgive you, that so it may be forgiven,
and may never come against you. And now Lord I come unto thee: I am a sinful
creature, but pardon and accept of me. I have broken all thy holy Laws and
Commandments: I have done as much evil as I could have done against thee; but I
come unto thee, pardon and accept of me for Jesus sake: I have no whither else
to fly, accept of me for Christ's sake; for Christ's sake: Lord Jesus receive
my spirit; Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Christian Reader,
SInce it has pleased God to make known unto you, by his Providence upon this
young man, a fresh discovery of his great forgiveness, and also his Severity
against sin: And since it is the will of God that none of his Providence
should be slighted, or return in vain; let you and I in the Fear of God take
heed that it may not be in vain unto us. We may clearly see by the Word of God,
and by this and many other his Providence to the Sons of men, that he is a
Merciful, and yet a Just God: Merciful our God was unto this young man, in that
he followed him with many awakings, many convictions, many good purposes,
resolutions and desires, and yet Just in punishing him for the abuse of these
his Mercies, Just in letting his own iniquity take him, and bind him over to
punishment; And wonderful Merciful unto him in bringing good unto him out of
his evil. You and I, it may be, have through the Mercies of God unto us several
convictions, good purposes and resolutions, some good affections and desires of
being better; but what fruit comes of them? do we not bear them down, and are
we not still the same men as formerly? Let us fear before God, for he is a Just
God. All are not tempted alike to the same sins; some are tempted one way, some
another way: some Peoples sins are open, others secret; Let us therefore
seriously consider what our sins are before God; they may admit of great
agravations; Let us consider of them, and by this example of Repentance, let us
be stired up to Repentance, and a more diligent seeking after God, that so his
Judgments may be prevented. And since there may be (as we have seen in this our
Friend) many convictions, good affections, desires and purposes, and yet gross
sins, such as may provoke the face of God against us, let us consider of it,
and fear and be stirred up thereby to beg of God that we may not provoke Him as
he did, not take boldness to sin, in expectation of Mercy at last; Let none
presume because of him, for few are snatched out of the jaws of the Devil as he
was; but obey the Motions of God's holy Spirit, that by it we may be able to
overcome all our Spiritual enemies.

And since we who are his relations further may, and are obliged to give God
the honor of his Goodness and his Truth in hearing Prayers, and having
received upon this our Friend a fresh occasion of the same; therefore, to this
end you may further take notice by that which follows, something that may
make it appear that God is a God of Truth and hears Prayers. He was a son of
many Prayers; I will instance only in one of his relations, a Sister of his who
is dead, whom God made eminent in Grace, and a blessing to the Family wherein
she was: who while she lived, carried him upon her heart, striving with God by
prayer for him, and by faithful counsel and reproofs with him concerning his
spiritual condition: for sometimes she would with tears of kindness, kissing
him, and weeping upon him, entreat him to consider of his condition, and would
make it plain to him according to Scripture, that his condition was certainly
sad, and that either it must not be the Word of God, or else he must be another
man, if ever he had any saving interest in it. Sometimes she would tell him
(and that truly) that she had not slept all night, because of him, she was so
full of fearful thoughts concerning him, lest he should be snatched away by
death in his present condition, which must then certainly be sad. Thus she
continued several years, as opportunity, and his condition received, several
ways to deal faithfully with him; and one night, as we well remember, after
she had been persuading him to stay in the house, and read to her, and not go
out into company as formerly he used; and telling him, that if he would but
deny himself and stay, he should find better comfort and delight, than any he
could meet with in his companions, with many other motives and persuasions she
used, as though she would needs prevail with him, But when she saw that she
could not, and that he would go notwithstanding, as he went from her, these
words she spoke to him; Brother, will thou go notwithstanding all that I can
say; well, thou will not hear me, but I hope God will; and that sometime before
thou dyest, thou shall have little comfort any where but in God's Word, and
well if thou may have it there. By these words you may perceive she was
earnest in prayer for him, and that though she could not prevail with her
Brother, yet she hoped to prevail with God for him: and upon her deathbed she
spoke these words following to some of her relations then by, to the end she
might encourage them to seek unto God. I never (said she) was earnestly set to
beg any thing of God, that I durst pray absolutely for, that I was denied; and I
have some hope concerning William that poor Lad, that there are some prayers
put up for him that will not be denied, which will not depart until the Most
High give heed thereunto. And although she dyed in Faith, and did not in her
life time see that change which she hoped for, yet God, who never fails those
that put their trust in him, did not fail her, but heard her prayers in his own
due time, and in his own way: We therefore who are hereby obliged, do on her
behalf, and on our own, desire to speak good of God; for we have largely
experienced upon our selves, and upon these our relations that it is not in
vain to seek unto the Almighty; for as we have heard, so have we seen it made
good; Such as sat in darkness and the shadow of death, being bound in
afflictions and irons, because they rebelled against the Lord and contemned his
Counsels, yet even then when they cried unto the Lord, He heard them, and saved
them out of their distress. O that men would Praise the Lord with us for this
his Goodness, and for his wonderful works to the sons of men: for he satisfies
the hungry soul with good things; he fulfilleth the desire of such as fear him
and hope in his Mercies. Be encouraged therefore to be earnest in seeking unto
God for your selves and for your relations; for the faithful prayer of a
Righteous man avails much if it be fervent; he that asks receives, and he
that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened; and as David
experienced, even so may we, that the Word of the Lord is a tried Word, and all
his! Judgments are done in truth; And although the seeming sad Providence
which accompanied this Mercy may seem to lessen it in the eyes of some, yet let
it not, for God's Ways are not as our ways, nor his Thoughts as our thoughts.
And though sinful man came off with shame in this Providence, yet both the
Goodness and Severity of God were hereby made to appear: Severity, that so sin
might not be encouraged, and Goodness that so we might be encouraged to seek
unto God, and therefore this death was the best and the best for him, and does
not lessen the Mercy.

And since laying open the Virtues of others, sometimes has and may be as a
whetstone, putting an edge upon the Graces of others, drawing on and
encouraging them to imitate the same; it therefore will not be amiss, since she
of whom we spoke is out of the reach of being hurt by applause, to give you
further knowledge concerning her: She was of a courteous winning carriage, very
diligent in her business, and a careful attender upon all the Ordinances of
God. She was a faithful friend unto whomsoever she was acquainted withal; for
if she knew them to be accustomed in any evil, or whatsoever she thought to be
their fault of faults, she would be sure to tell them of it, and yet in such a
way, that they could not choose but see her true love to them thereby: And this
consideration, as she said, sometimes put her upon this duty, viz. What if I
must never see this Friend of mine again until I meet him in Eternity, since I
think such and such things to be his fault, if I do not seriously tell him of
it, if he miscary, how shall I then answer it? how shall I look him in the face?
may he not then curse me? She also accustomed herself to walk out in the
evening, when it began to grow dark, into some solitary place, as the
Churchyard where people are buried, or without the walls of the Town by the
Waterside; and being asked by some of her relations, why she chose such a
time, and such a solitary place? she answered thus: Because I can at such a
time, or in such a place, the better put my self into a dying condition; for
when the fears of the night are about me, and the flesh apprehends some danger,
then I can see the things of the world to be as they are, and can think thus
with my self: What if I must never have to do with anything in the world more?
I must shortly be in the condition of these dead persons under me, and my place
must know me no more: and when all the world is gone with me, what is it that
will abide or stand me in stead at such a time? And likewise my conscience
would at such times bring to my mind such things which I had done, or said, or
thought evil in, which before passed without taking notice of. And these
thoughts are of use to further me in seeking after that, wherein I then found
solid comfort, and to make me more watchful against such things as at such
times I found my conscience to be offended withal: I find likewise that I can
be more free from distracting thoughts; Though I cannot say I am altogether
free from natural fear at such a time, yet after a while when I have, by acting
Faith, overcome it, and reasoned away my fear; then I find great advantage,
great delight, and satisfaction in God, and am thereby encouraged cheerfully to
go through those trials and duties which otherwise in my place I found hard.
And one time as she was stealing forth, as formerly, to her solitary walk, her
Mother perceiving, seemed to be angry, that she should go out at such a time of
night to endanger her health; but she answered her, and that almost with tears;
Good Mother, do not hinder me of my portion: it is my portion in this world,
neither can I undergo any business, or go through the world as I ought, without
some such refreshments. Further, if any one had taken offense at her, though
causlesly, she would be the first in seeking reconciliation, and seldom or
never without good success: and when she met with any deriding speeches, or
backbiting from others, instead of repaying home in the same kind, she would
overcome their evil with good. This was usually her word; What is my duty? what
would God have me to do in this matter? and so she practiced; for she would
usually go or write to such persons, and deal in such a manner, and show such
meekness, that either she gained them to be her friends, or else their mouths
were by this her carriage so stopped, that they could not fasten their reproaches
upon her.

I might make a large discourse concerning her, but I forbear. -- She was
buried the tenth day of February, Anno Domini 1658. The place of Scripture she
chose to be preached upon at her Funeral, was John 12.26. [If any man serve me,
let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my servant be: If any man
serve me, him will my Father honor.] Which (as she said) she could scarce ever
read, but it would affect her, so as to cause tears.

Here follow also some Verses, made by the same Mary Barton, in the praise of
CHARITY: She her self being singular in the love and practice of this Grace,
above most others. The substance of them is taken out of the 13th Chapter of
the first Epistle to the Corinthians.
THe matchless Worth of Charity,
my heart desires to prize;
O that in all I do or say,
I may with it advise.
If I the Tongue of Angels had,
or of men most renowned
For Eloquence, which makes men glad
more than sweet Musicks sound:
Yet void of this, there would in me
of worth no more appear,
Then sounding Brass, or Cymbals have
that tinkle to our ear.
Though I through gifts of Prophecy,
could things to come foretell,
Or though in understanding, I
all others did excel:
Though I deep Myst'ries could unfold,
or did such Faith enjoy,
That I could Mountains high remove,
when they did me annoy:
Yet void of this, so prime a Grace,
I should accounted be,
As nothing by him, who all hearts
does plainly search and see.
Though all my Goods unto the poor,
I do most freely give,
Or unto scorching flames commit
this flesh wherein I live:
Yet void of this, it cannot help,
or any whit amount,
To profit me when I appear
in day of mine account.
Seeing its absence makes all vain,
its presence then is bliss.
Therefore give ear, and you shall hear,
what this chief Virtue is.
It Is Charity that suffers long,
and kind has ever been.
She envies not, nor vaunts her self,
puffed up was never seen.
Unseemly rude behavior,
she always does detest,
And seeking not her own, is still
possessed with inward rest.
She thinks no evil, nor her joy,
in wickedness has set,
But evermore made glad by Truth,
seeks Truth not to forget.
By Patience she can all things bear,
That here on Earth befall;
Upheld by Faith, by Hope made glad;
she well endures all.
This Excellency more it has,
it ever still abides,
And in that breast where ere its wrought,
for aye it there resides.
Nor is that sentence doomed on her
which on some Gifts is past,
That they shall fail, yea cease and quite
be done away at last.
Now but in part our knowledge is,
In part we prophecy,
But when Perfection we attain,
This done away shall be:
Even as we see that men of years
those rudiments forsake,
Of which whilst children in their youth
they great account did make.
For now the perfect'st views we have
are dark as in a glass,
But then our perfect sight shall be
as when face answers face.
Whilst we are here in our warfare
by Faith we stand our ground,
And are by hope kept up that we
with waves are not quite drowned.
But Charity of all these three
in honor does surmount,
And he that makes most use of it
shall best give his account.
FINIS.

