A Brief Survey OF OUR LOSSES BY THE Exportation of Wool.
I. HE that duly considers the Quantity and Quality of our English Wool will
readily acquiesce in the Opinion of our Ancestors, who termed it The Flower of
the King's Grown; The Dowry of the Kingdom; The Chief Revenue of the Kings; The
Gold of our Ophir, and the Indies of England: It affects all Conditions and
Callings of Men amongst us, from the highest Peer to the lowest Peasant.

II. The Quantity of our Wool is so Comprehensive, that were it secured to Our
Selves, industriously managed in its full Manufcture, and Exported by an
English Merchandise and Navigation; it would give Employment to so great a
Number of People, that we should soon become the Glory of the whole World, and
be able to balance the Affairs of all Europe.

III. Its Quality is more excellent, God and Nature has herein seemingly
conspired for a suitable Accommodation to all Ranks and Degrees of People, in
the different goodness of several Counties Wool, which is capable to be
improved to any use, for the Benefit and Ornament of the Body in a great
Variety of Fancy, and true Merit, from the thickest Drabb to the thinnest
Crape, branching it self into various Occupations, which produce a wonderful
Variety of manufactures, suitable to all Seasons of the Year at Home, and the
more different Climates abroad.

IV. By this Excellent Commodity we are able to Outdo our Neighbors in all
Merchandises abroad. In what Esteem have our English Factories lived in at
Hambro, Flanders, Holland and Dantzick in former times? And what Estates have
been brought home to our English Nation? And how are we now declined? Near
expiring at Hambro; quite extinct in Flanders, and very few English Merchants
in Holland or Dantzick that reap any Benefit by our Golden-Fleece; and no great
number at Home; and I think, I may truly say, That the late Growth of France
has been chiefly owing to the Advantages they have gained this Thirty Five
Years last past by our English Wool.

V. To illustrate this Matter, I will compute (with all possible exactness) the
Loss to our nation by one Pack of our finest Kemb'd Wool Exported into France
(large quantities of which have been Kemb'd at Canterbury and other Places, and
then carried into France and Holland) by which we may make an Estimate of our
whole Loss in its due Proportion.

l. s. d. One Pack containing Twelve Score of our finest Kemb'd Wool, I
compute to be worth at this time 030 00 00 The Spinning of this into the finest
Worsted, cost Five Shillings per pound. 060 00 00 Four Ounces of this Worsted
thus Spun, will make a Pair of Hose, worth Five Shillings the Knitting 240 00
00 This Pack so Knit, will make Eighty Dozen of Hose, which pay the King 7 per
Dozen Custom 002 10 00 The Dying of these Hose, partly with materials of our
own Growth, 000 00 00 the Custom of Foreign Dy-Stuffs to the King, and the
Freight, is a considerable Article of Value, tho difficult to fix at a certain
Sum: And France has had but little less Advantage in our courser Wool; being
enabled by one Pack of ours, to work up two of their own into Manufactures of a
bet ter Quality.

VI. The Employment to their People, and loss to ours (which is very
considerable in so great a quantity of Wool, an Account being taken of above
Thirty Thousand Packs which were Landed in one Year at Three Ports in France) I
take to be but half our Loss: For it is evident, as the French increased in
their Woollen-Manufactures at Home, they prevailed in their Merchandises and
Factories Abroad, particularly in Spain, which has been their most gainful
Trade; and by this means got themselves into a Fabric of Spanish Cloth, which
does hugely interfere with out Interest at Foreign Markets. Although Spanish
Woolls are as free for their Money as ours; yet were they confined to the
Linens of their own Nation, or any other product of France, to procure them,
their Merchants in Spain would make to great Figure in their Sortments. The
long Wool of England and Ireland in its variety of Bays, Perpetuana's,
Stockins Use, which is no way to be equaled by any other part of the World (and
so agreeable to the Spaniards, etc. and the West Indies) is certainly the
master-Wheel of the Spanish Trade; and we are capable of securing this
advantage to our own Subjects, which would hugely lessen the Interest of our
chiefest Competitors in Trade. If the Strength of England may be said to be
particular in any one thing (as Sampson in his Locks) I should readily assign
it to the excellent Staple of our long-combing Wool.

VII. And here I cannot but mention one particular, by which in my Opinion,
France has had a great benefit (...) our Wool, by our own Act and Deed. ^t
the coming-in of King Charles the Second, the ^ds of Jersie, Guernsie, Alderney
and Sark, were allow^^ ^hree Thousand Three Hundred Todds of English ^^^^l,
each Todd Thirty Two Pounds. In the beginning of the Reign of His Present
Majesty King William, those Islands were allowed by Act of Parliament, Three
Thousand three hundred Todds more, and a Liberty given by the same Act to
French, Dutch, Flanderkins, Hamburgers, Germans, Danes, Swedes, etc. to Export
our Woollen-Manufactures to their Native Countries upon equal Terms with our
English Subjects; and how these new Set of Merchants fell in to the Exporting
of our Wool and Smuggling of Goods, is pretty well known -- Felo de se -- And
it will be very difficult to prevent this practice, as our Affairs now stand,
having scarce EnglisH merchants enough abroad to give Notice of the landing of
our Wool on that side. This Six Thousand Six Hundred Todds allowed to those
Islands, does chiefly consist of Combing-Wooll for Worsted-Hose, a valuable and
useful Commodity at most Foreign Markets; and the amount of the Workmanship may
be easily cast up by the aforesaid Calculation; provided there be no greater
quantity Exported, which is very much doubted.

How Commondious these Islands are in their Situation for France to reap the
benefit of their labor, I need only mention, the Inhabitants (consisting of
many French) are able to live very Cheap, and work accordingly, at about half
the price we pay in many Places in England. They enjoy the Benefit of the
Draw-back of the Custom of our West India Goods, and pay not the least Tax to
England. What Stockins are brought into England, and exported again, by the
Carriage and Custom paid to the King, may be rendered Four or Five per Cent.
cheaper by the French. The reason upon which this is grounded, I cannot perceive.

To allege that any part of the Creation is left insufficient for its own
Subsistence and Preservation, must be a reflection upon Divine Providence; and
that all parts of the World should be upon an equal Foot in obtaining this
Subsistence, seems to be contrary to the Design of the great Creator. St. Paul
valued himself in being a Freeborn Roman. These Islands have Wool of their
own Growth, and doubtless must be very fair for Fishing, and by that means may
be subservient to England, as we now serve them: Which practice will strengthen
their Islands in Shipping and Seamen, for their Preservation; and what is got
out of the Sea will be a clear Gain; the loss of our Fishing is very
considerable, and much lamented. I know no such Instance of Generosity, to give
away that which God and Nature has made our Birthright, whilst multitudes of
our Woollen Manufactures have wanted it at Home, who are under many heavy
Taxes. We may learn better of our rich neighbors, who are said to burn part of
their Spices in the Indies, that we may pay them the better Price, which we do
at this time with a Witness.

VIII. As our Affairs now stand, it highly concerns us to secure our own Wool,
which being effectually done but one whole year, many established Fabrics
abroad with our Wool, must of necessity sink, and the manufacturers disperse,
and many of our own brought home again, which many years would not recover. And
we can promise to our selves, at this juncture, no advantageous Settlement of
Trade, but by an effectual Cure of this Evil; to the effecting of which,
whatsoever Money is expended, will be brought in again to the King in his
Customs, with a hundredfold advantage to the Nation. To find out the Causes of
Things, is said, to be a Work of Philosophy; to find out a fit Remedy, is of
high Eminency; but to apply the Remedy, is a Matter of State and Policy.

FINIS.

