A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE REASONS For which the Three Estates of Scotland
Forfaulted the Late KING JAMES, AND SETTLED K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY Upon the
THRONE, Anno 1689. And some of the Reasons induced them to Abolish EPISCOPACY
there.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1695.

A Brief ACCOUNT OF THE REASONS For which the Three Estates of Scotland
Forfaulted the Late King James, and settled King WILLIAM and Queen MARY upon the
Throne, Anno 1689.
THE Prince of Orange (now our Gracious King) having called the Three Estates
of Scotland together by his circular Letters, first of all they chose the Duke
of Hamilton (who deserved Laurels for his indefatigable Labor in that great
Work) their Praeses, then declared themselves (unanimously) a Free Estate, and
secured their frequent Meetings. After adjusting other Matters for the common
Safety, it was moved by the Earl of Leven, and seconded by many, That for
several Reasons the Throne should be declared Vacant; and that the Vacancy
should be filled up. Some were for Delays, but the Duke of Hamilton, and many
others urged, That there was a necessity to settle that matter as soon as was
possible: And after much reasoning at several Meetings, an Act was drawn up
concerning the same, and Copies given by the Clerks to every Member who desired
them.

Upon the 11th of April the Convention met at Nine a Clock in the Forenoon; and
the Reasons in the aforesaid Act, declaring the Throne Vacant, with the Estates
Conclusion, were all read Paragraph by Paragraph, to see if any, Member had
further to fay against the same. There were several Arguments Pro and Con; but
the most material were these betwixt Paterson the then Archbishop of Glascow,
and Sir John Dalrymple (now Master of Stair, and Secretary of State.) The
Bishop said, That in relation to the great Business then in Hand, there were
Three things chiefly to be considered. 1. Whether the Ministers of State, their
Faults or Crimes could be imputed to the King, so as he should lose his Right
to the Crown, which was his Inheritance by a Lineal Succession (in this Nation)
for many Ages: And his own Opinion was, That the Faults, etc. of the Ministers
of State could not be imputed to the King, so as to Dethrone him, etc. 2. He
judged it more proper for Redress of their Grievances, to send Commissioners to
the King, that he might come home to keep a Free Parliament; and then not only
give security for their Religion, but also give the standing Laws their full,
free, and vigorous Execution, rather than to defend themselves with Foreign
Powers, thereby to Dethrone their native King, and his Lawful Successors, and
to advance another to the Throne, whilst there were any of them living. 3. It
was a Question whether this Meeting had an Authoritative and coercive Power to
declare the Throne Vacant, and to dispose thereof.

Sir John Dalrymple answered to the first, That he wondered how any Member of
that House could pretend to be so ignorant of the Reasons mentioned in the Act
for declaring the Throne Vacant, or so obstinate as to deny the Truth of them:
And being true Matters of Fact, it was visible that it was not for the private
Acts of Ministers of State that King James was to be Dethroned, but his own
Actions done during the whole Course of his Reign; by unhinging the Laws, by a
Despotick Power, and Arbitrary Government, giving Commissions contrary to Law,
dispensing with the Law in favor of Papists, Erecting Popish Chapels,
Schools, and Colleges contrary to Law: And whether these (and many other
things) were done by Insinuations of Evil Ministers which he put in Offices,
and defended those Ministers so put in Offices against the standing Laws
(others knew best) but being they were his own Acts and Deeds, must land at
King James's Door.

As to the second, the Remedy proposed by that worthy Prelate (in Recalling
King James) would prove worse than the Disease: For besides the Reasons
contained in the Act (which are sufficient of themselves) let us but consider,
that in the midst of our late Fears and Confusions, he Deserted us, went to
France privately to our Enemy, and the Enemy of Mankind; where he actually
raised Forces, procured them Arms and Money to go for Ireland, with a Crew of
French to assist the wild Irish Papists. And as the Protestants there met with
hard measure, if he and that Party prevailed there, what might we expect but
Popery and Slavery? And is there any true Protestant (pretend what he pleases)
can dream of Security either to our Religion, Laws, Liberties, or Properties,
if he and his Army of cruel French and wild Irish came hither. So that we must
secure our selves, and all that is dear to us (by keeping him and his Party out)
and settling on the Throne Persons, who (with God's Assistance) can and will
secure all of them to us: Nor is it doubted but the Honorable Estates will
fill the Vacancy with those of the Royal Line.

And as to that point the Bishop cries out of against, viz. the Estates
advancing another to the Throne whilst King James and others (whom he called
his Lawful Successors) were alive, answered, That there were none here but knew
that there have been many Precedents of this nature in Scotland, where the
Estates thereof have Dethroned their Kings and Queens for Faults and Crimes,
and advanced others to the Throne whilst they were alive, but still of the same
Line: And it is not doubted but our Kings lawful Successors will succeed in the
Throne. And as to that point of putting K. James's standing Laws in execution
after his Return, answered, That it was hoped the Honorable Meeting, before
they separated, would be so wise as to Repeal several of these, which the
Bishop called standing Laws, which were Acts made against the first
Constitution and Fundamental Laws, Freedom and Liberty of the Nation, and were
both intolerable and grievous thereto, to the utter Ruin of many Protestant
Persons and Families.

It was answered to the Third, That it was out of Season for the Bishop, or any
other Member of this House now to talk of want of Power, after they, (as well
as the Bishop himself) had unanimously declared themselves a Free Estate; And
he hoped the Honorable House would take notice of that Allegation. As also,
That it was very well known, that our first Constitution of Monarchy here was
Elective, by the Peoples Choice; but was to continue of Inheritance to the
Royal Line from Father to Son, etc. upon Conditions, and therefore a limited
Monarchy; So that our Kings were to maintain and defend the Subjects by Law;
for which the Subjects were to pay Homage and Supplies to them, to support them
in the exercise of the Government; and if this did not hold, a Government would
soon destroy it self. Yea, the truth of this will clearly appear to any who are
(in the least) versant in our Constitution, Rights, Laws, or Histories. And
will any Man doubt but this Honorable Meeting has these Powers usual and
requisite consolidate in them by the Peoples Election? Were it not so, none in
Scotland could have a Right or Title to any thing he has in the Kingdom. Now,
in our present Circumstances, we are obliged by the Laws of Nature, positive
Laws of God, Nations, and our Municipal Laws, to secure our selves, our
Religion, Laws, Liberties, and Properties; and especially, seeing God by his
good Providence (even to a Miracle it self) has put this Opportunity in our
Hands. We have Power to establish such a King and Queen upon the Throne, who,
we hope, will be a Nursing Father and Mother to their Subjects, and not to
return back again to Egyptian Bondage, to enslave our selves to these
unreasonable Tax-Masters. But if there be any here, who for love of the
Fleshpots, or other things best pleases their Palates, would do otherwise
(take their Course:) But we are not to make their Designs or Fancies our Rule
or Method to follow in a matter of so great Concern.

After this Debate, the Earl of Crawford moved that there might be no more
Debates, but that the Act should be put to the Vote; by which Men's Inclinations
would be fully known. The Duke of Hamilton Praeses called for the Act to be
Read, and to be put to the Vote: And being read Twice again, and put to the
Vote, There were but Twenty No's, of which number the seven Bishops present,
and the young Lord of Craichlaw (who was Forfaulted for being at Bothwell
Bridge, Anno 1679. and pardoned by King James) were eight.

COPY of the ACT.
THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland Find and Declare, That King James the
Seventh, being a professed Papist, did Assume the Regal Power, and Acted as
King, without taking the Oaths required by Law; and by the Advice of wicked and
evil Counsel, invaded the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, and altered
them from a Legal limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power, and
has exercised the same, to the subversion of the Protestant Religion, Laws,
and Liberties of the Nation, by inverting all the Ends of Government; whereby
he has Forfaulted the Right of the Crown, and the Throne is become Vacant.

The Three Estates Voted and Declared King William and Queen Mary, of England,
etc. King and Queen of Scotland, nemine contradicente, were proclaimed the same
Afternoon with great Solemnity and Acclamations.

But all the Bishops having refused to pray before the Parliament for King
William and Queen Mary, after several Admonitions, they withdrew all but one or
two: And the Bishop of Dumblain (one of the best of them) after all Business
was over, being desired by the President to say Prayers, the aforesaid Bishop
(that he might not give Offense) repeated the Lord's Prayer only, and no more:
Upon which (...) said, That People used to repeat the Lord's Prayer last of all
^^^ter other ex tempore, or Common Prayer: So he judged that would be the
Bishop's last Prayers there; and so it was: For the Estates, for many Reasons,
Voted them out of Doors, as a Grievance, and unnecessary Trouble and Charge to
the Nation. And I am very well satisfied, that these Bishops own personal
Cruelty to the Presbyterians in Scotland (who were forced to fly to England,
Ireland, and Holland for their Safety) and their Behavior in the Convention,
were the Motives induced the Honorable Estates to abolish that Estate so
sudden as they did. And had these Bishops lived peaceably after their
Abolition, the States had provided for them during their Lives. And thereafter
the Estates appointed the Earl of Argile, the Master of Stair, and Sir James
Montgomery of Skelmorlay their Commissioners to tender the Crown to King
William and Queen Mary, with the Instrument of Government; which Their
Majesty's Signed, and took the usual Oath accordingly. By which Proceedings it
is very clear, the King and late Queen did not intrude themselves upon the
Scots Throne, but were the Choice of the People.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautem.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published, An Impartial Account of the Transactions in
Scotland (concerning the Earl of Broadalban, Viscount and Master of Stair,
Glenco-Men, Bishop of Galloway, and Mr. Duncan Robertson. In a Letter from a
Friend.

To be Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster.


