WILLIAM and MART, By the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To all and singular
Archbishops, Bishops, Arch Deacons, Deans, and their Officials, Parsons,
Vicars, Curates, and all other Spiritual Persons: And also to all Justices of
the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Churchwardens,
Chapel-Wardens, Headboroughs, Collectors for the Poor, and their Overseers: And
also to all Officers of Cities, Boroughs, and Towns Corporate, and to all other
Our Officers, Ministers and Subjects, whatsoever they be, as well within
Liberties as without, to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:

Where as We are Credibly Informed, as well by the humble Petition of the
Minister, Churchwardens, and Inhabitants of Towyn in the County of Merioneth,
and Diocese of Bangor, as also by a Certificate made at the General Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, holden at Bala, in and for the said County, on Thursday
the Eleventh Day of January last past, under the Hands and Seals of our Trusty
and Welbeloved Reger Price, John Lloyd, Edmond Meyrick, and John Vaughan
Esquires Justices of the Peace for our said County; and under the Hands of Our
Trusty and Welbeloved Sir John Win Knight and Baronet, Thomas Bulkley, Sir
William Williams Baronet, Price Deverux, Edward Vaughan, Edward Brereton, and
Robert Price, Members of Parliament for North Wales; That on Monday the
Eleventh Day of September last, the greatest part of the Parish Church of Towyn
aforesaid, (being one of the greatest Churches within the Diocese of Bangor)
together with the Steeple and Ring of Bells, (by casualty and great mischance)
fell down and Sunk, to the great Grief of the poor disconsolate Parishone^s,
who are thereby destitute of a suitable and decent Place to meet and celebrate
the Worship of Almighty GOD in, according to their Duty and earnest Desire; and
not being able to Rebuild the same, without the Assistance and Relief of Pious
and Charitable Christians have therefore humbly besought Us to Grant unto them,
Our gracious Letters Patents, under Our Great Seal of England, to License and
Authorize them to Ask and Receive the Charitable Benevolence and Contributions
of all Our Loving Subjects, in the Counties and Places in these Our Letters
Patents mentioned, toward Rebuilding the said Church.

We being willing to forward all Good Works, especially wherein the Worship of
GOD is concerned, have Condescended to their humble Request, and have Given and
Granted, and by these Our Letters Patents under Our Great Seal of England, do
Give and Grant to the said Parishioners of Towyn, and to their Deputy and
Deputies, the Bearer and Bearers hereof, Authorized and Deputed in this behalf,
as afterward in these Presents is Appointed, full Power, License, and
Authority, to Ask, Gather, Receive, and Take the Alms and Charitable
Benevolence of all Our Loving Subjects, not only Householders, but also
Servants, Strangers, and Others, in all and every the Counties, Cities,
Boroughs, Towns Corporate, Privileged Places, Parishes, Chapelries, Towns,
Villages, Hamlets, and all other Places whatsoever within Our Dominion of
Wales; and in the Counties of Salop, Stafford, Warwick, Worcester, Gloucester,
Hereford, Chester, and Monmeuth, and in all Cities, Towns, Parishes, and
Places, within the said Counties, and not elsewhere, for and toward the said
Pious and Charitable Use.

VVherefo^, We Require and Command you and every of you, that at such time and
times as the said Deputy and Deputies, the Bearer and Bearers hereof, shall
come or repair to any your Churches, Chapels, or Assemblies for Religious
Worship, to Ask and Receive the Alms and Charitable Benevolence of Our said
loving Subjects, quietly to permit and suffer them so to do, without any manner
your Letts or Contradictions; And you the said Parsons, Vicars and Curates,
upon some Lords Day, soon after that these Our Letters Patents shall be
produced, and the true Copies thereof tendered unto you, or the said
Churchwardens or Chapel-Wardens respectively, and before the expiration of
these Presents, deliberately and affectionately to publish and declare the
Tenor of these Our Letters Patents unto Our said Loving Subjects, and earnestly
exhort, persuade, and stir them up, to extend their Liberal Contributions
toward the Rebuilding of the said Church and Steeple. And you the said
Churchwardens, Chapel-Wardens, Collectors for the Poor and their Overseers, to
Collect the Alms of Our said Loving Subjects, and the Sums of Money Collected
by Virtue hereof, to Endorse upon these Our Letters Patents, or the said
Copies, in Words at length and not in Figures, together also with the Names of
the Counties, Cities, Towns, Par^hes, Chape^ries, and Places respectively,
wherein and the time when such Sums were gathered; which Endorsements are to be
subscribed by the Ministers and your selves, and also to be entered into your
Books of Accounts for the said Parish, Chapelries, and Places respectively: And
you are also to deliver the said Moneys, with all the said Copies, unto the
said Bearer and Bearers hereof, (Authorized as herein is appointed) whenever
you shall be by them or any of them thereunto required, but to no other Person
or Persons whatsoever; whose receiving thereof, together with their or any of
their Acquittance or Acquittances, shall be your sufficient Discharge for so
doing: Which said Bearer and Bearers hereof are hereby Willed and Required,
upon Receipt of the said Moneys, forthwith to pay the same, and deliver all the
said Copies, unto the Right Reverend Fathers in GOD, William Lord Bishop of
Litchfield and Coveniry, Humphry Lord Bishop of Bangor, the Lord Bishop of St.
Asaph, Our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir John Win, Knight and Baronet, Sir Robert
Owen Knight. Edward Vaughan, Griffith Vaughan, Colonel Hugh Nanney, William Pugh,
Roger Price, John Lloyd, Vincent Corbet, Richard Owen, Owen Anwill, Robert
Price, John Vaughan Esquires, John Vaughan Gentleman, and William Lewis Vicar
of Towyn aforesaid, whom We do hereby Constitute and Appoint Commissioners and
Trustees of all such Money as shall be Collected by Virtue hereof, with full
Power to them, or any Five or more of them, (whereof the Bishop of the Diocese
of Bangor for the time being to be always one) as well to Depute and Appoint,
such Person or Persons as they shall think fit to Collect the said Money, as
also to dispose of the same toward the Rebuilding of the said Church and
Steeple, and to or for no other Use whatsoever.

And Lastly, Our Will and Pleasure is, That no Person or Persons whatsoever
shall Collect or Receive the said Moneys of or from the said Churchwardens,
Chapel-Wardens, Collectors for the Poor, and their Overseers, or any other, but
such only as shall be Appointed and Authorized so to do by Deputation under the
Hands and Seals of the abovenamed Commissioners and Trustees, or any Five or
more of them.

In VVitness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents, and
to continue for One Year, from the day of the Date hereof, and no longer.

VVitness Our Selves at Westminster, the Sixth day of November, in the Sixth
Year of Our Reign.
GOD Save the KING and QUEEN.
Fall.
In the SAVOY: Printed by Edward Jones for William Fall dwelling in
Weld-str^et. 1694.


