A BRIEF DISPLAY OF THE French Counsels.

Representing the Wiles and Artifices OF FRANCE, In Order to Ruin the
CONFEDERATES, AND The most Probable Ways to Prevent Them.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCIV.

THE Secret Intrigues OF THE COURT of FRANCE.
THat which we call the Policy of a State, very nearly resembles the Economy
of a Private Family: the Ministers and Treasury-Officers of the One, are like
the Steward and Caterer in the Other. And therefore it was, that an Ancient
Author made no difficulty to say, That a Politic Court supported the State, in
like manner as Economy kept up the Grandeur and good Discipline of a single
House. And as there are two sorts of Economy; the one Honest, and
Praiseworthy, the other Mechanic and Sordid, which a Lunatic person makes use
of to pile up Riches any manner of way, thereby rendering himself odious to all
Men of worth, it is very near the same thing with Policy, which may be also
distinguished into two Classes, the one Lawful, the other Illegitimate. Which
latter having only usurped the name of Policy as Usurpation has done, conceals
it self under the Appellation of Conquest, On the other side, True Policy is
not only beneficial but commendable, and permitted by the laws of God and Man.
She is the Daughter of Prudence, and the Prince that makes use of her
Profitably and Sincerely, wins to himself by that means, the Admiration of
Foreigners, as well as the Love and Respect of his own Subjects; and frequently
merits the Epithetes and Sirnames of Great, and Wise. On the other side, False
Policy is merely slye cunning, wilely Craft, or in a word downright Knavery and
Cheat, always covetous of other Men's Goods, leaving no Stone unturned to
aggrandize it self at any rate whatever, come what will come of it, and
tacking, according to the Proverb, The Foxes to the Lions Skin. And these two
different sorts of Politics, are as two Opposite mirrours, that openly display
the Inside of Princes, and show their virtuous or wicked Inclinations. Nor can
I forbear divulging to the World that the Court of France, ever since the Death
of Hen. IV. has very much studied the Practice of this same false Policy, on
purpose to endeavor the Aggrandizing of her self by Cheat and Usurpation. And
it may be said to have had extraordinary Success in this last Reign of Lewis
XIV. under a false Idea of Conquest, having thereby augmented his Revenues to
above two Thirds, and his Dominions above a Third Part; as might be easily
proved, were it not visible to all his Neighbors, or if his Neighbors were
not sensible of it by woeful Experience. And I do farther averr, that it was
almost impossible for France to aggrandize her self, and very way to enlarge
her Dominions as now we see her Limits extended, or for her Monarch to raise
himself to the present Pinnacle of Grandeur, had she not made a smart use of
Violence, Usurpation and Breach of Faith. To which I may moreover add, the
Hypocrisy and Deceit which the King of France has used in these latter times
of Religion, on purpose to trample under foot and appropriate to himself the
Estates of his Subjects; and the Treacherous Leagues he has made with Foreign
Princes the more easily to deceive 'em, and lay hold upon favorable
Opportunities to invade their Territories, when least they dreamed of any such
thing, but lay reposing under the Security of a Peace; and all this to make
himself Master of their Dominions, when it was not in the Power of their Allies
to assist 'em. Formerly indeed the Romans, who were Pagans, made use of the
same Maxims and the same Stratagems to grow great upon their Neighbors, and to
make themselves universal Masters of the World. And no Lewis XIV. believes he
cannot fail of obtaining the same Success in his vast Expectations by treading
the same landable and worthy Steps.

We have seen, that since the Churchmen, for most part greedy Heapers of
Wealth, have intruded into the Ministry of the Court of France, they have
instilled into the Government Sentiments like their own; that is to say,
Sentiments of Usurpation and Covetousness, and a Liberty to do whatever they
please: and as it is usually seen, that a Master endeavors to bring up his
Disciples in his own Sentiments, and to be of his humor; so the Cardinals of
Richlieu and Mazarine inspired into Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. eager Desires to
make themselves Great by Usurpation, infusing into 'em by all the ways
imaginable, that a Prince was always cried up in his Undertakings, let 'em be
good or bad provided that they prosper'd in their Enterprises, because the
People adore, and like the Sun-flower, turn toward the Glitter of Prosperity.
That it was neither necessary nor beneficial for a King to be good, sincere or
merciful, only that 'twas sufficient to appear so; in regard it was frequently
dangerous to be so indeed; and for that it became a King above all things, to
be always his own Master, by acting quite the contrary, when his Affairs
required it, whether it were to make himself Great, or for his own Honor;
seeing that Men judge rather by the Eyes then by the Hands; every body having
the Liberty to behold and consider the Actions of Kings, but not to handle 'em;
that is, to examine and dive into 'em; those are Mysteries concealed, like the
Oracles of the Pagans in times of Old. Lewis the XIV. is so strongly persuaded
that the People are only taken with Appearances, and gaudy Show, that he
affects no more then only to appear outwardly honest, sincere and Religious;
when in reality and at the bottom of his Soul there is nothing of all this in
him, as has been seen by all the World, ever since his first coming to the
Crown. Seeing there is no better way to judge of the Inward Heart then by the
Constancy of a Man's outward Actions; then which there can be nothing more
plain, if we consider the Opressions, the Exactions, the Cruelties committed
during the whole Course of his Reign, as also his Usurpations upon his
Neighbors. Nor can the more Moderate of his Subjects allege any thing fairer
in his Excuse, then only this, that his Design is to aggrandize himself; and
that this is the surest Means to render himself formidable as well to his
Friends as to his Enemies both at home and abroad. Therefore to become Great
according to Lewis the Fourteenth's method, there was a Necessity for him to
fail of his Word and faith, so soon as he found the Keeping of either
prejudicial to Him; to break his Alliances concluded and solemnly sworn with
his Neighbors and nearest Relations, so soon as an Opportunity presented it
self to invade their Territories. It may be said, that this Monarch has made an
excellent Use of Cardinal Mazarine's Lessons. For that same Prelate being both
Crafty and Cunning, and somewhat of a Cheat besides, failed not frequently to
lay before his Prince the Example of Alexander VI. who notwithstanding his
being the Vicar of Christ, never forbore to falsify his Word, when he found
there was a necessity for it: though never any man promised things with more
solemn Oaths, and his Deceit proved successful to him: Nor was Fordinand, King
of Castile and Aragon, beholding for his Grandeur to any thing, so much as to
his Breach of Faith. The Emperor, Charles V. was always wont to swear By the
Faith of a Man of Honor, when he had a Design to act contrary to what he
promised. This Mazarine maintained as a Maxim never to be contradicted, and
that it behooved a Sovereign to observe this Rule, if ever he designed Grandeur
and Puissance, never to stick to, or govern himself according to the
established Laws of a Monarchy, when they agreed not with his present Interest,
and the Politics requisite to enlarge his Power: because the same Laws that
were made in former Ages, were good and wholesome at that time, but could not
always so continued. As much as to say, that a King may break and trample over
the Fundamental Law; of a Realm, when they concur not with his Ambition and his
Inclination to plunder his Neighbors, and ruin his Subjects. For this reason
it is, that for some Years since, we have seen Lewis XIV. practice all these
Maxims with a vehement Swing, but with little Circumspection; consulting
neither the Laws of his Kingdom, nor the Prerogatives of other Princes. However
observing this Rule, never to threaten beforehand, but to execute his Design at
the same time that he set forth his Manifesto, that his Adversary might have no
time or leisure to oppose his Torrent.

Morevover, Men judge of the Inclinations of Princes by the Ministers and Great
Personages that are in favor near their Persons: and the Deceased Prince of
Orange, William the First, was wont to say in his time, with great Reason and
upon solid Grounds, That a True Judgment might be given of the Natural
Disposition of Philip II. King of Spain by the Cruelties which the Duke of
Alva, his Chief Minister committed without fear of punishment in the
Low Countries. If it may be lawful to say the same thing of Lewis XIV, What
Sentiment ought we to have of that Prince? If we look narrowly into the
Inclinations and Proceedings of the Ministers that have served him all the
whole time of his Reign, to begin from Mazarine till this very time, we shall
find 'em to have been all Birds of Prey, and most Cruel and Insatiable
Blood-suckers of the People. Cardinal Richlieu was the First who laid the
Foundation of this Policy now practiced by the Court of France: for that same
Minister abusing the Simplicity of Lewis XIII. made himself absolute Master in
the Kingdom. He was naturally Violent, nor could he endure any Companion; all
People must submit to Him; He Exiled, and Imprisoned; he cunningly got rid of
the Baron d'Ancre, of Monsieur de Thou and Cinqmarc; chose rather to establish
the Security of his Person and his Fortune by Rigor and Violence, then to
hazard either by Clemency, or by too much Complacency with those that were
beloved by the King, and so he triumphed over all, even over the Protestant
Party, which was very numerous in France, and which he endeavored to oppress
by all manner of ways, against the Edicts of Pacification, and ruined 'em all
by ruining Rochell; which that he might the better bring to pass, he deceived
the English and Hollanders, who in good Policy were bound to have ventured all
to have preserved that Important Place, which was another State within the
State it self, and was a kind of Sanctuary and Place of Retreat for all the
Malcontents of the Court. And it may be said that the Loss of that City was
the Source of all the Calamities that befell Charles the I. King of England.
for France not only raised the Tempest in the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland: sent Money into England to Kindle the Fire, and feed the Civil War,
but encouraged Oliver to lay hands upon the Person of the King: in hopes at
that time to bring down the Power of that Formidable Monarchy by Sea, as is
easy to judge by the Entertainment which the Court of France gave to the
Princes of the Royal Family of England in that Conjuncture.

Moreover after what a Treacherous manner did France act with the Old Duke of
Lorrain, that he might have an Advantage to usurp his Country. For Cardinal
Richlieu under pretense of Friendship drew him to Lion, where Lewis the XIII.
then lay with a Powerful Army, under a false pretense, that it behooved him to
come and pay his Respects to that Monarch. Thither the Prince, suspecting
nothing but honest and fair dealing, repaired, and was received at first with
Extraordinary Honor and Civility, not only by the King and the Cardinal, but
by all the Grandees of the Court, who were ordered to treat him Splendidly. But
that was but the Bait to draw him on: for when the poor Duke, laden with the
Honors of the Court, and satisfied with his Kind Reception, was about to
return home, he was stopped by the Cardinal's Order; nor could he procure his
Release, but by delivering back into the hands of France a great part of his
Territories, which afterward occasioned the loss of all the rest, under
pretense that the Prince was an active stirring Soldier, and devoted to the
House of Austria. But indeed, because the Policy of the Court of France could
not brook so near her a Sovereign Prince, whose Territories were a Goad in her
sides, and might serve for an Inlet into France out of Germany.

Now in regard it is the Policy of a Minister of State, to the end he may be
lamented and desired after his Death, to justify his Conduct in the Eyes of
the People, Richlieu was willing to have for his Successor a Minister that
should outdo him, and finish what he had begun: therefore he recommended
Cardinal Mazarine, an Italian by Birth, and of mean Extraction, naturally
covetous, and deceitful in whatever he undertook, covering himself with the
Foxes Skin, the better to deceive others and play his own part, not caring for
whatever People said of him, nor what Mischief was laid to his charge, so he
could bring about his Grand Design, which was to get Money; so that all the
whole time of his Ministry he was called The Horsleech of the People. By good
luck, he came to his Ministry during the Regency of a Credulous Queen and a
Young King, whom he Christened, that he might acquire to himself the more
Respect and Veneration. It was easy for him both to imprint in the mind of
this Young Prince, and instill into him Precepts according to his own Humor,
which were to Sacrifice every thing to his own Interest; Honor, Word,
Alliances, Edicts, Promises, Oaths, when all these Virtues were opposite to his
Aggrandizement: That it behooved a Prince that would be great, to accommodate
himself to the Necessity of Affairs: that it was sufficient for a Prince to be
Virtuous, when he could not dispense with being otherwise: that it was good and
commendable to know what was just and honest, but not always expedient to
practice it. That there were some Vices which no way hindered a Prince from
Governing well: that Solomon was subject to Women, yet looked upon to be the
Greatest and Wisest of all Kings: for that there is always a Distinction to be
made between the Domestic and Public Life of a Prince, his Royal and his
Private Virtues. Cardinal Mazarine having thus found out the Genius of his
Disciple, 'twas an easy thing for him to imprint in his Mind these New
Lectures of Policy, which afterward served for a Basis and Foundation to the
Reign of Lewis XIV. who together with the Queen Mother, out of pure Gratitude
delivered into the Cardinal's hands the Keys of all the Favors and Honors of
his Kingdom, upheld him in despite of all the Princes of the Blood, and
notwithstanding all the earnest Importunities of the Parliament and People,
underwent all the Dangers of a Civil War for some Years; and not being able to
live without the Cardinal'd Presence, the King sent for him twice out of
Banishment, and received him with those Honors that were no way due to him,
even to the going several Leagues to meet him, and to express his excessive Joy
for his Return by mutual Embraces. I shall not here enlarge upon the Authority
and Power which that Italian Cardinal had in France; it is sufficient to say,
That the King, during his Minority, had all the Deference and Respect for that
Prelate which a Son could have for a Father, and that it was the Cardinal who
only reigned in France. In lieu of which, he promised the King and Queen, That
he would make him the Greatest Monarch in Europe. In order whereunto, he was to
do Two things. The First, was, To heap up Treasure, and augment his Revenues.
The Second, was, To lay aside all Scruples of Conscience, when the main Concern
was, the Aggrandizing his Kingdoms. The first Trial of Skill which the Cardinal
made in the behalf of France, was during his Nunciature when the Peace was
concluded at Chirasco, where the crafty wilely Minister deceived the Pope his
Master, the Princes of Italy, and the King of Spain, in favor of the French
Court; and so well Cully'd the Duke of Savoy, that he wrested out of his Hands
that Important Place of Pignerol, to deliver it into the Hands of France; which
was an Acquisition that all the King's Money and Power could not obtain before,
though he had had an aching tooth for it a long time. And this same Cheat, and
cunning piece of Knavery it was, though the Court of France paid for it in good
Ready-Money, that purchased him the Good Will of all the Court of France, and
the Friendship of Cardinal Richlieu; which Mazarine still improved, and kept
tite by Presents which he sent him out of Italy, from time to time: and so well
he understood to inveigle all the rest, that he was called into France in the
Year 1639. where, a little time after his arrival, the Death of Father Joseph
the Capuchin, became the Life of Mazarine. This Capuchin was he who served
Cardinal Richlieu in all his Intrigues both within and without the Kingdom; and
who was sent into England, during the Reign of Charles I. to sow Division, and
raise a Civil War, which cost that Nation Rivers of Blood. So that the Capuchin
had good reason to say, at his return out of England, That he had set Fire to
those Sparkles which would kindle such a Flame as would not easily be
extinguished; in Acknowledgment of which, the Court of France promised to get
him a Cardinal's Cap to cover his Blad Pate. But he was not so happy as to see
himself clad in Purple, Death seizing him in the Habit of a Saint of a
Franciscan. After which, the Court of France bent all her Solicitations in
favor of Mazarine. To which Cardinal Richlieu was the more willing to give his
Consent, as being glad to see himself succeeded in the Ministry by a Person of
no less Rank then he was; who, though he were inferior to him in Birth, yet
was his Equal in Dignity, Both Princes of the Church; yet not without some
secret Jealousies between 'em. But the King and Queen favored him, in
Consideration of the business of Pignerol, and his declared Devotion for the
Interests of France; so that he was advanced to the Purple toward the End of
the Year 1641. Immediately after his Promotion, he went to take Possession of
the Principality of Sedan, which the two Cardinals had wrested from the House
of Bouillon by Violence; forasmuch as that Principality bordered too near upon
France, and also durst make Head against it, but at a time when France was not
so powerful as now it is. It Is true, that the Duke of Bouillon, Frederick
Maurice, who was then Sovereign of the Place, had very much contributed to the
loss of it, by changing his Religion, upon his marrying the Countess of Berghe.
For being at that time Governor of Maestricht, and in the Service of the States
of the United Provinces, whose Protection warranted his Territories from all
Assaults of France; yet finding himself no longer acceptable to the Prince of
Orange, his near Kinsman, nor to the States themselves, he desired leave to lay
down his Commission and retire to Sedan, there to lead a private and quiet
Life, and wholly to employ himself within his principality to the Propagation
of the Roman Religion, which he had embraced; in which Employment he made some
Progress during some Years. After which, he met with Business much more
considerable, by reason of the Refuge which he gave to the Count of Soissions,
one of the Princes of the Blood, and who was retired in discontent from the
Court of France, by reason of some Quarrel with Cardinal Richlieu; and this
Count was followed by the Duke of Guise. Now the Duke of Bouillon thought to
have avoided all Occasion of Trouble, by giving notice to the Court of France
of the Retreat of those two Princes: but the Cardinal, a subtle and crafty
Politician, seeing he could not hinder it, persuaded the King to approve what
he had done, till an Opportunity of Revenge presented it self, as it appeared
not long after by the King's taking the Field, in order to besiege the City of
Sedan. Nor had the Duke, at that time, any other way to preserve himself, but
by clapping up a League in all haste with the Emperor and Spain, by which they
were to assist him against France with Seven thousand Men, and Two hundred
thousand Crowns in Ready-Money. But the Emperor only performed his Promise, and
sent him some Forces under the Conduct of General d'Amboi. Nevertheless, the
Germans, together with about Four thousand Men which the Duke of Bouillon had
raised at his Charges, defeated the French Army under the Command of Chatillon;
the Fruit of which Victory was, the taking of Doncheri, not far from Sedan. And
this lucky Beginning of the Duke made the Court of France begin to look about
'em, as being afraid lest that petty War should kindle a greater. Thereupon the
Duke of Breze was sent the same way with Five and twenty thousand Men; and the
Cardinal persuaded the King, and all the Court, to march as far as Rethel. But
unfortunately for the Duke of Bouillon, Lamboy quitted him, with all his Men,
being ordered to march to the relief of Air, which the French had besieged. So
that the Duke finding himself constrained to shut himself up within the Walls
of Sedan, and seeing himself besieged, began to think of an Accommodation, so
much the rather, because the Count of Soissions, who had been the Occasion of
the War, had shot himself in the head with a Pistol Bullet. This was no more
then what France desired, as having at that time a War with Spain, several
discontented Princes and Lord; within the Kingdom, who waited only for an
Opportunity to rise, and the Siege of Air begun; uncertain therefore of
Success, and having so many Irons in the Fire, she durst not venture the
besieging of Sedan, which they were convinced that the Duke would defend with
the last drop of his Blood; besides that he had Great Men that took his Part at
Court, as not being willing that Place should fall into the King's hands,
which, upon many Occasions, served 'em for a Retiring Place. Wherefore being
also no less desirous to spite Cardinal Richlieu, who was looked upon as the
first Author of that War, they persuaded the King, who was advanced as far as
Meziere, to hearken to an Accommodation. Thereupon the Cardinal seeing it was
not to be avoided, offered his Mediation to the Duke of Bouillon, to the end
that the Affair passing through his Hands, the Duke might think himself
beholding to him for this Kindness, though his Design were to ruin the Duke
some other way. To which purpose, he made great Protestations to the Duke, who
took all for Gold that glister'd; and being but a new Catholic, believed that
whatever that same Prelate and Prince of the Church assured him, was sincere,
and truly honest. But whatever Protestation his Eminency made, he had always a
Reserve which he kept close in his Breast: and the better to cover his Design,
and show his Good Will, he would needs enter into a Treaty, as a Security for
the Duke's Sincerity; and a Gauranty on the King's behalf, That His Majesty
would perform the Agreement to the least tittle of the Stipulation, the better
to lull the Duke asleep, and draw him to the Court. Thereupon the Articles
being signed on both Sides, the Duke went forthwith to pay his Respects to the
King at Meziere, where he was entertained with Court-Holy-Water, fair Words and
Complements, and received by the King, the Cardinal, and all the Lords, with
all the Honors imaginable due to his Dignity. the Cardinal also gave him large
Demonstrations of Friendship, and made him extraordinary Promises, on purpose
to engage him to have a Confidence in him, and make him believe that he had
forgot the injurious Manifesto which the Duke had printed against him. Yet all
this was nothing else but Snare and Decoy. For his Eminency told the King, in
the presence of all the Court, That he could not do better then to entrust an
Army under the Command of the Duke of Bouillon, as one that so well deserved
the Honor, seeing that with a handful of wretched Germans he had beaten the
Army of France; so that there was nothing which he might not well expect from
his Valor and Experience, when he should once come to Head the Valor of the
French. This the Duke took in good earnest, and so fell into the Snare; and
though he had been forewarned by the Cardinal's Enemies, that the more
Affection and Kindness that Minister showed, the less he was to be trusted; yet
he was so easily wrought upon, as to accept the Command of an Army in Italy;
and that was the very Place where the Cardinal was desirous to keep him. For
being in the Post, he forgot himself to that degree, as during the Sickness or
Lewis XIII. to give the Duke of Orleance a Letter of Credence to be admitted
into Sedan, together with the Queen Mother, and the Children of France, under
pretense of retiring thither after the King's Death, to avoid the Oppression of
the Cardinal, though the Count of d'Aubijoux, who went to him in Italy, promised
him with great Oaths and Imprecations, that he would never deliver the Letter,
unless there should be an Absolute Necessity. But the King escaped that
Sickness, and the Cardinal having notice of every thing to the smallest
Circumstance, gave him an account of every particular, and thought it a
favorable Opportunityto revenge himself for what was past, and to put the
Principality of Sedan into the Hand; of France without the Effusion of Blood.
For he seldom separated the Remembrance of an Injury and the desire of Revenge.
It happened at the same time that the Duke of Orleance finding his Brother very
infirm and sickly, and believing that during the Minority of the Young King,
when the Cardinal would have all the Power in his hands, he should lead but an
ill life in the Court of France, and seeing himself exposed to the Resentment
of his Adversary, he bethought himself of making a League with the Spaniards by
the mediation of a Gentleman, whose Name was Fourraille, whom he sent to
Madrid. But the Cardinal having got an Inkling of it, sent his Secretary
Chavigni, privately to give the King notice of it, and in the mean time he left
no Stone unturned to discover the Contents of the Treaty that had been
concluded at Madrid; and he set so many Engines at work, that he found a way to
get a Copy of it from some Secretary to the Duke of Orleance. So soon as he had
read it, he sent it to the King by the same Chavigni, and ordered him to assure
his Majesty that the Copy was drawn from the Origninal it self; and for this
same Piece it was that Cinqmarc and du Thou were apprehended, and that the King
ordered his Brother the Duke of Orleance to be very narrowly watched, who
finding it Impossible for him to make his Escape out of France, took a
Resolution to submit himself to the King's Mercy, and implore his Pardon; and
wrote a very submissive Letter to the Cardinal, which he sent him by one of his
Favorites; wherein he set forth his Repentance in very moving Expressions, and
his desire to be beholding for the Favor of his Reconciliation with the King
to his Eminency, who willingly embraced the Opportunity of gaining the Duke of
Orleance's Friendship, and of having at his Beck an Instrument to ruin the
Duke of Bouillon. Thereupon he made the Duke of Orleance's Peace with the King,
upon Condition that he should deliver into his hands the Original of the
Treaty. But the king's Brother protested that he had burned the Original, and
had only kept a Copy signed with his own Hand, and Counter-sign'd by the
Secretary of his Commands; by virtue of which Copy both Cinqmarc and de thou
were both arraigned, and the Fatal End they came to is well known. But to
return to the Duke of Bouillon, you are to understand that Fontraille, who was
sent into Spain to conclude the Treaty, that he might bring it the sooner to
pass, and imprint a higher Opinion of the Business in the Court of Madrid,
would needs insert the Duke of Bouillon's Name in the Treaty without his
Knowledge; and promised that he should not only ratify it, but allow Sedan for
a Place of Refuge; though the Duke never ratified the Treaty, nor ever caused his
Name to be inserted; but quite the contrary had always opposed it, when the
Duke of Orleance had formerly made some Overtures to him of the same nature.
However there needed no more to ruin him; so that the Cardinal dispatched away
a Courrier forthwith into Italy, with Orders for seizing his Person, which was
done at Casal by the General Officers, who commanded under him, from whence he
was conducted by a numerous Convoy to the Castle of Pierre-en-Cize. And there
it was that the Duke first understood, That he had been comprehended in the
Treaty of Madrid, of which the Duke of Orleance had given him a Copy signed
with his own Hand; and that he at the same time had discovered the Queen's and
the Duke's Design to retire to Sedan, upon the King's Decease. The crafty
Cardinal observed by this Confession how much he was feared and dreaded, which
served to render him more absolute then ever, and empowered him to revenge
himself of his Enemies more loftily and more inexorably. For whatever Excuse
the Duke of Bouillon could make, and though it could never be proved that he ever
signed or ratified the Treaty, or gave any order for the inserting of his Name
therein, there was no other Choice for him to make, but either to lose his Head
or his Principality of Sedan. Which was no more then what France had sought a
long time, and for the bringing of which to pass, there was no foul Play which
the Minister had not put in Practice, no Snare that he had not laid to entrap
the Innocent. The Duchess of Bouillon, having notice of her Husband's
Imprisonment, and of the danger he was in of his Life, sent her Sister in Law
to Court, to let the Cardinal know, that if the Duke were put to death, she
would deliver Sedan to the Spaniards, to which purpose she had already sent to
Brussells to solicit their Approach to the Town. But Mademoiselle de Bouillon,
arriving at the Court of France, and understanding that du Thou had been
condemned for only being privy to, and concealing Cinqmarc's Design, changed
her note, and was so far from delivering the Dutchesses Menaces to the
Cardinal, according to her Instructions, that she told the Cardinal she had
Orders to enter into a Negotiation, and to engage for the Life and Liberty of
her Brother. This was that which the Cardinal expected, and therefore without
giving her any time to recollect her self, the Treaty was concluded, That the
Duchess should deliver Sedan to the King of France, and that the Duke her
Husband should be put into possession of other Lands of equal value in the
Kingdom; and that at the same time that the French Garrison should enter the
Town, the Prisoner should be released. Thereupon, Cardinal Richlieu not being
able to go himself, sent his Coadjutour in the Ministry, who took possession of
it, and secured it to all Intents and Purposes. Thus that Important City which
had withstood the King, fell into his Hands, partly through the ill Conduct of
the Duke of Bouillon, but chiefly through the Snares which the Policy of France
laid for him, ever since he quitted his Religion and the Service of the States.
For in good Policy they ought to have preserved that City which gave Protection
to the Protestant Party.

The Death of the Cardinal happening in one and the same year, the Queen being
declared Regent, and Duke of Orleance Chief of the Council, the Duke of
Bouillon returrn'd to Court, flattering himself with being restored to his
Dominions, considering that his Misfortune did not befall him but for the good
Services which he was ready to have done those Two Illustrious Persons, that
now sat at the Helm of State, and who had engaged him without his Knowledge.
But when he came to Court, he only found a change of the Regency, but not of
the Ministry, which was still cunning and wilely: For Mazarine, who succeeded
Richlieu in the Government, out-did his Predecessor. He found that the Disciple
knew more then the Master; that he had a double portion of Avarice and
Self-Interest; that Italian Knavery had succeeded French Refinedness, and that
he had no mind to let go the Prey which he already held fast in his Gripes, and
for which he had labored conjoyntly with is Predecessor. It Is true, that when
the Duke of Bouillon first arrived, he received a world of Complements from the
Queen, the Duke of Orleance, and all the Court; but when he came to talk of
Business, all that Courship vanished, nor could he obtain so much as Audience
either of the Queen or the Duke of Orleance, till at length by dint of Pressing
Importunity he got so much favor, that the Abbot de la Riviere, a Favorite of
Orleance's was appointed to conferr with him about his Pretensions; and that
merely to be ridd of him: Bouillon therefore seeing he could do no better, fell
upon the Matter with the Abbot, and told him, That he was willing to fulfill
the Treaty made with Lewis XIII, but that the Evacuation, the Verification in
Parliament, and so many other Formalities absolutely requisite, would
infallibly take up a tedious Space of several Years: therefore till all those
Ceremonies were at an end, that'twas but just that Sedan should be restored him
to be surrendered back into the King's Hands, so soon as he should be put into
Possession of the Equivalents: that considering the Present Posture of Affairs,
he foresaw long Delays and infinite Cavils; whereas if Sedan were in his Hands,
it would be looked upon as the King's Business, no less then the Enlarging of
France by the Acquisition of a Sovereignty, and a City of great Strength and
Importance. That if these Reasons would not work upon the Queen nor Monsieur,
he desired the Abbot to lay before'em, that the One or the Other might happen
to dye before Things could be brought to that perfection, as to be fit to be
put in Execution, which would inevitably prove the Ruin of his Family; and
that they were engaged as well in Honor as in Conscience not to expose him to
that Extremity. To this he added, That though the Queen and the Duke had the
least reason in the world to distrust his Words, nevertheless he offered to
give his Children in Hostage, or to submit to whatever Precautions they desired
to take, for the Security of the Young King. But this was like knocking at a
deaf man's door; for the Abbot, who had his Instructions, told him with a great
many Complements, That he had only Orders to hear him; but that he would make a
faithful Report of what he had said; adding with great Protestations, That it
should be none of his Fault that he had not a favorable Answer: but that was a
thing which was never intended. So that Bouillon finding that the Abbot never
came at him more, resolved to address himself directly to the Queen and the
Duke of Orleance: but both the One and the Other knew so well how to avoid
meeting him, that he could never find an Opportunity to speak to 'em. Which put
him into a Rage, and caused him to let fall some hard words against the Queen
and the Duke, as being too forgetful of what he had done for 'em. However
Bouillon, unwilling to return Home without a positive Answer, applied himself
again to the Abbot: but then he could never find the Abbot at home, his
Servants having Orders still to deny him whenever Bouillon came to ask for him.
Nay, it happened one day, that though he knew that the Abbot was at home, by
certain Persons of Quality that waited in his Antichamber to speak with him,
yet the Abbot was so unmannerly as to send out one of his Servants to tell him
bluntly in the hearing of those Gentlemen, That the Abbot was gone abroad;
which put the Duke of Bouillon into such a Rage, that he bid the Servant tell
his Master, That had it not been for the Respect which he bore the Duke of
Orleance, he would have returned him such a Treatment for his Sawciness, that
should have stuck to him as long as he lived.

This Transport of Passion in the Duke made a great noise at Court, so that the
Queen, and the Duke of Orleance were glad of this pretense to ridd themselves
of a Person whose presence continually Reproached 'em with his past Services,
and the Cardinal proposed in Council a second seizure of his Person. But
Bouillon having notice of it underhand, took Post for Turenne, there to spend
the Remainder of his days, having lost not only the Important City of Sedan,
but the promised Equivalent besides. Nor does the Court of France do any thing
more for the Family of Bouillon, then only lull 'em asleep with Cardinals Caps
and Benefices of the same value. Thus we send Trifles to the Indians, and bring
away their Gold and Silver.

I would fain have the French Emissaries tell me what reason the Most Christian
King had to make himself Master of the Principality of Orange, to beat down the
Fortifications of the Castle in the year 1667. when the Sovereign was under
Age, and afterward utterly to demolish the Castle and Walls of the City, and
not content with the same Desolation, to solicit the Corporations to submit
themselves to the King, threatening, if they refused, to burn and totally ruin
the Inhabitants, as afterward the French Forces did, notwithstanding their
Independent Sovereignty. I am persuaded the best reason those Emissaries can
give, is because the Policy of France cannot brook a Foreign Sovereignty within
her Dominions: and so it was the Interest of the Court to make themselves
Masters of it, before the Sovereign was in a Condition to withstand their
Power, by means of his Friends and Confederates: and all the while they
pretended that they had done the Prince of Orange a signal Piece of Service,
because they had spared him the Expense of a Garrison. But if such be the
Charity of the Most Christian King, what may we expect from his Severity?

Without Question the same Spirit it was that inspired France to seize upon
Burgundy and Franche Come, without any pretense of Claim, after the Pyrenaean
Treaty, and without any other reason, but because Spain being weak, was not
able to defend her self, and because it is really the Court of France to
aggrandize her self so soon as she finds an Opportunity, without any respect to
Treaties or Alliances. And it may be said, that the Ministry of Mazarine was a
continued Chain of Oppressions, and that he made it his Study all his Lifetime
to extinguish the Nobility of France by all the ways imaginable, whether right
or wrong: though he were cunning enough to support 'em during the Troubles which
happened in the Kingdom during the reigning King's Minority.

But so soon as he had managed 'em, so soon as he had humbled their Power by
ruining 'em: for he who deprives a Prince of Money, takes from him the Soul of
Authority; the Princes of the Blood did nothing but cry out and openly reproach
the Court, that she was full of nothing but Craft, Artifice and juggling Tricks
to abuse the People and the Confederates; but they might cry as loud as they
pleased, the Ministry went its own way, and the Cardinal let 'em say what they
pleased, provided he did his own business. For it may be said of him, that his
Tongue belied his Heart, and that his Countenance quite differed from his
inward Thoughts. He was often wont to say, that the French were naturally
Turbulent given to Novelty, and prone to Sedition, and that the Court was full
of Restless Spirits. Which was the Reason that he always endeavored to cut 'em
out Employment without the Kingdom. But in regard he had no reason to be
satisfied with the People, he was the Inventor of the greatest part of the
Taxes now raging in France, the Father of the Publicans and Toll-gatherers. He
sucked the Blood of the Subjects, in imitation of the Grand Signior, for the
Support of the Soldiery, preferred before the People, at the Expense of the
People, and though it should be to their utter Ruin; to the end he might be able
to quell 'em, when ever they should be inclined to Mutiny and Insurrection;
Insinuating into the Young King, that the Preservation of his Crown depended
upon his Soldiers; as heretofore the German Legions vaunted to hold the Empire
in their Hands. And in pursuance of that Maxim we have seen, that during this
Reign, the Court of France has practiced this Lesson, which has ruined her
People, that she has impoverished her Subjects, deprived the Nobility of their
Privileges, and all this merely by keeping great Armies on foot, to serve her
at all times with both Hands to ruin the People, when ever they went about to
shake off or complain of the Excessive Taxes and Imposts with which they are
daily overwhelmed: to chastize the Parliaments when they refused to verify the
Edicts and Impositions which the Kings sends to 'em: as also that she may have
her Legions always ready to invade the Dominions of her Neighbors, when they
least dream of any such Acts of Hostility; or are otherwise employed, relying
upon the Faith of Treaties. As we have seen how that after the Peace of
Nimeghen, when France finding her Treasures quite exhausted, and her numerous
Armies ruined by Sickness and Hardships, was constrained to make fresh
Provision, fearing a Change of Fortune, as she had already felt at the Battle
of St. Dennis. For this reason she sought Peace to break the Union, and
obtained it in despite of those who well foresaw that France would no longer
keep it after she had once recovered Breath, or that she found a Propitious
Opportunity to break it. For since the King of France falsisy'd his Oath to
observe the Pyrenaean Peace, so solemnly sworn upon the Altar, Sincerity is
fled from the Court of France, and returned to Heaven, from whence it
descended, and Corruption has taken the Place of Justice and Integrity. In
regard the Ministry of France was only meditated to aggrandize the King. And
therefore the deceased Sieur de Colbert, Chief Minister, never scrupled to
assert, That the King might break and make Laws at his own pleasure; Privileges
being Chimera's odious and offensive to it, and that Law was only the
Inclination, Reputation and Authority of the Prince.

When the King of France has a mind to make himself Master of a Country, or
only of a single Town, he never considers the Outward Situation, but the Inward
Condition of it; by whom it is governed, who defends it; and the Louidores are
most commonly the Cannons with which he attacks it. And therefore Pompone,
formerly Ambassador at the Court of Sweden, had in some measure good Reason to
say, that France with her Money would always do what she pleased; and that it
was by means of that Metal, that she was at that time become Mistress of his
Swedish Majesty's Cabinet, and that she became Mistress of so many Places after
the Peace of Nimeghen, under pretense of Appendences and Dependences, of which
a great Volume might be made. This is a Truth not to be denied, since we have
seen it with our Eyes, and that we still behold the Inhabitants of those Places
groaning under the severe Servitude of the Despotick Government of France. But
in regard that Usurpation cannot always long subsist, and for that so many
Princes are at last awakened from their Oppression, the Court of France finding
her self very much embarrass'd to preserve what she has usurped since the Peace
of Nimeghen, all her Policy could find out no better Expedient then to propose
a Truce while the Emperor and the Empire were engaged in a War against the
Turk.

The Court of France had two Prospects in desiring this Truce. The first, That
in detaining all the Places of which she had made her self Mistress, she at the
same time lulled asleep the Court of Vienna on the Rhine side, that she might
oblige the Emperor to continue the War with the Grand Signior. Secondly, Not
to observe the Truce any longer then till one or other of the Two Empires were
reduced to a Low Condition. Had it been the Emperor's misfortune to have lost
Vienna, then the Business was concerted and decreed, That the King of France
was to have invaded the Empire with a powerful Army, and to have been
proclaimed Emperor with a high hand. On the Other side, if the Turks were
beaten, he was to declare War against the Emperor, to prevent him from growing
too great by his Conquests. But the latter falling out for the good of
Christendom, presently France without any regard had to Truces or Alliances,
openly attacqu'd Philipsburgh, carried it, and afterward marched with his Army
into the Palatinate which he over ran with Fire and Sword, and by Violence, and
Conflagrations, got sure footing all along the Banks of the Rhine. where we to
this day behold the sad and deplorable Remainders of the Rage and Fury of the
French Armies. However in regard the Violence never wants a Pretense, and that
the most Impious Actions veil themselves in like manner with some Outward
Appearances; the King of France to justify himself before all the World, out
of a kind of Generosity pretends to declare the Reasons why he was constrained
to resume Houstile Arms, to the end he might persuade all Christendom of his
sincere Intention; to establish the public Repose, while his Soldiers in all
Places ruined and burnt whole Provinces, and carried away the Goods and Cattle
of the Poor Inhabitants.

To this purpose the Most Christian King follows his begun Hostilities with a
Manifesto, wherein the Principal Reasons that France alleges to cover her
Breach of Faith, are first, That she was well informed that so soon as the
Emperor should have made a Peace with the Turk, he had resolved to bend all
his whole Force upon the Rhine against France. To which I shall answer
hereafter in Particular: but in general thus much is to be said, that the Most
Christian King, after he had broken the Truce, desired to make a Peace upon two
Conditions. First, That the Truce for Twenty Years might be changed into a
Perpetual Peace: and Secondly, That the Cardinal de Furstenbergh might be put
into the Possession of the Electorate of Cologne; and that afterward the King
would endeavor to bring the Cardinal and the Chapter to such Accommodations as
should be proposed for the Satisfaction of Prince Clement of Bavaria; that is
to say, to cause hm to be declared Coadjutour to the said Electorate.

As to the first point the Politics of the Court of France were very fine Spun
and extremely Crafty; seeing that while the Emperor and the Empire were
engaged against the Turks, it was the proper time for her to appropriate to her
self all the Places, Lands and Signiories which by the Truce were not left to
the enjoyment of France but for Twenty years, of which three were expired, and
which the King was fully persuaded in his Conscience that he could not justly
keep, but must be forced to restore at the Expiration of the Truce.

As for the Possession of Cologne by the Cardinal of Furstenbergh, (the
detaining of which from the said Cardinal was another specious Pretense for his
resuming Arms) all Europe is sufficiently acquainted with the Engaging Reason
which the Most Christian King had to make himself Master of that
Archbishopric: seeing the Cardinal and the King were all one, and so by means
of that Possession, the King of France had one Foot in the Empire, and upon the
Territories adjoining, belonging either to the States of the United Provinces,
or the Palatine and Brandenburgh Electors. But because it will be a difficult
matter for us to treat otherwise then confusedly of the Policy of France in
general, we shall descend to Particulars, thereby to render it more
Intelligible, beginning with the Holy See.

The Kings of France have always held themselves highly honored with the Title
of Eldest Sons of the Church, and would have made War upon any one that should
have ventured to dispute that Title with 'em. In like manner, they have all
along given Marks of their Filial Obedience, and a devout submission to what
ever came from the Holy See. And to have seen Lewis XIV. persecute the
Huguenots in France, there is no body but would have sworn that he had been the
most Zealous Catholic in the world. Nevertheless we have seen the contrary,
and that what he has done in reference to the Protestants, was only to ward off
the Accusations that might have been charged upon him for openly opposing the
Holy See, while he affronted, as all the world knows he openly did, Pope
Innocent XI. only because the Holy Father would not give way to his Usurpation
of the Regale in France; which produced the Assembly of some Prelates of the
French Clergy in the Year 1682. wherein the Archbishop of Paris who presided
there, being flattered in case of a Rupture, with the hopes of being Patriarch
of the Kingdom, or in case of an Accommodation, with the expectation of a
Cardinals Cap, got all the Prelates who were present at the Assembly, to
degrade the Papal Authority, and of a Universal Pontiff, to make him a Simple
Bishop, subjected to Councils. And the King constrained all the Preachers in
the Kingdom, and Rectors of Universities to declaim and teach a Doctrine in
Opposition to the Authority of the Pontiff Nay, the Business went so high, that
the Court of France undertook to govern Rome it self, in opposing the
Suppression of the Franchises of Ambassadors Quarters in Rome; which indeed
were no more then a Sanctuary for Robbers and Bankrupts. Moreover, the King of
France, that he might remain peaceable Possessour of the Regale, went about to
set a foot an Old Pretension of the Duke of Parma to the States of Castro, and
Ronciglione, supposing 'em Guarranties only of the Treaty of Pisa, which was a
Pretense to seize upon the City and Country of Avignon, which the Court of
France had for a long time looked upon as an Estate that lay convenient for
her, and only sought an Opportunity to detain it, without being obliged to make
Restitution; and which had taken effect, had not Innocent the XI. been a quiet
and peaceable Pontiff, suffering with a Christian Patience while he lived, all
the Affronts of the Court of France, referring the Revenge of 'em, as he was
often wont to say, to his Crucified Savior; and to him it was, that the Holy
Father appealed, when France sent him a Copy of the Extract of the Registers of
the Parliament of Paris, in the ensuing Words.

This day the King's Advocate-General coming into the Chamber of Vacations, and
declaring, That the Matters of Fact explained by the Letter which the King
wrote to Cardinal d'Estrees the 6th. of this Month, having obliged his majesty
to let our Holy Father the Pope know, That for the future he could not but look
upon him as a Prince engaged with his Enemies, consequently that he could not
acknowledge him for a Judge of every thing that concerned his Majestly's
Interests, the King's Advocate General though it his Duty, at the same time to
take the Precautions settled by the Law, practiced upon several Occasions, and
grounded upon the Opinions of the Italian Canonists themselves, to hinder his
Holiness from pronouncing Effectual and Regular Judgments upon these Matters.
To which purpose, he has put in to a Universal Council an Appeal Extrajudicial,
as to all Proceedings of his Holiness at present, or for the Future; and as to
all Sentences which he may have given, or hereafter pronounce, to the Prejudice
of the King, or the Prerogatives of his Crown, or of his Majesty's Subjects. Of
all which, the Respect which he owes the Crown, has obliged him to come and
give the Court an Account, and present to their view the Act which he has made,
wherein he cannot but acknowledge the Piety; Wisdom and Moderation of the King
in this particular, which seem to have extinguished in the Person of the King,
those Passions that most vehemently agitage other Men. He hopes that the Court
will approve his Conduct, and assures himself that they will both zealously and
faithfully use all the Authority with which it has pleased the King to invest
'em, to maintain the Respect which is due to his Majesty, and to preserve the
Prerogatives of his Crown, the Tranquillity of his Subjects, and the Liberties
which are not only particular to the Gallican Church, but which she has
preserved with more Learning and Vigor then any other. Which things being
considered, the Chamber Ordains,

That the said Act of Appeal be Registered in the Registers Office, that
recourse may be had to it, as occasion serves, and that Thanks be returned to
the King for ordering his Advocate-General to proceed according to the Usual
Practice upon the same Occasions, and that the First President do assure the
King in the Name of the whole Society of their Devotion to his sacred Person
and his Service; and that they will at all times make use of that Authority
which the King has conferred upon 'em, to support the Prerogatives of the
Crown, the Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Repose of his Subjects.

It was also further added by M. Harlay, the King's Counselor in his Council
of State, and his Advocate-General, That the Reputation and Piety of our Holy
Father Innocent XI. causing his Majesty to rejoice at his Exaltation to the
Pontificate, his Majesty endeavored to close with his Holiness, in order to a
unanimous Care of what ever might be for the Glory and Service of God.

That his desires and the Progresses he made in order to such a Pious Design,
not having had that Success which he expected, the King however still continued
in his part to employ the Power which God has put into his hands for the
preservation of the Purity of the Faith in his Kingdom, and to bring back to
the Bosom of the Church a Great Number of Children that are gone astray, as
also to afford the Church all the Protection, which she could expect from the
Authority of a Great King: his Majesty also has edified by his Example, and
instructed all his Subjects by his particular Piety.

Nevertheless, our Holy Father the Pope, to whom so many wonderful Virtues and
Actions ought to have rendered the Person of the King so dear, has with great
heat embraced the Complaint of the two Bishops about the Right of the Regale;
and his Holiness at the same time rejected the Testimonies of all the rest of
the Prelates of the Kingdom, touching the Favors they have received from the
King in that particular to the Prejudice of his Prerogatives.

He went about to take from the King's Ambassadors at Rome the Franchises
which they enjoyed, even under his Pontificate, in a City where it became the
Gratitude of the Popes to have preserved to our Kings, more singular Marks of
that Sovereignty, of which they formerly despoiled themselves, to enrich the
Holy See.

Our Holy Father has also looked upon as a dangerous and suspected Doctrine,
the Declaration which the Assembly of the Clergy made in the Year 1682. of
their Opinions concerning Ecclesiastical Power; at such a Conjuncture too, when
some of his Predecessors would rather have been banished to the Extremities of
the Earth, then have suffered so man New Converts.

He refused his Bulls to several Ecclesiastics nominated by the King to supply
the vacant Churches in his Kingdom.

The partial Behavior of our Holy Father in reference to the Archbishopric of
Cologne; his Resolute Refusal to acknowledge or give Audience to the King's
Ambassador at that Conjuncture; but thundering out Anathema's against him, and
Interdicting him from St. Lewis's Church in Rome, will perpetuate an Example
almost Incredible to Posterity of the King's Zeal for Religion, and his desire
to preserve the Peace of Christendom, and of the Pope's proceedings so contrary
to the Obligations of the Place which he supplies.

Wherefore seeing His Holiness stops his Ears to all the King's most just
Complaints, we are constrained at length to defend our selves, and to maintain
the Dignity of the Crown, and the Repose of the King's Subjects by the Rules of
Justice, at a time that his majesty does the same, with so much glory, by the
Puissance of his Arms.

Thereupon the King's said Advocate-General, having first obtained the King's
permission, declares, That he is Appellant in the King's behalf, and in behalf
of all his Subjects to a Universal Council, which His Holiness shall be pleased
to call in due and Canonical Form, etc. Protesting in the mean time in the Name
and by the Express Command of the King, that it is his Intention to remain
inviolably devoted to the Holy See as the true Center of the Church's Unity,
etc. And so soon as our Holy Father, being better informed, shall show the
Equity, the Sentiments and Partiality of a Judge and common Father, his Majesty
will pay to his Person the same Filial Respect, as he did before; and from
which nothing but the ill Conduct of his Holiness causes him to abstain.

After the Court of France had put these unheardof Affronts upon the Holy See,
and thus debased the Authority of the Sovereign Pontiff, instead of making use
of those means which the Catholic Church and Councils have put into his Hands
to bring back Princes and People to their Christian Duty, the Pope out of a
peculiar Fund of Charity and Piety, contented himself with making appear to all
the World, the Justice of his Proceedings and the Injustice of the French
Court, declaring all along, that he was persuaded that the Truth of Affairs had
never been truly represented to the King of France; only that the Artifices and
Passions of those who are no Lovers of Peace had infused into him an Idea
altogether different. Otherwise that it was never to be believed that the King
would have harbored in his Mind those Injurious Sentiments contained in
Cardinal d'Estree's Letter: his Holiness having never failed to show himself a
true Father to all Catholics, but more particularly to France; who upon
several Occasions had received various Testimonies of his Indulgence and
Esteem; but instead of being repaid with Grateful Acknowledgement, his
Holiness had been exposed to most heinous Injuries and Affronts not only
offered to his Person but the Holy See, by extending the Regale to above half
the the Churches in France that are no way subject to it; but by the Second
General Council of Lion, by prescription of almost 400 Years by the Testimonies
and Evidences of Edicts of several Kings, Decrees of Parliament, and Registers
of the Chamber of Accounts, as also by the Opinion of the most celebrated
French Lawyers, ought to be exempted from it.

The Pope loudly complained of the Violence done to the Convents of the
Carognes and Urbanistes; and that, only for applying themselves to the Holy
See, in Opposition to an Invasion of their Privileges, and the Canonical Rules
of their Orders, which imports, That Abbots and Superiors ought to be
Elective, and continue for three Years together. In contempt of which, the King
had introduced Abbots of his own Nomination. Besides the Rending away of Five
Abbeys, without the consent of the Apostolic See, to erect a Commandery, and
applying to Other uses the Revenues possessed by several Monks and Nuns,
according to the Will of the Donours.

But that which was more enormous, was the King's Prohibiting the Bishops to
have any Recourse to the Pope, according to their Duty and the Custom of all
Times, to ask his Counsel in matter of Religion; as also in reference to what
concerned Prince Clement of Bavaria: though in granting him the Eligibility for
three Churches that were Legally possessed by the deceased Electour of Cologne,
all Christendom saw that the Pope had no other Aim then the Public Good. For
besides the high Value which it behooved him to have for that Illustrious House,
the Merits of the Electour his Brother, who had so gloriously defended
Christendom against the Invasion of the Turks, his Holiness had done nothing in
that particular, but only imitated the Liberality of his Predecessors, who
conferred the like and greater Favors also upon Persons much Inferior in
Birth, Age and Merit, then Prince Clement, and that too at the Request of the
Kings of France.

And for the Bull granted to Prince Clement, the Pope could not be accused of
any Injustice for so doing, since that Affair was exactly and seriously
examined in a Consistorial Congregation at Rome. Besides that the King of
France had neither any Reason nor Right to intermeddle in that Affair, since it
was a Business that only related to a German Archbishopric, and an Electour of
the Empire, which no way concerned France either directly or indirectly, but
the Pope only in respect of Apostolic Confirmation, and the Emperor, as to
the Investiture of the Pincipality in admitting him into the Electoral College,
to which belongs the Right of Electing a new Emperor, and which has a very
great Sway in managing the Affairs of the whole Empire. So that the Pretense
for War which France lays hold on from the Proceedings at Cologne is to be
imputed to the King's Passion, and his own Interest.

After what past in the Assembly of some Part of the Clergy at Paris, where
among other things, the King caused the Regale to be adjudg'd his Right,
notwithstanding the Appeal of the Bishops of Alets and Pamise, to the Pope; and
the Propositions so injurious to the Apostolic See, supported by Royal Edicts,
enjoining every Body to receive and publicly profess and teach 'em in such a
manner as was never yet practiced, His Holiness had great Reason to refuse his
Bulls to the Ecclesiastics nominated by the King to supply the vacant
Bishoprics, because they were present at the said Assembly of 1682. and there
openly declared themselves Enemies of the Apostolic See; and for that the
Canon Law, and the Agreement made with France, that the Pope should be judge of
the Capacity of the Persons nominated, prove moreover, That the said
Ecclesiastics nomianted by the King, were not Persons proper to be entrusted
with the Instruction of the People, but absolutely addicted to their pleasures,
and their worldly Interests, seeing that they never scrupled to revolt against
their Spiritual Chief, and to betray the Liberty and Privileges of the Church,
to the end they might gain the King's Favor, and augment their Temporal Means.
Upon this, the Court of France being desirous to vex the Pope, made choice of
the Marquis of Lovardin for his Ambassador to Rome, because he was a Known
Enemy of the Apostolic See, and was both able and willing to affront and
molest his Holiness No wonder then if he never had Audience of the Pope, seeing
that according to the General Rule, no Minister should be sent to a Sovereign
Prince, but such a one as is acceptable to the Prince with whom he is to
negotiate: besides that it is not sufficient for a person to be sent by a
Prince, to entitle him to the Prerogatives of an Ambassador, but according to
the Laws of Nations, he must be acknowledged for such a one by the Sovereign to
whom that Minister is sent. Therefore the Court of France had no reason to
complain that the Pope refused to give Audience to the Marquis. Nor indeed
would any Sovereign have suffered the Marquis, as he did, to enter Rome with
Armed Force, as it were to deprive him of one Part of his Sovereignty, and on
purpose to affront him after such a manner, unheard of even among Barbarians
themselves.

It Is observable that when France has any occasion to court the Favor of the
Holy See, she sends Prelates, Cardinals and Bishops for her Ambassadors; in
regard it is a Thing both decent and becoming Ecclesiastics to be submissive
to the Pope; besides that they are allowed Admittance, when Seculars are
excluded. But when France has a mind to affront the Sea, she sends a Lawyer or
a Sword-man, who neither depends upon the Pope, nor expects any Kindness from
him, and who dares ruffle him stoutly, when it is to promote the Interests of
France. But France seeing the Pontiff inflexible, and that he was not to be
gained either by his Nephew nor by the Cardinals that were most Intimate with
him, resolved either to rid him out of the world or to wait for his Death. But
Old Age sparing France the Labor of her first design, he was no sooner dead,
but France began her old Custom of making Parties, and scattering her Louidores
up and down Rome, to purchase a Pope of her own Faction; and the Lot fell upon
a Venetian, Ottoboni, who took upon him the Name of Alexander VIII. France
thought him her Friend, and attributed the whole Glory of his Election to her
self. But she found him to be a Venetian, that is to say, one that concealed
his real Sentiments as long as he lived, and never declared himself till he
came to lie upon his Deathbed; but then he did it in such a Manner as was no
way for the Advantage of France. Now in regard he was very Old, and desirous to
make the best of those few Years he had to live, to raise the Fortune of his
Family, the French Ministers failed not to be liberal of their enchanting
Golden Philters, to allure his Kindred into the Interests of the French Court.
But how willing soever, or how Importunate to Oblige their Uncle to do
something in favor of the King, they could never procure from him any thing
more, but only that while he held the Pontificate he did France neither good
nor harm. However, the Italians say this of him, That he did like the Swan,
that is, he Sung a little before his Death. Nevertheless France suffered
patiently that petty Mortification, and the loss of all her Presents to the
Family of the Ottoboni, in hopes to have at length a Pontiff more favorable to
her Purposes. At last after much canvassing, most Voices were for a Neopolitan,
of the Family of Pignatelli, whom the Cardinals of the French Faction would not
exclude, upon his promise to the French Cardinals that the French Court should
have no reason to be dissatisfied with his Pontificate. But being elected he
forgot the Promises he had made, the rather because the Imperial and Spanish
Ambassadors dissuaded him, as much as lay in their Power, from the observance
of 'em. The Court of France therefore finding that they had to do with one that
was not less weak in Mind then infirm in Body, pressed it upon him that he
would occasion the damnation of a great number of People that were without
Pastors, if he persisted in the Refusal of his Bulls to the Bishops of France,
who were present at the Assembly of the Clergy in the Year 1682. And at the
same time the French Cardinals, according to their Instructions, gave the
Pontiff to understand, that a War was very near breaking out in Italy, and that
he would be answerable for the Blood that should be spilt; seeing the Most
Christian King's Patience was at an end, and that most certainly he would
withdraw himself from his Obedience to the Sea of Rome, and set up a Patriarch
in his own Kingdom, and thereby retain several Millions that went every year to
Rome. Thereupon, those Fears that usually seize People superannuated, and the
Delicacy of Conscience without any necessity of a Pontiff, made him determine
to satisfy the Court of France, upon frivolous Promises that the Bishops
should submit, though to the prejudice of the Holy See; since the King retracted
nothing of what he had done publicly against the Authority of the Pontiffs and
the Religion of the Sea, and for that the Registers of the Parliament of Paris
(containing the Injurious Appeal of the King's Advocate-General) still remain
upon Record, and for that France will one day revive it again, when she finds a
favorable Opportunity to humble the Court of Rome.

Neither the Pope nor the Holy See are to judge of the Catholicity of Lewis
XIV. or his Court by the Passion which he has shown in persecuting the
Huguenots within his Kingdom. So far from that, seeing that while the French
Monarch persecuted the Huguenots in his own Realm, and destroyed their Churches
and their Exercises, he succored Count Teckeli, the Head of the same Sect,
that were revolted from their Sovereign in Hungary: and the Court of France was
not only more closely Allied for his sake with the Ottoman Port, to which he
also gave considerable Assistance, but made Vows for the Prosperity of the
Mahometans, and repaired their Mosques even as far as Vienna it self. Moreover,
I have frequently heard the Director of my Conscience say, and have heard
several of the queint Doctors of the Sorbonne preach, that the Fruits of the
Christian Religion were Charity, and that he who was void of it could not be a
True Catholic; that Charity was a Virtue which produced a Patient Spirit, that
it was benign, that it was not covetous of other men's Goods, nor sought its own
advantages; that it neither commits Injustice nor possesses any thing unjustly
got: that it endures every thing, believes every thing, bears with every thing;
never carries it self insolently or dishonestly. This is the Character of a
True Christian, according to the Learned. Now if the Pope finds but one of
these Virtues in the King of France, I mean that Sincerity which Pope Gregory
required from a true Catholic, which consists in fulfilling by our Actions
what we have promised in Word: in that case I agree, that the Pope may not only
embrace him as his Eldest Son, but canonize him after his Death, and I will be
the first that will pay my Homage to the Great St. Lewis. If it be inquired,
From whence this way of proceeding arises, so different and irregular in
reference to the Holy See, more especially in a King who adorns himself with
the Title of Most Christian; I answer, that it is from hence, because that
whatever he took in hand was for the Service of that Great and Ambitious Design
which aimed at nothing less then to be the Master of all Europe. To which
purpose he had it in view, by the Persecution of the Religionaries of his
Kingdom to acquire to himself the Suffrages, the Esteem, the Assistance of all
the Roman Catholics, in the midst of those great Designs which he had to
invade the Empire by means of that Succor which he gave the Turk. There is
nothing makes the King of France so sick at heart, as the Prosperity of the
Emperor. He would willingly make War against Heaven, because God did not give
him all the Earth to himself, or at least because he thinks his Neighbor has
the better share, and possesses the more lovely part. For this Reason you see
that France is always upon the Enquiry; Her Emissaries continually inform
themselves what Territories, what Splendor others enjoy, that their Monarch
may have an Opportunity to fall upon This or to Other, or Both together.
Envious Persons are as it were the Animated Skeletons of Demons, that are
nourished only by their own Torments. Agrippina, the Mother of Nero, was wont
to say, That there was nothing in the World which a Prince ought not to
Sacrifice for a Crown. And therefore it was, that Katherine de Medicis, Queen
of France, finding her self ready to sink under the Burden of the Civil Wars,
after the death of her Son Francis II. and not knowing any longer, after she
had tired 'em all out, to what Saint to recommend her self, went to the Devil
with her three Younger Children, Charles IX. the Duke of Anjou and the Duke of
Alanson. And the Medal is still to be seen with this Device beneath her Figure,
engraved in Copper, and the Figures of her three Children which she offered to
the Demon, Soit, pourvu que je regne. Let it be, so I may reign. If these
Miserable Women have carried their Ambition so high for a single Crown, what
may it not be Lawful for Lewis XIV. to do, so he may gain the Universal
Monarchy? For still whatever he does, the French have a Name for it; they call
it Grandeur of Soul. They offer Incense at this very day to the Divinity of
Lewis the Great, and below his Statue, the Head of which is environed with a
Glory, there are written these Blasphemous words, Numini Ludovici Magni. This
is the Religion, and this is the Idol of the Court of France, and of their
Emissaries, that compass the Earth to make Proselytes to embrace and adore the
Interests of France. If among such proceedings as these, if in such a Dreary
Chaos, the Holy See can find out Catholicity, I will acknowledge him to be like
God himself, who alone can bring Light out of Darkness.

But Lewis the XIV. was not content with the Crown of France, nor to make
himself Emperor, but to be the Universal Monarch of the World, and then not
having any more to conquer here below, like the Giants of Old he would have
built a Tower to scale Heaven, and Dragoon the Inhabitants of the Eternal
Mansions. However the Sovereign KING of Kings, who derides the Folly of Men,
has in a good Measure confounded the Counsels of France, and dissipated all her
Great Designs; particularly since the raising the Siege of Vienna, upon the
12th. of September 1683. a fatal day for France, but glorious for the Emperor
and Empire, and Happy for all Christendom. This unexpected Blow, contrary to
the Hopes and Expectations of Lewis the XIV. and his Ministers, constrained him
to seek a Truce, which was granted him for Twenty years; and by which the
Policy of France had a fair Prospect of Keeping those Towns of which she was
Mistress; and on the other side had gained time to see the Issue of the War
between the two Empires, with a Design however, as already has been said, no
longer to observe the Truce, till the King beheld the Fate of the Two
contending Parties. If the Emperor fell, then the King was to march in Person
into Germany, and cause himself to be proclaimed Emperor and Protector of the
Christians, at the Head of his Army. If the Grand Signior had the worst of it,
then the King was to send his Forces to his Aid, by ravaging all Germany, and
dividing the Forces of the Empire, as he did under imaginary Pretenses; which
was more then openly to Succor the Turks, who in Truth had broken with the
Christians barely upon the Solicitations of Count Teckeli and the King of
France, promising great Assistances, if they happened to prove the weakest, and
in that alone the French Monarch may be said to have kept his Word. It Is also
no less true that his own Interest was at the Bottom, he not enduring to behold
the Prosperity of the Imperial Arms; and fearing least the Emperor, proving
Victorious, should one day re-demand the Towns and Territories which he had
usurped from him.

France then seeing the Emperor's Success, the Christians winning Battle after
Battle, the Turks driven beyond Belgrade, his Design upon Cologne frustrated,
the Baron of Plettenberg chosen Bishop of Munster, the Baron of Elderen elected
Prince and Bishop of Liege, and by this means all the vast Designs of Lewis
XIV. quite ranvers'd, she was no longer to be restrained within the Bounds of a
Truce, so that her Fury fell first upon Phillipsburgh, which the Emperor not
being in a Condition to defend, the King carried the Town, the 29th. of October
1688. and thus neither Decorum, nor the Interest of the Christians; neither
promised Faith, nor all the Catholic Religion it self, could hinder the
perfidious Victor from declaring openly for the Infidels and Enemies of Christ
and the Christian Name. However if on the one side France in some measure
wrecked her Revenge by the War which she unjustly declared against the
Emperor, it may be certainly said, that the Acquisition of Philipsburgh cost
King James his Crown, as being at the same time abandoned by Lewis the XIV. to
his Evil Fortune. The Council of France soon after, but too late, acknowledged
their Fault, and could find no other way to excuse the Blunder, but by entering
into a War with England, Spain, and the United Provinces, at the same time that
they declared War against the Emperor: and this same mistaken piece of Policy
occasioned that strict and sincere Confederacy, which we see at this day,
between the greatest part of the Christian Princes to preserve themselves from
the Invasions of France; and Lewis the XIV. to wreck his Revenge upon 'em for
the sad Fate of K. James, his most dear Allye, whose Misfortunes were only the
Consequences of his having followed the Counsels of France and her pernicious
Politics, was obliged to raise Great Armies and equip a Numerous Fleet, to
restore K. James to his Throne; though hitherto he has not been able to
accomplish any thing in his Favor, but rather has lived to see the
Disappointment of all the Hopes that flattered his first Attempts. Whereas if
the Ambitious Monarch had turned his whole Force against the Empire only, and
bent all his strength on that side, he might have gone a great way into the
Empire, and have given Mahomet, his Dear Friend and Allye, a fair Opportunity
to recover his Losses. But while he labored the Re-mounting of two unhors'd
Princes, he ruined both the One and the Other. And here it is that we ought to
adore the Divine Providence that confounded and struck with a sudden Stupidity
the Counsels of France, on purpose to dissipate those unjust Designs which her
False Politics had suggested to her, no less then the Assailing of all Europe
at a Time; according to the Proverb, Covet all, and Lose all.

There is no question but that France was sensible of her Error, after the
Revolution in England; for which reason she discharged all her Fury upon poor
Germany, where the French Soldiery exercised the utmost Extremities of Cruelty
and Barbarism, because that Electorate belonged to the Emperor's near Relation
and Confederate.

France being thus Embarked upon this Tempestuous Sea, the Prosperity of the
Imperial Arms, the Revolution in England, and the strict League of all the
Confederate Princes for the Defense of the Common Cause could not choose but
raise prodigious Storms about his Ears; and therefore finding there was no
repairing the Fault she had committed, she was constrained to caress and
promise the Ottoman Port whatever Succor the Infidels demanded both of Men and
Money to oblige the Turks to continue the War. With a Design however to deceive
and forsake 'em, so soon as the Court of France should find it convenient to
agree with the Emperor. But in regard the French have drawn in the Ottoman
Port, and blinded with their Presents the Principal Ministers, and more
especially the Mufti, who holds his Dignity for Life, it is almost impossible to
open the Eyes of the Grand Sultan, who is willing to flatter himself with the
Hopes of recovering that part of Hungary which he have lost. So that as long as
the French are able to domineer at the Port as they do, it is in vain to send
Ambassadors thither, to make proposals of Peace, since it so absolutely
behooves the Court Politics of France to hinder it, by all manner of means,
cost what it will, either by Money or Poison, as we have seen. It Is not long
since, that the French perceived, that the Ministers of the Mediators had made
some Progress in the Interim that our Minister was hastening to the Port; but
their Emissaries both at Constantinople and Adrianople overturned with Money
all the Measures that had been taken. So that there is nothing but an
Insurrection in the Ottoman Empire, that can ranverse the Practices and
Machinations of France; and this is that which the Christians ought to
meditate, if they desire a Peace between the two Empires; and there are ways to
bring it about, if they would but put 'em in Practice.

Nor is it to be questioned but that France drives on all the Intrigues
imaginable in the Ottoman Court, where she is in daily fear, least early or
late a sudden Truce should be clapped up between the two Empires, by reason of
some unexpected Insurrection, as I have already said. And therefore it is, that
the Court of France endeavors to supplant her Confederate, and to make a Peace
with the Emperor and the Empire, by restoring several Places which she now
holds in Germany; because that Lewis XIV. and his Ministers see very well, that
they cannot continue the War, so long as the Confederacy continue their Union,
as hitherto they have done: that being alone by himself to bear the Burden of
so many Enemies, he stands in need of Numerous Armies to oppose the same
Adversaries that environ him on every side, in Germany, Flanders, Brabant,
Catalogna, Navarr and Piemont; but above all, the Conjoined Fleets of England
and Holland, that threaten his Coasts, and enforce him to an Excessive Expense
to guard himself from a Descent: his Trade being quite lost, his Subjects
reduced to utmost Misery, and his Exchequer decreasing every day, through the
decay of Trade, and the Poverty of the Inhabitants of his Kingdom. We must
believe, that France would fain have a Peace, while she thinks she has some
Advantage, before any Terrible Blow befall her, which would enforce Lewis the
Great, to accept of such a Peace as it would please the Emperor and the
Confederates to afford him. It Is no less certain then, that his Imperial
Majesty, together with the Confederates, have no more to do then to continue
the War a little longer, to compass their Ends upon France, that can never be
able to make Head against 'em for any long time. Which is the reason that we
find her already beginning to change her Batteries, at the same time that she
sees her self obliged to alter her Designs in respect of the Empire. Formerly
nothing would serve Lewis the XIV. but the Imperial Crown for himself, and the
Title of King of the Romans for the Dauphin his Son. But now no more of that:
The Grapes are out of his Reach, and therefore he cries, They are sour. All
those vast Designs having failed, and all his Lofty Enterprises being come to
nothing, the Policy that France made use of when the Turks were marching to the
Siege of Vienna, is now no farther useful: the End failing, the means must of
necessity surcease. Formerly France was all for dethroning the Emperor; but
now it is well if she can keep the Crown upon her Monarch's own Head, in
preserving by the force of her Arms what he has usurped from his Neighbors.
Heaven has altered the Face of Affairs, by the ill success of the Ottoman
Arms, and thereby confounding the Counsels of France; the designs of both
being the same, and both acting in order to the same Ends.

And as the Designs of France are changed in respect of the Emperor, who is
the Chief and Head of the Empire, so they may be presumed to be the same in
regard of the Electours, who are the Members of it: Formerly, 'twas the Policy
of France to caress 'em one after another, to dazzle 'em with the Grandeur of
Lewis the Great, and persuade 'em to side with the Interests of that Monarch;
sparing neither for Promises nor Presents to render 'em inclinable to elect
French Coadjutours. But afterward they were clearly convinced that this was
the Apple of Discord which the King of France threw into the Empire, to the End
he might swallow 'em up one after another. Now therefore let us see what new
course he takes to manage the Princes of the Empire. They can now no longer be
serviceable to him in making the Dauphin King of the Romans, in regard they
have Check-mated him on that side already. So that they have spared him a world
of Trouble, and a great deal of Money which he was wont to throw away by
Shovel-fulls upon that Occasion' Much less is it to be thought that Lewis has
now any Hopes of being Emperor, since I am told, that the Book entitled, The
just Pretensions of the King to the Empire, written by the Sieur Aubri,
Advocate in the Parliament of Paris, serves now to no other use, then to wrap
up Butter and Cheese in the Chandlers Shops.

The Ministry of France now labors to separate the Electours and Princes of
the Empire from the common cause (not by the means of Gold or Silver because he
finds 'em incorruptible) but by invading their Territories by Fire and Sword,
as he has done the Palatinate, the Dioceses of Cologne, Mayence and Treves,
with a design to enforce 'em to persuade the Emperor to accept of a Separate
Peace; by which means France will remain the Mistress still of the Greatest
part of all her Usurpations. To which purpose she makes a dextrous Use of the
easy Access which the Monks and Jesuits have to the Persons of the Roman
Catholic Princes, and to intrude among the Ministers of State, every where
extolling the King's Catholicity, and his great design to have exterminated
Heresy, had not King James been dethroned. But some have said very well in
Answer to those Emissaries, that all those forward Acts of seeming Zeal were no
other then a sort of Clumsie Trapans; that they must go and tell their Stories
to Children and Fools, for that they were no Strangers to the King of France's
Religion.

There is one thing very Remarkable, that Lewis XIV. designing the Destruction
of the Empire, was the occasion of the strengthening it, and of underpropping it
in some measure with new Supports, by adding a Ninth Electour to the Electoral
College, and more particularly by the Choice which the Emperor and the
Electours have made of the Duke of Hanover, to supply that Place, to the great
Grief of the Court of France, who with all her wilely Stratagems and false
Politics, could not prevent it. The Election of a King of the Romans, of
Prince Clement of Bavaria, to the Electorate of Cologne, of the Baron of
Elderen to the Bishopric of Liege, of the Baron of Plettenberg to that of
Munster, but more especially the Revolution in England, were bitter Morsels for
the Most Christian King to swallow, and still lie heavy upon his Stomach. And
whenever France comes once to see the Bottom of her Exchequer, there is no
question but her Fall will be very great, since it was her Money that only
upheld her in all the Courts of Christendom, that she has plastered over all
her Usurpations, and that she has lulled several Princes asleep, whose real
Interest it was to oppose her. Silver is a sort of Metal every where
acceptable, and the Avarice of the Switzers has spread it self into several
Courts, according to the saying of Alexander, That there was nothing
inaccessible to Silver: though Matchiavell upholds, That it is a hard matter for
Steel to keep possession of that which is purchased with Gold. Nevertheless we
have seen the Contrary both in Germany and Flanders, where the King of France
bought several Places with good ready Money, and has held 'em for several
Years. But give me leave to add this Reason for it, I mean the little good
Correspondence at that time between the Princes of the Empire, and the Powder
of Gold which their Jupiter rained among 'em. That Monarch not only got great
Footing within the Territories of his Neighbors, but made his Possession good.
Witness Strasburg, Hunninghen, and several other Places upon the Rhine, as
Mayence and several Fortresses in the Diocese of Cologne, if Heaven, by a Blow
that France little expected, had not linked together that Sacred Union, in the
Empire, for the Common defense, which all the gilded Politics of France could
never prevent, nor her Poison put a stop to. And this is a Truth never to be
contradicted, that the Sincere Union of the Princes of the Empire preserves 'em
from being corrupted, and early or late will render 'em Victorious over the
Common Enemy, and put 'em in a Condition of being able to recover what they
have, and fix 'em in the Possession of what they hold untouched. No wonder then
that the French destroy and ruin Germany where they come, because they find
they cannot hold it, but must surrender back all their Usurpations: though by the
Havoc which they make, they are in hopes to weaken the Strength of their
Enemies. 'Twould be but Justice then, and what the King of France has no such
reason to wonder at, that he should be one day constrained to repay the
Damages, for the Spoil which his Armies have committed, in pursuance of his
Infernal Politics.

During the Reign of Philip the II. King of Spain, it may be said, that France
and Spain divided Europe between 'em; and that they were truly the Two Scales
of a Balance, which the Other Sovereigns endeavored to keep in an
Equilibrium, and sided sometimes with the One, sometimes with the Other, as
their Interest directed 'em, in order to keep an Equality of Force, for fear of
being swallowed up by the Strongest. But since King Philip's time, it may be
said, That Spain has been continually sinking lower and lower; that she has
been in good part the Prey of France; and that had it not been for the Allies,
the French at this Hour would have been not only Masters of the Low Countries,
but of Madrid it self. And indeed it may be said, that the Duke of Alva lent
the first helping Hand to the fall of the Spanish Puissance, by his
Proclamation concerning the Tenth Penny in the Year 1569. by his Depriving the
People of the Liberty of Conscience, and the Massacers that succeeded, and
which was the real Cause of the Revolt of part of the Low Countries, and the
Fountain and Original of all the Misfortunes that afterward befell that
Monarchy, which instead of striking Dread and Terror into all Europe, and the
Other World, is dwindl'd away to that degree of Impuissance wherein we now
behold it; governed it is true, by one of the best Princes in the World, leading
a Pious and Exemplary Life, and void of any Vicious Inclination: and it may be
certainly said, that the People and Grandees of the Kingdom are happy under so
Just a King, if they understood their Felicity, and would but correspond with
the Pacifick Genius of their Prince. But most commonly the Ministers and their
Adherents make their Advantage of the Good Nature of their Prince to fill their
own Purses by emptying his, and by that means deprive him of his Ability to
withstand the Sworn Enemy of Spain, who environs him on every side, and who for
more then one Age together, has studied nothing but his utter Ruin, and makes
a dextrous use of his Imbecility. The King of France has been a long time
acquainted with the Constitution of the present Catholic King, and upon that
Knowledge it is that the Policy of France has built her Designs, and so well
understood to carry on her Affairs, that she brought about a Marriage of that
Monarch with a Princess of France, Daughter to the Duke of Orleance, and that
merely to be informed of what past even in this Catholic Majesty's
Bedchamber, as was seen by the Relations frequent in the Court of France, and
which merely served for Sport among the French Ladies, who are naturally
inclined to Gossipry, Tittle Tattle, and Railliery. And therefore it is a
pernicious sort of Policy in the Court of Madrid, to bestow the Daughters of
Spain upon France, and to match their Sovereigns with the Daughters of France:
and of this there are recent Proofs that make us sensible. For it is certain
that the Marriage of the Infanta Maria Teresa to Lewis XIV. has brought nothing
but War and continual Trouble upon Spain, and still will become the Occasion of
More, by reason of the Dauphin's Pretensions, n case the Catholic King happens
to dye without Heirs. 'Twill be in vain then to allege that Lewis the XIV. at
his Marriage renounced his Claims with a Solemn Oath: for if he brake his Oath,
and all the Princes blame him for doing an unlawful, and unjust Act, tending to
Usurpation, a Sin against Reason and Conscience: it is presently told ye, that
he could do nothing to the Prejudice of a Third Person, meaning the Dauphin of
France, the only Offspring by that Marriage; and usually in such differences
between Sovereigns, the longest Sword carries it. Ratio ultima, Regnum, was the
Motto which Cardinal Richlieu caused to be engraved upon the Arms of France.
Or if it be not reason, it is the definitive Will of Kings, and becomes Reason,
if once it proves successful. The want of Issue by the Catholic King's second
Marriage with the Princess Palatine of Newburgh, increases and swells the
Ambition of France; and it is very probable, that Lewis the XIV. would not be
willing that the King of Spain should happen to dye (which God forbid) during
his being enga'd in a War with almost all Europe; in regard that not having his
Hands free, he could not so easily fall upon Spain with a sufficient Force, as
he might be able to do, to make himself Master of that Monarchy, in prosecution
of his Hopes and Pretensions, if his Catholic Majesty did not prevent him, in
his Lifetime. It Is the Policy of France to insinuate into the Grandees of Spain
desires of enriching themselves, while they have an Opportunity; to the end
that after his Death, they may be able to erect Petty Sovereignties in every
Corner of the Kingdom, for there is not any Prince among 'em who wants a
Pretension, with a promise to every one that she will stand by Him, and grant
him her Protection against all Assailants; They not considering all this while,
that France will at last swallow 'em all up, one after another, and that they
will become the Sport of Lewis the Great, their secret Enemy. Who in the mean
time by this means enfeebles Spain, extenuates the King's Treasure, and
deprives him not only of the power to recover the Places he has lost, but to
defend those which he has yet in his Possession, which the French wrest from
him by degrees, because that Spain is not in a Condition to make a Potent
Opposition; as Experience had taught us too apparently, not only during the
War, but also in time of Peace. For that since the Pyrenaean Peace, Spain has
suffered the Usurpation of a great many Provinces, as Burgundy, Franche Conte,
and Considerable Portions of the Low Countries and Catalonia. And all this,
because that Spain is a languishing and sickly Body, whose Forces waste by
degrees, through the too much softness of the Sovereign, and the Greedy
Covetousness of the Grandees of the Kingdom. Whereas if the Catholic King
would make use of his Authority; forsake his Cabinet and Head his Arms, there
is no question but that the Face of his Affairs would quickly alter. It behooves
him for the replenishing of his Coffers to squeeze the Spunges that have
swelled themselves with his Treasures, and enriched themselves at the Expenses
of his Crown and People. A Prince that leads a Soft and Effeminate Life is
neither feared by his Enemies, nor beloved by his People. He is looked upon as a
Statue, and resembles those that wish for mighty Things, as if they designed to
leave only their Dreams to Posterity. Whereas a Monarch ought with his own
Sword to make the Pen that is to write his History: that is to say, that his
Valor and Prowess ought to afford his Historiographer, Matter: otherwise he
only serves to fill up the Catalogue of the Kings, and the Day of his Birth,
and the Day of his Death are the most Illustrious and Memorable Parts of all
his History. A King receives his Crown from his Ancestors, but his Renown must
spring from himself. The Council of Spain falls asleep presently after a Peace,
and many times after a Truce, not considering that France is always awake, and
that she never lays down her Arms but that it Costs the King of Spain some or
other of his best Towns. It would be superfluous to set forth in Painting to
the Spaniards, the misery of their Condition, should they once fall under the
Despotick Dominion of France. They need no more then cast their Eyes upon the
lamentable and wretched Estate to which the French are at this day reduced;
while some are forced to wander about the World, exposed to utmost Misery, to
Hunger and Cold, and all this merely to avoid the Cruelty and Tyranny of their
Monarch; and they that remain behind, lie Groaning under the weight of his Iron
Scepter that continually bruises 'em to death with his Oppressions and his
Imposts. The only way therefore for the Spaniards to prevent their Ruin, is to
countermine the Policy of France: to supplicate their Monarch to appoint his
Successor in his Lifetime; to the end he may be bred up in the Court of
Madrid, and be ready to oppose the Invasions of France after the King's
decease. But more especially, to beg of the Emperor to put a speedy End to the
Turkish War, that he may have his Hands at Liberty to be assisting to Spain at
a time of need.

It Is also an Affair of Great Importance, and most Essential toward the
Preservation of the Remainder of the Low Countries, and not to rely as the
Council of Spain does upon her Neighbors; which is the reason that they
neglect to send the True Succor, which it would behove 'em to send in time
into those Provinces which were within a Fingers Breadth of being utterly lost,
during King James's Reign. And indeed there happen so many Changes and
Revolutions in the World, that a well advised Monarch ought never to rely upon
the Forces of Other Princes but his own.

While the Provinces of the Spanish Low Countries were governed by Interested
Viceroys, who preferred their own private Concerns, before the Preservation of
the Provinces, with which they were entrusted, we still found that France
seized upon City after City, and is now in Possession of whole Provinces; and
it may be said that a better thought never came into her Head, then when she
abandoned the Conquest of Italy (where she Exhausted her Men and Money) to turn
her Forces upon Flanders, where all Appearances seemed more easy, since she
saw well that Governors were sent thither only to enrich themselves: among
whom the Greatest Part minded more the getting of a Million into their Purses,
then the preservation of the Best City in the Low Countries! To avoid which
Mischief, there is a necessity of having a Prince for Governor, whose
particular Interest it is to preserve 'em, who will march at the Head of his
Army, lay out the Subsidies of the People, in defraying the Necessary Expenses
of the People, and take care for the Timely Returns of Money; for that the
Low Countries can never subsist without an Army well paid.

We have met with all these Advantages in the Person of his Electoral Highness
the Duke of Bavaria; and it may be said without flattery, That the Choice which
his Catholic Majesty made of that Prince for the Government of the
Low Countries, was one of the best and most imortant Hits of State that Spain
has been for some time guilty of. It Was such a Blow to France, as broke all the
Measures she had taken, during the Government of Gastanaga; nor could Lewis
XIV. ward off this Blow which the King of England gave him, without ever giving
him warning to guard himself.

It Is a thing no less observable then wonderful, That the Council of Spain
having no more then this little Corner of the Earth to guard, should neglect it
as They do; seeing that good Policy requires, that Spain should drein herself,
rather then part with it, were it for nothing else but to serve her as an
Amuzement to the Arms of France, as we have found it to have been in all the
last and present Wars, and the Counterguard that keeps the most Christian King
from Marching to the very Walls of Madrid it self. The reason of this
Carelessness may well be thought to be the Popular Error of the Inhabitants of
Flanders and Brabant, who tell the Hollanders, when they upbraid 'em with their
Remissness as to their own Preservation, It Is you that ought to defend us, for
the sake of your own Interest. And indeed, there is some reason for this
Opinion. But the chief reason proceeds from the Avarice of the Spanish
Ministers, who shroud themselves under this Mistake, which serves 'em to heap
up Wealth, while the King their Sovereign is engaged on every side to preserve
himself.

The Policy of France, together with her Louid'ors, works now the same Effect
with the which formerly Philip II. wrought by virtue of his Doublon's. For I
have heard say, That even in Time of Peace, there was not any Place in the
Low Countries where Lewis XIV. had not his Creatures and his Cabals ready to
declare themselves in Time and Place, and when an Opportunity required. And
certain it is, That if this were not the whole which was then said, it is a good
part of the Truth. For having beheld what we have seen in our days, in
reference to that impregnable City of Luxemburgh, and the Acquisition of the
whole Province that followed, we ought to be convinced, that that same Place of
so great moment was not obtained by the Bravery and Courage only of the French.
There is no better way then, to disappoint those Treacheries, then by often
changing the Garrisons, and sometimes the Governors themselves; but above all
things, to Pay well, and Punish without Exception, when there is the least
Fault committed. The Low Countries are, at present, like an Insolvent House,
that must be re-settl'd by good Economy, and by affording the Inhabitants the
Means of being able to contribute toward it.

The Low Countries have a long time been the Mark at which the Court of France
has aimed. Upon the least Dispute, or Pretense of a Quarrel with the Court of
Spain, in she pours with all her Fury upon the Low Countries, like an impetuous
Torrent; plunders, burns, and never retreats without some considerable Loppings
which she dismembers from the Body of the Tree. Which nevertheless is not a
Mischief never to be remedied; since the Sea it self is many times restrained
by Causeys and Mounds, though it be an Element a thousand times more to be
feared then the Policy and Pride of Lewis XIV. And this is that which the Duke
of Bavaria, and the rest of his Brave Confederates must do, to stop and curb
the rapid Inundations of France. They must look upon the French Monarch as one
that thunders in all his Forces and his Fury upon those Places where he is sure
to find but little Resistance, and from such Victories as those he reaps his
greatest Honor. I confess, that a Prince who is violent, and a Usurper, is
happy so long as Fortune goes hand in hand with his Natural Humor. But in
regard she grows weary, for the most part, of always carrying one Man upon her
Back, we also find that the same Prince becomes unprosperous, when Fortune
changes her Mind, or rather, when there is an Opposition made against him. And
therefore, if we may build upon outward Appearances, and if there be any thing
of Prognostication in the Presentiments of Wise and Judicious Men, the
Low Countries may well hope, by the Blessing of Heaven, the prudent Conduct of
their Great and Sage Governor and Leader, and the sincere Intentions of the
Confederates, to be soon delivered from the Yoke and Barbarity of France, and
enjoy the Fat of a fruitful Soil, that has so long fed so many Thousands of
Foreigners, both Men and Beasts.

From the Low Countries I cross over into England, where I find, that the
Revolution which happened in the Year 1689. affords a large Field, and ample
Matter to supply my Discourse. The Court of France not only cried The Town's
our's, but Europe's my own so soon as she beheld James II. upon the Throne of
Great Britain. I shall not here enlarge upon the Accident that set him in the
Throne. But certain it is that, France and He had long and passionately waited
for the happy Minute; for that according to their Saying between 'em, Charles
II. was a mere Slugg, and had neither vigor nor courage to put in Execution
the Projects that France was a Brewing. But far from that, Charles II. wanted
neither Policy nor Ingenuity, and might have gone to his Grave with the
Character of Prudent and Virtuous, but for his scandalous Inclinations for
Women. However, it may be assuredly said, That the Match to which he was in a
manner driven against his own Consent, made him disgust Matrimony, and threw
him into a Vein of wanton Courtship. It Is true, 'twas a Weakness in him too
apparent for his Honor; but France, and his Brother the Duke of York, knew how
to make their Advantage of it. And therefore the Joy of Lewis XIVth's Court was
not to be conceived, so soon as both He and his Adherents understood the Death
of that good Prince, and the Elevation of James II. to the Throne; the Jesuits
rejoiced in particular; and never was such Posting backwards and forwards
between Versailles and London, as after the King of England's Death came to be
publicly known at the French Court. And there was some reason for it; for that
then it was, that the French Council began to take terrible Resolutions, in
order to the putting in Execution a Design that France had kept concealed in
her Breast for many Years before. She began with the Revocation of the Edict of
Nants; a Thing which she durst not meddle with, so long as King Charles was
alive, (though that Prince, in his heart, was none of the Devoutest
Religionaries; but a Politician much more, and one who observed his Measures,
by reason of his Parliament, that was well informed that England was the
Garrantee of that Edict.) But so soon as James II. became sole Master in
England, the Court of France gave her self her full swinge, and pushed on her
Design upon Europe, might and main, because that then there was no longer any
fear of England, which was the only Puissance that could either disappoint or
advance her Enterprise. And this was a Truth at all times so well known by the
Kings of England, that Hen. VIII. made a Medal of Gold, upon which was engraved
a Hand stretching it self out of a Cloud, and holding a Pair of Scales that
were equally poised, with this Motto, My Friendship turns the Beam.

But in King James's Time it was not England turned the Scale, but France,
while England like an Ox, ignorant of his own Strength, tamely surrendered her
Neck to the Golden Yoke of Lewis XIV.

Formerly the Policy of France sent to the Court of England Lovely French
Nymphs to cultivate the Hearts of the English Lords, and of the Monarch
himself. But during King James's Reign, another sort of Vermin were made use
of, and Monks and Jesuits were sent in Shoals, that like so many Caterpillars
and Locusts devoured the Country; and who had already dispersed themselves over
all the Kingdom, and had made themselves Masters of the King and his
Privy Council, to the great grief of all his good Subjects. What a
Heartbreaking must it needs be to the sounder Party at Court, to see a Father
Peter's Chief in the Privy Council, pearch'd upon one of the highest Dignities
in the Kingdom, slighting and domineering over the Lords and Peers of the
Realm, as having got the Sovereign Authority into his Hands, and for that the
King and the Queen (a Princess transported altogether by her Passion) suffered
themselves to be deluded and governed by this Tartuff of a Hypocrite, and he
overruled by Father La Chaise, who had all his Orders from the Court of
France. By which it may be easy to judge in what Condition France was at that
time; what Devils haunted both the Court and the Kingdom, trampled over the
Necks of the King's best Subjects, and were just exposing the People to the
Rage of Queen Mary's Reign, who allowed her Subjects no other Choice but of the
Mass or the Faggot.

They who seriously consider the Policy of France in respect of England, during
the Reign of King James the II. will find the Game but very ill played, seeing
that in so short a time it gave an occasion to a Revolution so dangerous to
France. But so it happened, because that Lewis XIV. not foreseeing the
Consequences, after he had once given a loose Liberty to the Monks and Jesuits,
was no longer Master of the Affair; and those Vermin pusht on King James with
so much precipitancy, that he being desirous to do too much at once, they
ranvers'd at the same time all the Designs of France, and cast him headlong
from the Throne into an Abyss, from whence he will never be able to rise again
so long as he lives: nor will all the Power of France, nor the detestable
Wealth and Politics of the Jesuits be able to restore him again.

If the Court of France were so excessive in their Rejoicing upon the
Coronation of King James, we may assure our selves, that they were no less
drowned in Tears of Grief and Rage upon his Abandoning the Crown. And then it
was, that all the best Head-pieces, both Jesuits and Courtiers, met together
which way to apply some proper Remedies to a Blow so fatal and so unlookt for:
and then it was that Lewis XIV. acknowledged his Error in following the Marquis
of Louvois's Counsel, which was to attack Philipsburgh instead of Maestritcht,
and give the Prince of Orange an Opportunity to pass un-disturb'd into England.
But that which deceived France, was an Army of Forty thousand Men which King
James had a foot, of which a great part were Irish, and a Fleet of Forty Men of
War riding out at Sea; which indeed was a Force sufficient both by Sea and Land
to have resisted so small a number as attended the Prince into England. But it
may be said, that that same great Body was a mere Monster, all Arms but no
Head, and whose Veins were filled with Water only instead of Blood. And if
France had bethought her self to have sounded in the first Place, the Heart of
King James, she would have found there more of Cowardice then Courage, and
without question she would have marched her Troops to the Lower instead of
sending them to the Upper Rhine. But by this we see that there is a certain
Destiny which all the Wisdom, all the Force and Industry of mortal Man cannot
escape.

But now the Constitution of the Court of England being changed by the
Alteration of the Government, there was a necessity for the Court of France to
change her Batteries, and to employ all her Politics which way to dethrone the
reigning King, whether by the Sword, by Fire or by Poison, 'twas indifferent to
her, provided she attained her Ends: and for the Truth of this, we have
sufficient Proofs; the Testimony of Grandvall at his Death, and the authentic
Depositions of Dement, who is still living to the Shamne and Confusion of
France; the Remembrance of which will be a lasting Stain to her Honor; a Fact
which her succeeding Princes will deny, as a Reproach to their Posterity, and
for which Histories only furnish us with the Example of Darius, King of Persia,
who not being able to vanquish his Enemy Alexander in Battle, treacherously
labored to have won the Grecian Soldiers either to kill or betray their
Prince. And for that it was that the Macedonian Victor upbraided Darius's
Ambassadors, when they came to sue for Peace, and to return him Thanks for the
Civilities he had showed to his Mother, his Wife and his two Daughters; to
which Ambassador the Macedonian Monarch thus began his Answer. Tell your
Master, that Thanks are superfluous among Soldiers that make War one upon
another; and therefore if I were Civil and Courteous toward his Relations,
'twas only to satisfy my self, and not out of any Affection that I bear to
him; for it is not my Humor to insult over the Miserable. I never attack
Prisoners nor Women, I only assail those that I meet with Weapons in their
Hands, and who are in a Condition to defend themselves. So that if he sincerely
desired Peace, I should consider what I had to do, but seeing that he still
continues by Letters and Money to solicit my Soldiers, to betray me, and my
Friends to Kill me, I am resov'd to pursue him to the uttermost of my Power, no
longer as an Enemy, but as a Poysoner, and a Ruffian, etc.

It Is not to be denied, but that when any man designs to murder his Enemy,
it is because he dreads him with a more then Ordinary Fear, and to deprive his
more valiant Adversary by such a Cowardly and detestable Action of the Honor
of vanquishing him in Battle. But such Assassins never come to good End: for
Darius perished miserably, being murdered by his own Subjects, and at the same
time lost both his Life, his Diadem and all the Wealth of Persia. But to return
to our Subject.

During the Reign of King James, France sent into England whole Legions of
Monks and Jesuits, under pretense of Propagating the Faith, and to screw
themselves into the most considerable Families of the Realm, under pretense of
Religion, as also to assist this Unfortunate Prince, to observe his Footsteps
and dive into his secret Thoughts, to the end he might not be able to avoid the
Chains which the Court of France had prepared for him. But now the Emissaries
of France have altered their Language; and whereas at that time they preached
nothing to the English but Peace and Obedience there; now they breath nothing
but Fire and Flame, Sedition and Murder where e're they come, fomenting
Rebellion in all parts of the Kingdom, and ready once more to fire the City of
London, if they believed the Conflagration would contribute any thing to their
wicked Designs.

The whole Policy and Craft of France is at a great Loss at this Conjuncture,
to find that all her Machinations against the Life of the King of England, at
present prosperously Reigning, are still disappointed. Nor is it less a bitter
Choak-Pear to Lewis XIV. the Proudest Monarch upon Earth, to see himself at
last constrained to acknowledge his Brittanick Majesty the Lawful Monarch of
the Three Kingdoms, and sue to him for Peace; and all this after he had Vaunted
before all the World that he would never lay down his Arms till he had restored
King James to his Throne, not without a profane and Daring Application of the
words of God the Father to the Son. Sit thou at my Right hand till I make thy
Enemies thy Footstool. Now after such a Bounce, a man would think it should be
a trouble to the Court of France to find her self constrained to dismiss this
poor unfortunate Prince. But there will be no such Thing: For when Persons that
have been profitable to the Court of France become once unserviceable, she
never scruples to send 'em packing in cold Blood. It Is true that she observes
some Measures, and lets ye know her Mind at first by Hints and indirect
Whispers: but if you do not understand her Mute Language and Dumb Signs, she
fails not to inform your Stupidity with plain and downright Expressions: it
being a Maxim of the French Court, never to love the Unfortunate. But you will
say, what Benefit can accrue to Lewis XIV. by keeping King James in France:
it is not for the Benefit of his Counsel; for he could never give or take any
himself; nor is it out of any heat of Concupiscence for the Queen of England;
for he has much handsome and Prettier in his Seraglio of St. Cyr, where Madam
de Maintenon out of her Pious Care, for several Years together has kept in good
decorum a numerous Bevie of young handsome Ladies, who are as it were so many
Victims which she offers to the Divinity of Lewis the Great; and though that
Monarch had not that Reserve for his little Pleasures, the Court is full of
Coquetts, and the Mothers are such Ninnyhammers as to carry their Daughters
thither, to try whether or no their good Fortune will advance 'em to the
Embraces of that Great Monarch, and all this in hopes to raise the drooping
condition of their Family. Insomuch that I have known some Parents condescend
to that point of Panderism, as to Lesson their Daughters and instruct 'em what
they were to say and do, in case the King should happen to take notice of 'em.
So that most assuredly, it would not be no Queen Jemmykin that the Sultan of
France would throw his Handkerchief, unless it were with that Limitation that
Alexander observed who refused to exercise at the Olymptick Games, unless he
might have Kings for his Competitors, And thus Lewis XIV. grown more Great
perhaps then formerly, would have the World believe, that he will no longer be a
Gamester in the Sports of Love, unless he may have Queens for the Objects of
his Passion. However, the King grows old, and therefore let us be so favorable
to him as to believe, that if the Court of France did entertain King James and
all his Train at St. Germains, 'twas not for any Affection the French Monarch
bare him, but because the English Fugitive who generally, feeds upon Chimera's,
fancied Himself, and endeavored to persuade the Court of France that he had a
Great Party in England; not only all the Roman Catholics, but all the
Fanatics in the Kingdom. That the Quaker Penn, who indeed is no other then a
Jesuit in Masquerade, assured him of the Absolute Devotion of that whole Sect
to his Party and Service. But the Court of France has been well informed, that
all these Assurances were mere Illusions, seeing that neither Catholics nor
Quakers are admitted into the Parliament, nor into any the meanest Offices in
the Kingdom; and that it would be a very difficult thing not to say an
Impossibility to embody all those that go by the Name of Jacobites, scattered
up and down in several Parts of the Kingdom, and for the most part known to be
such. Besides that, we find that no sooner a Dozen of these Rebels meet
together, but they are presently discovered; a visible Sign of the Care that
Divine Providence takes for the Preservation of their Brittanick Majesty's; and
that the same Providence watches over 'em, while they, without intermission,
labor to settle the Government, to protect the Nation against their Enemies,
and to re-advance the Honor of the British Name, beyond what the Princes,
their Predecessors, have done for several Ages.

There is no question to be made but that the King of France, or his Council,
is very well informed of the Constitution of England, and that it will be in
vain for their Enemies to attempt any thing there, so long as the King and his
Parliament are united together, as we find 'em at this Day. Insomuch, that this
good Correspondence has furnished the King with powerful Supplies, to oppose
his Enemies both by Sea and Land, though their Number were double to what it is
at this Day. For that so long as the English have a formidable Fleet upon their
Coasts, who shall be so daring as to attack 'em? Not France, I Am sure. Besides,
that if they can but come to grapple with their lurking Enemy, the French would
soon be constrained to quit their Coasts. So that all things being considered,
there is nothing more for France to do, but to give over the War with England;
for that unless they be Masters of the Sea, their Trade is lost, and they are
absolutely ruined, not being able to sell their Wines, their Brandies, and
other Products of the Kingdom; besides that, they are fore'd to drein
themselves of all their ready Money to pay the King's Subsidies; with a number
of Impositions and Taxes with which the Kingdom swarms. And which is worst of
all, their Harvests having failed for Two Years together, from whence shall
they have Corn if they be not Masters of the Sea? more especially being at War
with the Hollanders, and excluded out of Spain, which has several times
supplied their Wants. So that it is no marvel that the French begin to be weary
of the War, especially with England; and that he no longer observes any
Measures with King James, who at present resembles one of one those petty
Saints, to whom they will not put themselves to the trouble of lighting up a
small Wax Candle, because they neither cure any Diseases, nor are able to make
their Guardian's Pot boil.

France has begun a War, which she will not get quit of when she pleases her
self. Her Monarch has a long time acted Orlando Furioso, and affronted both in
Word and Deed, a Prince that was not in a Condition to defend himself; but now
that Providence, by a miraculous Conduct, has placed the injured Prince upon
the British Throhe, it is not for the Court of France to think, that God, by
his Providence has so highly exalted that Prince, has conferred upon him the
Government of several Kingdoms and Provinces, and put so great a Power into the
Hands of the only Prince that France is afraid of; a Prince that has so well
united the greatest part of the Princes of Europe, in order to make a vigorous
War against the common Enemy, who by degrees has so largely usurped upon their
Dominions, and all this only to render more conspicuous the Honor of Lewis
XIV. as his Emissaries give out. It Is never to be believed; and they that
imagine it, must be either void of Sense, or be of the Number of those
Phanaticks that have no more Wit then to adhere to King James.

But if France can get nothing by a War with England, she may be much a loser,
considering the present Condition of her Affairs. For should the English once
happen to set Foot in France, they have not forgot their Right to Normandy,
Guienne, Poitou, and Languedock. When the English quitted Calais, they promised
the French Governor, who came to take possession of it, to return when their
Sins were not so crying loud as those of the French. At least the Court of
France is not to believe that the English will let 'em alone in the quiet
Possession of Dunkirk; a Place that is no more the Patrimony of the Kings of
France, then Strasburgh. They that sold both the one and the other of those
Cities, had no right to make the Bargain: France treated with those that were
under Age. Now we know that what an Infant Sells or Contracts for, is liable to
be cancelled. Charles the Second had neither conquered nor purchased Dunkirk;
he found it annexed to the Crown upon his return to his Kingdoms; nor was it
for him to sell it, to satisfy the Avarice of his Chancellor. So that the
Kings his Predecessors, have still an undeniable Right, either to regain it by
Force of Arms, or recover it by Treaty of Peace, with much more Equity and
Justice, then the Chamber of Metz can pretend, to make Reunions to the Crown of
France.

The words surrender back, are doubtless very hard of Digestion to Lewis the
Great, who pretends at all times to be the only Person that can restore Peace
to Europe: and therefore he ought in the first place to understand what
Restitution is. The Greatest and Wisest of Kings assures us, That Destruction
presses close upon the Heels of the Proud; and as I have already said, Fortune
grows weary of always carrying the same Prince upon her Back. There are many
Reasons why France should sink, after all the Cruelties she has committed, and
which are not yet at an end. People trail their Chains after 'em for some time
without much complaint; but it is with a design to break 'em upon the first
Opportunity: and there is no question to be made, but that if the English once
set Foot ashore with their Prince at the Head of 'em, but that the greatest
part will receive him as their Deliverer. And I dare be bold to affirm, that
there are at Present a Great Number in France who wish it, and wait for their
Deliverance, and that there is hardly a Lord at Court, or a Prince of the
Blood, who does not pray for the bringing down their Monarch, and the
Prosperity of the Confederates Arms. The Race of Valois ended in France for
less Crimes then those that Bourbon has committed. But there is a precise Time
appointed for humbling the Monarchs of the World, concealed from Humane
Knowledge, and it is a Folly to go about to penetrate into a Secret which
Divine Providence has reserved to it self. However we see the King of France
tries all Ways and Means to Support himself, like a Man that strives against
Death. He ruins his Subjects to maintain his Armies; he Impoverishes 'em, to
constrain 'em to turn Soldiers. He calls in all their Money, embases it, and
pays 'em with New Money enhaunc'd above a Third part of the True Value, to fill
his Coffers. He seizes upon all the Church-Plate, and what belongs to private
Persons, and coins it into Money; and the better to inveigle the People as it
were to follow his Example, he sends his own Plate First of all to the Mint,
and sends for it back the next day. There is not any Tax, or Toll, or
Imposition that has escaped the Invention of his Flint-Skinners; so that the
greatest part of all the Handycraft Tradesmen and Peasants have abandoned their
Farms and their Houses, to wander about and beg their Bread, or else to seek
their Livelihoods in foreign Countries. I have often with my own Ears heard
very good Men and Old Catholics cry out, When will the Prince of Orange,
meaning the King of England now reigning, come and deliver us from all our
Miseries. Rightly judging, That the English are They who can only give that
Lucky Blow; by reason that their nearness to the Coasts of France facilitates
their Entrance into the Kingdom. The Court of France knows this to be true, and
therefore takes so much care to line their Coasts: though the King of France's
whole Army would not suffice to guard a Compass of 300 Leagues in Extent so
well as they should do, to prevent the Enemies landing in some part or other:
Where they that land have no more to do then only to stand the First Shot; for
the Second Discharge will prove very moderate; and for the Third, there will be
no occasion to fear it.

I affirm then, that the English alone are able to harrass France more then any
of the Confederates, to put her to an Excessive Expense, which dreins her
Treasury, forces the King to oppress his Subjects that he may replenish his
Coffers, provokes the Malcontents to shake off the Yoke of a Despotick
Government, and to desire a Government like that of England, which beyond all
contradiction is the most Just and most Equitable, as well for the King, as for
the People; every one there enjoying their Rights and Privileges, the King his
due Prerogatives, and the People their Repose.

If any one of the Republics of Europe be able to infuse Jealousies and Fears
into France, it is the Republic of the United Provinces, which is at present
the most potent, the most Illustrious, the most glorious, and the most wealthy
Republic in the World. I acknowledge that Venice may dispute the Point of
Antiquity with her: otherwise there is no Comparison to be made between 'em. No
wonder then that her Neighboring Puissance has drawn upon her the Envy of
France. The Policy of her Ministers, ever since the Beginning of this Reign,
has very Judiciously exercised it self in finding out the most clever and
probable ways to swallow up those Provinces, either by Conquest or by Ruining
'em, to which purpose Measures have been taken a long while ago. And Lewis XIV.
at the Beginning of the War 1672. did verily believe to have compassed his
Designs: having invaded the States at a Time when they relied upon the Faith
and Sincerity of Treaties, and had neither any Forces a foot, nor any General
to lead 'em; Good Husbandry being Natural to Republics in Time of Peace.
Nevertheless France could not strike that Blow so home as she desired, without
the Consent of England; and therefore it was that the Court of France was so
careful to improve their Friendship with Charles II. sparing neither for Money
nor the Allurements of Pleasure to inveigle and fasten him to their Interests,
and to cause him to bury in Oblivion all the Benefits he had received from the
Republic and the House of Orange. Nor would France quit her Hold, till England
had in conjunction with her, declared War against the United Provinces, where
the Ambassadors of France had for some Years labored underhand by the Enticing
Baits of Gold and Silver to gain Creatures within the Republic, since which
time the Count d'Avaux understood so well to follow their Steps, that he
out-did 'em. For that being Young, and a Courtier, he made his Love of Women
serviceable to get him Admittance into certain Families that had some share in
the Government; and there were few Cities where he had not his Creatures, who
gave him Intelligence of all things that past in Council; and some there were,
who like Nicodemus's came to him by Night, not daring to appear in the daytime.

The Greatest Policy of France was always to foment Division between England
and the United Provinces; afraid of nothing more then a good Correspondence and
Union between the Two Puissances. Nor did she see any way more Probable to
compass her Ends upon the United Provinces then by sticking close to England;
which had fallen out luckily for her, during the two preceding Reigns while she
amused those two Princes with Hopes of sharing in the Conquest. And upon this
Score Lewis XIV. had very little trouble to persuade James the Second to close
with him; for that in his Heart he was an Enemy to the United Provinces and the
House of Orange; besides that he was besieged by the Monks and Jesuits, and
particularly by Father Peter's, who kept him under the awe of the Ferula,
putting him in hopes of Great Rewards from Heaven, in case he would lend his
Helping hand to destroy the Heretics; persuading him that the United Provinces
were the Center of Heresy. So that he added to his private Hatred that
Biggotry, which those Hypocrites of Monks continually blew in his Ears. And
indeed, all things were in a ready forwardness to recommence, in Conjunction
with France, a new War against Holland. The King's Inclinations were altogether
bent that way, and the Thing would have had the Effect desired, so soon as
James the Second had once obtained to be Master of his Parliament, had
abolished the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and laid low the Heads of some
of the principal Lords, the best Affected toward the Welfare of the Kingdom,
and the Preservation of the Privileges of the Nation. But the Revolution in
England falling out so unexpectedly toward the end of the Year 1688. and the
Year following fended off the Blow, and broko all the Measures of those Two
Princes; to which we may add, the rejecting of the Cardinal of Furstenburgh
from being Archbishop of Cologne. All these Events, so contrary to the
Expectation of Lewis XIV. very much contributed toward the Preservation of the
Low Countries. For there is no doubt but the Cardinal, who is a Man dangerous,
turbulent, actuared by the Demon of France, to whom he has sold and devoted
himself, since he withdrew himself from his Obedience to the Emperor, his
lawful Sovereign, was int oduc'd into the Chapter of Cologne, only to be the
Tool and Organ, by whose means the Most Christian King might the more easily
disturb the States of the United Provinces. But all these ways failing, though
not his good Will, and finding he could not be assisted, either by Cologne, nor
England, nor by the Bishop of Munster, as in the preceding War, France could no
longer contain her self, but under pretense of assisting King James, presently
declared War, and fell upon the United Provinces to prevent 'em from
aggrandizing themselves by the sincere and strict Union which they were about
to make between the King and Queen at present prosperously reigning. But in
regard that frequently Revenge never considers the Danger to which it exposes
it self for the satisfaction of its Rage, in like manner the King of France has
drawn upon himself, all of a sudden, the the most numerous, and the soundest
part of the Puissances of Europe, who will never lay down their Arms till he
has made those Restitutions, which they shall think convenient for the Welfare
of Europe; there being no other way of Reliance upon the Promises and Faith of
the Most Christian King.

I believe that Lewis XIV. spoke just according to the Sentiments of his Heart,
when he happened one Day to say, That he neither Feared nor Loved the
Hollanders, who nevertheless filled him full of Jealousies and Fears, and often
broke his Measures. And yet it is to that warlike Nation, that he is at this Day
be-holding for his having got the upper-hand of Spain: For as France formerly
made use of the Hollanders to humble Spain, so the Spaniards are now glad of
succor of the United Provinces to humble the Pride of France: And the
Moderation and Flegin of the Hollanders, proves very effectual to abate the
Fury of the French, which only affrights those that fear it, and are not
acquainted with it.

In the Year 1672. the United Provinces alone made Head against the Two Potent
Kings of France and England, were Victorious at Sea, and constrained the latter
to make a Peace, and the other su'd for the Peace of Nimeghen. Though through a
remissness Injurious to the Honor of the Parties, the Plenipotentiaries, out
of a Compliance not to be endured, suffered the slipping in of those Words,
That the King of France being desirous to restore Peace to Europe, etc. Whereas
it was he that begged for it, and made such Condescentions to the City of
Amsterdam, that she consented to it; so that to speak properly, 'twas she, and
not Lewis XIV. that restored Peace to Europe. But in regard it was made without
any great Precautions, and without taking any other Guarranty, then the
Sincerity of a Prince who never had any, therefore it lasted but a short while;
and within the space of Six Years, the Peace-Restorer committed several
Hostilities, took many Cities and Fortresses, so that there was need of a new
Peace, and a Truce followed, to the end he might retain what he had usurped.
Nor were all these Treaties Mounds sufficiently strong to restrain the
impetuous Torrent. He breaks through all the Ties of Sanctity and Religion, and
falls upon Philipsburgh, the loss of which was attended with several other
scurvy Inconveniences. Now upon what Foundation could the States of the United
Provinces treat with a King that observed no Rule of common Morality, but broke
his Faith, his Word, his Promise, even with the Emperor himself. Certain
barbarous People, whom Alexander the Great would have obliged to swear Fidelity
to him, returned him answer, That they never swore any Oaths, but gave their
Word, which they kept inviolably; from whence I observe that they were not
French.

The Ministry of the Court of France imagines with it self, that Lewis XIV. not
having usurped any thing upon the Republic of the United Provinces, during the
Peace, nor won any Place from her, during the War, that it would be always an
easy thing for their Monarch to make a Peace with her: besides that, the
Hollanders are greatly inclined to Peace, by reason of their Trade, which is
much obstructed in time of War; neither is it the Interest of a Republic, to
enlarge her Confines, or to add new Provinces to those she has already, but to
preserve United what already she possesses, and to secure her Frontiers the
best she can. But though France may be in the Right, as to some Circumstances,
yet is she deceived in the main: For it is not so easy to make a Peace with
the Hollanders, as the King of France imagines. Those People, though naturally
good-natured and easy, are not readily twice deluded. That Prudence which
never forsakes the Counsels of their Sovereigns, has seen, by the Consequences
of the Peace of Nimeghen, that there is no trusting to France; but that all her
Promises and Treaties were only mere Amusements, that is to say, a sort of
Recoiling to fetch the greater Leap: he must be a very mean Politician, and
very dull-sighted, who does not percieve, that France had a great mind to have
made her self Mistress of the United Provinces, their Wealth, and their
Religion; those three things so precious and so necessary, that the Inhabitants
neither can nor ought to lose 'em, but with their Lives. And therefore as they
ventured all to purchase those Blessings, so they will use their utmost
Endeavors to preserve 'em, as the most precious Jewels of the Republic. For
the Hollanders are not like King James, who left the care of his Crown to the
Count of Lausune, while he ran away before the Battle of the Boyne, and before
his Person was in any evident Danger.

France knows not as yet the strength of the United Provinces, as being
ignorant of what she can do, if once she be hard put to it: Seeing that if they
could find the way, not only to shake off the Chains of Servitude, but to make
head for several Years against one of the most Potent, and one of the greatest
Monarchs of Europe, Philip II. and come off with Honor, why should the
Ministers of France flatter themselves under this Reign that they are able to
destroy 'em? It Is only because Men are apt to flatter themselves that they can
compass what they desire; and generally they never care to be dis-abus'd, in
regard that Hope supports, and in some measure, satisfies an ambitious Mind.
Usually the Court of France is crowded with Flatterers, who make no other
Prayers then for the Glory of their Monarch, and sing no other Hymns then in
his Praise; all their Opera's sound forth the Grandeur and the Conquests of
their new Deity, Jupiter-Bourbon. They persuade him that he was sent into the
World to reign by himself, and to subdue all the People of the Earth under his
Dominion; they have given him the Surname of Dieu-donne, or God's Gift, and
they make their Oblations to the immortal Man, Viro Immortali. To which purpose
they have erected his Statue in the Piazza of Victory, at Paris, to the end
that all his Subjects should pay the same Homages to his Figure as to his
Person. Marshal de la Fueillade would needs pay it the first Honors: For being
a Colonel of the Foot-Regiment of Guards, he marched his whole Regiment before
the Idol, saluted it with his Pike, and ordered all his Soldiers to salute it
with a Royal Volley; insomuch that at first there was no Body durst pass by it,
without some kind of Genuflexion. And by that Statue it is that Men may make a
shrewd Conjecture of the Design and good Intentions of Lewis XIV. since he had
caused to be engraved upon the Predestal of the Idol, the Hollanders, as well
as other Nations linked and chained together like Slaves under his Feet. By
which it is easy to discern, as in a Mirror, the very inside of Lewis XIV. and
his kind Intentions toward the United Provinces, in case he could attain his
Ends. And he discovered his wicked Purposes so openly, after he thought himself
assured of King James, upon his Elevation to the Throne by the hastened Death
of Charles II. that 'twas the public Discourse in the Court of France, how
they were going to fall upon the Hollanders, and that they would drown their
Provinces under Water, to the end they might never rise again, to vex the King
by their opposing his just Designs. This was the common Language of the Court,
and he that should have contradicted it, would have been Empal'd after the
Turkish manner. I must confess, that at present they see with other Eyes at the
French Court, and their Language is quite another thing. It Is the main Business
of the Court at this time to flatter and caress the Hollanders, by that means
if she can to disburthen her self of a War too ponderous for a Kingdom groaning
under Famine and many other Calamities; and which are more likely to increase
then abate. So that if the United Provinces, together with the rest of the
Confederates, do but stand their station, though they should gain no ground upon
the Enemy, France must be forced to condescend to what Conditions they please.

But say some of the more peaceful and quiet sort of People, what Assurances
have we of being able to constrain the King who makes Head against all the
Confederates, to restore to Spain so many Towns and Fortresses, and so well
fortified, which he has in his Hands, to the end the Hollanders may enlarge
their Barriers? I answer, That in this War the King of France is in an
Association with the Turk, who by the Diversion he makes, cuts out Work for the
most considerable Forces of the Emperor and Empire: That the Ottoman Empire
consists of a capricious and giddy-headed People, who have been several times
of late, and indeed upon all the most considerable Occasions defeated, and that
by consequences there is nothing of certainty for France to trust to on that
side, who only sways the Port by the force of her Money, and a few frivolous
Promises. So that there needs no more then an Insurrection of the People, or a
humor of the Grand Signior, the Prime Vizier, or the Mufti, to produce a
Treaty of Peace and overturn all the Hopes of France. Besides, that if we do
but consider the bottom of things, we shall find that this War which the Turk
continues with so many Disadvantages, costs the French Yearly those Sums which
they are unwilling to boast of. Secondly, Lewis XIV. alone by himself, is bound
to pay and maintain above Four hundred thousand Men, to make head against his
Enemies. Whereas the Confederates are not bound to keep so many Men in constant
Pay; for the supply of which, every one bears his Proportion: nor does he that
is most burdened bear a Fourth part of the Load of France. It Is true, the Body
of the Confederates is a bulky Fabric, but it moves upon several Engines which
makes it go the surer. Now I dare maintain, that it is impossible for the King
of France, to act alone by himself, above Six Years, as he does, against a
Confederated Body, without ruining his People. At the long-run the Soldier
turns the Citizen out of his House, and reduces him to beggary for want of
Trade: The Taxes devour that little which the Inhabitants have heaped up during
the Peace. The Treasury fails because the Springs are grown dry; the Merchant
is ruined by his Losses. The Customs and Gabells, which were formerly the best
and most ready Money the King had, by reason of the great quantity of Salt that
used to be uttered all over the Kingdom, must needs be very low, when People
want Money to buy Bread more then Salt, And it is not long since that I heard
one of the Farmers say, That the Gabells, of Salt are fallen above half in
half; and it is the same thing with all the other Farms in France. A Monarch
without a full Exchequer, is like a Man without Hands and Eyes.

Of all the Sovereign Puissances at present in Confederacy with France, there
is not any one can contribute more to her Ruin, then the united Provinces, and
that two ways: the one by preventing all Commerce and all manner of Trade with
France, and forbidding under severe Penalties the carrying of Provision and
Corn to the Enemies Country; in regard that Merchants are greedy of Gain, and
care not whether they supply Friends or Enemies; insomuch that it is said of
some People, to express their Extraordinary Thirst after Profit, that if there
were a Fair or Market in Hell, they would carry their Goods to the Infernal
Gate, so they might put 'em off. The Other way to Ruin France, is to make
themselves Masters of the Sea, which they might easily do in respect of the
French, and by that means prevent any thing for going or coming out of the
French Ports. Add to this, the Necessity that France is in to send for Horses
into the United Provinces, to remount her Cavalry, which it is in the Power of
the States with ease to prevent.

Besides all this, the United Provinces have had a vast advantage over France
during the Continuance of this War, by the Trade which she has driven all along
into the Indies, Italy, Turkey, Spain, England, the Baltic Sea etc. whereas the
French have only Italy and Turkey free to themselves: for if they will have any
thing from the Baltic Sea, they must put up Swedish or Danish Colors to
protect 'em from the English. On the other side, I must confess that several
Merchants Ships of both Nations fall into the Hands of the French Capers, and a
far greater Number then those that are taken either by Dutch or English. but
then we must consider that there are a hundred English and Dutch Ships for one
miserable Frenchman, continually trading upon the Sea; and many times our
Capers meet with French Prizes that are hardly worth the Taking. Then again the
Number of French Privateers surpasses double and Treble the Number of the
Dutch; in regard that the French Merchants having nothing else to do with their
Vessels, turn 'em all into Privateers, that so they may not lie idle. Insomuch
that all the Ports of France are become Nests of Pirates and Searovers only.
Nor do we find all this while that their ill-gotten Purchases enrich either the
Sovereign or the People. For according to the common Proverb, That which is got
with the Flute is spent with the Drum. And therefore it is, that the
Inhabitants of St. Malo's and some other Ports of France are not a little
troubled, that they have no better employment then to addict themselves to
Pyracy; but their Trade with Holland and Spain being quite ruined for the
present, they are constrained to turn Sea-rovers for their Subsistence.

Now then we may assure our selves that it is so far from being the Interest of
France to ruin and destroy the United Provinces, that it is the Study of all
her most serious Policy to gain their Friendship, and inveigle 'em by fair
Promises to accept a Peace, either separate or general, because the Intercourse
between the two States in times of Peace, brings more Profit to France then all
the rest of Europe besides. But this Peace is not to be obtained by France
either from the United Provinces or from any other of the Confederates but upon
safe Conditions. For to such a Dilemma has the Most Christian King reduced
himself, by beginning an Unjust and Cruel War, neither provoked nor compelled
to it by any other Motives then those of an Inordinate Ambition. So that it may
be said of the Sun, which Lewis XIV. has made choice of for his Impress, that
it resembles the Sun in March, which stirs and raises the Humors of the Body,
but has not Heat sufficient to consume their Malignity.

To say Truth, France may be looked upon as one of the worst Neighbors in the
World: for she lets no Prince along that has the Misfortune to lie near her. So
that after Lorraine, the Spanish Low Countries and the United Provinces had
felt the Effects of her Fury, she began again to prosecute her Old Designs upon
Savoy. And the First course she took to get footing in that Family, was by the
means of several Matches with French Princesses, to the End she might have her
Spies and Creatures in the very Beds of those Princes. For that is one of the
most Refined Pieces f French Policy for the King to make the Matches himself
and to give 'em their Dowry, to engage 'em the more Cordially to his Interests.
And at the same time he sends 'em home to their New Spouses, full of Great
Idea's of the Monarch of France, and the vast Obligations which they owe him,
besides that before their Departure, he causes 'em to Swear upon the Holy
Evangelists, That for the future they shall be absolutely devoted to France;
that they shall uphold the Interests of that Crown at all Times and against all
Persons whatever, in the Courts where they reside, and shall inform either him
or his Ministers of all that passes in their Husbands Cabinets; and blindly
obey the Orders that are sent 'em by the King, or given by his Minister
residing in the Court. And then there is no reason to wonder at the Troubles
which Henrietta Maria, and Christina, the Daughters of Hen. IV. married by
Lewis XIII. into England and Savoy, occasioned in those Countries. The first
never ceasing till by her ill Conduct and exasperating her Husband to act
contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, she had brought Charles I. to an Untimely
End; and her going into England may be said to be as it were the Source and
Leaven of all the Misfortunes that ensued in our days.

Leaving England, take a view of the greatest part of all the other Courts of
Europe, and you shall find French Princesses who play their Parts with the
Louidores of France. In Tuscany, we have seen the present Grand Duke, that he
might procure his own Peace at home, send a Bill of Divorce to the Grand
Duchess, his Wife, (who is a Princess of the House of Orleance) and return her
back to France, to undergo the same hard Fortune as Henrietta Maria, wasting
the remainder of her Days in a mean Condition, depending upon the inconstant
Humor of the King of France. To whom such a return cannot choose but be a
tacit Reproach of the Misfortune befallen her for upholding his Interests: But
in regard that Large Consciences are all the Mode of the Court of France, they
can never be injured by Petty Stings or little Keckings. If you look upon
Portugal, you shall find there Mademoiselle d' Aumale married to two Brothers
one after another though the first were alive at the time of the second Marriage.
King Alphonso VI. somewhat morose by nature, and not willing to comply with the
Counsels and Caresses of that Princess, the Court of France found a way to be
rid of that Prince, who was banished to the Islands of Tercera, and his
Marriage after dissolved by the Duke of Mercoeur, the Queen's Uncle, made a
Cardinal at the Solicitation of France, and sent Legate into Portugal with a
design to out the Nuptial knot (a Secret all this while unknown to the Pope,
who was ignorant of the Contrivances of the French Court) and though that during
the Three first Months of the Marriage it was given out that the Queen was with
Child, yet they parted the Wedded Couple for all that, under pretense of
Impotency, and married her to Don Pedro, Successor to the Crown and her
Husband's Brother; and if Charles II. of England would have consented to a
Divorce between Him and Queen Katherine, the Court of France had designed him
the Princess of Nevers. Spain has several times experienced to her cost, the
fatal Consequences of Matches with France: and his Royal Highness of Savoy at
present ruling, had been within a Finger's breadth of losing his Territories,
had he pursued his Journey into Portugal, to espouse the Infanta, at the
earnest Solicitation of the Princess his Mother who is a French Woman, and by
the Persuasion and Management of the Court of France, who were very Industrious
to procure that Match, on purpose to remove the Duke out of his Dominions, and
oblige him to stay in Portugal in Hopes of a Crown, while France took the
Opportunity to make himself Master of Biemont and Savoy.

France has been a long time contriving and studying for a favorable Pretense
to color the the Execution of this Design. Harry the Great in his time agreed
with the Duke of Savoy, that upon his resigning up to him all the Pretensions
that the Duke had in Milanois, he should oblige himself to conquer it, and
afterward exchange it for such Lands as the Duke held on this side the
Mountains, which consist in Genevois, all the Principality of Nissa, the County
of Foussigni, and a part of Savoy as far as the Alps; to the end it might be in
his Power to call himself Master from the Pyreneans to the Alps. But the
Tragical End of Hen. IV. put a stop to that Enterprise. However it did not
quench the greedy Thirst of the Court of France, which was rather increased
then abated, as we have seen, by what was aimed at by the Match with Portugal,
which Heaven prevented by a Kind of Miracle, his Royal Highness having already
taken leave of his Estates.

The Court of France has always so narrowly watched the Duke, that she thought
it impossible for him to escape her Trains, or to withdraw himself from the
King's Pleasure, who had so near a Relation at the Court of Turin, that he had
Intelligence of every thing which was acted there, and of every Petty
Resolution that was taken; and the main Business was to hold the Duke under the
King's Ferula; but above all, from holding any Correspondence with the House of
Austria. And for proof of the Truth of this, it may be remembered that the Duke
of Savoy could not go for his Diversion to Venice with his Electoral Highness
of Bavaria, but he was followed and watched by the Envoy of France, who was
then at his Court, and who knew so well to work and undermine with his
Louidores, that he was informed of all that past at that Interview. Which gave
the First Occasion that Kindled the Fire of the War at present between France
and Savoy. And though there be a great Disproportion between the two Contenders,
nevertheless the Duke gives no small disturbance and trouble to the Court of
France, whether it be by the Alliances which the Duke has entered into, or by
the Constitution of the Italian Climate, which has always cost France a world
of Men, as having been always called the Churchyard for the French; and
notwithstanding the inequality of Puissance, the King has been constrained to
keep up a numerous and chargeable Army on that side, to which he is obliged to
send, at vast Expenses out of the Dauphinate and Provence, his Ammunition and
Provision, for their Subsistence. Moreover France never imagined that the Duke
of Savoy could or durst have undertaken any thing against her. For which reason
the Policy of France never thought it worth while to fortify her Frontiers on
that side, to prevent in time of War the Savoyards from entering into Provence
and the Dauphinate. Nor was ever the King more surpised, or madder, then when
he heard that the Confederates had got footing in those two Provinces. So that
had it not been for the Accident that befell his Royal Highness, and the
unhappy Consequences of his confiding too much in the Jesuits of Ambrune, which
was in part the Cause of the Return of his Army, certain it is that the Duke
had entered Victorious into Grenoble. The Dread of his March reached not only
to Lion, but as far as Paris. A good part of the Inhabitants of the Dauphinate
and Provence had already quitted their Country, but the Greatest part
impatiently waited for the Conqueror's coming to deliver them out of their
Misery, and break their Chains: but they were frustrated in their Hopes for the
Reasons above mentioned. The Court of France always flattered her self till
now, that if she restored to the Duke of Savoy some Town that she had taken
from him, that he would be glad to renew his Alliance with her: Nay, she
believed it an Honor which he would sue for; but she found her self deceived.
For she met with a Haughty and undaunted Prince, who would not listen to any
Proposals that tended to disunite him from his Confederates: and besides,
knowing France too well, his Royal Highness was absolutely convinced that there
was no relying upon the Promises and Word of a King, much less upon the Faith
of his Ministers, who glory in deceiving those with whom they have to deal, if
any Benefit redounds from thence to France. The Court of France had her Aim and
her Prospects in her Offers which she made last to the Duke of Savoy, and it
was the Strife of her Policy to bring him off from the Confederates, and to
have rendered him liable to their Ill Opinion; who would doubtless have
abandoned him, and thereby have left France at her Liberty to have invaded his
Country. For should France resign to the Duke all the Places she had taken from
him, but keep Pignerol and Casal in his Hands, that were still no more then
lying always between the Hammer and the Avnil. His Royal Highness therefore
having drawn his Sword against France, that continually oppressed him, it
behooves him never to sheath it again, till he has procured his full Freedom,
and secured himself from future Dangers, seeing he may well expect to be
sincerely succored by the Confederates, who never will forsake him, but always
stick by him as hitherto they have done. So much the rather, because they may
be able in case the Catholic King dies without Issue, to seat him in a better
Station, to which he has already Great Pretensions by the Marriage of Charles
Emanuel, in the Year 1561. with Katherine, Infanta of Spain, the Daughter of
Philip II. So that by the Addition of Piemont to Milanois, he may take upon him
the Name and Title of King of Lombardy: Which is an Advantage he can never
attain to, if he depart from the Interests of the House of Austria, to embrace
the Promises of France, which early or late will deceive him.

It Is never to be thought that France will ever mend, or that she will act for
the future with more Fidelity then hitherto she has done. To trust to her,
would be for a Man to put a willing Cheat upon himself. The Blackmoor can never
change his Skin, nor the Leopard alter his Spots: So France can never help her
Usurping upon her Neighbors: Ambition is an inveterate Disease that has seized
her, never to be Cured, but by the Prosperity of the Confederates. I know very
well that they flatter his Highness with a Match between the Duke of Burgundy
(the Dauphin's Eldest Son, and who in his Turn may wear the Diadem of France)
with one of the Young Princesses of Savoy: but this is still to cast Oil into
the Fire, and give France a New Handle to lay hold on, who is ready enough to
grasp all Advantages without giving her an Opportunity. These are Baits, which
the Emissaries of France throw about at a venture, to try whether they will
take or no. If not, however it fails not to make some Impression in the Breasts
of the Ladies, who being Members of the Frail Sex, easily fall into the Snare,
and willingly feed themselves with worldly Honors, never considering what they
will cost 'em, nor the Dangers that attend 'em.

The Antipathy between the Danes and Swedes, whether it proceeds from any
Hatred of the two Nations one of another, or from Interest of Trade, by reason
that the Dominions of Both Kings lie so close together, has in some measure
paralleled 'em with France and Spain. Which is the Reason that the King of
France has always endeavored to procure their Amity; or at least to have the
one or the other on his side. And this has been his Care all along during this
War, which, began in 1672. at what time Sweden declared openly for France. Though
he repented of it afterward; whether it were by reason of his Ill Success and
the Advantage of the Electour of Brandenburgh, during that War, or the
Infidelity of the Court of France, so far from observing her Word, that she
never paid the Money which she promised to that Crown, but on the other side
deprived the Northern Prince of his Duchy of Deux Ponts. Which ill Usage lost
the French all their Credit in the Court of Sweden, where they were afterward
looked upon as Cheats: insomuch that the Good Correspondence formerly between
those two Nations turned into Hatred and Scorn. After this Change, in regard
the Policy of France found it Convenient to have one of these two Northern
Princes tacked to her Interests, she cast her Affection upon Danemark, and so
well plied the Ministers of that Court, with her Louidores, that now she
governs 'em as she Pleases, and makes 'em dance to the French Airs. I must
acknowledge that the King of France pays the Violins, but still Levis XIV. has
the Pleasure to see the Danes dance and foot it to his advantage. The Siege of
Ratz^nburgh cost France Three hundred Thousand Crowns, which were paid at
Hamborough, upon throwing the First Bomb into that Fortress. For the Policy of
the Court of France would needs venture that Sum at a time when she had little
reason to have spared it, in hopes that this Siege would have made a notable
Diversion, and that all the Princes of the House of Luneburg would have
recalled all their Forces from the Low Countries and the Rhine, to defend that
Place. But here the French were cully'd by the Danes. For the Difference was
made up between both Parties, France not being able to prevent the
Reconciliation, which seemed to her, to have been Impossible. But this is not
the First Attempt of the Court of France that has come to nothing: So that it
cannot be said that she takes her measures so truly as never to be mistaken; as
her Emissaries give out with high applause. For to hear them Chatter, a man
would swear that the Resolves of the Cabinet of their Great Monarch were the
Decrees of Heaven that never err; which France does often and more frequently
then she would her self.

In the Present Conjuncture, France ready to sink under the Burden of a Long
and Chargeable War, makes use of Danish Flags and Vessels, to get Corn and
Naval Stores for her Men of War. In short, at present she embraces the Danes
whom she contemned before, as her only Patrons and Deliverers to whom she can
have Recourse: and she would fain have the King of Danemark declare War against
the United Provinces. The Minister of France residing at Coppenhaghen, is
continually beating his Brains day and night, to furnish the Danish Ministers
with Pretenses to begin a Rupture; he promises Ships and Money to assist 'em,
and that though it should be their Misfortune to come by the worst, yet upon the
making of the Peace he would never forsake 'em, no more then he did he Swede
when the Peace of Nimeghen was concluded. The Louidores of France are most
alluring Baits at the Court of Coppenhaghen, but their Interest so undeniably
requires 'em to hold a good Correspondence with the Hollanders rather then with
any other Nation, that only that Consideration out-b^llances all the Golden
Persuasions of the French Ambassador Bonrepos; who having quitted his Religion
to please his Master, labors by all the Artifices of Fallacy and Deceit, to
become serviceable to him, in acknowledgment of the Honor done him in sending
him upon an Embassy for which he thought him a more fit Person then any Body
else, by reason of his Employment in the Sea Affairs under the Marquis of
Segnalai.

But that which most embarrases France and Danemark both together, is this,
that Swedeland, which is the far more potent Kingdom of the two, being engaged
in a strict Alliance with the Emperor and the United Provinces, and having also
Pretensions to Danemark, will not be wanting to cross the Enterprises of the
Danish King, who, all things being considered, can never hope for any great
Assistance from the French, in the Present Conjuncture. Moreover such is the
Jealousy between those two Nations upon the score of Trade, that the Danes are
always afraid least the Swedes should be too hard for 'em, and agree with the
Hollanders to furnish 'em with all the Wood and other Naval Stores, which
otherwise they fetch from Danemark, and which would be a loss to 'em that
France would never be able to repair.

If the King of France cannot oblige Danemark to break with the United
Provinces, he is bound at least to procure as much Succor as he can from the
North, and to make use of Danish Colors, to pass freely without molestation,
with promise to reimburse all the Losses which the Danes shall sustain by their
Protection: in regard the Danish Ministers readily foresee that so great a
Number of Passports which they give, for Money, to al Vessels, and all sorts of
Nations that desire 'em, must at length open the Eyes of the Confederates, and
force 'em to put a stop to a Trade that only serves to carry Counter band Goods
into France, contrary to Justice and Reason, and to the prejudice of the
Treaties. Bonrepos does all he can to continue this Game, and he keeps by him
whole Reams of Blank Passports, to fill 'em up in favor of those who desire
'em; and to encourge 'em to sail France he gives 'em to some, and promises 'em
to others, and bequeaths himself a hundred Times a day to the Devil to assure
'em of the Honesty and Sincerity of his Master. In short, that Ambassador
takes a world of Pains; so that if he succeed in his Negotiation, the King his
Master may well bestow upon him the Collar of the Order of St. Lewis, in
recompense of his Toil and Labor, and in exchange for his Religion.

The Count d' Avaux, a Cunning and Crafty Minister, at present the French
Ambassador at Sweden, is so well known in the World, that we should do him
wrong to write his Panegyric. He acted his part so well during his Embassy at
the Hague, that his Master sent him to King James to assist him with his
Counsel during the Heroic Expedition of that Prince in Ireland. His
Instructions are not altogether the same with those of Bonrepos's at
Coppenhaghen, because those two Courts are not both of one Opinion; and for
that the Promises of France have not that Reputation at Stockholm as at
Coppenhaghen. And therefore while Bonrepos presses the Danes to a Rupture, d'
Avaux only sollicits the Court of Sweden to stand Neuter, and to continue their
Trade with France, or instead of that, to grant Passports to such as shall
desire 'em, to the end that Sweden and Danemark may be equally concerned, in
case the Confederates should take disgust at the Great Number which the Dan^s
give out to all Comers. And indeed it is to be said, to the Praise of Sweden,
that that Crown has always acted sincerely with her Confederates, and even with
France it self, at a time when Sweden could not have reaped any great
Advantages by a Correspondence with her; and when no less sedulous Endeavors
were used to have drawn off the Court of Sweden from her. France has always
courted Sweden, to remove the Obstacles that continually lie in her way: which
is the Reason of that Infidelity of the French, who break with their Allies at
all times, when the Humor takes 'em; and well understand that Sweden, being so
potent and considerable, is able to counterpoize Affairs, provided she will but
concern her self: For in that respect she has always observed a very prudent
Conduct, neither does the approve all the Invasions of the French. She knows
the Truth of what M. Lyonne reports in his Memoirs, where he says, That there
is not any State, which is not bound to oppose the Aggrandizement of the Court
of France; and Sweden above all the rest seeing that if the King had taken the
Low Countries, he would have taken no further notice of her, as believing he
had no more Occasion for her. This is a solid Expression and to the purpose,
and ought to make a deep Impression in the minds of those who have prejudice
against the Court of Sweden, either deluded by the Flatteries of the Ministers
of France, or some base and sordid Interest of their own, which greatly
prevails in the world, and leads a world of People astray. But certain it is,
that Sweden has long since sounded the Ambition and Arms of France, more
especially at the Peace of Osnabrug; and if at any time she hearkens to the
Ministers of France, it is without doubt because she finds some little pleasure
in dreining France, and doing her but little Good.

It Is also certain and visible that the Ministers of Sweden and Danemark, who
reside in Foreign Courts, and more especially in those of the Confederates, are
frequently and vigorously assailed by the Emissaries of the French, on purpose
to fish out, how Squares go among the Confederates, and may well retort upon
the French Satan's, the Words of the Lord's Prayer, Lead us not into Temptation,
but deliver from Evil: but above all, from the Evil Spirits of France, that
continually environ us. For indeed a man ought to be shod with Frost-Nails, to
preserve himself from falling in such slippery Ground, and he that can surmount
those Temptations, may well be numbered in the Catalogue of Upright Ministers,
and Faithful to the Interests of his Master.

Corruption or Bribery is now a General Mischief in the world, but never any
advanced the Price of it so high as the King of France: for most certain it is,
that that one single Expense amounts to above Twenty Millions a Year. For it is
a Thing past all dispute, that France upholds her self more by her Gold then by
her Sword. It Is true, she is many times put to her Plunges in times of War,
which dreins her Exchequer, and enforces her to advance her Coin; by which she
gains considerably. Formerly instead of enhauncing her Money, France made use
of another Stratagem, which was to coin Louidores raised in value, but mixed
with a baser Alloy then those that went current in the Kingdom, which were
distinguished by a little Mark quite different from others. And some there are
in the Court of Danemark, who if they durst own the Thing, could bring a Cloud
of Witnesses to make it out; as having experienced upon several Occasions the
full swing that French Knavery allowed it self. I know likewise, that the Thing
was murmured at, but the Cheat passed for that time, upon promise of doing
better the next time. Therefore Charles II. King of England, who was well
acquainted with the Knavery of France when he received any French Pension,
which was usually paid him in Louidores, ordered the Receivers to cut 'em in
two pieces, to see what Metal they were made of; and then caused 'em to be
refined into Guinea's. So natural it is for the Court of France, not to leave
any Cheat omitted to defraud all those that rely upon her.

As for Poland, in regard it is a Kingdom remote from France, it can do her
neither any great Good, nor any great Harm; nor is there much Trade or much
Communication between the Two Nations. Corn is the Only Merchandise wherein
Poland abounds, and which it Transports from Dantzick into Foreign Countries.
But the Kings of Poland may in some measure sometimes be profitable to the
Designs of France, though it were only to molest the Emperor in many occasions
that may and frequently do fall out. For this Reason the King of France takes
Great Care to send an Ambassador with Money to the Dyets, upon the Election of
a New King; or else if they are not married, to offer 'em a Princess born in
France; and it is very probable that the French Ambassador Beauvais, and
Cardinal Fou^bin, who was then at the Diet in Poland, contributed very much to
the Election of the Present King; for which he has not been ungrateful. However
he was guilty of two Bold Strokes, which though they were greatly for his Honor,
were no way delightful to France. The First was the King of Poland's March to
the Relief of Vienna, which was effectually performed with the loss of 60000
Turks to the great Grief of Lewis XIV. and contrary to his Expectation and his
Wishes. and though some Remains of Decorum and Honor retained the Court of
France from openly displaying her Resentment, yet the Silence of the French
discovered how much they were vexed and mortified by it, at a time when all
Europe resounded with loud Acclamations of Joy and Gladness, and all the
Churches, with Thanks givings to Heaven. Only the Sorrow of France notoriously
displayed it self, by her Prohibiting the Bishops of the Conquered Cities in
the Low Countries to suffer Te Deums to be sung within their Diocesses.

The second Blow which his Majesty of Poland gave to the Contrivances of
France, was the Marriage of Prince James to one of the Princesses of Newburgh,
Sister to the Empress, notwithstanding all the Oppositions of the French
Ministers, and particularly of the Marquis of Arquin the Queen's Father;
wherein the Contests grew so high, that the King of France ordered one of his
Ministers to tell his Majesty of Poland, That since he could not hinder the
Marriage, he would hinder the Prince from being King. But in these two Affairs
the Polanders were guided by their real Interests; which was to bring down and
ruin the Turks, their sworn Enemy and near Neighbor, as also assure to
themselves the Amity and Alliance of the Emperor, and the Imperial Protection
for the Prince his Son, when the Throne should become vacant.

But if the King of France proved unsuccessful in the main, he has had his
fatisfaction in Part. For it is visible that his Intrigues in the Court of
Poland have a long time hindered his Polish Majesty from being Master of
Gaminieck: for what could else have hindered him but the French Louidores? more
especially seeing the Polanders, ever since this War have had only to deal with
a beaten, baffled Enemy, whom their Prince had defeated, and forced to rise
from before the Walls of Vienna with Ignominy and a Prodigious Slaughter.
Nevertheless these Great Advantages produced no great Effect; though the Pope
still continued his Supplies of Money to carry on the War. But the reason is
plain: for the Pernicious Policy of the Court of France, who was resolved to
march to the Succor of the Turk, her dear Confederate, wrought so powerfully
at the Court of Poland, by means of the Queen, and Great Presents, that the
Louidores which tarnish'd the Honor of Poland, surmounted the Pope's Piety and
his charitable Assistance both together. Moreover, the King of Poland being
naturally Thrifty, and rightly judging that the Prince his Son may one day one
day have need of ready Money, to hoist him into the Throne, had so much power
over himself, and so much presence of Mind as to keep both the Assistance of
Rome, and the French Pension. His Majesty of Poland who is a wise and an
understanding Prince, knows also that Money is a good Moveable at a time of
Need, and by a Knack of Prudence, the Critics may call it Pitiful, Mechanic,
and below himself if they please, he provides an Apple against he comes to be
adry. But if this be the King's Weakness, it is the Strength of the Prince his
Son.

The Policy of France has this particular Gift, that it carefully studies the
Inclination of Princes, the weak sides, and where lies the strength of those
Courts into which she strives to introduce her self, and get to be Mistress or
Misrule. Thither she sends such Persons as are proper for the Genius of the
People, either as Public Ministers, or private Spies. For Example, to sent to
the Courts of Italy, where Gallantry and Courtship abounds, such Persons whose
Principal Virtue consists in hard Drinking would be an Idle Thing, and spoil
all. No, the Court of France is more refin'dly cunning then so; she reserves
her Lovers of Bacchus's Liquor for the Courts of Germany, where the Temper of
the Climate induces the People to drink, on purpose to steel their Bodies
against Cold Weather, and there it is that frequently between the Pear and the
Cheese, they strike the Home-strokes and do their Business, when the Wine has
warmed their Courage. As for the Court of Poland, it is a Place where neither
Courtship nor the Pleasures of the Table are predominant, but the Powder of
Gold prevails with a witness; and indeed not only there, but in most part of
the Courts of Europe. There are few Courtiers and fewer Women, so void of
Ambition as to be proof against the Attacks of Money: I mean, that can refuse
to embrace his Interests, who courts 'em in Showers of Louidores. They are such
Irresistible Temptations to those that are short of Money, as it usually
happens in the Court of Poland, where Money does not tumble about
proportionable to the Expense, and where the Courtiers are not so thrifty as
the King. The French Men and French Women, who generally affect a Port
answerable to the Grandeur of their Prince, many times sacrifice their Fortunes
and their Honor, to render themselves useful to their Country; and such are
easily gained: A Director of Conscience works Miracles upon the Minds of such
People: and therefore the Policy of France is very Careful to maintain French,
both Men and women, in the Court of Poland; and the Ministers of France are so
dextrous as to recommend French Men to serve him, with the Character of Public
Ministers his Polish Courts, without any Expense to his Polish Majesty; while
France takes care to provide 'em a Maintenance; and by that means, the Court of
France is informed of all that passes, not only in respect of the Affairs of
Poland, but also of all that comes to the knowledge of the Ministers in those
Courts where they reside: those Ministers having sold themselves to France, and
only acting and actuated by the Spirit and Counsel of France their
Benefactress. As we have seen by Experience at the Hague, during the Residence
of the Sieur Moreau: and of which the Proceedings against Grandval and Demont
are authentic Proofs. We ought to be convinced, that France would never have
paid those Ministers, but that she received some Benefit by 'em; more
particularly in a time of War, when she cannot send Ambassadors to Princes in
Confederacy against Her. For though that France has not any public Minister in
the Courts of her Enemies, nevertheless we find she is informed of every thing
that passes there; she neglects nothing, but makes a dextrous Use of the Weak
side of Princes that are willing to listen to her, and takes her Advantage of
all Opportunities. It Is the chiefest, and indeed the Main Policy of France, to
surprise her Friends, as well as her Enemies; and therefore they had need be
always upon their Guard, and always distrustful of whatever France proposes to
'em.

The Kingdom of Portugal since the loss of the Battle in 1578. was possessed by
the Moors, and after that by the Spaniards till the Year 1641. at what time
John of Bragansa, assisted by France, and being the next Heir to the Crown, was
declared King of Portugal; after a general Revolt of the Kingdom, which not
being able any longer to endure the Oppression of the Spaniards, shook off
their Yoke under the Reign of Philip IV. The Kings of Spain always thought they
had an Ample Right to Portugal, by virtue of a Donation from the Cardinal of
Portugal the lawful Heir of the Crown after the Death of King Sebastian, his
Brother, who died without Issue. That Cardinal being unwilling to quit the
Priesthood, was pushed forward by the Solicitations of the Jesuits, who
besieged him in such a manner, that they never let him rest, till he had made a
Donation of the Kingdom of Portugal to Philip II. King of Spain; which could
not be done to the Prejudice of the Lawful Heirs, whom the Spaniards, contrary
to their Politics, suffered to live and grow up in Portugal. Nor did they lie
asleep, but laid hold of the first Opportunity, as has been already said. And
certain it is, that France, spurred on by her own Interest, contributed toward
it with all her Power: for indeed the Policy of France requiring the pulling
down and ruin of Spain, she could not take a better Course, then to dismember
and rend a whole Kingdom from the Spanish Puissance; in regard that Spain
decreasing in Dominions and Revenues, must needs decrease in Strength.

France, during the Reign of Lewis XIII. and the Minority of Lewis XIV. had
great cause to fear the Strength of Spain, but very little, to be afraid of the
Strength of Portugal, though separated from Spain. Quite the contrary, Portugal
might well make use of France to molest Spain, which visibly decreased and
perhaps will never be in a Condition again to pull that Thorn out of her Foot;
and to reduce Portugal under her Obedience. For after that Revolution which
followed that of the Low Countries, Spain languish'd away by degrees, and
Portugal increased both in Strength and Riches, and is become so Potent, that
alone by her self she can make head against Spain, which at this day resembles
a strong Man consumed and wasted by Inward Sickness and Distempers, and easily
overturned by the puny strength of a Child.

The Portuguezes therefore, who are good Politicians, understanding their own
Interest, leagued themselves with the Greatest Enemies of the Spaniards, that
is to say, the English and French, who in a time of necessity might openly
declare for 'em, if Spain should happen to be in a Condition to attack 'em. But
now Portugal has no need of Assistance against Spain: much rather she ought to
fortify her self against France, which in this Reign has looked with a
Covetous Eye upon the Wealth that arrives at Lisbon from the East and and West
Indies; and I am persuaded, that the Court of Portugal is truly convinced of
it. Which was the reason that enduc'd 'em, to the no small Vexation of France,
to seek the Friendship and Alliance of the House of Austria, by the Marriage of
Don Pedro to the Princess of Nieubrug.

However the Policy of France, that understands without all doubt the Design of
the Portuguezes, is careful at present to embrace the Friendship of the King of
Portugal, to the end that during the War she may have the free use of his
Ports, to fetch Provisions and Necessaries which she can have no where else.
And we have seen, not long since, that the French Men of War wanting Seamen,
and searing to be attacked by the English and Hollanders, supplied themselves
from the Coasts of Portugal. So that considering the Need which the French have
of the Portuguezes, would Don Pedro and his Council make the best of so
favorable an Opportunity, there is no doubt but the House of Austria, would
grant him very Advantageous Conditions, in case the Portuguezes would join with
the Confederates and declare War against France. And her Interest advises her
to it; for that if the Dauphin, after the death of the Catholic King, should
get the upper hand in Spain, there is no question to be made but he would revive
the Pretensions of Alphonso King of Arragon, and Philip II. King of Spain: for
by the same reason that formerly the Policy of France required her to support
Portugal, it would be then her Interest to ruin and make her self Master of
it. 'Twere well that all the other Courts of Europe would do as France does,
who foresees things at a Great Distance, and continually builds Designs upon a
Basis of Probable Futurity: and for fear of being deceived usually forms three
or four Contrivances which way to bring about one and the same Thing; so that
(...) one fail, another may hold. This is a Piece of Human Prudence that not
only prevents Surprise, but shows they way to undertake several Enterprises,
which else a Man would never have thought of. It Is a Maxim to be observed by
all Sovereigns, to mistrust even their nearest Allies, and so to act, as if
they were just ready to come to a Rupture; more especially they that border
upon France, that never observes Peace or Treaty any longer then she finds it
for her Convenience.

The City of Paris abounds in Persons full of Curiosity and Invention. Among
the rest, there are a Great Number of old Practitioners, who employ their Wits,
to get Money, in searching for Claims and Rights in Old Parchments, a good part
of which has served to feed the Rats and Mice, and to invent and set up Titles:
so that if they are but largely paid, they will prove their Benefactors
Descent from the Royal Race, though before that, he could hardly reckon a Groom
among all his Predecessors. These Antiquaries tell ye, that Portugal is
derived from Po^tus Gallorum. Thus you you see a Foundation laid for the
French to pretend, that Portugal belongs to France. Moreover there are still to
be seen among the Archives certain Ancient Registers (or if they are not there,
they can find 'em elsewhere) containing the Expenses that France was at some
Ages since, in assisting the Portuguezes against the Moors of Castile and
Andalusia, in the Reign of King Henry, who was of the House of Lorrain, and
married the Natural Daughter of Alphonfo King of Arragon, who gave him an Army
to conquer Portugal, or Lusitania, from the Moors. Now there would not need so
much, were this Affair once brought before the Tribunal of Metz, which is the
Sovereign and Irrevocable Court of Judicature to determine the Right of the
Dependences and Appendences of France. However the Germans would have the first
Right; in regard it was to the assistance of that Warlike Nation that Henry
was beholding for the Conquest of Lusitania, as also of Algarva, which is the
reason that the Germans enjoy such Privileges all over Portugal. But there is
the Mischief of it, that if the Case should come to be argued before the
Despotick Tribunal of Metz between the Germans and France, that Court would
never do the Germans Justice.

As for the Switzers, they are composed of Thirteen Cantons, which are as it
were so many Separate Provinces, free and independent one from another. These
Cantons having withdrawn themselves from their Subjection to the Emperor by
reason of the hard usage which they suffered under the German Governors,
bethought themselves of a Democratick Government, which they have upheld till
this present time after they had sustained several tedious Wars, and fought a
great number of Battles, always Victorious, protected by Heaven, and by that
means becoming so powerful as to be sought to by the Emperor and the
Neighboring Princes. They very rarely sent Ambassadors to the Potentates,
their Confederates, unless it were to renew an Alliance, or upon some
Extraordinary Occasion However the same Princes have generally their Ministers
residing among them, but more-especially France, whose Ambassador keeps his
Station at Soleurre, though it be one of the meanest Cantons, and that Berne be
one of the most powerful and the largest: for which we shall give the Reason in
due Place.

Any Prince who desires the Assembling of a Diet in Switzerland, must request
it by his Ambassador or Minister there residing; but he must pay for it: and
therefore they never refuse it to those that desire the Meeting, which would
not else be summoned, and consequently there would be no notice taken of the
Business there intended to be proposed. This same Coldness, natural to the
Switzers, makes me believe, that that Nation cares not so much for the
Friendship of their Confederates, as for their Money. However it be, this must
be agreed in their behalf, that they are not only faithful to what they
promise, but stout upon all occasions, as we may see by fourteen Battles which
they fouth with the Emperor F^^derick, and three others which they won from
Charles the Bold, the last Duke of Burgundy, and all the Brave Achievements
which they per orm'd in Italy, as well for, as against France, under the Reign
of Charles the VIII. Lewis XII. and Francis I. And for that reason it is, that
since that time the Greatest Potentates of Europe have always sought their
Friendship and their Alliance; and that the French have caressed 'em with a
great deal of Artifice and Money; not so much out of any Kindness which the
French have for the Switzers, or for the need which they have of their Men in
time of Peace, but for fear least the Cantons should enter into a Solemn
Engagement with the House of Austria. For which reason France is careful to
stipulate in all the Treaties which she renews with the Cantons, that they
shall not send above such a number of Men to any other Foreign Princes, and
those only for the Guards of their Bodies.

The Ambassador of France has made choice of Soleurre for the Place of his
Abode, because the Inhabitants of that Canton are all zealous Roman Catholics;
who pin their Faith with great Submission upon the Sincerity of their Curate:
and the Ambassador resides here, to show the Particular Honor which his
Master has for the Roman Catholic Cantons, above the Evangelick, and that the
Monks and Priests may have free Access to him, who bear a great Sway among the
Catholics. Moreover, the little Sums of Money which the Ambassador scatters
among the Chief of 'em, procure him Creatures, that still will be inclined to
the Interests of France, and readily stoop to the Lure. And by this means it
was, that the French got leave to build the Fortress of Huninghen, which as
long as it stands, will be a Hook in the Noses of the Inhabitants of Bale, to
lead 'em which way the Policy of France shall judge most convenient for her
purposes. Nor is it long since the Governor of that Fortress made an Essay
whether the Cannon of that Place would reach as far as the City, that he might
take his Measures accordingly. For whatsoever Protestations of Friendship
France at present makes to the Cantons, Lewis the XIV. had rather be their
Sovereign, then their Confederate; that Monarch has a long time cast a Covetous
Eye upon Bale and Geneva, and had e're this, been Master of 'em, had not other
Considerations kept him within Bounds; and were he once Master of those
Barricado's of Switzerland, the rest would soon be exposed to the Misfortune of
lying fit for his Convenience. He is a Fox; but he has Lyon's Claws; and he
makes use of his Head to deceive the Catholic Cantons, under the Specious
Pretense of Propagating Catholicity; but he reserves his Paws for the
Protestant Cantons.

There is no question, but that among the Switzers, among whom there are some
who have traveled and seen the World, there are to be found several Persons
sufficiently quick-sighted and Politic, and such as understand how Things are
carried. It Is not long since a Difference happened in the Canton of Glaris,
which France first kindled, and fomented to the utmost of her Power; but
Innocent the XI. quickly stifled it, by his Wisdom and Piety.

I am convinced that those Persons are deeply sensible of the Affronts which
France puts upon 'em from time to time, and with what Scorn she treats their
Ambassadors, the last of which, were forced to return without being able to
procure Audience of the King, after sedulous Applications to Colbert Croisy,
Secretary of State for the Foreign Affairs. But the more prudent sort of
Switzers, you will say, would fain have the Lion chained, and his Claws pared
before they fall upon him. To which I Answer, That the Switzers may contribute
very much toward the Chaining of the Lion, as furious as he seems to be, and
yet not openly declare themselves neither; by demanding the dismantling of
Huninghen, and for want of so doing, by recalling their Men out of France,
which compose the greatest part of the French Infantry, and are the only
Combatants well seconded by the Cavalry, upon which the French depend for all
their Success. The King of France is now Convinced of the Value of the
Switzers, and so has been, ever since Louvois's Ministry. Formerly they were
not well beloved at Court, nay, they were contemned; but since the Alteration
of the Face of Affairs, they are at present considered, for the Benefit which
France receives from 'em, like Twins that are tied together, and must dye
together. I must confess that the Establishment of the Swiss Regiments is worth
some Money to that Nation, and discharges the Country of abundance of idle lazy
People: but I Will maintain it, that the French Service is the Plague and
Destruction of vast numbers of Young Men of Good Protestant Families that ruin
themselves by the Debaucheries of Wine and Women, which always terminates in a
Revolt against their Religion and their Country. Which would never happen, if
they served the Protestant Princes. The Court of France knows well that she
cannot fasten an Officer of Quality to her Interests with a stronger Tie, so as
to make him absolutely forget his own Country, then by the Change of his
Religion. And therefore she Labors underhand by means of the Women and Monks;
and those Snares take Effect with the greatest part that are attacked by those
Vermin, as was seen by the Example of the Two Stoupa's.

Not to reckon the more Inferior Sort, all the Swiss Officers and Soldiers, as
well those that serve in France, as those that are sent to the Mines in Sweden,
I look upon 'em equally lost both to their Families and their Country; for they
never return again, unless they make their Escapes by some sort of Stratagem:
but it may be said, that the Pleasure and Voluptuousness of France is so great,
that they are pleased with their Misfortune. There they are bred, and there
they dye, to make room for other New Comers, who are Tempted thither like
Young Pigeons with the smell of Roasted Dogs.

France has had no place from whence to supply her self during this War, but
the Swiss Cantons: Some Seamen she may get indeed from the North: but for
Land-Soldiers, of necessity it behooves her to caress and embrace the Helvetian
Body, without whose Assistance the French would never be able to bring such
Numerous Armies into the Field: And the Switzers are the Only Persons upon
which the King of France may depend, so long as he keeps his Word with 'em, and
that he pays 'em what he contracts for, and what he promises. Nor will they
stand to the Losses of his enhauncing and re-inhauncing his Money. They must
have their Money paid according to the old value set down and agreed upon in
there Contracts; that is to say, the Louidores at Eleven Livres; and the White
Crowns at Sixty Sols. For the Switzers are thrifty Husbands, and send a good
part of their Pay to their Parents in Switzerland, where there is no Variation
of the Coin admitted.

Now it being so certain, as I have already said, that France stands in need of
the Switzers in this Conjuncture, this is the reason that the French
Ambassador residing in Switzerland, has Orders not to disgust 'em, nor give
'em the least Subject of Complaint, but in every Canton to caress all those in
particular who have the best Interest, and carry the greatest Sway, on purpose
to prevent 'em from entering into a more strict Alliance with the House of
Austria, the King of Great Britain, and the State of the United Provinces. For
which reason it was that the French Minister used all his Power and Interest to
stop the Levies which M. Cox, the King of Great Britain's Envoy would have
raised not long ago. But if the Business did not then succeed, France is
beholding for it to the want of Management in those that understood not the
right knack of dealing with the Switzers, seeing afterward others found the
way to discover the forward Inclinations of that Nation toward the
Confederates, by the Levies that were made underhand, which is a terrible Blow
to France, in regard that those new Regiments draw away a Great Number of their
fellow Countrymen out of the French Service, especially the Protestants.
However, we do not find that France dares to make any great noise about it,
moderating and restraining her Passion, till a more propitious Opportunity: but
in regard the Cantons on the other side may be assured that she Barrels it up,
and that if at present they escape Scot-free, yet whenever it lies in her
Power, France will never forget such heinous Provocations; therefore it is now
the Switzers Interests to labor with the rest, the humbling France, now the
Confederates are following her so close at the Heels. For the Lower France is
brought, the more the French will caress the Switzers, and seek their
Assistance; whereas in their Prosperity they slight and domineer over 'em, and
would utterly subdue 'em, were it in the Power of the Court of France, that
resembles Fire or the Sea, which never will acknowledge they have enough. But
at present, the Policy of the Ministers prompts em, as the wisest Course, to
temporize, and to oppose whatever is transacted to the Prejudice of France,
rather by Remonstrances and Presents, then by Force and Menaces.

As for the Turks, they have been all along Enemies of Christ and the
Christians; because the Gospel destroys their Alcaron. The Sultan takes upon
him the Title of Musulman, or Most Faithful, as the King of France assumes the
Title of Most Christian. Yet we know, that the Turkish Emperors have
established their Dominion by Cruelty only, and that their Throne is soder d
together with the Blood of a Great Number of Martyrs, and an Infinite number of
all sorts of People and Nations; yet notwithstanding all this, the Turk is at
present the sole Refuge of France, and she embraces him as her only Patron: She
is entered into a strict Alliance with the Ottoman Port; furnishes him with
Money, Cannon, and other Warlike Ammunition; supplies him with Able and Expert
Officers and Engineers, to the great damage of the Christians. And which was
more pernicious, the Policy of the Court of France exerted it self to that
degree, as to persuade the Turk to break the Truce with the Christians, two
Years before it came to be expired, merely to support the Rebellion of the
Hungarians, who according to the Opinion of the Ministers of France, were to
contribute toward the Ruin of the Empire and Emperor of the Christians. Had
the Bishop of Perefixe been living at this time, he must have been forced to
have recanted what he asserted in his History of Henry IV. where he says, That
the Valor of the French was made choice of by God, to support the Christian
Religion. Seeing that the Court of France labors nothing more earnestly then
to destroy the same Religion. She never minds whether or no the Turks change
the Churches into Mosquees, or set up the Standard of Mahomet above the Cross
of Christ, provided her Monarch satisfy his Ambition and become Master of the
Empire.

Though the Turks are People both Barbarous and altogether Infidels, nevertheless
they observe this Maxim, never to abandon those that put themselves under their
Protection, and to keep their Words and Promises; and this is one of the Points
of their Law. And therefore it is, that they acknowledge that all the
Misfortunes and Losses which they have sustained during this War, have
proceeded from their Breach of Faith and Truce. And this it was which spurred
'em on about two Years ago to send their Envoys to Vienna, with Offers of Peace
to the Emperor. Which hotly alarmed the Court of France; but she, being
Subtle and Crafty, took an Occasion to insinuate into the Turks, That they
might continue the War without any Scruple of Conscience, seeing they had
offered Peace to the Emperor, that he had refused it, and continued his
Hostilities against them; That now the Turks were to look upon the War as
purely defensive on their side; and the French Ambassador at the Port,
understood so well by Considerable Presents to gain the Grand Mufti to his
side, who is the Oracle of the Ottoman Court and consulted in all Cases of
Conscience, that the Infidel Pontiff embraced the Franch Divinity, and made it
out to the Sultan and the People, after the Return of the Envoys, that they
might continue the War without any scruple, and that their Submission to the
Christians, was a sufficient Expiation for the Crime they had committed. Nor is
it a difficult thing to persuade the Turks to these Things, who naturally hate
the Christians, and are easily induced to undertake their Destruction, and so
Self-interested, as readily to yield to the Temptations of Presents. Moreover
their Extraordinary Inclination and their Interest to recover Hungary which
they have lost, persuades 'em without any Reluctance to embrace the Proposals
of the Court of France, and to renew the League between 'em from time to time,
upon the Assurances, Promises, and Oaths of the French Ambassador, that his
Master will make no Peace with the Emperor, wherein the Turk shall not be
comprehended. And yet all the World knows how earnestly the Ministers of France
solicit the Confederates to make a Peace without mentioning the Turk in the
least: and it was an Argument of the French at Rome to spur up the Pope, that a
Peace would give the Emperor great Advantages, and strengthen him to carry on
his Conquests to the very Walls of Constantinople (for which France would not
be a little Sorry.) But when these Projects of France were made known at the
Ottoman Court, and that the Grand Vizier upbraided the Embassour with 'em, he
appeased the Prime Minister by telling him, That what the Court of France had
done in respect to that Affair, was only to deceive his Enemies, and to amuse
'em with Frivolous Offers, on purpose to put a stop to their Preparations
against the next Campaign, and to make the People the more unwilling to
contribute toward the War. It may be, some Persons well affected to France,
take this to be a Calumny, and will not believe that the Most Christian King
persuaded the Turk to break with the Christians. But to convince 'em, I shall
here insert what past at the Pyrenean Treaty, where Lewis XIV. espoused the
Infanta of Spain, renounced all the Pretensions which that Princess might have
to Spain or the Low Countries, and consented with an Oath, That if ever he
Pretended to what he had rencunced, that his Pretension should be accounted
Null and Void, and that if he proceeded to force of Arms, he besought all
Princes and Free States (observe the Expressions) to repute it unlawful,
unjust, and wickedly attempted, a Piece of Tyrannical Usurpation against Reason
and Conscience. This Protestation is to be met with in the Sixth Article of the
Renunciation of the King of France belonging to the Pyrenaean Treaty in the
Year 1660. Nevertheless, we have seen how Lewis XIV. brake this Peace so
solemnly sworn in a few Years afterward, immediately upon the death of Philip
IV. King of Spain, on purpose to renew the renounced Pretensions of his Queen,
which have since cost so much Christian Blood, and still are like to cost more
before the Conclusion of the War.

These Things being considered, all Men must be convinced, that France fomented
the War in Hungary, that she encouraged the Turks to besiege Vienna, that she
designed the Dethroning of the Emperor, and to have set up her Monarch Lewis
the Great, in his Place. But she met with many Disappointments. The Great
Victories of the Christians, the Conquest of Upper and Lower Hungary, but above
all, the Taking of Belgrade, together with the frequent Revolutions in the
Ottoman Court, ranvers'd all the Affairs of that Empire: and then it was that
all the Persuasions, nor all the Promises nor Presents of the French could make
any Impression upon the Turks; all the Policy of the Court of France was
reduced to this last Shift, which was to persuade the Ottoman Port to continue
the War but one Campaign more, and then if the Face of Affairs did not alter,
but that their Misfortunes continued, she would consent to a Truce such as the
Turks should think fit to make. This Expedient wrought well for the French: For
in the Year 1690. the Infidels re-took Belgrade by Assault, which puffed 'em up
to a high degree. Nor was it then a difficult thing to persuade 'em that their
Misfortunes were at an end, that Heaven was now going to punish the Emperor
for refusing the Peace which they had offered him; and that to second this
happy beginning, the King his Master or the Dauphin (who was called the Young
Sultan at the Port) would come in Person with a numerous Army; and make a
Considerable Diversion upon the Rhine. But in regard the Turks have never yet
seen any Effects of these Mighty Promises, the French Ambassador is forced
from time to time, to bear the Brunt of most bloody Reproaches from the Lips of
the Grand Vizier, and to endure many a rugged Storm without going to Sea. And
the least affront put upon him is that of Dog; That his Master is a man of no
Faith, and worse then a Christian; and that if he does not keep his Word for
the future, the Port will make a Truce with the Emperor, and leave him to
himself. But these are Reprimands which the French never boast of; and the
Ambassador has Phlegm enough to stay till the Tempest be over, and never to
return to the Charge with his Flamms and Excuses, till the first firing be
over, and that the Grand Visier's Fury be abated; and then with new Presents he
makes fresh Promises, and like the Children, promises to do better next time. A
sad Conjuncture for a Monarch, who believes himself to be the first and
greatest in the World, and ranks himself like Philip of Macedon and Alexander
the Great, in the Number of the Gods, to be forced to such mean Submissions,
and to suffer continual Affronts and Reproaches from an Infidel, to preserve
the Friendship and Assistance of the Turks. But this is now the Depth of the
Policy of France, rather to Cringe and Creep, and become a kind of Tributary to
the Ottoman Port, then to make Restitution of what he has usurped from the
Christians: rather to allow Liberty of Conscience to the Turks then to the
Huguenots. And this I have been assured, that Chasteauneuf, the French
Ambassador, not knowing one day which way to appease the Grand Vizier, offered
him that Liberty in his Masters Name, and that he should give leave to the
Turks to erect Mosquees at Tholoun and Marseilles. The same Offers have also
been made to the Governor of Algiers in any place of Bretaigne that he should
make choice of, provided he would send his Men of War into St. George's Channel
to rob the English and Hollanders. And if these Offers did not take effect,
'twas because the Grand Signior stood in need of the Algerines to serve against
the Venetians, and reinforce his Fleet in the Levant. Nevertheless, these
Offers failed not to work with the Grand Mufti, who like the Romish
Ecclesiastics, loves the Propagation of his Faith and the Free Exercise of his
Religion; and who being sweetened up withal, by some Considerable Present
openly declared for the French Sultan. But as submissive as France is yet a
while to her Ally, that she may preserve his Friendship, you shall see that he
will leave him in the Lurch, and deliver him up a Prey to the Emperor, so soon
as he can find a way to make Peace with the Confederates. And then that
Separation would infallibly beget a War between the two Sultans, were the Turk
in a condition to revenge himself. However his want of Strength to commence a
War will not hinder him from loading the French Merchants that reside in his
Dominions with Terrible Oppressions; and so the poor Merchants must pay for the
Infidelity of their Monarch. But the Court of France never troubles her Head
about That, provided she can but compass her own Ends. And for the Obtaining of
those, she will never Spare for the Blood or Estates of her own Subjects, nor
did she ever value the Lives and Liberties of so many poor Christians as have
been sacrificed during this War with the Turk, to the Ambition of Lewis the
Great.

But we are now ascending if we can, to the Pinnacle of French Policy, so high
that few or none can reach it; that is to say, the Depopulation of France, and
consequently the Ruin of the Kingdom for Religion's sake. For it is well known
that the Protestants of France have always made a Considerable Body of that
Realm, and though they have been Persecuted and Massacred under diverse Reigns,
more-especially in the Reigns of Charles IX. and Henry III. nevertheless they
have still revived again and considerably increased their Number; yet always
faithfully devoted to the Service of their Sovereign: and that Fidelity
obtained all those Edicts of Pacification and Liberty of Conscience, which were
granted 'em by Henry IV. and Lewis XIII. For as the Historians themselves
confess, the Huguenots were the Men that fixed the Crowns upon the Heads of
Henry IV. and his Off spring Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV. now Reigning, whose
Crown, when he was Young and in his Minority, the First Prince of the Blood
would have wrested from him, pretending that the Succession belonged to him by
Right of Birth after the Death of Lewis the XIII. openly asserting his Claim as
well by word of Mouth as public Manifesto's, at the Time of the Parisian
Baricado's. Nor could the King himsel forbear to give Truth her due, in several
Declarations and Edicts, and by Letters written to the Protestant Princes. And
indeed so Signal a Piece of Service, and a Devotion so faithful to the Person
of this Monarch gave the Protestants all the Encouragement in the World to hope
for an Irrevocable Protection, and an Enlargment of their Liberties and
Assurance of Safety both for themselves and their Posterity, not only during
the Reign of this King, but also of his Successors. Nevertheless,
notwithstanding all these Signal Services, they only obtained the Title of
Faithful Subjects, which the King affected to bestow upon 'em in all his Edicts
and Declarations. Nay their Fidelity was so disserviceable to 'em as to create
nothing but Fears and Jealousies in the Prime Ministers and Courtiers; and
augmented the Natural Hatred of the Jesuits, who all together from that time
forward meditated nothing more then to abase and ruin the Protestant Party,
and inspired into the Young Prince distrustful Sentiments of those to whom he
was beholding for his Crown; persuading him, that if the Huguenots were so
powerful as to settle him in his Throne, they would be able at another time to
throw him down again whenever he refused 'em any Privilege which they demanded.
These Disturbers of the Repose of France having thus found the Monarch disposed
and inclined to follow their pernicious Counsels, the Jesuits, Directors of the
Prince's Conscience, failed not to improve those Sentiments so Opposite to his
Real Interests and his Promised Faith; and for the Expiation of some Great Sin,
imposed upon him, by way of doing Penance, the cancelling some Privileges
granted to the Protestants by the King his Predecessors, and with an Oath
confirmed by the Reigning Prince. And as it is usual for Scorn to degenerate
into Hatred, the King having laid a Design to ruin the United Provinces,
thought it then high time to begin with the Destruction of the Protestants of
his Kingdom. And then it was that every Body studied who should be most forward
to second the Bloody Design of their Sovereign, and to invent new Torments for
the more quick dispatch of the Great Work, as the Court of France called it:
and the King himself could not refrain himself from saying, That he would have
the satisfaction, in his Lifetime, of having the Honor to destroy Heresy,
and that he had rather leave the Dauphin a Beggarly, then Heretical Kingdom;
and thus enflamed, Men, Women, Children, Monks and Ministers of State, all
cried out, To the Sack, to the Sack with the Churches of the Huguenots; and
every one according to his Power lent a willing hand to the Diabolical Work.
Madam de Maintenon, an Old Female Sinner, was the Jesuits faithful and sedulous
she-Intelligencer, who for that purpose held their Cabals both day and night:
the Marquis of Louvois sent away the Dragoons into the Provinces, and St. Ruth
put in Execution with great delight the Cruel Orders that were dispatched from
Court, and recommended to his Executioners and Hangmen the Care of tormenting
the poor Creatures with all sorts of Barbarism and Cruelty. And while this
Tragedy was acting in the several Provinces, the Chancellor Tellier, sent forth
Declaration upon Declaration against the Protestants, and issued out the
Revocation of all their Edicts, Privileges and Liberties, with so much
Satisfaction, that as he was sealing the Revocation o of the Edict of Nants, he
could not forbear declaring, That it was the greatest Blessing that ever
overjoyed him in his Life, and that he could be content, after he had seen that
happy Day, to dye; and he was so impious as upon that Bloody occasion to repeat
the Song of Simeon: and indeed God took him at his word: for within a few days
after he delivered France from that same Monster of Men. However the
Persecution did not cease with the Life of that Minister, who left very good
Disciples behind him: for that Father La Chaise, finding one day the Kin gin a
Good Humor, obtained an Order from him for a General Massacre of the Huguenots
all over France, grounding his Persuasions upon the Constancy of some of 'em,
with whom the Prisons and Convents were crammed; and upon the Hypocrisy of the
New Converts, who when Opportunity served, would be as so many Enemies within
the Kingdom, and that therefore there wanted a little Blood-letting to cure the
Mischief. And if this Order were not put in Execution, the Protestants were
beholding to the Two First Princes of the Blood, Conde and Conti, who took it
out of Father La Chaise's Hands, and returned it to the King. This Persecution,
which produced nothing but Hypocrites and forced Catholics, constrained a vast
number of People to quit France, and retire with their Effects into Foreign
Countries, contrary to the Expectation of the Court, and the Policy of the King
and his Ministers, who never intended to dispeople the Kingdom, as the
Spaniards did their Country, by expelling the Moors: and for fear of falling
into the same Blunder again, they committed another as bad: setting forth
Rigorous Prohibitions, forbidding all People to stir out of the Kingdom,
guarding the Passes and ordering all to be brought back Prisoners that should
be taken upon the Frontiers, and filling the Prisons, convents and Galleys with
their Captives, which was very near the same thing as expelling 'em the Kingdom.

All this so barbarous and unheard of Usage was premeditated, however,
notwithstanding the outward show of Piety, to be serviceable to the King's
Design, as having been for some Years contriving the Utter Ruin of the
Protestants: and therefore rightly judging that the Potentates their
Confederates would never consent to their Destruction, in regard their Downfall
would only serve to aggrandize France, and augment her Strength in order to the
carrying the whole Universe before Her; therefore the Policy of the Court of
France very sillily believed that the Persecution of the Huguenots would draw
all the Catholics into her Snares which she had thus baited with her Pretended
Zeal But the same Catholics being more discreet and wary, and well acquainted
with the Tricks and Finesses of France compared the French Zeal to Crocodiles
Tears, that weep to drill Passengers within their reach, and then darting
themselves upon their Prey, seize and devour it. Nay, the Pope himself smelt
out the Cheat, and did all that lay in his Power to oppose it; as was
apparently seen by the Business of Furstenberg.

But though the Event has showed us that France was mistaken in her Calculation,
yet she still goes on with her Prosecutions of the Protestants, though less at
one time then another, in regard that it is the best way for Princes to go
through with Follies begun, and for that the King's meaning was to make all
Europe believe, that he had no other End then to make Proselytes, and to
propagate the Catholic Religion, which is a thing that most prudent and
moderate Persons of the same Religion could never perceive by what is past, nor
discover in any Prospect of Futurity. Nor has the King of France procured the
least Advantage to the Roman Church by his Oppressions within his Kingdom, or
by his persuading and inveigling the Duke of Savoy to persecute the Vaudois
with the same Severity; quite contrary to the Sentiments of Innocent XI. who
openly disapproved Violence in Matters of Religion, and who could not forbear
saying, That at the same time that the French Ambassador made Bonfires at
Rome, and rejoiced for the Destruction of the French Huguenots, That his Heart
bled Tears of Blood: foreseeing that all those Forced Conversions would one day
prove extremely Prejudicial to the Church: and that the King of France did but
dispoil himself of the Lovely Robe of Primitive Charity, to put on the Old Rags
of Paganism, died with the Blood of so many Martyrs.

Moreover these abominable Proceedings of France have only served to render the
Catholics suspected to the Protestants, and to beget a Scorn and Hatred of 'em
in Places where before they lived together in Brotherly Love and good
Correspondence.

But what is more Considerable, and for which Rome and all the Catholics will
have just Reason eternally to reproach France, and complain of her Monarch
Lewis XIV. is this, That he preferred the Advancement of Mahometism before the
Support and Preservation of the Catholic Religion in England, quite ruined by
the Dethroning of King James, whom he forsook in his Greatest Necessity;
more-especially seeing that unfortunate Prince had never fallen into such an
Abyss of Misery, had he not followed the Pernicious Counsels of his Confederate
who incensed him to persecute his Subjects in England, as he had done his own
in France; and to alter the Religion and Laws of his Realm, to serve the
Interests and Designs of France.

But the English, more Prudent and Circumspect then the French, foreseeing the
Tempest that began to gather already over their Heads; and of which the
Consequences could not but produce a Shipwreck, like to that which had
swallowed up the Protestants of France, seeing that the Dragoons began already
to cross over out of France into England, where there was a Father Peter's
animated with the same preposterous Zeal as Father La Chaise; and a Chancellor
Jefferies no less wicked and bloody then Tellier or Louvois; the English, I
say, beholding the Scaffolds erected, and the Fires just ready to be kindled,
withdrew themselves in time from the Yoke that France was preparing for their
Necks; and by that Resolution for ever dashed the vainglorious Hopes of all
the English Catholics.

In short, the King of France has great Reason to repent of Two Things; his
Persecution of the Protestants of his Kingdom, and his last Siege of
Philipsburgh. For that those two Things were the Original Cause of the War, and
the Basis of all the Calamities with which France is at present overwhelmed;
and which daily augment beyond any Help or Remedy, which all the Policy of that
Court, all the Wiles, the Artifices and Knavery of her Ministers, and all the
Bigotry of her Male and Female Hypocrites can apply to stop their spreading, or
prevent the sme Destiny from befalling the Reign of Lewis the Great as befell
Anticohus, sirnam'd Epiphanes or, The Illustrious: there being so great a
Uniformity in their Manner of Acting, the Beginning and Progress of their
Achievements, that we have great Reason to hope, that their Exits will be the
same.

FINIS.

