A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF THE SEVERAL POPISH Treasons and Cruelties AGAINST THE
PROTESTANTS In England, France, and Ireland.

Giving a Full Account of the POPISH PLOT: AND A Full Discovery of the Manner
of the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey.

With Allowance.

London, Printed for P. B.

A Brief Narrative of the several Popish Treasons and Cruelties against the
Protestants, in England, etc.
WEll may we call Popery a Bloody Religion, if at least we may afford the name
of Religion to a thing made up of Idolatry, Usurpation, Rebellion, and Cruelty:
Amongst other Christian Nations, England, the Land of our Nativity, has
suffered deeply under their Tyranny; Not to mention our King John poisoned by a
Monk, nor the several Rebellions against that most pious young King, Edward the
Sixth, which were chiefly occasioned by the Priests, and designed to bring in
the Romish Religion; We will come to the time of Queen Mary, who restored the
Popish Trumpery, which her Father in part, and her good Brother wholly had
suppressed: In her five years time, there was more Christian Blood spilt,
concerning Religion and Matter of Conscience, than had been shed in any one
Kings Reign since Christianity was first established in England. Then it was
that diverse of the chief Compilers of our Book of Common. Prayer, sealed the
Truths of the Protestant.-Doctrine with their Blood; Fire and Faggot were the
Papists best arguments, and he that would not Turn against his Conscience to
the Idolatrous Mass, must Burn for it; the Reverend Ridley, Bishop of London,
and Latimer, Bishop of Worcester, were consumed to ashes at a Stake at Oxford;
and sometime after the famous Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, suffered in
like manner at the same place; Holy John Bradford, an excellent Preacher, and
of a most sober Life, was burnt in Smith-field; as likewise Saunders, Tailor,
Rogers, Heoper Bishops of Gloucester, and several other Godly Ministers. In one
year there were burnt for Religion above 80 persons, besides those that dyed in
prison; and in the next, 86, of which many were Women and Maids, and one a poor
blind Woman, Ann Askue by name, who yet by Arguments from Scripture against the
Real Presence, Confuted their most Learned Doctors. The total Number that
suffered Death for their Religion in cruel manner in this Queens short Reign,
is feckoned between 2 and 4 hundred, besides multitudes compelled to leave the
Land, and undone by imprisonments. After her followed Queen Elizabeth, whose
Name will ever be precious to all Protestants, who Establishing again the true
Religion, it is impossible to recite in this Sheet the several Treasons, plots,
and Conspiracies hatched against her Life and Government; sometimes the Pope
cursed her, and gave away her Crown and Kingdoms, but the best is, none of
those he bestowed them upon, were ever able to take possession; sometimes
particular men were bribed with Money, or seduced with fancy of Merit, and
promises of Heaven for the good service, to murder her; as Parry to Stabb or
pistol her, Squire to poison the pummel of her Saddel, Throgmorton to kill her
in her Palace, Lopez her Physician to poison her, for which he was to have
fifty thousand Crowns, but all these Traitors were from time to time
discovered, and Executed according to their deserts: Then the Pope and Spaniard
stirred up Rebellion in Ireland, and sent over Soldiers thither to assist the
Rebels, but they were always defeated: at last they both joined to invade the
Land in the year 1588. but that mighty Spanish Fleet was scattered and bear to
pieces, a very few of them escaping by flight to tell at home the News of the
others disaster.

In the Reign of this most Virtuous Maiden Queen, happenned several instances
of Popish Treasons and Cruelties in France. First, a most bloody Massacre in
the year 1572: on St. Bartholomews day at Paris, The King of Navarr, and
Coligni the Admiral of France, and most of the chief Protestants being
assembled at a Wedding to be solemnized between the said King and the Sister of
the French King, on a sudden, when no such thing was in the least suspected,
they were set upon, and in one night above twenty thousand Protestants in that
one City were barbarously Butchered without any provocation or warning,
insomuch that it is said the streets of Paris ran with blood in several places;
And for the Admiral, against whom was their chiefest spite, they flung his
body out of a Window, and caused it to lie in the open street to be devoured by
Dogs and Vermin: Not long after that, Henry the Third King of France was
traitorously murdered at the instigation of the Jesuits, because he was not
so violent to persecute the Protestants as they would have him then the lawful
Heir of the Crown (as they themselves acknowledged) was Henry, Surnamed from
his mighty actions afterward, The Great, and Grandfather (by the Mothers side)
to our Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, but because he was a Protestant,
they entered into a Confederacy, which they called, The Holy League, to keep him
from his Right, till at last he consented to the Roman Religion, but still
imagining him not so zealous therein as they would have him, he likewise was
some years afterward murdered, being stabbed by Ravillat, a Fanatical
Jesuited Papist, in his Coach on the New-Bridge at Paris, in the Year 1610.

Upon the same score, because King James was a Protestant, several Papists
conspired to debarr him of his just right to the Crown of England, after the
death of Queen Elizabeth: and two Priests soon after his coming into England,
were put to death for plotting against his Life and Government. But in the 5th.
Year of his Reign (Just 73 years ago this present Year 1678) The said Papists
proceeded to such a Treason as the World never before heard of, commonly
called, The Gun-powder-Plot, designed to blow up the King, Queen, Prince, and
both Houses of Parliament at one Blast: but a Letter being sent from one of the
Conspirators to a Lord, warning him not to come to the Parliament, because they
should receive then a Notable Blow, etc. Search being made, 36. Barrels of
Gunpowder were found under the Parliament House, and Faux with a Dark Lanthorn
standing ready at the time appointed, to give Fire to the Train: Upon which
several persons concerned, and some Priests that encouraged them, suffered.

But if we would take a view of Popery in its true Scarlet Dye, and know what
horrible Murders, Prodigious Cruelties, Barbarous Villainies, and Inhumane
Practices the Jesuits and Friars are the Authors and encouragers, and Papists
in general the Actors of, We need not look any further back than the present
Age: In the Rebellion of Ireland wherein there were in all above Three Hundred
Thousand Innocent Protestants destroyed, and this in a base Treacherous manner,
without any provocation; No Age, Sex, or Quality being privileged from
Massacres and lingering deaths, by being Robbed; stript' naked, and so exposed
to perish by Cold and Famine, or else suddenly Hanged, their Throats cut,
Drowned in Rivers, Bogs and Ditches, or else Murdered with exquisite Tortures:
Wives Ravished before their Husbands faces, Children forced to hang up their own
parents, others compelled against their consciences to own the Romish
Superstitions, and swear thereunto in hopes to save their lives, and presently
Murdered, as if they designed to destroy Souls as well as bodies: And such
beastly Cruelties Acted as the most Barbarous Heathens would blush to practice.
All which being Acted within these 40 Years, I hope is not yet, nor ever will
be forgot.

But least it should, behold! they awake our remembrance with an horrid Plot,
which in the consequence was like to have proved more Bloody and Barbarous than
any that went before it, being against the Life of our Lord the King and all
his good protestant Subjects, the Subversion of the Government, destruction of
our Religion, etc. And what kind of Spirits were engaged therein, we may see by
their Inhumane Murder committed upon Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, who being one of
this Majesty's Justices of the peace for Middlesex: Upon the discovery, had the
Examination of some Priests and others concerned, whom he committed to Newgate
on the 28. of September last; But merely for doing thus his duty, others of the
Tribe were so devilishly enraged against him, that they contrived his death:
for on Satudray the 12th. of October, he walking out about 9 a Clock from his
House near Charing Cross on his usual occasions, was no more to be seen or
heard of till the Thursday following, and then was found in a Ditch at a place
called Primrose-Hill, near Hampstead, about 3 Miles from London, with his
Clothes and Money, nothing missing but his Band and a Pocketbook, wherein he
had taken the said priefts Examination; but his own Sword was run through his
bdoy, and so left in it: This the Villains had done intending to Murder his
Reputation as well as his person, and persuade people that he Muthered himself,
but in that the Devil made Fools of them, for there being no blood to be seen
in the place: the soles of his Shoes clean, and especially a Circle about his
Neck that showed he was Strangled; every body concluded he was killed before,
and lately carried thither: Hereupon the King published a Proclamation,
promising 500 l. reward, and pardon to any one concerned that should discover
the rest; and at last (though rather out of trouble of conscience than the
invitation of that reward) There is a person come in who acknowledges himself
privy to it; that on the said Saturday they wheadled in Sir Edmundbury into an
Eminent House in the Strand, under pretense of bringing him to some that could
discover more of the Plot, that there they forced him into a Room, and two
Jesuits and one priest flinging him down, clapped a pillow on his face and sat
thereon, till they thought they had Stiffled him, but finding still some life,
with a Neckcloth they Strangled him: then it is said, they laid the dead body
for some time, under their Alter as the securest place; but of that there is
yet no certainty. However, afterward they carried it out in a Sedan to the end
of the Town; and from thence in a Coach to the place where it was found,
running his Word through him oh put pose to make people believe he killed
himself, as aforeraid.

These are the cursed fruits of Popery, the effects of Romish zeal and Charity;
From which let all good Protestants with a just Abhorrence, ever pray to be
delivered, and that God would still be pleased to preserve our most gracious
King, and the Religion established, against all their Bloody plots, and Hellish
Conspiracies.

FINIS.

