A Brief Account of the Evidence given on behalf of Edmund Warner, at a Trial
had at the Bar the 24th of November, 1693. before the Four Barons of the
Exchequer, relating to a Parcel of Potters Clay, seized by the Custom-House
Officers, under the pretense of it is being Fullers Earth.
William Riddal SWore that he was Steward and Tenant to the said Warner for
above 20 Years, in all which time the said Warner constantly sold to the
Potters in London considerable quantities of the same sort of Clay now in
dispute, for the making of White and Painted Earthen-Ware: That he never knew
or heard that the least Parcel of it was ever sold as Fullers-Earth, or put to
any other Use than making Earthen-Ware, excepting some small quantities yearly
in the Neighborhood for daubing of Houses, which may be alleged as a good
Argument that the said Clay is not of the nature of Fullers-Earth; for, whereas
this makes the best Clay Wall in England, if it were of the nature of
Fullers-Earth, upon the first wet Weather it would all fall to the Ground: He
likewise farther deposed, That the first time the said Warner shipped the said
Clay for Holland, it was seized by the Custom-house Officers as Fullers Earth;
but upon Trial of it, they were convinced of their Error, and cleared the same.

William Knight, Thomas Harper, Henry de Wild, John Robins. Moses Johnson, Are
all Potters in London, and swore that they had all seen the said Warner's Clay,
which was seized, that it was really Potter's Clay, and of the same sort which
they had constantly bought of him, some for above 25 Years, others ever since
they were Traders, that it is of a quite different nature from Fullers Earth;
for the said Warner's Clay though never so often dissolved in Water, may be
brought into a Body again, and will work, like Wax, into any shape, whereas
Fullers Earth being once dissolved is never to be got into any Body, but when
it is dry crumbles like Sand, and all the art of Man can never make a Pot of it.

Hen. de Wild, one of the said Potters farther deposed, That about five Years
since he shipped some of the said Warner's Clay for Pensilvania, where his Son
had set up a Pot-House, that the Custom-House Officers did then likewise seize
it as Fullers Earth, but upon Trial of it found they were mistaken, and cleared
the same.

Benjamin Furly, Merchant in Rotterdam, to whom the said Warner consigned his
Clay. John Sonman, Servant to the said Furly. Were, by virtue of a Commission
from the Court of Exchequer, examined upon Oath, (by Commissioners appointed
for that purpose) to several Interrogatories, and their Depositions being read
in Court, did plainly prove that all the said Warner's Clay which was sent for
Holland was really sold to Potters for making of Earthen-Ware, That they never
heard, nor do believe that any part of it was ever used for the Fulling Trade,
or is any way proper for it; that they sold the said Warner's Clay from 25 to
30 Guilders a Last, when they could buy Fullers-Earth at 7 Guilders a Last.

Adrian Van Arde, sworn Measurer of all the Earth and Clay imported to
Rotterdam. Was examined by virtue of the said Commission, and Deposed, That for
many Years which he had been in that Office, he never knew or heard of any
English Fullers-Earth imported into Holland, that they were so plentifully
supplied with that sort of Earth from Flanders; that it is commonly bought and
sold at Seven Guilders a Last, and had an Hundred Last by him to sell at the
same Rate.

Ten or Twelve Potters in Holland. Were likewise examined by virtue of the said
Commission, and deposed severally, That they had bought considerable quantities
of the said Warner's Clay of Mr. Benj. Furly, and paid for the same from 25 to
30 Guilders a Last; that they used the same in making Earthen-Ware* but do not
believe it any way useful for the Fulling Trade, nor never heard that any of it
was ever sold for that use.

Colonel Holt, a Member of Parliament. Swore, That he (being very lately in
Holland) made the strictest inquiry into the Truth of this Business, that he
could, First amongst the Potters, who all declared to the same Effect, as in
their Depositions before mentioned, that he likewise took some of the said
Warners Clay, and got a Fuller to try it,whether it were any way useful for
their Trade, who answered it was not? nor could he use it if he might have it
for Nothing; after which the Colonel asked him, From whence they were supplied
with Fullers-Earth, and at what Rates? The Fullers answered, generally from
Flanders at 6, and 7 Guilders per Last; and sometimes from Rosendale, in the
States Dominions, at 10 Guilders per Last; that being much dryer, and wasted
less by lying; all which the Colonel (being unwilling to believe upon the
Fuller's bare word) caused to be drawn up in the Form of an Affidavit, and the
Fuller before a Magistrate, swore to the Truth of it, which Affidavit the
Colonel has to produce.

Mr. Edward Paget, a Divine. Swore, That he being in Holland at the same time,
made the like Enquiry amongst the Fullers at Layden, the chief clothing Town
in Holland, who all gave him the same Information, that the Fuller at Rotterdam
had done the Colonel above* and for his better satisfaction, Three of the
Chiefest went with him before a Magistrate, and swore to the Truth of what they
Affirmed; after which he went to Delfe amongst the Potters, who all affirmed
the same thing, that the Ten or Twelve had sworn in their aforementioned
Depositions, the Truth of which they attested by a Certificate, under the Hands
of above Twenty, which Affidavits, and Certificate, the said Paget has to
produce.

Rich. Cutler, Matthew Hanson, Ship-brokers. Will. Read, Tho-Wood, John Saliby,
Mariners. Swore, They had hired many Ships for the said Warner, to load Clay
for Rotterdam; and the general Price of the Freight, and Primage paid for the
same, was 15 Guilders, 8 Stivers per Last; and sometimes 17 Guilders, 12
Stivers per Last.

Swore, They had the same Prices above mentioned, for several Fraights which
they carried, and saw delivered to the Potters in Holland.

Hump. Bellomy, Richard Hopkins, Timothy Fowler, -- Shepherd, Worcester. Are
all Buyers, and Sellers of Fullers-Earth, and swore they could well judge of
the same, having dealt therein from Ten to above Twenty five Years, that they
all took Samples of the said Warner's Clay, out of the King's Celler, and tried
all the Experiments, to judge of it, that they were capable of; and possitively
affirmed that it was no Fullers-Earth; neither could they find any thing of the
Nature of Fullers-Earth in it, that for their Use they would not give a
Shilling for 100 Last, for they should never be able to sell it.

Alderman Bearcraft, Tho. Cooksey, John Wynn, Roll. Hancock. Glocestershire.
Rich. Osborne, Tho. Woorrel, John Chilton, Sam. Beadle. Essex. Simon Meazy,
John Lawson, John Backer, John Peartree. Suffolk. John Clarke Senior, John
Clarke Junior, Will. Baines, Tho. Baines, Dan. Baines, John Smith, John Carter,
Dan. Wenden, Sam. Wrinch. London. Dan. Bars, John St. Berry. Are all
Clothiers, Fullers, and Cloth-Workers; being the most Eminent in their several
Places; as well for Honesty, as great Traders, and good Estates; they all swore
they had made the most impartial Experiments they could of the said Warner's
Clay, now in dispute, being the same taken out of the King's Celler, that they
tried it upon several sorts of Goods, as several sorts of Cloth, Bays,
Cloth-Serges, and Perpetuanaes, and every one possitively affirmed that it was
no Fuller's-Earth, but on the contrary, was an absolute Enemy to the
Woollen-Manufacture; for instead of scowring, it fixed the Grease in the Grownd
of all the Goods, that were done with it; and instead of making them White, it
absolutely stained them Yellow, all which was apparent to the most common Eye,
in all the above said several sorts of Goods, produced in Court: They likewise
declared upon Oath, that they were all Strangers to the said Warner; and that
it was as prejudicial to their Interest, to have Fullers-Earth Transported, as
any men's, and therefore could have no Inducement to favor the said Warner,
beyond the Merits of his Cause, to the Violation of their Consciences.

This is so just a Recital of the Evidence given on behalf of the said Warner,
that he challenges the greatest of his Enemies to detect him of the least
Falsehood therein; and if his Adversaries had been as fair in representing
theirs, there would have been no need of this; for whereas in their printed
Papers, they make their Witnesses to affirm the said Warner's Clay was tried in
all Experiments, without any mixture, there was not above One or Two, but upon
cross Examination at the Trial, owned they used either Segg and Hogs-dung, or
Soap and Gauls with it, which would have scowered any Cloth better without the
said Clay than with it.

It may not be amiss likewise to observe that for a whole Year in which the
Custom-House Officers have been so very diligent in spreading the Fame of the
said Warner's Clay to be the best Fullers-Earth in England, he has not been
able to sell the least quantity of it as such, though he has proffered it to all
Men for a very little more than one Third of what Fullers-Earth is generally
sold for.


