AN ACCOUNT OF SOME OF THE TRAVELS AND SUFFERINGS Of that Faithful Servant of
the Lord, Thomas Briggs.

And also several Testimonies concerning his Faithfulness to the LORD and
Diligence in his Service till DEATH.

Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, that they may rest
from their Labors; and their Works follow them.

Printed in the Year, 1685.

An Account of some of the Travels and Sufferings of that Faithful Servant of
the Lord, Thomas Briggs.
IN my Youth, and tender Years, I sought after the Lord God of my Life; with
Weeping, and Crying after him: that I might know the way to everlasting Peace
and Salvation; and run up and down among those People called Ministers, twenty
years together in a Profession that was called Puritans, who were the Ministers
that were then called Puritans. But they never could direct me to my teacher
within, which was the cause of my wanting Peace and Satisfaction to my immortal
Soul; and I went under many heavy Burdens, because of my sin and iniquity, that
separated me from the God of my Life. And in an acceptable time, it pleased the
Lord God to send his dear Servant George Fox into the North Country; who was a
Messenger of the everlasting Gospel of Peace: and did direct me and others to
the true light of Jesus Christ, that does lighten every Man that comes into
the World. And I with many more did believe his Message, and received, and
joined to the Light; and in that which shined in a dark place, I believed and
waited: And the mighty power of the Lord God did appear, and was manifested in
me, and did shake terribly the Earthly part that was above the Seed, in which I
held the profession of God and Christ, but did not know him; and in that power
of God that did shake the Earthly part, the Lord God did give me faith to
believe: And so the judgments of the Lord God I felt to be come in me. And I
waited in the way of his Judgments in Patience on the Lord God; and his power
had brought down that which was for Judgment, and the door of Mercy was
opened, and my understanding by the Light of Christ was opened; and I saw all
the Teachers of the World that were not sent of God, that they were in the
Scribes and Pharisees way. And I was moved to bear a Testimony against them
all, and to go to Steeple*Houses, and to cry against them, and to exhort People
to turn from them, to the true Light of Christ Jesus; and to hearken to the
Light of Christ within them: that they might know the Lord to be their Teacher.
And I was commanded of the Lord to go from my House and dwelling Place, to
Manchester; to Preach repentance to that Town that was high in Profession: The
Lords power and presence did wonderfully accompany me, and these were the sum
of the Words that I was moved to speak through the Town, Repent, Repent, for
the mighty terrible day of the Lord God of power is appearing, wherein no
worker of iniquity shall stand before him; who is of a purer eye than to behold
iniquity; for he wills not the death of a Sinner, and if ye repent and turn to
him, he will abundantly Pardon. And this Message the Lord God did lay upon me,
to go through many Towns, and Cities, in England; through Preston in
Lancashire, and Gaerstang, and through many Villages and Places up and down
thereaway; the Lord God required me to go through Cambridge*streets with the
same Message among the Scholars, that they might repent, and turn to the Lord;
and also this was my message to them. The Lord God was never known by all the
Learning, that is got at Cambridge and Oxford.

In Manchester I was moved to go to the Steeple-house, to declare against the
Priest; and they haled me out, and put me in a Dungeon on the top of their
Bridge; and when I was put into that hole, the Lords power and presence did so
fill my heart, that I Sung for joy, to the admiration of those that put me in:
And on the Morrow they brought me out before a Man called a Justice, and he
said, I must go out of the Town; I told him, I had been without Victuals all
that Night, and a Piece of the other day; and I had done nothing worthy of
being thrust out of the Town, and I told him that I was one that believed in
the name of Jesus Christ; and it were better for him that a Millstone were
hanged about his Neck, and that he were cast into the Sea, then that he should
offend one of the Little ones that believed in his Name. He said, if he knew
that I were such a one, he would not offend me for all the World; the Lords
blessed power and presence was with me, and some of his Servants were
convinced: But to please the People, he sent a Man with me, and put me out of
the Town over the Bridge, and so left me, and I followed him into the Town
again, and got a deal of Friends that were convinced to settle a Meeting in
that Town. And in Warrington in Lancashire, I was moved to go to the
Steeple-house with another Friend, and the Friend spoke a few words after the
Priest had done, and his People fell upon us violently, and many blows they
laid upon us with all their strength; but that the Lords power did support us,
we had been destroyed by them, for many weighty blows they laid upon my head,
and I lost my hat, and went above a mile bare headed to a meeting of Friends;
and this was the fruits of a Priest that was called an Independent: who since
the King came in is turned out of that Place. And as I was going in my journey
in Cheshire, I was moved to speak to a Priest: and he was full of Wrath and
Indignation against me; and one of his Hearers came behind me, and with a
mighty blow upon my Head, he felled me down to the Ground: and I got up again,
and I turned unto him my Face, and gave it to the Smiter; and he Smote me upon
the Teeth: that I gusht out and Bled exceedingly. Then some People standing by,
cried exceedingly against him, and they were ashamed, and fled away: After some
little time, the Man that Smote me fell Sick, and Dyed; and upon his Deathbed,
said, Oh that I had not Smiten the Quaker. And in Salisbury, in Wiltshire, I
was moved to declare the terrible Day, the mighty Day of the Lord God of Power;
and was carried on by his mighty Power, to clear that which was upon me, that
they might Repent, and turn to the Lord. And when I was got through most part
of the Town, an Officer came and took hold upon me; and brought me before many,
called Justices: who proffered me the Oath, and accused me to be a Jesuit; and I
said, I could not Swear, because, Christ had commanded not to Swear at all; so
they made a Mittimus to send me to Prison, and in that time, my Companion, and
Brother, John Braythwait, which was with me, was speaking without upon the
stairs: So they brought him also, and committed us both together to Prison,
where we were a Month; and they would have had us to promise to have gone out
of the Town, and not to have come again; our answer to them was, we could not
yield to any such thing: and they were vexed, and grieved, and wished they had
Whipped us, and let us go at the first; and so they released us, and let us go.
In that time, there were many People convinced up and down thereaway; so the
Lords work has prospered, Blessed and Praised be his Name for evermore.

In Yarmouth, I was moved of the Lord to go through the Town, up and down in
the streets, to proclaim the mighty terrible Day of the Lord God, that all
might repent and fear him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Fountain of the
great Deep; and a great Multitude of rude People did follow after me, and the
mighty power of the Lord God was strong upon me, and the word of the Lord was
sharper than a two edged Sword; and I turned my Face about to them, and fear
smote them, that they ran away: And after a little time, one called an Officer,
came and took hold upon me, and did lead me very gently; and I did declare to
the People while he did lead me on, that I had a very good time to clear my
self, and he brought me before the Magistrate, who ordered him to put me out of
the Town; and when he had so done, I went by the Water side, and got a Boat,
and came into the Town another way, and had a Meeting among Friends, and went
away in Peace: And in several Towns, and Markets, I was moved to declare to
People, of the mighty and terrible day of the Lord, that was appearing; and the
Lords everlasting power that did move in me, to go to declare the Message of
the Lord did preserve me and uphold me, and many times delivered me out of the
hands of them that had an intent to have destroyed me. For in a Town that is
called Lin, I was moved of the Lord to go through the Streets, to warn People
to Repent and Turn to the Lord, and as I was going in the streets and
declaring, they set a mighty Dog upon me, one of the greatest that ever I saw.
And when the Dog came to me, he did fawn upon me: as he would do to his Master;
and I laid my hand upon his back, so the power that Created all things bound
the Dogs nature; and I received no harm by him. And as I was declaring, and
going over a Bridge, a Company of wicked People combined themselves together,
to throw me down into the Water; but the Lord God of my life, who sent me, and
was with me, put it into the heart of an Officer that was there present, and
prevented them; that I went on in the service that the Lord required of me, and
cleared my self: and so came away in much peace. And thus it was with me in
Olivers days, that I have gone through four or five Towns in a day, to warn
People to Repent and turn to the Lord, that the Lord might be clear, and I
might be clear of the Blood of all Men; So blessed be the Lord God who
preserved me from the Mouth of the Dog. And sometimes Swords have been drawn
against me, and Axes, that they cut wood withal, have been taken up to hew me
in pieces, and that which they intended to do, they could not do; and thus by
the mighty power of the Lord, I was preserved: Blessed and praised be his Name
for evermore; and several who have heard my Voice, who have not seen my Face,
have confessed since that a power did reach them, and they were convinced by
the power, and brought into the Truth, by which I know my labor in the Lord
has not been in vain. And it was upon me to go through most part of Wales to
declare the mighty, and terrible day of the Lord God of power; and in a Town
called Clanzous, as I was so declaring, many People were attentive a pretty
time, till the Constable came forth and stirred up the People, and Cried out,
Kill him, Kill him; and they did throw stones upon me that were so great, that
I did admire they did not kill us; but so mighty was the power of the Lord,
that they were as a Nut or a Bean to my thinking. The Constable himself took
hold upon my Coat, with an intent to have pulled me down under his Feet; and my
Coat did Rent: and he got the one half, and the other did hang about my Neck,
and one that was with me, said, let us flee for our Lives; and it rose up in
me, that I might fight the Lords Battle and not flee. And I turned again upon
him in the dread of the Lord, you must give an account for this days work; and
one Man came with the half of my Coat, and desired me to take it again, for he
was smitten inwardly, for that which they had done; and I put off the other
part that was about my Neck, and left it with them, to be a Witness against
them, and afterward they sowed it together, and sent it to a Friends House. I
was moved of the Lord to go through Cardiff for a sign, I got up in the
Morning, and went out of a Friends House, with my Coat upon me till I came into
the Street, and when I came there, I let my Coat fall down, and so went naked
up and down through the Streets; and this was the Message that the Lord put
into my Mouth, to declare unto them, which was a Town of great Profession; Thus
must you be stripped of all your Profession, that are not found in the Life of
Righteousness: and I went through a Steeple-House where People were gathered to
Worship, and the power and dread of the Lord God that was upon me, did so smite
them, that I did not hear them say a word against me; and truly when I was
Naked in the streets, the Burden was taken off me: that I said in my self, Oh,
how easy am I now! it is good to obey the voice of the Lord; so in several
places in Wales, did I declare the Message of the Lord, as formerly Mentioned.
And in Windsor was I moved of the Lord God, to declare of the mighty and
terrible day of the Lord God of Power; that is appearing against all the
workers of iniquity, that they might turn and repent while they have space and
time; and they were very wicked, and many stones with mire and dirt were thrown
at us; and Isaac Peningtons Coat was much dirted with the throwing, but I
passed to and fro in the streets twice, and received no harm: Blessed be the
Lord God for evermore. In the time of the Committee of Safety after Olivers
days, I was moved of the Lord to go to the Committee of Safety, to tell them
the mind and will of the Lord, what he would have them to do: and when I came
to the Door, the Doorkeeper said, I should not come in there; and there was an
Ambassador come from a far Country, and he was admitted to come in, but the
Lords Messenger they would not let come in, but shut the Door against me; and
so it was in me from the Lord. You shut the Lords Messenger out of Door, and we
will shut you out also: And so to clear my self, I was glad to go to them one
by one as I could find them, to declare the Lords Message unto them, whether
they would hear, or forbear; that is, if they would take away the Law by which
Tithes was upheld, by which Law the People of God had suffered greatly, and
make good their promise; the Lord would let them see a way by which they might
go on and prosper, and if they did not, they should all be turned out, which
came to pass in a little time afterward. And the word of the Lord came to me,
that I must go through the streets of London, and preach Repentance: and that
the Lord God of power would overturn, and overturn, till it come to him whose
right it is; and through that great City, the most part of it the Lord did
carry me with his mighty power that I received no hurt; and as I came back
again in Cheapside, the word of the Lord came unto me, that Nineve repented at
the preaching of Jonah, and the Lord spared Nineve; and except London repent,
God would destroy it. All these my Travels and Exercises with many more were in
Olivers days, and soon after: Also in those days, as I was traveling in the
South Parts, it was upon me to set a Paper upon the Door of the Steeple-house
to bear a Testimony against the Priest, and I did so. And as I was going by a
House, it was in me the Priest was in that House; and as I was gone a little
past it, I said to my Brother John Braythwait, there is a Priest in that House,
and I must return back again to speak to him; and I went to the Door and
knocked, and the Man of the House came to the Door, and I said, Friend, will thou let me come into thy House, and he was willing to let me in; and I went up
to the Chimney Corner, where I found the Priest sitting: and charged him in the
Name of the Lord to give over deceiving the People for dishonest gain; the Man
of the House was grieved and took me by the Shoulder and put me out, and I
said, Friend, thou gave me leave to come in; when I was in the Street, the
power of the Lord was upon me, and I left my voice, and rung the Gospel Bell
among them, and many People came; and so I bear my Testimony against the
Priest, and directed People to their Teacher within. So in much peace and ease,
I went on my journey; so to the Lord God, and to his power be the Glory, and
Honor, and Praise, for ever whose right hand and power is known that brings
mighty things to pass.

Jonathan Chapham a Priest in Norfolk, I was moved to go to bear Testimony
against at his House, he came out of his Door and would not speak to me; and
ser his Dog upon me: and his Dog would not bite me, and he turned in again as a
Man grieved; and thus the Hireling fled like an Hireling.

As I was coming out of Wales in Shrowsbury, at the time the Monarchy Men rose
at London, I was taken by the Soldiers and brought before Justices, who
proferred me the Oath, and because I could not Swear contrary to the Command of
Christ, they made a Mittimus and sent me and another Friend to Prison; and the
Jayler being very wicked, put me and another Friend into a Dungeon, where they
put Persons Condemned to die; and we could get nothing to lie on but a little
Pease Straw; and there I remained ten weeks: But the Lord was very good to me,
and other Friends that were in Prison at that time; for his presence did so
fill our hearts, though it was a Noisome place, that I could truly say it is
good being here: for the Lord is with us. And though they kept us very close,
and would hardly let any come to see us, the word of the Lord came to me, thou
shall be delivered* out of this place, and go and declare my Name among the
People, but thou must go into Prison again: and at the ten weeks end, before
the releasement came for all Friends from the King, the Justice that did commit
us, asked me, if I would promise never to take Arms up against the King? I
said, I am a Witness of the Day that the Prophet spoke of; saying, They shall
beat their Swords into Plow shares, and their Spears into Pruning hooks, and
they shall learn War no more; for I have learned of Christ Jesus to do to all
Men, as I would have them do to me. And he said, get as many into that mind as
you can: And He, and his Wife, had a good Esteem for Friends, for she was there
that time; and he had a desire to have a Quaker to be his Miller, and he got
one: And when the Turn-Coat Justice would have sent Friends to Prison, he was
very favorable to them, and would take their word to appear when they were
sent for; He was one of them they call the Royalists, and one of the Deputy
Lieutenants in Shropshire, his name was Thorns: And I traveled up and down in
Staffordshire among Friends, as I was moved of the Lord, and then returned
again toward Wales; and in Herefordshire, I had a Meeting at one Nicholas
Dyers, where we had a Precious Meeting; and the Power of the Lord and his
Presence was much manifest with us; and a Priest dwelling near thereby, heard
of our Meeting: and got a Lieutenant with his Soldiers to come and break up
our Meeting; and they came in when I was at Prayer on my Knees to the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth, and commanded me to give over, and set a Pistol to my
Breast: The Lord prevented them that it would not do that which they intended,
and I continued in Prayer till they stopped my Mouth with a Pair of Gloves. So
they haled us out, and carried us to Hereford City before a Justice there; who
made a Mittimus and sent twelve of us to Prison, where we remained twelve weeks
till the Assizes; and the Jailer was very wicked at the first, and would not
let us have the Privilege of the House of Easement, and kept us close in a
Cock-loft for a time: but he was exceedingly tormented and confessed he could
have no Peace; and then he let us have liberty to walk in the Garden* and then
his Son and Daughter were convinced, and he became very loving to me: For he
found case in being so to me, and said, when I was released he would ask no
fees. And at the Assizes we were called before the Judge, and the Power and
Presence of the Lord was so with us, that when the Judge examined us, many
times he would turn his Face another way; and he set all Friends at Liberty but
me, and there I remained three weeks, and I wrote to the Justice that did
commit me to Prison, for by him I was comm^ted, and I laid it upon him to
release me* and at the three weeks end he sent for me, and I met him in the
Street as I was going to his House, and he looked cheerfully on me, and I am
persuaded the Lord did plead my cause with him; and he demanded of me that if I
would promise to come again at the Assizes, I should have my Liberty: And I
said, if I had my Health and Liberty, I should appear again at the Assizes.
When the Assizes came I did appear, and sent to him that I was come to answer
what was laid against me; he sent me word again, there was nothing laid against
me, I might go which way I would; so I went to the Jailer, and he desired me
that if I came into that Town, I would call upon him and see him, for he had a
love for me; and after that time the Jailer was very loving to Friends, who had
been very wicked before. Blessed be the Lord God of Heaven and Earth for
evermore, who by his blessed power has made our Enemies become our Friends.

I with John Moon appointed a Meeting in Wiltshire, near to the Vizes where
many Friends and People of the World came to our Meeting, and two Justices of
Peace hearing of it, came to our Meeting and broke it up, and took the names of
most part of Friends that were there, and let them all go but John Moon and me
and three other Friends; and they took us to a House by our selves and examined
us: The one of the Justices was a Royalist, and the other a Turn-Coat, a
deceitful Man; they made a Mittimus to send us to the House of Correction for
three Months; and when they had done, we who were Committed were filled with
the Power, and Presence of the Lord exceedingly; and I said to the Justices,
Friends, I am one that believes in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
better it were for you that a Millstone were hanged about your Neck; and you be
cast into the Sea, than to offend one of the little ones that believe in his
Name. And so we went to the House of Correction, and the Man that was the
Master of it in a little time became exceeding loving, and we had very many
precious Meetings while we were there; and many Friends came to visit us: And
in that time the Justice that had been a Turn-Coat being a Parliament Man, went
up to London, and as he returned home again he Dyed; I never saw his Face more.
We did understand by their Speeches when they examined us, that they did intend
to profer us the Oath at the three Months end, and so to continue us Prisoners,
but the Lord prevented them; and so the keeper of the Prison, according to the
command of the Justices, when the three Months were up, sent to know what he
should do with us; the Man that was a Steward to that great Man, who was a
Royalist, persuaded him to let us go, for we were honest Men; and through the
mercy and goodness of the Lord their snare was broken, and we were delivered:
Blessed be the Name the Lord God for evermore.

And since that time I have traveled and labored in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ in many parts of England, and thrice through the most part of Ireland,
where I have found the blessed presence of the Lord to go along with me, and
have had a good service for the Lord.

And also I went to the West Indies, to Barbados, with George Fox and other
Friends, and the power and presence of the Lord was largely manifest with us,
and over us; and many were wonderfully refreshed and comforted, and many turned
from the Darkness to the Light; and from the power of Satan to Christ. And I,
and William Edmundson went down to Anlego, where we had several precious
Meetings, and many believed and received our Testimony with gladness of heart;
we also went down to Mevis, to visit Friends in that Island: and when we came
there, an Old Persecutor called Wheeler, sent eight Soldiers aboard the Vessel
to stop us from coming on Shore, for many Friends of that place came to visit
us, and were refreshed abundantly; though he was wicked to hinder us to come a
shore to see Friends. So we returned again to Anlego, and had some Meetings
there; and then returned again to Barbades: And I being long upon the Sea, was
very weak, and few Friends did expect that I should live; I was giving up
freely to stand in the will of God, for Life, or Death: and as I was waiting on
the Lord one Morning in my Bed to know his Mind, and Will, the word of the Lord
came to me* and broke my heart in great tenderness; and said to me, lie low
before me, thou shall not die in this Island, but return to thine own Nation,
and there thou shall lay down thy Head in Peace.

And thus the Lord has dealt Mercifully, and Bountifully, with me in all my
Travels, and Labors, in the Gospel of the Lord Jesus; his power and presence
has attended and been with me: Blessed, and Praised, and Magnified be his holy
Name for evermore. Amen,

IN the forty third year of my Age I was convinced, and in the Year of our Lord
God, 1653. I was drawn out to go from my dwelling Place to declare the
everlasting Gospel in most parts of this Nation; So he was seventy five Years
Old when he wrote this.
and these were the words given unto me that John spoke in the Revelations,
saying, The Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel
to preach again, saying, fear God and give Glory to him, and give over
Worshipping the Beast, and Worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the
Fountains of the great Deep; So he Labored in the Gospel of Christ Jesus 37
Years.
for the hour of his Judgment is come, and coming upon all false ways and
worship; for God who is a Spirit will be worshipped in the Spirit and the
Truth: and such he has sought, and is seeking to worship him. And this is that
worship that will stand with Christ Jesus set up Sixteen hundred years ago,
when he reasoned with the Woman of Samaria, saying, Neither at this Mountain,
nor yet at Jerusalem will the Father be Worshipped: but true Worshippers shall
Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; and in the power of the Lord was I
carried on to declare the Truth through this Nation and other parts, who
preserved me and kept me in all my Travels by his mighty power; to him be
Glory, Honor, and Praise for ever and for evermore. Amen.

My House has been fined five times by John Daniel, called Justice, upon the
account of the Conventicle Act; and, goods taken to the value of 50 l. In
Cheshire for worshipping God.
All the rest of my Sufferings are recorded among other Friends; both
Imprisonments for Tithe, etc. as may be seen in other Books, not here inserted,

Thomas Briggs.
George Fox, the 8 th of 7 th Month, 1684.
Dear Friend,
I Received a few lines from thee, and I was very glad to hear from thee; for
in the remembrance of thee, my heart has often been refreshed and made glad:
when I called to remembrance those blessed opportunities, and heavenly
fellowship that we have had together in the Gospel of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; which can never be forgotten. But remains as a Nail in a sure
place. Dear Friend, though I have not written to thee, yet thou have often been
fresh in my remembrance; and many a time has my Soul been sweetly refreshed in
the remembrance of thee: Oh blessed be the name of the Lord for ever, that has
quickened us together, for it was the blessed power of the Lord that quickened
my Soul when I lay in Death, which I believed, in and by which I came to live,
and I have cause for ever to praise the Lord who sent thee to awaken me out of
Adams Grave, to hear the voice of his own Son in whom he is well pleased; whose
voice shoke terribly the Earth, and caused the Keepers of the House to tremble:
and the graves Mouth was opened, and the Dead came to hear the voice of the Son
of God, and believed in him, and was made to confess at that time. This is the
power of that endless life, that healed all manner of sickness and diseases, so
with the heart of Man believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth
confession is made unto Salvation; this was that joyful day indeed of the Lord
God which is never to be forgotten by me, but to be had in everlasting
Remembrance; Praise thou the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within, praise
and Magnify his holy Name and power for evermore, Amen, Amen, faith my Soul. So
dear George, in the blessed truth of God, my dear love is to thee, and I take
my leave of thee, not knowing that ever I shall see thy face more; for I am
grown Old and very weak, not able to go nor ride not two Miles from my
Daughters, where I live near Namptwhich; Namptwhich in Cheshire.
so with my Dear love to all my Dear Friends, to Dear John Elson and his wife,
where I lay, I rest

thy loving Friend and Brother in the Truth. Thomas Briggs.

UPon the 18th of the third Month, 1685. A deep Consideration being upon my
mind, Concerning my late Father Thomas Briggs; it sprung up in my heart on this
wise, Blessed be that Instrument of life by which my Father was convinced, let
his name shine for ever. It was dear G. F. whom the Lord made instrumental in
that blessed work, of whose Ministry and Apostleship my deceased Father was a
seal; of whom it lives in my heart thus to say. He was a Man of great Exercises
in his days, which he patiently went through, he was brought forth in a time
when much roughness and cruelty by the men of this World used against the Lords
People; a great share of it he met withal, of which I am a witness; for his
servant in the beginning lying pretty much to the Steeple-house, and
Marketplace, the abuses he suffered were very great and too many to instance;
yet two particular things, of which I was an eye witness, are fresh in me to
utter forth, viz. One time being at a Steeple-house he suffered great abuses;
after which a Man took hold of a handful of the hair of his Head, and having
bound him, did smite his head against a stone, till the hair came off in his
hand, which my Father bore patiently; and when the Man threw the handful of
hair upon the ground, my Father took it up in his hand: and mildly said, One
hairs of my head shall not fall without my Fathers providence; another time,
standing upon the uppermost step of Lancaster Cross, publishing the truth to
the People, he was violently thrown down to the bottom, and many exercises of
the like nature he met withal; in all which he was as one that gave his back
to the Smiter, and turned not his Face away from such as pulled off the hair.
He was a tender Father to me, and the worst of his Children, an instrument in
Gods hand by whom we were convinced; his wise circumspect walking was that
which first reached me, and with much tenderness and care, watchings and many
several breathings to the Lord for us; he brought us up in the fear of God, and
we are sealers of his Ministry, both as to Doctrine, and God: and he has many
sealers of his Apostleship and Ministry, and this Testimony lives in my heart
for him, he was Father in all his House and Family, he kept his integrity to
the end; and was frequent in exhortation to us his Children, to love truth, and
live up to it: the benefit of which exhortation we now receive. Blessed be the
Name of the Lord.

The sense of this Godly care rests upon me, to whom in a day of great
exercises he was a true Prophet; surely although he be removed and taken out of
the World, being gone to the Father to partake of endless Glory and everlasting
joy; all Sorrows being ended, and tears wiped away, and we have the want of him
here, and suffer the loss of such benefits as we had whilst conversant here
together, received by him, as an instrument in Gods hand; yet his life is with
us, and among us: his memorial lives, and shall never dye; and since it has
pleased God to take him to himself in his good pleasure, I do acquiesce in God
being comforted, believing, and being satisfied that if I keep my integrity,
and be faithful to the end as he was, I shall in the Lords time go to him; and
receive a crown of life with him: which God of his infinite love grant to me,
and to his whole Israel. Amen.

Sanky the 2d. of the 2d. Month, 1685. Deborah Barrow.

Loving Friend John Hall, The 2d. of the 9th. Month, 1685.
AS concerning our dear Friend Thomas Briggs, he did powerfully declare in our
Meeting on the first day, and was as large in his Testimony as I had heard him
for some time; and I really believe it was very well with him, only he
confessed he was weak, and said to his Daughter and others, Be not afraid, I am
not so Ill as you think I am; he was not well on the third day, and departed on
the fourth day after, and went away like a Lamb.

He powerfully Preached the word of God on the first day before, which my
Spirit had Unity with Exhorting Eriends to be faithful to God; he was a
faithful Man and my Soul was Refreshed with him at that juncture of time, and
he bore Testimony for the Truth a full hour or more on the first day before he
departed, which was on the 4th day after; which is all from

thy loving Friend. John Kennerley.

NOw concerning our Dear Friend and Brother in the Lord Thomas Briggs, who
traveled in the Service and Work of God above thirty years; and bore Witness
both of Christ's Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension: and to the pure
Religion that keeps from the Spots of the World, and to the Worship of God that
Christ set up in the Spirit and Truth; and had a zeal for the living God
against all Looseness, and Debauchery, and Deceit, and Hypocricy, and all
unrighteousness, and Ungodliness, and Profaneness; and such as made a
profession of God and Christ, and did not walk according to their Profession;
and was zealous for a pure holy life against all Profaneness, in Professors,
and Profane: and could not sow Pillows under the Arm-holes of Hypocricys,
Apostates, Backsliders, Disemblers, and Flatterers, with their fair Speeches,
that had got a form of Godliness, but denied the power thereof, for such to lie
soft upon. But from such he always turned away, according to the Apostles
Doctrine; and gave Gods Judgment upon them that such might not deceive the
Simple, being an upright hearted Man for God and Christ, and his pure holy
Truth; and sounded, and declared the pure holy day of Christ, in whose day no
workers of the Night, nor Darkness, comes without Repentance; and he preached
Christ in his days in most Countries in England, and Wales, and in Ireland, and
in Bardados, and some of the Cariby Islands; and was faithful to the end in the
service and work of Christ, and finished his service for the Lord in Cheshire,
where he dyed in the Lord, and his works follow him. Being a Man of a Blameless
life and Conversation, which preached to people as well as his Doctrine of
Salvation; who turned many from the Darkness to the Light, and from the power
of Satan to God. And likewise turned many from their vain Conversation to the
Spirit of Grace that brought their Salvation, and so to serve God in newness of
Life, and Spirit; and to walk in the new and living way Christ Jesus, in whom
they have peace with God. He was a Man that went through great Sufferings, and
Imprisonments, and Afflictions; Especially in the other Powers Days, and since*
for I have seen the Butchers, and the Tanners set their Masty Dogs at him, when
he bath declared to them the Truth of Christ at Salisbury in Suffolk; and the
Lord chained up the Dogs Mouths that never a one fastened upon him; and the
outward professors have been worse then the outward Dogs against him: But none
of all these things could separate him from the Love of God which he had in
Christ Jesus, who esteemed the reward of Righteousness in Christ Jesus his
Crown of life above all, his Afflictions and Sufferings who loved the Lord
Jesus Christ and his Son, and was valiant for his name and precious truth upon
the Earth; who laid down his head in peace, and is entered into Christ Jesus
his everlasting rest* in whom he has peace with God. And so blessed are they
that die in the Lord as this Faithful Servant of the Lord has done.

London the 2d. of the 8th. Month, 1685. G. F.

NOw as in Relation to Thomas Briggs deceased, before he was convinced of Gods
blessed Truth, he was in the Notion of outward Profession amongst the
Presbiterians and Independants without life and power; but after the Lord
opened his understanding, he came to see the emptiness of it; and the Lord
brought him very low, and bowed him by his power, and made him subject unto his
will and mind: and he was obedient to the Lord as a Child unto a Father, and
the Lord gave unto him his good Spirit to enable him in his service, and to
clear his Conscience at Steeple Houses, and Market Places to them and all
People: and then they rose up in great Rage against him, as the Jews did
against Paul; he was a Man of Sorrows, and was in several Prisons and fastings
often, yet he gave Bread to the Hungry, Milk unto the Babes, and stronger Meat
to them that were of ripers years; he had still in the word and Doctrine of
Christ Jesus, who made him a Minister of Righteousness, Peace, and Good Will:
He was a man for Peace among his Brethren, a true Labourer in the work of the
Lord, and did continue to the end steadfast in the Faith without wavering; and
he rejoiced to see the increase of Laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord, he
brought up his Children to be good servants, who were not accused of Riot nor
of ill Carriage; and when they grew to riper age, they married with equal Yoke
fellows and partners in the Truth and grace of God, and he has left them a
blessing behind him, and a good example he was to them; and to the Flock and
Family of God.

In life and Conversation, in Sufferings, and Afflictions, whom the Lord was
with, and bore him up in all his Trials, and now has taken him unto himself,
where no unclean thing can come, to rest from all his Labors and his works
follow him, for a sweet savor has he left behind him, as many can testify,
who has been refreshed and comforted by him: and a good report he had of them
that were without; for his life was pure and harmless, and they are blessed
that follow the Lord in Faithfulness and Truth as he did, to receive a Kingdom
that is Eternal and never fades away, as the Lord in his Love has made him
partaker of.

London the 3d. of the 8th Month, 1685. Thomas Robertson.

THE END.

