A Brief Discourse Between a Sober Tory and a Moderate WHIGG.
Tory. TRuly Neighbor Whig, I have always had a very good Esteem of you, and
I think in my Conscience a great many of you called Whigs, are very honest
well-meaning People, but that you are so thoughtful and uneasy in matters of
Government: which in my opinion very ill becomes a good man, or a true
Christian.


Whig. I thank you Neighbor Tory, for your kindness. But what mean you by
saying that we are uneasy in matters of Government; you know that I have
always been as well satified with and as much admired our Government; both in
Church and State, as any man whatsoever: and were I to have my wish. I would
only desire that the Ecclesiastical Courts might be a little better Regulated
and the Dessenters (whether Scrupulous, or Stubborn) a little more mildely
dealt with; and the many good Laws we have, more strictly put in execution
against the Papists, that so we might be effectually secured from the cruel
designs and villainous practices of those Blood-sucking Monsters.


Tory Why Neighbor, you cannot forbear discovering your discontent
immediately, you are now for conniving at the Fanatics, and abating the Rigor
of the Law against them, and for Prosecuting the Papists with the greatest
extremity: whereas you see that some of our admired Ministers of Justice Act
quite contrary.


Whig. Whatever the Ministers of Justice do, you know it was the Opinion of the
four last Parliaments, after their most deliberate Consideration, that the
Dissenters should not be so Violently prosecuted on the Penal Laws: And they
were for repealing some of the most harsh Laws against them because they were
not willing it should be in the Power of every malicious, troublesome fellow,
to prosecute them thereupon, to their utter Ruin; as we have seen it in many
parts of the Nation. Besides they thought that the Prosecuting them so
furiously at this Juncture. was a means of giving the Papists the greater
Opportunities of Effecting their Villainous Disigns. And of escaping the
Punishment which the Laws most Justly pronounce against them.


Tory. Oh Neighbor will you be so great a Whig as to Rely upon the Actions,
and Opinions of the late Parliaments, The Extravigancy and unreasonableness of
whose Intentions, his Majesty has sufficiently made known to the world in his
Declaration. And the Nation in general by their Addresses, and Abhorrencyes
have fully Declared their detestation of their Proceeding.


Whig. Neighbor, the Parliament being Composed (or should be) a number of men,
Generally of the Estates, and greatest Prudence, and discretion in their
several Countries; whilst their Actions tend to the Conservation of our Laws,
and the Maintenance of the Kings Royal Authority, and our Established Religion,
I know not on whom I may better Rely. And if they did Vote any thing that may
seem extraordinary, I think we ought to impute it to the Exigency of the Times,
and Necessity of affairs as they then stood; for they ( I suppose) well enough
saw that whilst the Popish, and Arbitrary Counsels were so prevalent, they were
only Deluded, and should not be suffered to do any thing that might effectually
secure the Nation against the Papists and their Designs. And for the Addresses,
and those kind of things you speak of, we believe in most Towns they were
Proposed, and carried on either by Persons Popishlike affected, or else by
those who by their interest were bound and obliged to such; and they procured
some, of the same Inclinations with them, and some of the Ignorant Vulgar, to
subscribe them; and then called it an Address from such a Town, or County
whereas we belive there were very few Subscribers of Quality, and Sobriety
amongst them. Not but that all good men will be ready to Address, or do any
just thing, that may be acceptable to his Majesty; but they thought they could
not justly endeavor to Reflect, or cast an Odium, upon the late Parliaments,
who were so Sollicitous and concerned for his Majesty's and Nations good. But
let us return to our Dissenters and I protest Neighbor did they preach such
abominable and Hellish Doctrines, or Patronise and Justify those Horrid
Villainies, Butcheries, and Murders, that the Papists (as is manifestly known to
all the world) to, I should then be altegether as Zealous for prosecuting them,
as I am now for Prosecuting the Papists.


Tory. Have you them forgot that Bloody War, that was begun by them, even in
our memory, and that most abominable Nefarious deed, the Murdering the late
King. Sure when you look back on what was then done by them you will have very
little to say in their excuse.


Whig. As for the Original of that Unnatural War, we cannot lay the blame of it
only on the Dissenters: if you examine the true History of those Times, you may
find that there were great Distempers growing in the State many Years before
the breaking out of that War. And perhaps many that were no Dissenters from our
Church, may as justly been tilled to the Original of it as the presbiterians
themselves: and for that most execrable, and most horrid deed, the Murder of
his late Majesty; we believe it was perpretated by a number of men, that after
a most bloody. War had gotten the sole power of affairs into their own hands;
and thought it Impossible for themselves to be safe, without committing that
abhorred Villainy for which we have seen most of those of them that were taken
Recieve their most just demerits, and we know that many of the Dissenters were
as much Concerned for the commission of that Fact, and Declared as great an
abhorrency of it, as any. And I think they of late have Sufficiently
Demonstrated to the World, that they have no Inclination to Rebellion, or
disloyalty when as they being supposed in many places the Superior Number, have
taken so patiently, those Notorius abuses from their Inveterate Enemies; and
have plaineough understood their Malicious Design of Rendering all those you
call Whigs, Odious to the World. How have Papists and their Secret Friends,
continually endeavored to throw of the Guilt of their accursed Plot, from
themselves upon many of his Majesty's good Subjects, whom no indifferent Person
upon du con ideation can possibly believe guilty of those things whereof they
are accused they have so impudently, and incessantly followed these Methods,
that amongst most of those you call Loyal, and well Effected to the Crown the
Popish Plot is almost exploded, and Laughed at; and some of the Witnesses (whom
never could Disprove, I think in any one thing they Testified) Villified, and
reproached as the Worst of men; to the great Scandal and Disgrace (in my
Opinion) of the Government.


Tory. Come Neighbor, do not be over cofident of any man's Innocence: Time you
know is the Mother of Truth, and she may perhaps shortly produce those things
that may satisfy you of the Guilt of some persons; which you cannot I percieve
get credit, Notwithstanding those notorious things that have been by so many
Witnesses testified agrinst them.


Whig. Were there any Circumstances Concurring with their Evidence, I should
not be so unbeliving: but since after so long a Time of Preparation, they could
make the matter appear no better on their parts than it did; I cannot do any
person that wrong as to believe him Guilty of such abominable and impracticable
Designs, in the mean time that any Man's Life, Honor, Estate, and the Good of
his Posterity, should upon false or frivolous Suggestions, be brought into that
apparent hazard of being Forfieted, and Lost, I think is nor one of the least
of injuries.


Tory. Prithe Neighbor Whig, since you and I differ so much in our Judgments
about these things, let us not talk more of it. But I am of Opinion, that if
you, and others of your Inclination, did but give more heed, and credit to some
of our Learned, Divines you would not so sollicitously trouble your heads about
Popery. for they most piously tell us, that we ought to commit the Event of
those things to the Almighty, who will undoubtedly take care of his own Truth
That Prayers and Tears to God, are the only Lawful means we have to Defend us
from Popery, and that if it pleases God, as a Punishment for our sins, to
suffer it to be Established over us, all our Endeavors against it shall be
Ineffectual: and that if a false Worship should be set over us, we ought to
show our Faith and Love to the Truth, in suffering for it under their Power,
but not in Resisting, or Endeavoring Forcibly to maintain the Truth.


Whig. Methinks they might allow us to petition and, sue to our earthly Prince
also, as well as to God Almighty, to be delivered from that Intolerable
Bondage of Popery, and other dangers that threaten us. But therein they think
we are too presumtuous and tho they find none but such mild ways, Opposeing
Popery, they have other Weapons than Prayers, and Tears, (viz) severe Laws, to
use against the Dissenting Protestants: and should they ever engage in half the
Villainy the Papists do; (which God forbid, and I hope there is no fear they
should) they would find Axes, and Halters enough to use against them and they
inveigh against them, and Revile them so bitterly, as if they already thought
the use of those Impliments too long forborne; although our Laws Provide no such
Punishment against thein; but against all those that acknowledge a foreign
Jurisdiction, or take orders from the Sea of Rome, they do. And I protest
Neighbor no thing in the World is to me a greater Mystery, than to fee and
consider, how strangly many of our Divines (whom I ought in Charity to believe
far enough from Popery) behave themselves in this Point.


Tory. Well Whig; Prithe tell me now Ingeniously, what Methods thou would
have taken, to prevent Popery.


Whig I Will tell thee Tory, as well as I can, my full desires in it. And first
of all, since the Papists after, all the Connivence, and favor that has been
shown them, L. Scrogs Speech at Coalmans Trial.
by a too mercyful King, have so ungratefully, and monstrously, Plotted against
the Government, and the Protestants of England, and continue still to do it; I
would have the Laws put in severe Execution against them. I would have a time
given them to quit the Realm, and if those that are by Law Guilty of Death,
would not go, I would have them brought to Trial, and Execution. And if those
severe Courses were for a while taken, we might hope to be rid of those
Pestilent vermin, with whom we are now so much Troubled. And fince we that are
True Loyal Subjects by our Oaths of Allegance and Supremacy are Sowrn to
defend and maintain the Protestant Religion, and to suppress Popery; I think it
becomes all good men, in their several Stations, and capacities, what in them
lies, to be Concurring with them to the same ends. And truly Neighbor Tory, I
think we are Highly accountable to Almighty God, for our Neglect if we all do
not color utmost, to defend the Protestant Religion as it is now established
in England, and to Oppose Popery, for how can we expect Pardon at the hands of
God, if we tamely suffer his Truth to be rooted out from among us, and something
introduced in the place of it, that shall bear the name of the Doctrine of of
the Gospel of Christ, but patronise under that fair, and glorious name, the
Worst of Villainies, and abominable crimes that either Pagans, or Mahometans,
would blush to hear of. And tho the Papists may impudently deny this, yet it is
easy enough to prove it out of the W. N. things of many of their eminent men
by their Cannons, Bulls, Decretals, etc. And, their Constant Practice. I am
sorry to say this of them for there are many of them I know fine Gentlemen, and
men of an extraordinary Sweetness, and pleasantness of humor. but if we look
on these men in their Religious Capacity, and as they are set on by their
Priests; tho they are of so sweet amicable, and friendly Temper, yet would they
cut mine, and a thousand Heretics Throats, to advance the Holy Roman
Catholic Cause; so that they must Degenerate from being men and become
Barbarous, savage, and Inhuman that so they may be True Christians.


Tory. You are very Violent Neighbor, against the Papists, and I hope you
believe worse of them then indeed they are. But have a care of talking as you
do of Opposeing popery, for if a Popish Prince Should ever come to Feign over
us, can you believe he would Establish the Protestant Religion as it is now
Enacted by Law, which is a Crime so black, and Odious, that every Papist that
has the least spark of Religion, or Honesty, will be very careful to Avoid.


Whig. I doubt not Neighbor, but that I have always behaved my self with as
much I Loyalty, as you, or any other Tory in England; and have as deep a Sense
of nay Allegiance, and Duty to my natural and Lawful Prince, as the Loyallest
Subject of you all. I own it to be a thing most wicked, and Dishonest, to
Oppose or Rebel against my Lawful Prince And I believe the Subjects ought by
all Lawful ways, and means to look after the Conversation of their Laws and
Privileges. And as for Popery; I protest Neighbor, I think you and I, and all
True English men, ought to Oppose it to our utmost power, and to adventure our
lives, and fortunes against it, at any time, whosoever they are that openly,
and forciebly endeavor to introduce it upon us. For my part I declare, I had
rather be cut in pieces in the Field if fighting against it, that to be brought
to the Stake at any Time, under it is power. And I think I acquit my duty to
God, and my Country best in so doing. But if it pleases God, after we have done
what we can to prevent it, to suffer it to be Established over us, then is the
time (I think) for us to show our faith, in suffering under it.


Tory Neighbor, I cannot be satisfied in my Judgment that I may Lawfully,
Oppose Popery. For there is no crime. I would more Cautiously Shun than
Rebellon. And since the Nation stands in so Hazardous condition, let us all
pray that God will be pleased long to preserve his present Majesty to Reign
over us, Dureing whose time we may expect Peace, and Tranquillity, to be
continued amongst us.


Whig. I Heartily beseech God to grant him many and happy days, and that not
only because our happyness and security Depends upon his Life, but because he
is my natural and Lawful Prince, and as he is so we ought to pray for and
endeavor, his happiness, and posterity cut of that natural Love and allegiance
that we ought to bear to him. And of this mind are many thousands reproach
fully called Whigs


Tory. In this we agree in our Love to our Prince tho as some have ordered the
matter, it is a very hard thing to believe you honest notwithstanding all your
Oaths and protestations but of this Enough.


Whig. Time wall discover it, and so farwell Neighbor Tory.


LONDON Printed for J Adams


