A Brief Discourse Concerning PRINTING AND PRINTERS.

Aliis serviemus, nosmetipsos conterimus.

LONDON: Printed for a Society of PRINTERS. MDCLXIII.

A Brief DISCOURSE Concerning PRINTING AND PRINTERS.
NOt to insist here, upon the time when, place where, and manner how Printing
was invented; let it suffice to speak of the time of its bringing hither, the
entertainment it had here, the progress it made, the abuses it has suffered,
and the encouragement (under favor) it ought to have among us.

John Stow in his Annals, p. 404. tells us, that it was brought into England by
one William Caxton a Mercer of London, circa Anno Dom. 1471. which was the
eleventh year of the Reign of Edward the fourth.

Hither being come, you may judge how the Learned of that Age esteemed it, by
the reception they gave it; not permitting it to take up its abode in common
and ordinary houses, but receiving it into their Monasteries, as if they
intended to make it a part of their own studies; which it seems they did for
some time, it being practiced not only in the Abbey of S. Peter in Westminster,
but in that of S. Austins in Canterbury, S. Albans, and others.

Thus it continued thirteen years, or thereabout, without any considerable
improvement, as to Englishmen. And therefore (that such a Talent might no
longer lie hidden as it were in a Napkin, but be employed for common good) in
the first year of King Richard the third, in an Act of Parliament made (amongst
other things) for restraint of Aliens from using any Handy-crafts here (except
as servants to Natives) a special Proviso was inserted, That strangers might
bring Printed or Written Books to sell at their pleasure, and exercise the Art
of Printing here, any thing in that Act to the contrary notwithstanding: and
this done (as is intimated in the Preamble of the Act of 25 H. 8. for repealing
the said Proviso) not only that the Kingdom might not want the benefit of so
excellent an Invention, but that the Natives might thereby gain an insight into
the same.

And Englishmen proving good proficients, in the space of thirty years they
were grown so numerous, as to furnish the Kingdom with Books; and so skillful,
as to Print them as well as any beyond the Seas; as is attested by the said Act
of 25 H. 8. which abrogates the said Proviso for that reason. And, the better
to encourage and secure the Native Printers in the exercise of their
new-acquired Faculty (as also the Book Binders) it was in the said Statute
further Enacted, that if any person bought foreign Books bound, he should pay
6 s. -- 8 d. per Book for every Book so bought: the like for any that bought
any Printed Books of strangers, except in gross: with a Proviso against the
inhansing the prices of Books, as in that Statute at large appears.

Thus we see that Printing was received into the Church in its infancy in this
Nation; where having been nursed till it could creep abroad, the King and State
took care of it when abroad: using strangers as Crutches to support it when
weak, and securing it when strengthened, from being beaten with the same.

Printing being thus improved, and secured from foreign invasion, it continued
for many years in the hands of Englishmen at large. But afterward, in the 3d
and 4th years of Philip and Mary, they were concorporated together with
Stationers, or Booksellers, by the name of The Company of Stationers. Which
constitution, and concorporation, although it were without doubt made in favor
of Printers, and for their encouragement and security (after the example of
former Kings, as before is shown) yet, where interest and prejudice swayes
not, it will be judged rather destructive and mischievous then otherwise, by
any that understand the case; at least, if perhaps it might conduce to their
well-being then, when the Booksellers were very few, and as inconsiderable,
and so the Printers sufficient to hold the balance even, yea, to turn the scale
with them; yet, the case being now much altered, the constitution ought also to
be changed: and Printers being (as aforesaid) freed from the intrusions of
foreign Nations, should not, in reason, be enslaved by the encroachments of
Natives, nor suffer that which was intended for their benefit, to turn to their
destruction; and so lose the fruition of the good designed by the several Laws
made in their favor, and without doubt intended by that Charter.

I say, now the case is altered: for whereas when the Grant was made,
Booksellers were very few, (as indeed they have been within man's memory) and
those few not considerable (nor could they, in regard that all ancient Books of
worth were Printers Copies) now they are multiplied exceedingly (how much in so
long a time, we may ghess by what we have seen in our short time:) and whereas
at first they were but as an Appendix to the Printers, and (as ciphers) stood
but to make up a number; now they are grown so bulkie and numerous (together
with many of several other Trades that they have taken in) and so considerable
withal, (being much enriched by Printers impoverishment, and chiefly built upon
their ruins) that there is hardly one Printer to ten others that have a share
in the Government of the Company; and those that have, either dare not stand
for the Interest of Printing, for fear of losing a Work-Master; or will not,
because they have an interest among them; or if they do, it signifies nothing,
in such a disparity of number.

But they may object, why should you envy our prosperity, or grudge at our
growth? why did ye not look better to your selves, and keep what ye had gotten?

To this objection Printers may answer, That though they ought not to envy or
grudge at the prosperity of others, (no, not of the wicked) yet they ought not
to neglect their own, nor suffer themselves to be trodden down by the insolence
of others. And as for looking to themselves, they might have done it, had they
been by themselves: but being yoked to the Booksellers, and having no other
support but their authority, it has proved a broken staff, and like the reed
of Egypt, which whilst Printers have leaned upon, it has pierced them through.
For when other Artificers could retain their freedom, and enjoy their
immunities, notwithstanding the confusions of the late disorderly times, the
Printers were the only men liable to irregularities among themselves, and
usurpations and intrusions from others; while the Stationers (who have got the
Rule by such means as aforesaid) either would not or could not afford any
redress, or use means to repress or prevent any disorder: (yet never failed to
exact their accustomed pretended dues from all such their members, to the
utmost.) Yea, so far were they from redressing the Printers wrongs, or
vindicating their rights, that some of themselves took upon themselves the
exercise of their function, and as if that had not been enough, one that was a
forreiner, having no relation to this or any other trade, had a freedom given
him gratis, to enable him to usurp the exercise of the Printers calling. And at
last, to complete the abuse, and to encourage others in the like, they erect a
Printing House by a joint stock of their own, and call it, The Companies House;
wherein (for several years) they robbed the lawful Printers of as much of their
employment as would have maintained many of their families. Which example of
theirs, was after followed by a person as extraneous, by the erection of
another Printing house; which although it were to a noble end, was no less
irregular, and injurious to Printers: whom yet Printers cannot blame, since all
their fences being trodden down, even by such as ought to have upheld and
repaired them, no marvel if strangers mistook their Pasture for a Common. Yea,
by these means their whole tribe were grown to such a height of insolency,
that if a Printer presumed to contend with them about the price of work, and
would not take their rates, the meanest of them would menace him with having a
Printing House of his own.

Thus it was with Printers; and being thus, no marvel they are reduced to such
a pass as they are. For whereas formerly (even in the last age) they were
Aldermens fellows, and lived above the temptations of a necessitous condition;
now (except one or two of the old stock, and a few others that raised
themselves by the late times) they are so far from having considerable estates,
that they can hardly subsist in credit to maintain their families. Neither can
it be otherwise, when they that should have upheld them, have not only
suffered them to fall, yea thus pulled them down with both their hands; but
lest they should rise again, continue by all means to keep them down, in the
abridging of their prices, and the uncertainty of their payments.

And thus come Printers to be choused (as they call their overreaching one
another) of all the most considerable Copies: for since these disorders, when
an ancient Master-Printer died, and his Copies were exposed to sale, few or
none of the young ones were of ability to deal for them, nor indeed for any
other. So that the Booksellers having engros'd almost all, it is become a
question among them, whether a Printer ought to have any Copy or no: or if he
have, they (keeping the Register) will hardly enter it; or if they do, they and
their accomplices will use all means to disparage it, if not downright
counterfeit it.

If it be said (as they commonly do) that they had not power to prevent or
redress the irregularities of Printing, or to keep out intruders; it may be
answered, That they had power (if they had not wanted something else) not to
have done that themselves, which they could not help in others. But had they
not power? how then could they demand or expect obedience? If Protection and
Subjection are reciprocal, they that cannot afford the one, ought not to exact
the other.

But they may say what they will, we see and feel what they have done. And now
I leave it to the consideration of all uninterested persons, whether those that
for the time past have thus improved their opportunity of tyrannizing over
Printers, ought to have the Government of them for the future, when the like
opportunity cannot be wanting, as the constitution now is, they having gotten
the start of them both as to number and estates. Yea, as to number, they may if
they please still increase adinfinitum; which Printers cannot, but must lie
under a restraint in that respect: which is no small argument of the absurdity
and unnaturalness of their Concorporation; since in all sound Bodies, the
natural growth is in all members proportionable; and where it is otherwise, it
is esteemed monstrous.

But more particularly: there are two things that render any man or men
incapable of trust or oversight.

1. Ignorance in the thing entrusted. 2. A contrary interest thereunto.
That the Stationers or Booksellers are incapable of the Rule of Printers upon
both these accounts, is not hard to evince.

For the first: They must needs be ignorant of Printing, because never
instructed in it, or brought up to it. For the manifold mysteries of that
exquisite Art are not so easily discovered, or so quickly made practicable, but
that the time of an Apprentiship is little enough for the acquisition of the
same.

And this want of knowledge in the Art, incapacites them to govern the Artists,
upon a double account; since a more then ordinary inspection ought to be made
into it, for two Reasons.

1. Because the Art it self is more then ordinarily curious, insomuch that many
of those that have served Apprentiships to it, and spent many years in the
practice of it, are yet to seek in the most material requisites of a good
workman. But if we grant it to be but ordinary, surely it is not so mean, as to
be divested of that privilege which all other Societies enjoy; witness the
custom of London. But it is absurd and ridiculous for any to have the rule or
oversight of that which they have no insight in: as well may a blind man judge
of colors, or a deaf man of sounds. A controversy may arise betwixt Artist
and Artist, which referred to those that govern, might prevent vexatious
Lawsuits; but if the Governors understand not the thing in difference, how
can they decide the controversy?

2. Printing requires a more then ordinary inspection, because of the great
influence it has upon the Public peace and safety, which is very much
endangered by its irregularity, and which ought by all means possible to be
preserved. Now by how much the more evil or danger there is in the miscarriage
of a business, so much more care ought to be had in the management of that
business: and the not due inspection of Printing being of such dangerous
consequence, surely it ought to be committed to them that have the most perfect
understanding thereof, and not to those that can pretend to no knowledge
therein.

But to salve this, they say, We take Printers with us when we go to search;
(whereby (by the way) they acknowledge their own insufficiency.)

That frequent and diligent searching and overlooking of Printing-houses, is
the only way to keep Printing in order, I think cannot be denied. And since
this cannot be done without Printers, why should not they only be entrusted
therewith? Again, in matters of great trust, it is not enough that a person
skilled in the affairs entrusted, be employed therein; that person must also
receive suitable countenance and encouragement in the discharge of his trust,
or it may justly be feared his faithfulness will soon fail: and therefore the
Law and Custom has made provision in all like cases, to cut off such
occasions, and to remove such temptations, the better to secure the end of the
trust. And is the great trust of the oversight of the Press like to be well
discharged, when they that are only capable thereof must have no hand therein,
but at the appointment of such whose interest it is to keep both Printing and
Printers in confusion and disorder? All men naturally as free Agents propound
some benefit to arise from all their actions, which is the motive to their
through and ready performance of such actions. But when they can propound no
such end to themselves, they either do not act at all, or no further then they
are forced; especially if it be so far from procuring benefit, that it brings
mischief with it: as in our case, should Printers (as now constituted) use
their utmost skill and care in discovering the abuses of the Press, the
Stationers would have the credit and honor of it, and be reckoned the only
loyal and industrious men; and thereupon get new privileges, together with the
confirmation of their old; and the Printers so far from being benefited by it,
that it would only the better enable the Stationers to keep them under.

And truly the case being thus, here is not only a temptation, but a ground
for Printers (self-preservation being natural) to do the work either not at
all, or but by halfs.

But to this it may be said, They may employ some certain Printer, giving him
good encouragment, either to accompany them in their searches, or to go alone.

To which I answer: This were mercenary, and here would be place for bribing;
and he that sees largest, should be the most spared, or the oftnest have
pre-intelligence of searches, to evade them. And this would be far enough from
answering the end of Regulation.

But then it may be objected, If ye would have neither Stationers, nor
Stationers and Printer, nor Printer alone, who should be employed in the
oversight of Printing?

Answ. I would have the oversight of Printing committed to Printers only; and
not only so, but to Printers as Printers, and not to Printers as Stationers.

Two reasons enforce this: the first respecting the prevention of Printing
scandalous and mischievous Books; the other regarding the better Printing of
all Books.

For the first, it has been showed already how ineffectual it is for any other
but Artists to take the oversight of Printing, and how easily the inspection of
strangers may be eluded by any that have a mind to make a sinister use of that
Art; and likewise how little better it is to call Printers to the assistance of
others, since they are like to be but cold in their scrutiny, when their
discoveries shall redound nothing to their own profit or reputation, but to the
advantage of those that call them, whose hands will be thereby the more
strengthened against them. It has been showed also how much less available it
will be to employ a Mercenary in the case. So that Blasphemy against God, and
Treason against the King; Error and Heresy in the Church, and Faction and
Sedition in the State, may still be (as it is and has been) broached and
fomented by the Press, for any thing to the contrary can be done by the present
establishment, wherein they that only have the capacity, have neither
authority nor encouragement to discover and prevent such abuses; I mean, the
Printers, who were they encouraged, as they are only able, so they would be
engaged both in Honor and Interest to be faithful in the discharge thereof.

1. In honor: it would free them from the many clamours that lie against them.
For at the first sight of any thing in print that is offensive, who is cried
out upon but the Printer, yea, all Printers, as if they were the most wretched
of men! So that it is almost a shame to own that most noble Profession. Whereas
indeed (as now) Printers are not Printers; that is, they have no power as a
Society to rectify disorders in Printing; and so bear the blame of that they
cannot help. Besides, such enormities are generally committed by such as have
irregularly crept into the exercise of the Art, in the want of a due
establishment: neither do such transgressors ever want encouragers to begin, or
chapmen to vend such ware when finished, among the Stationers.

2. It would be for the interest of Printers to keep their Faculty in due
order, since it would both prevent their damage, and procure them again: both
which concern Printers in this case.

1. It would prevent the damage that might accrue by the displeasure or
disobligement of the King that entrusts them; who in case of failer might
resume his power, or exact such Fines as might be made the condition of their
standing.

2. It would procure the gain of the Kings favor (which Solomon tells us what
it is Pro. 10.35 16.15.10.12.
) whereby it is hoped such further privileges and immunities might be
obtained, as might set both Art and Artists above that disdain and contumely
under which it and they are now subjected; so that of contemptible, it may
become honorable; of despicable, desirable; and such as are free of it, may be
free indeed, and not manumitted (as of late) from the service of one Master, to
the slavery of many Tyrants.

For, if Stationers have obtained so many and great favors upon the account of
Printing (which yet they have not in any measure been able to manage to the
promoting of the Kings interest) much more shall the Artists themselves find
favor with his Majesty, when they shall be in a capacity to give testimony of
their abilities, usefulness and diligence in that service, and the preservation
of the peace of the Kingdom, wherein the well management of their Art is so
much concerned.

Again, as it is the only effectual way for the prevention or discovery of
evil and mischievous Books; so also to procure the well doing of all Books.
There is a clamor (and that not unjustly) against English Printing, because we
Print not so well here as they beyond the Seas. Many reasons are assigned. Some
fault the Paper, and some the Ink; some say it is in the Water, others in the
Letter; and a third sort, in the Workmen: but it seems to be taken for granted
by all, to be impossible to Print here so well as there; whereas the defect is
not necessary, but accidental. It is granted, that the generality of our
Printing falls short of theirs beyond Sea. But that it must necessarily do so,
I deny; forasmuch as some of our Printing at this day equals theirs; and the
generality came not short of them in former times, even in the infancy of
Printing in England, as is witnessed by that Statute of 25 H. 8. So that the
fault lies not in the things before alleged, but in something else, even in
the want of encouragement, and due looking to. For, those that escaped ruin by
our disorders, and are in a capacity to undertake generous designs in Printing,
carry them on as credibly and as gracefully now, as any beyond Sea; and so
might the rest, were they in the like condition. But the Stationers having
usurped our Calling, and encouraged, yea hired others so to do, and thereby
increased our number beyond measure, and consequently brought our rates so low,
as not to afford good Materials, or engage good Workmen; hence comes Printing
to be at this pass. Which they regard not; for the most of them little regard
how ill their work be done, so it be cheap done.

Now as a due establishment of Printers upon a right ground would put them in a
better capacity of obtaining Materials and suitable requisites for their
Calling: so would it enable those to whom the oversight should fall, from time
to time, to look after such as are ignorant, careless, or negligent in the
duties of their Calling.

Thus having showed the Stationers ignorance in Printing, and consequently
their incapacity of the oversight thereof: let us now consider their interest;
and if that be found to oppose the good both of Printing and Printers, I think
there needs no other Argument (had we no more) to prove them unfit to be
Governors in the case. I might instance in several particulars wherein the
Interest of Stationers (I mean Booksellers, who are the most considerable, and
chiefly intended here) opposes that of Printers: yea, it is hard to instance in
one particular wherein their interests agree. But this one consideration may
suffice, That they stand related to each other, as the Buyer to the Seller: and
as reasonably (in my judgment) may the Buyer have the Rule of the Seller, as
the Bookseller govern the Printer.

Neither can it be reasonably said to be an ambitious humor or affectation in
Printers, to desire their own Rule and Government, any more then it may be said
to be pride in a Householder to desire the government of his own household; or
ambition in one that has served his Apprentiship, to desire his freedom.
Indeed, did they aim at domineering over others, whose persons are out of their
jurisdiction, and whose affairs are above their understanding, this were
reprovable: and yet this is the great design of the Stationers, in reference to
Printers; and they take it for great presumption in the Printers, to go about
to oppose their design, in procuring their own freedom; calling it breach of
Oath: as if because of our Oath, we must lie down under all their abuses and
oppressions without seeking redress; wherein yet we take not upon us to be our
own Judges, but refer our cause to the same power that gave them theirs, who
may resume or abridge the same upon misuser, at their pleasure.

And whereas it was urged once before the Lords, that Printers were the
Mechanic part of the Company, and so unfit to rule; let the import of the word
be considered, and it will be found to bear no such slight signification as
that Gentleman was pleased to put upon it. For besides that a considerable
branch of the noble Science Mathematical ( viz, the Art of moving great
weights) goes under that denomination; if it be taken for Manual Arts, or
handy-Crafts, yet it is to be understood of such as require ingenuity of the
mind, Generaliter autem (...) dicitur opifex eorum operum quae ingenio simul
and manu fiunt. Scap.
as well as labor of the hand; as the learned Scapula observes upon the word
(...).

But let them be supposed to be Mechanics in his sense, that is, such as are
below the grandeur of Shopkeepers; must they not therefore have the management
of their own Affairs? has not the meanest Subject as great a command in his
own Family and Affairs, as the greatest Lord in his? But the Gentleman miss-put
the case, as if the Printers aimed at the Rule of the Stationers; whereas they
only aim at their own freedom, and the reaping the like fruits of their
servitude with other their Fellow Subjects and Citizens.

Nor should Mechanics or Handy-Crafts be so lightly esteemed, when the Law
has so great a regard for them, and makes so manifold Provision for their
improvement, and the encouragement of Manufactors; witness the many Statutes
about the Weavers of Norwich, more concerning Clothiers: an ancient Decree
about Cordwayners, and many Statutes thereupon: Barbers and Surgeons united,
for mutual benefit: Clothiers to be overseen by the Lord Mayor, and
incorporated: Brewers and Sope-makers not to make their own Barrels, but the
Coopers: Plaisterer and Painter not to entrench upon each other; nor Carpenter
and Joyner. Indeed, it were endless to enumerate the Statutes and Decrees made
in favor of Manufactors, to protect them from disorders and abuses; to which
end the meanest have been put into distinct associations, and empowered to make
by Laws for their better subsistence. And for the encouragement of them all,
there is a clause in the Statute of 5 Eliz. prohibiting any to use a
Handy-Craft, that has not served seven years Apprentiship to it.

Neither was this care taken of them without good reason, since they are
essentially necessary, whereas Shopkeepers are but accidental, like suckers
springing out of the root of the former. For without the Clothier, where were
the Draper? without the Hatmaker, where were the Haberdasher? and without the
Printer, where were the Bookseller? Yea, having the Clothier, what need
(necessarily) is there of the Draper? having the Hat-maker, what necessity of
the Haberdasher? and having the Printer, no fear of wanting Books, though there
were no Bookseller.

But it may be alleged, that the present Constitution is ancient, and
therefore not to be altered.

I answer: If evil, the older the worse: neither are there examples wanting of
the change or suppression of more ancient Constitutions then this, when once
they have proved injurious or useless. Nor is this the first time the present
Constitution of Printers has been complained of as a grievance: for our
forefathers (many years since, even when Printers had not experimented a tithe
of what they now suffer) did the like in their time, as appears by some of
their Papers yet extant, and the testimony of persons still living.

Besides, we want not examples (both former and later) of the division or
separation of one part of a Company from the other, when their conjunction has
been found inconvenient or injurious.

BUt because Printing and Printers have so light an esteem, and such harsh
usage in this age, insomuch that neither it nor they find like respect or care
with the meanest of Occupations; let us examine whether it deserve no better:
and herein we will not be our own Judges, but refer the matter to the Learned,
who are both competent, and capable of the decision. Among whom, we shall only
give you such as have already come to hand; not doubting but many others bear
witness to the same, of which a future account may be given.

Dr. Hakewil, in his Apology of the power and providence of God in the
government of the world, (p. 316.) treating of diverse artificial works and
inventions of the later Ages, matchable with those of the Ancients, insists
chiefly on Printing, Guns, and the Sea-Chard or Mariners Compass; of which he
brings in Cardane speaking thus: His tribus tota Antiquitas nihil par habet;
that all Antiquity has nothing equal to them. But he cites Bodin speaking
higher, Una Typographia cum omnibus omnium veterum inventis certare facile
potest: That Printing alone may contend for the prize with them all. He
alleadges likewise Polydore Virgil, who having spoken of the Ancients famous
Libraries, adds thus: Fuit illud omnino magnum mortalibus munus, sed nequaquam
conferendum cum hoc, etc. i.e. That was indeed a great benefit to mankind, but
not to be compared with this which our Age has found out and enjoyed, since a
new kind of writing was brought to light, and practiced; by means whereof as
much may be printed by one man in one day, as could be written by many in a
whole year; or, as Sabellicus, as much as the readiest Penman could well
dispatch in two years. He shows the benefit of Printing also by its redeeming
Books out of the bondage of Monasteries, where they were formerly confined,
whereby the Monks had opportunity to sophisticate them, and make them speak
their sense: whence arose such a confusion in most Authors, whereof Erasmus
complains, both in his Preface to St. Augustines Works, and that to St.
Hieromes. He further commends it for the fairness, and brings in Cardane again,
thus speaking of it: Mira certa ars, qua mill chartarum una die conficiuntur:
nec facile est judicare an in tanta facilitate ac celeritate pulchritudo, an in
tanta pulchritudine celeritas and facilitas, sit admirabilior: i.e. An
admirable Art sure it is, by which a thousand sheets may be dispatched in one
day: neither is it easy to judge whether in so great easiness and quickness of
dispatch the fairness of the letter, or in the fairness of the letter the
quickness of dispatch and easiness thereof, be more to be wondered at. His last
benefit accruing by Printing he places in the dispersing of Books into abundant
particular hands, so that there can no more be such a decay of Learning by the
spoiling or burning of Public Libraries, as formerly, when Learning was stored
up only in them. He concludes thus: Since then by this means Books are become
fairer, and cheaper, and truer, and less subject to a total perishing; and
since by this Art, THE PRESERVER OF ARTS, the acts and writings of worthy men
are made famous, and commended to posterity; it were a point of heinous
ingratitude to suffer the Inventor thereof to be buried in oblivion. And so
goes on to speak of the Author of this Invention: which being not to my present
purpose, I shall pretermit for this time.

Mr. Fox in his Martyrologie, (Vol. 1. p. 926.) having discoursed of Printing,
and showed how that by means thereof upon its discovery the light of the Gospel
brake out in Germany, (whence it has since spread into many Countries and
Kingdoms) sticks not to compare it to the Gift of Tongues; since as the
knowledge of the Gospel was at first dispersed by that, so now by this.

I have seen a small Book of ancient print, written by one John Pain then in
the Low Countries, and directed to his friends of several faculties that used
to frequent the Royal Exchange London; wherein he gives them all very sober and
Christian counsel: among the rest, he mentions Printers, acknowledging their
Art profitable, excellent, and necessary for Church and Commonwealth; and that
God is to be praised for it, and prayed to for its better use and less abuse.

Nay, such fame has it had in the world, that Countries have been at strife
about the honor of bringing forth the Inventor of it: neither is the question
very well resolved yet, whether it were High or Low Germany. And the Spaniard
envying that either of them should have the honor of it, pretends they
borrowed it from the Chinese: which as it is no way probable, neither is the
China-print in any measure comparable to ours for beauty, perfection or speed.
But (says Salmuth) Germania certe nunquam sibi hanc laudem patietur
extorqueri. Hence Beroaldus, thus: O Germania muneris repertrix,
Que nil utilius dedit vetustas,
Libros scribere quae doces premendo.


With whom agrees Laurentius Valla, though an Italian: Abstulerat Latio multos
Germania libros,
Nunc multo plures reddidit ingenio:
Et quod vix toto quisquam perscriberet anno,
Munere Germano conficit una dies.


Our Author having spoken of the Inventor, and endeavored to reconcile the
differences about the persons, Guttenberg and Fust, who both pretend to it,
gives to both their commendation; and not to them only, but to such as since
have added to the grace and perfection of it; as Aldus Minutius, Operinus,
Raphelengius, Plantin, Erobenius, and the Stephens, who were famous Printers
for four Generations successively: See more to this purpose Leigh's Foelix
Consort. p. 54, 55. and a little Book of Manual Arts lately published.
quibus plus debet Christianus orbis, quam cuiquam fortissimorum belli ducum ob
propagatos fines patria debuit unquam, says Thuanus. Upon the said Aldus of
Venice, the Reverend Beza has bestowed a Copy of Latin Verses. As for
Plantin, his very Printing House was counted The eighth Wonder of the world,
for the great variety and multiplicity of his materials. And it is more then
probable, that the great esteem and veneration which our forefathers had of
Printers and Printing, occasioned the places where they exercise their
function, to be called not Shops or Workhouses, as in ordinary Trades, but
Chapels, as they are to this day, both here and in foreign parts; intimating
their employment to have something of divine in it.

Indeed, it were endless to repeat what has been written by learned men in
praise of this noble Science, there having been whole Treatises of the same. I
shall only add a word or two.

How grateful to the world was the invention of Letters, when they were no
otherwise to be made legible but upon Pillars, and Bark of Trees? but how much
more, when the use of Parchment was found out, and after, that of Paper, with
the use of the Pen to write thereupon? And yet that compared to this, is but as
a Rush-candle to a Torch; but as a Candle under a Bushel, to one upon a
Candlestick. For Printing is as it were the Firmament, in whose Expansion all
the Luminaries of Learning and Art are made visible to all above the Horizon of
Literature.

Yea, Printing puts Books into every man's hand, whereby though we cannot
practice all things, we may try all things. Now the Divine cannot pin another
Faith upon his sleeve, and lead him implicitly, because the Bible is at hand,
whereby a man may try whether what he says be so or no. Nor can the Lawyer
deviate in a cause, but he may be discerned by a quick eye, by reason of that
light which shines round about us in Books of that Faculty. Neither can the
Physician prescribe at random, without being discovered by the same means.

And whereas formerly the common people were entertained with feigned
Traditions of the Legendaries, in stead of those Divine Oracles of the Old and
New Testament; and with like fabulous stories of Giants, etc. in stead of real
Histories: now they have not only the Bible, but Expositions thereof, bringing
it to their capacities, for their spiritual use and comfort; and the civil
transactions of former times lively represented, whereby they may imitate the
good, and shun the evil, and furnish themselves with Notions and Discourses
suitable to rational Creatures. And all this by the benefit of Printing.

Yea, by this the Church of Rome has received such a wound, as she will never
be able to cure: for upon its discovery, such a light has broken forth, that
many Kingdoms and Countries that formerly had no other glimpse but what
proceeded from her Dark Lanthorn, have hence received so great Illumination,
that they find just occasion to forsake her, notwithstanding her pretended
Infallibility.

By this also our modern Pretenders of new lights, are discovered to be only
Revivers of old Errors; we having hereby the Ecclesiastical Histories of all
former Ages, wherein we find the Founders of those Follies and Impieties
wherein these ape them.

To conclude, having given you the opinions of the Learned concerning Printing
and Printers, let us wade a little into the discovery of the usage both it and
they find in other Countries. How it fares with them in France, the Stationers
themselves inform us, in a Paper called, The humble Remonstrance of the Company
of Stationers, signed by one Henry Parker Esquire; who says, That France
especially favors that Profession and Trade of men, (meaning Printers;) for
there they are above Mechanics, and live in the Suburbs of Learning. And a
little before, speaking of Europe: The more civil (says he) a place is, the
more regard it has to Printing. Whence he proceeds to commend the Papists, as
well where the Inquisition is not, as where it is, for their strict Regulation
of Printing, whereby their Church is better fortified, and the Artists more
encouraged then ours. Nor are Printers without extraordinary privileges in
most transmarine parts, as in Italy, France, Spain, etc. where (as if they were
Churchmen) they are exempted from those ordinary Taxes and Duties whereunto
the rest of the people are liable. Nay, so great a respect have the Kings of
France for this Art, that for many years they have maintained the practice of
it in their own Royal Palace of the Louvre, at Paris; allowing the Artists a
subsistence suitable to their eminent place, and generous employment: and in
Spain it is mostly exercised in Monasteries and Religious Houses to this day,
as it was here at its first arrival among us, as we have shown in the beginning.

Neither is it to be forgotten, that those two great Monarchs, the one of
France, the other of Spain, seemed to conceive themselves not sufficiently
illustrious, unless they had eminently concerned themselves in the
encouragement of this Art; and therefore they took upon them the Patronage of
those famous Bibles in several Oriental Tongues, which pass under their great
Names to this day.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. l. 15, 16. read incapacitates. Page 12. Marg. read 14.35. 16.15.
19.12.

