A BUNDLE OF Soul-Convincing, Directing and Comforting Truths: clearly deduced
from diverse select Texts of holy Scripture, and practically improven* both for
Conviction and Consolation.

BEING A brief Summary of several Sermons preached at large, by that faithful
and pious Servant of Jesus Christ, M. RODGER BREIRLY, Minister of the Gospel at
Grindleton, in Craven.

Matthew. 11, 25, 26. I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto Babes; Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. LONDON, Printed
by J. R. for Samuel Sprint, in little Britain, 1677.

An Epistle to the READER.
CHristian Reader, concerning Roger Breirley, the Author of these following
Notes of the heads of some several Sermons by him more fully Illustrated in his
public Ministry, I desire to say something to thee of his Life, and Message
that he witnessed. As also to give thee an account of the Ground and Rise of
this Word Grindletonism, by which many men of the World, as adverse parties,
styled his Followers. Concerning his Life and Conversation therein, it was as
became the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and comely in the eyes of the Sons and
Daughters of Sion, and beautiful in the Streets of that City, so that none
could lay any shame thereon. As for his Message, that was given him for to
declare to the World, it was mighty and piercing, to the laying open in the
very Heart and Conscience of man, the most secret and hidden things of
dishonesty, though never so closely infolded in the deepest mystery of
iniquity; so as many, yea, and many that stood fenced in the Field, with the
Weapons of their own self-righteousness in the flesh, and the Covenant of
works, fell wounded to the very ground, and were found to be of Sinners, the
chiefest. And to this I bear record, such was the Penetrating Power of God in
his Ministration, that if thousands were before him under it, in very few hours
discourse, every man's several Condition, whether under Light or Darkness,
should have been spoken to, laid open, bare and naked; that every one might
truly have confessed in their several conditions, that the Word was spoken to
them in particular: For what was done and acted in every man's heart and spirit,
was there openly related and revealed, that all might read their sevenfold
abominations: So that in a word, (for much more here might be related) none
either in their Gentilish Nature, nor in their self on taken Jewish
Righteousness, nor in any formal way either to Law or Gospel, could stand
t^^ir ground (if they dealt truly with themselves) but they ^^ll convicted
under his Message; for it was not in word only, but in the Power of God, to
take away from Man the whole stay and staff of his own Brea^, that every House
might be lest without inhabitant, and man lying desolate might sit in silence
upon the ground; whereunder many gave out this witness, that God was in him of
a truth.

And not only so, but mighty and powerful was his Ministration, in the evident
demonstration of the Holy Ghost, to bear witness, in and to the desolate,
weary, forlorn, hopless, broken heart of man, sentenced unto death, of that
unchangeable love, in the faithful Promise of the healing Covenant of God,
established in, and with Jesus Christ; against which Sin, Death, and Satan, the
father of lies, should not prevail to blast and curse, but it should arise the
blessing of his own free love, to sit above them all in true dominion, by the
witness of the Holy Ghost sent down in faithfulness from above, to comfort the
desolate, needy, poor, beggarly heart of man; writing the Law of Life in his
heart, tha^ he shall not dye, but live: where, whose eye is so opened by the
living Faith begotten of the Incorruptible Word, he man Run and Read (in the
same place where be Read the blood Lines of Death) the Lines of Gods
unchangeable Love and Blessing: which is only perfect to cast out of the
Conscience and Heart of man all fear and torment whatsoever; Saying Rise up,
and walk, for thy sins are forgiven thee. And the his Ministration, being (as I
may say) in the Authori^^ and Power of the living God, and not as the
Ministratio^ that stands only in the Art, Wisdom, and Eloquence of Man it drew
hearers from diverse places about, several miles (...) stant, to wait on his
Ministry: Some in go^d will, hungeing, and thirsting, and traveling in birth
under the stro^ of the powerful Word, until the living. Seed we brought forth
by the Spirit of Life in open view in the hearts, to give unto them that Bread,
that should endu^ unto eternal Life: the taste whereof made their Spirits dance
for joy, and caused them to tell it out unto others wh^ they had seen and
heard, and handled, that they also mig^^ come and taste of the same love of
God: The Echo and Fa^^^ whereof went diversely abroad. Some saw, and heard the
w^ders of God, and believed; others, astonished, went a^^ wondering, that they
never heard any preach like hi^ And many others came to hear and see what
should cause such strange reports, seeking to catch something, that they might
report also. Whereupon mistake: went abroad, and great contentions stirred up,
and jealouses fixed in men's minds, that some great Heresee, as a monster, would
appear when indeed the living Truth only appeared to the Children thereof,
although those against him could not see it, but daily sought to compare it
with some new or old Errors, and Heresies. And when they sought accusations
from this Authors Doctrine, and could find none: being in the hearing of it
silenced, that they had nothing to say against it yet to shewtheir minds, what
good will they bare to him in his Message, and to those who did embrace it,
because they could not well style them by the name of Breitlists, finding no
fault in his Doctrine: they then styled his Hearers by the name of
Grindletonians, by a name of a Town in Cravan, called Grindleton, where this
Author did at that time exercise his Ministry; thinking by his name to render
them odious and brand them for some kind of Sectaries: but they could not tell
what Sect to parallel them to: Hence rose the name Grindletonism. And yet they
rested not with this nicknaming, but raised aspersions against this Author:
informing the High Commission against him; who sent their commands to bring him
up to York, where he was kept in prison for a while, during which time; fifty
Articles were exhibited by his Adversaries against him before them: which, when
he came to his trial, not one of them directly proved against him. Whereupon,
after a Sermon preached by him at the Cathedral, he was dismissed, and liberty
by L. Bishop Tobias Matthews, granted to exercise his Ministry as formerly:
who, after much travel and pains in witnessing the glad tidings of Salvation,
ended his Natural Life at Burnlaie in Lancashire; after whose Death, these few
Head-notes of some of his Sermons came to my view. Wherein, Christian Reader,
if thou mind well, as thou reads, thou may taste the fundamental grounds of
Truth, and also perceive the various deceits of thy deceitful heart, and Satan's
deep temptations unvailed and discovered, to thine and his shame, which thou
may read, as follows.

J. C.

Here follows a Catalogue of the Texts of Scripture that these lines treats
of.
SERMON. I. PHilip. 3.19, 18. Brethren, be ye followers of me, and walk so, as
you have me for an example, for many, etc. Page 1. SERMON. II. Matthew. 11.25,
26. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise, and etc. p. 12. SERMON. III. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you: Take my yoke upon you,
etc. p. 22. SERMON. IV. Luke 2.8, 9, 10. And there were in the same country
Shepherds, abiding in the field, watching their flocks, etc. p. 30. SERMON. V.
Luke 7.36, 37, 38. And one of the Pharisees desired that he would eat with him,
and Jesus went into the Pharis^es house, etc. p. 43. SERMON. VI. Luke 8.4. And
when much people were gathered together, and were come out of every City. p.
67. SERMON. VII. Isa. 57.10. Thou have wearied thy self in the greatness of thy
way, yet saidest not, There is no hope. p. 74. SERMON. VIII. Psalm. 81.10, 11. I
am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: Open thy
mouth wide, and I will. p. 79. SERMON. IX. Exodus 12.21, 22. Then Moses called
all the Elders of Israel, and said, Choose you out, and take for every house a
lamb. p. 90. SERMON. X. Isa. 28.14, 15. Hear ye the word of the Lord ye
scornful men that rule my people which are in Jerusalem, etc, p. 96. SERMON.
XI. Isai. 39 5. Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the Word of the Lord;
Behold, the day come, that all that is in thy house, etc. p. 106. SERMON. XII.
Mat. 1.1. The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son
of Abraham; Abraham begat Isaac, etc. p. 112. SERMON. XIII. Heb. 2.24.
Forasmuch as the Children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part
with them, that he might through death, etc. p. 121. SERMON. XIV. Luke 22.31,
32. And he said unto Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat,
but he has prayed that thy faith fail not, etc. p. 131. SERMON. XV. Dan.
3.16.19. Then Shedrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the King
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer, etc. p. 140. SERMON. ^VI.
Jeremiah 48.34.56. Thus says the Lord God of Israel to thee, O Baruch; thou
did say, Woe is me now, for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, etc. p.
151. SERMON. ^VII. Isa. 64.6.7. But we are all as an unclean thing; all our
righteousness is as filthy rags, and we all do fade as chasse or a leaf, and
our iniqui^ie^ like the wind has taken us away. p. 159. SERMON. XVIII. Isa.
65.2, 3, 4. I was sought of them that asked not after me, I was found of them
that sought me not, and I said, Behold me to a nation that called not, etc. p.
169. SERMON. XIX. Isa. 63.1. Who is this that comes from Edom with dyed
garments from Bozra? this that is glorious in his apparel traveling in the
greatness, etc. p. 181. SERMON. XX. Genesis 22.14, 15. After these things God
tempted Abraham and said, Abraham, Abraham, and he said, I am here, etc. p.
199. SERMON. XXI. Esa. 9.6, 7, 8. For unto us a Childi: born, and unto us a Son
is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders, etc, p. 213. SERMON.
XXII. Matthew, Chapter 5. An exposition of some verses of the fifth Chapter of
Matthew: Blessed are the poor in Spirit, showing the condition of those that
are blessed. p. 231. SERMON. XXIII. Sam. 15.13. Declaring the double dealing of
Saul in the matter of Amalek. And Saul said to Samuel, etc. p. 247. SERMON.
XXIV. 1. Sam. 1.3, 4, 5. So when the people were come into the Camp, the Elders
of Israel said, Wherefore has the Lord smitten us, etc. p. 254. SERMON. XXV. 1
Samuel 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Then the Philistines took the Ark of God and carried it
from Eben-ezer, etc. p. 261. SERMON. XXVI. Math. 14.27. I will smite the
Shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered. p. 26^. SERMON. XXVII. Mark 13.35.
Watch ye, for ye know not when the master of the house will come, whether at
even or at midnight, or, etc. p. 250.
SERMON I.
Philip 3.17, 18. Brethren, Be you followers of me, and walk so, as you have us
for an example; for many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
weeping, that they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, etc.
THree sorts of People troubled the Church, 1. Dogs, which with open mouth
fought against Christ. 2. Evil workers, who professed Christ, and yet walked
inordinately. 3 The Circumcision, that cut themselves off from Christ and the
Church, by their singular Opinions: and fell into Sects, and would needs join
Circumcision and fleshly Righteousness with Christ: and so become confident in
the flesh. Against which the Apostle opposes his own example, who had more to
boast of than they; and yet it was nothing to him, in comparison of Christ: So
he persuades the Church to hold on forward in the Faith, to the crucifying and
laying down of all things, till they come to the Resurrection of the Dead; and
in all this Contention, to walk in love: that if some did not understand the
truth of the Mystery of Christ, nor yet were brought thereto, yet to proceed on
in love by the same Rule; and that God in time would reveal it. Here again he
propounds his own, and the Faithful for an Example; that they would walk in
that way of Faith toward Christ, and Love amongst themselves: and then he gives
them warning of the former, viz. Some in the Church that were Enemies to
Christ's Cross: and so describes their course and end. 1. He propounds himself
as a Pattern. 2. He warnes them of false Teachers or Brethren: In whom
consider, 1. His affection, Of whom I have told you often, and now tell you
weeping. 2. Their curse in these particulars; 1. They are Enemies to Christ. 2.
Their God is their belly. 3. Their Glory is their shame. 4. They mind earthly
things. 5. Their End is Damnation. This was no vain boasting, for elsewhere, be
acknowledges himself the least of all Saints, but only opposes himself and
the faithful against false Brethren, who only for Glory lived in Envy, sought
earthly gain by the Gospel, lived inordinately; and lest that weaklings by them
should be drawn to fleshly liberty. But look on them which walk after our
example, for we have no confidence in the flesh: We count not our selves
perfect, we seek not glory, nor profit, but only the maintenance of the Truth
of the Gospel; viz. Faith in Christ only, and Love to all men. So that this
being their example: Note that,

Faith in Christ, and simple Love to Man is the very Sum of the Gospel, and
the Life of all Religion in the heart of Man, Gal. 5. Faith works by love. 1.
Tim. 1. The end of the Commandment is love out of a pure heart, a good
Conscience, and faith unfeigned, all else ver. 7. is dross and dung. This is
the sum of all Paul's Epistles: This Paul to Tim calls the spirit of faith,
love and a sound mind. Thus Paul thanks God, for to the Col. the Faith and love
to all Saints, etc.

1. For these destroy Self Righteousness, and Self Confidence, and Self Love;
which are the poison of all Religion, viz. Self Wit, and Self Will; these Adam
got, and therein opposed God.

2. For by Faith he is made a Lord over all things, that will suffer nothing to
start up in the Church, and in his Heart, but Christ: and by Love he is servant
to all, and pliable; and servant to every one. By the one he is freed with God,
and by the other amongst men.

3. By Faith, he that had thought to live in, and by himself, through the Law,
comes to dye in himself; and to live in, and by another.

4. Nay, all Religion without these is nothing, but mere opinion and conceit,
whereby the heart is puffed up, and so not fit for mercy, and also tied to
himself and his own good: Mind the Religion of Christ: was it any thing, but a
denying of himself, and cleaving to the Father, and giving himself to the
Church in love: yea, to his very Enemies? Which Faith and Love is nothing else,
but a partaker so of himself, and his own weakness, Sin and Death thereby:
that he can believe and trust nothing in himself or the world, but only the
Word of God, and in that weakness waits on Christ and mere Mercy, and cut of
that dislike of himself, and love to that he sees in Christ, loves all, judges
none but himself.

1. How far are we then from Christ's Religion, when all our Religion is, 1.
Either in Fire of questions and disputations about this and that Opinion,
maintaining of our singular conceits, wherein we seem to excel others in
knowledge, whereby true love is drowned quite.

2. Or in some singular conceit of quality and disposition which we conceive in
our selves, and thereby grow proud, and despise Christ, and trample mercy under
our feet.

3. Or in high roveing conceits of the eternal Deity, Majesty and Power, and
Secret Will, and Purpose of God, without Christ; whereby the heart is hardened.

4. Or in the Notion of the Gospel and Christ; and faith without the power
thereof, gloriously vaunting of deep Mysteries: But in all these, the thing is
wanting, viz. an humble low, believing and loving heart like unto Christ.

1. Thus in all these, man leaves his own heart, and follows his heady
opinion; he forsakes Christ, and pleases himself with his own qualities:
turns from the word, and follows vain speculations, denies the Faith, and
lives by the flesh.

2. Know then, that whatever would draw thee from Christ and his Truth, is not
the Doctrine of God; whatever sets up man, and makes him any thing but a
Sinner, is not the doctrine of Christ, but of the Devil and Antichrist; for it
destroys faith.

Pray we then that the Doctrine of the Gospel, even of Faith and Love may be
continued pure in the Church: For Maus Wit and Reason will gather a thousand
Errors out of Gods Truth, viz. when it will not be content to become a fool,
but will needs comprehend a spiritual Truth, and determine thereof according to
its own Principles and Judgment. Then it brings a world of absurdities; for
all errors have risen out of the Wit of fleshly minded men, for the Spirit
leads unto all Truth.

And I fear, there will arise men of perverse minds, to pervert the truth of
the Gospel: some to their carnal liberty, some to the establishing of a
righteousness and power in man, without Christ: bear we the Infirmities of
men: But take heed of false Doctrine in the Church, for this is the worst of
all.

And I pray God, that many alive do not see that the Truth of the Gospel be
turned into the Mystery of Iniquity, and a greater Mystery of spiritual
wickedness than yet we have seen: Sed magna Veritas and praevalet^ Great is
the Truth and prevails

4. But the kindly effect of the Gospel is, to establish these two in the heart
of man, viz. to bring all things down in man by the Cross of Christ, and so
lay him low under thee feet of all: For the Gospel is a low thing, Faith is a
low thing, though mighty in Christ: and Love is a low thing; Therefore all high
flowen Chimical Divinity is the Doctrine of Satan, and not of Christ.

And therefore, if man be brought under the power hereof, then will Christ be
precious to him, and his Word will be the Life and Treasure of his Soul,
because man has nothing to stay him in his deep humility but only he: And then
will man love a man, because he is a man: and not because he is of my opinion,
or good to me, or of my way or lineage: but loves as Christ did, yea, h s very
Enemies, As you have us for an example, viz. Us in whom you see the Truth of
the Gospel to rule, and to walk according to the same, who seek Christ's
Kingdom, not ours, So that,

He walks safely, who truly feeling his own weakness, and believes man for the
Truths sake, and not the Tr^u^h for man's sake.

Follow me as I follow Christ: But many were drawn away by the Error of the
wicked. For man having a good conceit of another, is apt to believe what he
says: for he believes that God is with him, and so falls into odd opinion^.

1. Better we should never preach, than that the Gospel should be believed for
our sakes. Can we that are nothing bu^ error add to the Truth of God? nay, if
God be not with us, and guide us, we shall tell a thousand lies for Truth.

2. But woe be to that man, who becomes by his example a perverter of the
Brethren, either for matter of Faith, or Life, or Liberty: It had been better
he had ^ever been born. Take heed then how we depend on ^an: there is one man
for all, even the man Christ, Who is the way, the truth and the life: follow
him in the way o^ faith and love, of whom I have told you often: because of the
danger thereof, and man's weakness. So that,

Man is apt and weak of himself to be drawn into an ^vil way of error, and
hardly to believe the truth, and ^tick thereto, 1. For he is blind of
understanding, apt to believe any thing that may further his fleshly Kingdom,
^oath to believe any thing that makes for the destruction of it.

1. Hence it follows that we fall into so many bywayes, and bypath of error,
because we think we are able to know, and we strain our wits to comprehend, and
^eck out a reason o^ Gods matters, which are only to be believed: For though I
cannot see a reason how God brings about his purpose, and righteous will, shall
I therefore conclude; that he is not righteous, and not believe him; nay, Paul
is glad to shut his eyes at that wisdom, Rom 11. And cries out, Oh the height,
and depth, and length of the wisdom of God.

2. Nay, nothing preserves the Truth to man, but the Cross; for all things are
tried by the fire, and that reveals it.

3. That we may be guided in the way of Truth, First, depend on no man, nor on
the opinion of man. 2. Stick to the Word of the Gospel. 3. Pray instantly in
humility, and the Spirit shall lead us into all truth.

And now I tell you weeping: see the loving affection of Paul, First, who wept
partly for those men who h^d forsaken the Truth of the Gospel, and turned to
the World. And, 2. Partly for the danger of the Church, So that,

A loving man is truly loving to all, and truly mindeful of the good of the
Church, and advantage of Christ's Kingdom in all.

1 Paul sought not theirs but them: and the care of all the Churches lay upon
him.

1. Away then with this partial affection, when men rejoices to see others
misled, that he may justify himself: and away with this judging and not
pitying, bu^ hating them, They are enemies to the Cross of Christ.

Men that profess Christ, but deny him in his sufferings: their minds is not
prepared by faith and patience to bear the Cross; partly in doctrine they
denied it not understanding that mystery, partly and especially in life; for
they lived in sensuallity and fleshly pleasures and yet professed the Gospel.
So that,

Many in the Church profess Christ, and the Truth of the Gospel, which deny,
and are enemies to the Cross of Christ, and deny the power of the Gospel.

This is to deny him before men. To the Jews and Gentiles the Doctrine of the
Cross was foolishness. Paul when he was called before the Emperor, they all
denied him. The false Apostles, Gal. 6. strove against Paul, and desired to
have the Disciples circumcised because they would not suffer persecution. The
Lawyer, Matthew 19. and the Stony ground.

1. For they would have Christ and the World also, which cannot be.

2. They were never brought to see their own desert, and to justify God, for
then if so, they would bear the Cross willingly, as in Micah. 7. I will bear
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.

3 They turn the grace of God into wantonness, and dream only of ease, and
peace, and understand not the mystery of the Kingdom, but would make advantage
of Christ to the satisfying of the flesh.

Now this Cro^^e whereto they are enemies, is indeed that sore affliction,
whereby man is past all helps and hope in himself, or the World,

In Christ you see it was, First, He bare the iniquity of us all, so to us,
when man bears iniquity in daily repertance. 2. He bare the Fathers wrath, so
we judgment and wrath in our selves. 3. He suffered all indignity and loss of
life, so we patiently. And to be enemies hereto is, 1. To put off sin and bear
it through hardness of heart. 2. To pacify wrath by self holiness in our own
conceit only. 3. And for the World to keep it alive in our hearts, and cherish
it under Christ's wings.

1. And how many of us are such, we all believe and like well of the Gospel,
and to hear of sitting at Christ's right hand, but to drink of his Cup, none
has a mind. It is good believing, when we have the Gospel before us, and the
World about us, but to suffer want of all viz. the Fathers wrath, none like to
this. The Child can bear any thing better, we all like Gospel, but we will
loose nothing for it, which argues, we have little confidence in the truth
thereof, and little joy therein.

2. But we can talk of the Cross and sufferings, but we talk of it with light
and merry hearts, we make but a play-game of it, for we seek not the
bitterness of Christ's agony, nor the smart of the Cross, and so we dally with
all truth, we boast, with Peter, that we will die with him, but before the Cock
crow, we deny him thrice.

3. A fearful thing to forsake Christ and his Cross, so that, it is not so
light a thing to be a Christian, which must suffer willingly the spoyli^g o^
goods and soul and all, and be a friend of the Cross: Yea, he is the safest
whom God keeps under, for hereby is the truth of the Gospel revealed indeed to
man.

4. And happy is he that is guided by Christ in this way, and that his eyes are
kept waking all night, and feels the terrors of the Almighty, for he is safe
from security; It is not the dreaming of a power and free will in man, by use
whereof, security is prevented: but it is the Cross of Christ on man, that
keeps him waking; for Peter and the rest fell a sleep, notwithstanding, Christ's
warning given to them so often; only because they dreamed of such a power as
Peter boasted, but not sensible of the Cross that lied on Christ. Nay, all
errors have sprung in the Church for want of this, for while men were kept
within themselves, and their own misery, their pride was kept under: but when
they had lost themselves, and begun to be strong men of knowledge in conceit,
then they began to be masters, and run into a thousand opinions from truth, and
these are the enemies to Christ's Cross. First, Those that live in ease and
pleasure under profession and knowledge of the Gospel, and seed on the World as
their dainty dish. Secondly, Those which bear out sin through hardness of
heart; he bare the sin of all, but these bear it not as a burden, but as a
pleasure and delight: Thirdly, Which put of wrath and judgment, through self
righteousness and qualities, and so with Christ bear not the indignation of
the Lord: Fourthlie, Which are lifted up in knowledge of Christ, but walk not
in that denying, humble, and believing way of Christ: And it is a fearful
thing to stumble at this stone, and to frame a Christ to our selves: but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will crush all those to pieces, and bring down
their pride (whose god is their belly.) Those who were professors and teachers
of the Gospel, and yet under pretense thereof served their own lusts and
appetites they went talking of Religion, and thereby got good cheer: labor
not in their calling but made advantage of the Gospel, to the satisfying of
their lusts: These he gives warning of as e^emies So that,

It is a fearful thing, and dangerous in the Church, and to man: when man under
knowledge and profession of the Gospel, seeks chiefly the serving of his own
lusts, and pleasures of his appetite and not crucified to the world with Christ.

Such Paul speaks of, that they served their own bellies and not Christ, and
said, That they turned the grace of God into wantonness, and yet frequented
their feasts of love: And others Peter shows, that under pretense of long pray
rs, spoiled widows houses, and led captive simple Women; These Paul commanded,
that seeing they would not work, they should not eat: They profess that they
know God, but in deed deny him, that is, They are silled with knowledge, that
Christ is the way of Life in Justification, but they follow the world in their
appetitte and deny him.

1. For thus, Religion is made but only a cloak to a rotten and fleshly heart,
that under it, they may better attain their own desires.

2. Those that have the knowledge of the Gospel without the power thereof, that
have learned to know Christ, but not as the truth is in Jesus, they want the
power of his death, which is indeed all.

3. These never came in by the right door, the denying of themselves, forsaking
all, and taking up the Cross.

1. And thus does most of us that profess Christ to be our Lord and King, our
life and hope, our joy, and salvation and that besides him, there is none under
heaven, and yet none denies him more. We, would enjoy Christ with full bellies,
and purses, and so enjoy Christ in the Flesh but Lust: rules over the Spirit.
Thus we strive to have Heaven and Earth both, which cannot be: what care and
labor to please our bellies? Is not all a man^ care for his mouth, and yet his
desire is not satisfied? this we make sure of to look too; Is not most of thy
life time spent in labor about that curious belly of thine, summer and winter,
night and day, all is but for back and belly, and yet nature is satisfied with
a little? And these are still h^^d-hearted men, had rather the poor perish in
the Streets, than they want to satisfy their appetites: For if a man would but
spare the tenth penny that he spends idelie, only to please his lust, would it
not relieve a Town? Nay, if that vain waste were spared, which man spends on
his lusts, only to feed a sort of fat idle hostesses, it would keep the poor of
a Paroch. And then if our gairesh women would but spare one Lace and Guard of
five, it would cloth them from cold. Well, Christ will be no pattern for these
things. But above all ashame it is for believers to stoup to this loose god, to
live daintily and fair deliciously. How many Martyrs have line in prison with
bread and water, and yet better hearts? are we enemies to the flesh, and yet
pampers it? Is flesh thus crucified with Christ and yet so great a god unto us?

2. Then if the Cross go not along with the Gospel, it prospers not, but flesh
is strong and presses to be satisfied, and man will not, cannot lay violent
hands upon it, but even this must be given of God, that he keep man down, and
his lusts and desires under, viz. so to see and feel himself, as, 1. That he
shall think himself unworthy of any food, or to live. 2. That his mind be so
perplexed with want of another thing, even Christ, that his mind is thereby
drawn off all these things.

3. But he that walks orderly with Christ under the Cross, is pleased with any
thing: Brown bread and the Gospel is good fare, not vowing wilful poverty, but
rejoicing in Christ; and all his gifts, yet well contented in the want of them:
whose glory is in their shame, of w^ll end in shame, viz They seek glory by
their Religion and Profession of the Gospel, but this course will bring more
shame, then if they had never professed it. They seek glory but it is but a
poor portion. So that,

Many in the Church profess the Gospel, that they may gain glory to themselves
thereby in the eyes of man, rather than out of simple love, and simpathize of
heart with the Gospel.

You seek honor one of another; The Disciples sought who to be greatest.
Pharisees took the uppermost rooms made their Phylactaries broad, and all to be
seen of men.

1. For respect is still the aim of all knowledge, and therefore, man labors
for knowledge, that he may appear so: this itching humor setting him a work,
rather than his own misery and want.

2. This does still follow the Gospel, others that profess not, look for no
glory this way, and yet this shall end in shame.

1. Is not this apparent, when men speak and talk of Religion, and utter great
bumbaisted terms, and fly and soar above, when God speaks not in them all
to be seen and heard: nay, when we preach to please men, we are not the
servants of Christ; but when out of love to Christ, and sense of the misery of
man, and our own, we pity man, and make known the will of the Father to them,
then we serve Christ.

2. Have not all an aiming* and desire of this, man loath to appear Ignorant,
but clothes himself with knowledge: well, Christ sees thy double heart, and his
servants feel not the warming power of his Spirit in thee, therefore it shall
end in shame, Christ loved the Publican better than those.

3. But sure a believing, loving heart walks in shame, which shall be turned to
his Glory, for he that seeks Glory shall never have it, and be that seeks it
not shall have it, he that truly understands himself never looks for good
opinion of any, for look what good opinion a man has of himself, he looks that
all the World should have the l^ke of him.

4 And this shall end in shame: for God will dishonor man at last, nothing hid,
that shall not be made manifest.

Who mind Earthly things, viz They profess the Spirit, yet their hearts is
after the Earth. So that,

He that under Light and Knowledge of the Gospel is carried after the lusts and
desires of the Earth, is an enemy to Christ, and a stranger to him.

SERMON II.
Matthew. 11.25, 26. I thank th^e Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth; that thou
have hid these things from the wise and Prudent, and revealed them to Babes: It
is so O Father, because thy good pleasure was such: all things are given unto
me of my Father, etc.
THese words are a part of Christ's Sermon to the hard hearted Jews, who
neith^r by the austerity of John's Preaching nor Christ's Doctrine of Love, would
embrace the Gospel and Mystery of Life; nor by the great works that he had done
in Chorazin and Bethsaida, against whom he threatens heavy woes: Yet in the end
gives thanks, that though the wise men of the Jews rej^cted the Truth, being
justly blinded: yet it was his good pleasure for to reveal it to poor and
ignorant men, even to Babes, that his mercy and love might appear.

1. He gives thanks for confounding the wisdom of Man, and revealing it to the
Ignorant.

2. A limitation of that knowledge, only to the Power of God in Christ.

3. An Invitation to all poor and desol^te souls, with a promise of help.

4. An Ex^ortation to Patience, in bearing the cross after his example, with a
promise of rest therein.

First, He thanks God for confounding the wisdom of the wise, not that he
rejoiced in their blindness: but wished rather that all might be saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth: but he rejoices, that seeing fl^shly wisdom
shuts its eyes against the truth, that yet he reveals it to others, wherein he
shows whose eyes are only open to the truth, viz.

He that in conceit of his own wisdom is lifted up above the simplicity of the
Gospel, understands the least of the Mystery and Life of the Gospel: but he
that lies low in himself, seeking to be guided by another, shall understand all.

None of the Doctors received his message: not many wise, Cor. 1. etc. If any
man seem to be wise, let him become a fool. Christ choose not the wise Scribes,
but poor Fishers to know his Truth.

1. For the Gospel is not understood by wisdom, but by that Spirit whereby it
is revealed to the Faith of a Believer, that is blind in himself, and seeks
wisdom from God.

2. Faith only sees things not seen: if they be seen and comprehended by man,
they are not of Faith.

3. The Son that is grown wise through pride, casts off the Father: but the
little Child walks in his hands.

4 Conceit of Knowledge makes man unteachable, and hard hearted: as a man that
sits on high, looks down to the dungeon, can see nothing there: but sitting in
the dungeon, looking up, sees light of Sun: So a man, sitting above, and
looking down to the Gospel, as a thing under him, sees nothing: But he that
sits in darkness of his own heart, and looks up to the Sun, sees all, waiting
still for the Sun to shine. Though man know all the Mysteries of Life to be in
Christ: yet without Christ he knows nothing that he dare trust to.

Object. To what end then should Man labor for Knowledge?

Answ. Yes, This condemns not Knowledge, but that a Man should seek it at
Christ, and enjoy it in him, In whom it is hid from the flesh in all the
treasures thereof: But not that man should store it up, thereby to comprehend
God; but to know, that when he thinks he knows all, he knows nothing, as he
ought to know.

2. That he may maintain Truth in the Church of God.

3. That he may guide himself wisely and soberly before men.

1. Where then are the wise? where is the Scribe? etc. All the wisdom of this
World is but foolishness; and yet these count the Truth of God foolishness:
These of all think most basely of the Gospel.

2. Yea, what a fool is Aristotle himself, and all humane knowledge in the
matter of Jesus Christ.

3 Be content to be counted a fool with the wise of the world. Thou thinks that
he is a fool that follows Christ, but he knows that thou art a fool that
follows the World

4. Who would think that many wise men should be so ignorant in Christ's matters
as they are, and that many ignorants should know him.

5. Well worth low and Child like minds, that dare not trust their own wit or
strength, but wait upon the Father.

It is so O Father, because thy pleasure was such. Here he shows the ground and
prime cause, that Babes, and not Wise Men understand the Gospel: Not any Power
or Worth in Man, but the good will of God: which is not only his absolute Will:
but (...), the free love and good will of God toward man, without any respect
of his worth: so that,

The good will of God, and his good pleasure, is the only cause of all good to
man, when man believes it, and becomes subject thereto, James 1. Of his own
good will begat he us. Ephesians. 1. Our Election is from this ground, God has
chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world was laid, who has
predestined us to be adopted in Christ Jesus: according to the good pleasure
of his will: not according to our works, but according to his grace he saved
us: so he chose Israel. Who can give a reason in himself, why God does any good
to man, but his good will and pleasure.

1. For its God that moves man, and sets him a working, not man God.

2. Hereby does he take away all b^asting from man, and lays him low, to
depend upon another, and live by mere grace.

3. For he is absolute Lord over all; no resisting of his Will, to which man is
never brought to be subject.

But 1. When he feels nothing but weakness, sorrow, bondage and misery; and no
power to get out, but lies under quietly; and commits himself to his good
pleasure, in faith, tears and sighs, and groans: This is his case, for now he
bears wrath patiently.

2. And then finding help in God, according to his word, and joy and peace, and
freedom he sees; that it came not by any wit or power in himself, but it was
only his good pleasure: so that,

1. Hereby he is enlarged to praise God freely with admiration.

2. And also to believe and vvait on that word of Faith, though he feel
nothing, yet Gods will and pleasure is instead of all to him.

1. Thus from the Doctrine of free mercy, does the Kingdom of God thrive in
man, and grow vigorous: Nothing brings down but this: for want of subjection
and believing of this good pleasure of God, man still seeks a cause in himself,
as this and that good quality, and so never trusts his good pleasure. Man would
still know a reason of his good will, which he will not suffer: For Christ
does not here curiously seek out a reason of the Fathers will, but gives
thanks, that God has revealed it by the Gospel: To teach us, that we do not
rashly presume to search his Counsels, but wait upon his good pleasure in his
word.

2. What place then has free Will, which depends only on Gods good pleasure,
and not on thy right use of free will. For there is no more willingness in
thee, than in others that never obeyed the truth; but it was only his good
pleasure to thee: For by nature, Man fights against God, and would have rest
any way, rather than this; and loath to commit himself to his good pleasure,
but still would have a la^d in his own safety, and so share in the glory. But
Christ takes all boasting away, that Faith may live, and Man thereby: that Gods
pleasure may stand, and Man subject thereto, that his grace may be
communicated, and Man praise his goodness.

But this Doctrine of free will destroys Faith, sets his pleasure aside, and
binds God: lifts up man in pride and presumption, and makes him secure in a few
faint endeavors of his own.

3. But the only bed of rest in all things is this, as Chemnitius says, That
against this s andal of refusing Gospel, we lift up our thoughts to the good
pleasure of God, and there rest in subjection, so in all things: as,

First, Wants thou Comfort and Peace of Conscience? does God wi^hhold the
f^eling of his Love from thee? Thou wonders what is the cause, nay, say, Even
so, O Father: because it is thy good pleasure to bring me down.

2. Art thou troubled with a worldly husband, a frowa^d wife unt^ ward
Children: say, Even so, O Father, It is thy go^d pleasure.

3. Art thou weak and sickly, say, It is even so thy pleasure, to keep under my
Lost, and Pride, and Wordly affections.

4 See thou Iniquity to abound, and Gospel despised, say so, Father, its thy
pleasure.

5. Art thou Persecuted, and the Enemy prevails over thee, say, Father, its
thy pleasure.

This is the continual exercise under the Cross, in patience not to fret, and
lust and strive, seeing the will of the Father orders all things, we would still
have our own pleasure done, and strive for our own wills: but this is our woe.

Nay, and herein is our happiness, that it is his good will toward all little
ones that are subject as Children, his Will and Rod shall rule and crush the
stoutest, even Pharaoh himself, but the meek and lowely shall find his good will
toward them, that he will turn their enemies to be their friends, etc.

This good will of God is not to be comprehended by man, for it rests in the
Word of God, and there to be made known in time, and only to be believed. For
all the works of God, are never known till they be wrought, only to be believed
before. For to Reason, many times God seems to be a severe Tyrant, nay his
Word a Fable, which speaks of great privileges, and they seem in their own
sense to be forsaken in affliction, but God gives them a Word that will stand,
and his good will shall be revealed in time, in the mean time sit still.

All things are given to me of my Father. Here he shows how this good
pleasure is c^nveyed to man, viz in Christ, for he has given all things to
him. So that lest you little ones should be disheartened; know that I have all
in my power, by a free gift, and come to me, and I will ease you. So that,

God the Father has given and stored up in Jesus Christ a treasure of all
wisdom, goodness etc. And whatsoever appertains unto the perfecting of his
Kingdom: that in himself the Father may be glorified, and man made happy.

So by promise, he gave him strength to crush the Serpents Head, and to
Abraham, that in him all people should be blessed. Isa. He laid help on him
that was mighty, in his birth he was to be called Wonderful Counselor, etc.
And a light to the Gentiles, and the glory of Israel, the deliverer of his
people out of prison; to give light to the blind.

He was the Vine that had the sap in him: yea, the treasure of wisdom; Yea, the
fullness of the Godhead; Yea, all Judgment was committed unto him, Yea, in
conclusion, all power in Heaven and Earth, and victory over Hell and all
Enemies: This was manifested in his Word that was with authoritie^ and never
man spoke like him, even to the World in general: And in his Miracles? has it
been seen, that any man opened the eyes of the blind, and raised the dead? This
the Father did by an eternal purpose for his glory, and this has been done for
the good and salvation of man, that man that was not capable by his fleshly
wisdom of Gods ways, yet should have one in the flesh like himself: in whom,
and by whom he would convey all things that is good to man, because we cannot
ascend to Heaven, therefore we might have a God on Earth.

1. Where then is that power and ability in man, o^ in any other Creature for
guiding or preserving himself, which the wit and pride of Man so boasts off?
Has not the sparrow power to fall without his providence? Then, what power in
Man toward this great work. Nay, as there is no power in the Commonwealth,
neither for preserving right, nor keeping under of vvrong, but in the King: and
therefore the very pett^^ Constable: or any Officer, he commands in the Kings
Name, and Rules by the power of the King; nor no Will, but the Will of the
King: So in this Kingdom of Christ, no power but in the King for subduing of
rebellious men in the Church by his Word, or Rebellious lusts in the heart of
man, but the power of this Kingdom. Therefore, the Apostles commanded the evil
Spirit by the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. And as he that rules in his own Name
is a Traitor, and does no good; So he that thinks to live and rule by his own
power, shall not prevail: This conceit only arises out of blind pride, that
when God has shown his power in him he takes it to himself: and stores it up
in conceit: and this out of the strength of Lust that will needs have another
thing than he gives: or out of a proud opinion, that he would believe another
truth than his. So that lust and opinion are the two great enemies of Faith:
But if thou haste some abilities out of Christ in thy self, What? 1. needs thou
Faith? to believe in him; or to pray him? 2. Why do thou not conquer thy
Lusts, and free thy self as thou seems to desire.

2. Whatever then man desires, here he must have it: for it is not else whereto
be had: whether Peace, Forgiveness, Assurance, Comfort, Rest. Here it is laid
up, and given to the needy; he has always to deal with such, and none else

3. Happy then he that lives by says in him, and whose eyes are still toward
him, that waits at his Posts, and listens to his Word: let all things else
pass, work Righteousness, live holily; but look for life in none but him. And
yet how loath is man to attend here, but he would have all in his own keeping,
because he would not depend on him: and yet were we then most miserable, if our
life depended on our own care and keeping.

For No man knows the Son, but the Father. Here is his limitation, viz. That
none by the wit of man is able to know Me, and Power, and Wisdom, and Mercy,
and Truth, and Way of Happiness that is hid in me, but whom the Father does
teach and uphold by his power, but I that know it in him truly: and those to
whom I reveal it by my word and spirit, through the cross and way of death.
For it is an unknown way to the world, that by Death should come life, and by
sorrow and sufferings, joy and freedom; so that,

No power or possibility in man by the strength of natural wit, to know the
good will and pleasure of God, or the Mystery of Christ; so as man shall find
life theteby or certainty therein; but as the Father makes himself known in
Christ, by his Word and power of his Spirit, unto the faith of man believing
his truth, 1. Cor. 2. The natural man understands not the things of God,
Christ says, I am the light that enlightens all that comes after me. Joh. 1,
He is the light of the world. Joh. 1.4. There is anointing that teaches all
things. 1. Joh. 5. None can say that Jesus is the Christ, but by the Holy
Ghost. Though we think, that That Jesus we read of, was the Christ and Savior:
yet the flesh thinks but of him after the flesh: but his mighty Power, his
wonderful Truth, unspeakable Love to Man, the bitterness of his Sufferings,
the Joy in the Fathers will, the Victory over Hell and Death, the joy at the
Fathers right hand: none knows it, but he that believes it out of blinnnesse
and misery.

1. For the Father has hid the treasures of wisdom in him, hidden them from
the world: found, not by curious searching, but by humble crying and believing:
and found not in man, but in Christ, and there to be enjoyed: for he is made
our Wisdom, Righteousness; Sanctification and Redemption.

2. Adam had thought to have known God in the Creatures, and himself, and the
evil also without God; but knew no good, till God revealed Christ in the
promise: So until we be brought by the truth of Christ, to know no good in any
thing, but in God: nor no evil in any thing, but in our selves, we know nothing
at all: but we seek to see a good in every thing, and in our selves especially:
and would see no evil, and so are lifted up: and know nothing as we ought.

3. And this Christ prays, that his Elect may know that thou art in me, and I
in thee: and that thou have sent me: And I speak not of any self, but they are
the words of my Father that sent me, for of my self I can do nothing.

4. And note, that this great Mystery was revealed after Christ's death: for
then he sent the Comforter to lead into all truth, and not till then. Before
this, the Disciples had a thousand imaginations of Christ, but now they knew
that he was the Son of the Father, and Head of the Church; So we have a world
of fancies to^c^ing God and Christ, but never know him, until the Cross reveal
him: for till then, we only t^ink him to be such and such, and another thought
crosses that. But this makes the weakness and vanity to appear, and his power
preserves: for every man's work shall be revealed by Fire. How wonderful are the
blind conceits that man has of God and Christ: as,

1. When we will needs comprehend God without Christ in his Essence,
Properties, Attributes, Eternity, Omnipotency, etc. What a foolishness is
this: to think to compass in our thoughts Omnipotence? etc.

2. Others that frame a knowledge of Christ, in comprehending the Story of his
Life and Death, Works, etc Thus we know him by Relation, as we do other
Countries where we never were, but never walk on foot with him in his death
and misery. None knows him, whose miserable heart is not delivered from Death
by him: who believes his truth above all, then this truth makes him free.

3. We see then, that all Knowledge comes by Faitht as, suppose a man a
Stranger, promise to ransom me (a captive) I believe he will: but I know not
that he will, but only vvait in faith: nor how he vvil do it, nor why he
will: but when he makes good his word, then I know his love which he revealed
to me, and I not able to conceive in my self. So with Christ he promises that
he will redeem me, but I know not that he will: only I believe, and wait in
misery: yet by that Faith I am preserved through the Word; though I feel
nothing but death and b^ndage. Would thou know the Love of God that passes
Knowledge? vvait on Christ by Faith, believing his Word; and he will reveal
the Love of the Father. For though we know not the mind of G^d, yet we have
the mind of Christ: So that thou must know nothing but in him; abide in him,
and his Word abide in thee, and he will reveal all things unto thee. So that
our curious and busy Wit, so hun ing to know! and straining out the Wit to
understand, leads to many fancies: But know, that his ways are insearchable:
but vvait and attend, and he will reveal Christ and the Father: if thou fit
under the burden of thine own ignorance, and content for the time to know
nothing but thy own vileness.

Here we see, that Christ is both God and Man A M^n, in whom the fullness of
the God head dvvells, to whom all is given that knovvs the mind of the Father,
and reveals i^ to us. This is the only God on Earth that man's mind man be fixed
here, and not gade abroad: neither ascend into Heaven, nor descend down into
Hell, etc.

Where then is the free will and power of Man, without Christ living in him,
and leading into all Truth: dravving the will of Man to vvait on God in
subjection? All else, is but trusting to the Wit of Nature, which is alvvayes
blind. It follovveth in the 28. verse.

SERMON III.
Matthew 11.28. Come unto me all that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease
you: Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart
HEre is his Invitation, upon the former relation of his fullness, viz. You see
where all help is. (...) then you want help in any strait that lies on you as a
burden, Come to me, viz. to my Word and Promise; for there he dwells, and I
will ease you; So that,

There is no certain way or means to a burdened heart, to free his guilt, ease
his burden, or rid in him ou^ of the Snare of Satan, but the simple fleeing of
the mind from all to Christ, in his Word of Truth; and there to stick and abide
in life and death.

He was of old ordained to break the Serpents head, and prophesied of, to bind
up the broken hearted. He was the refuge of Job in all his afflictions, I know
that my Redeemer lives. He was sealed and appointed thereto by the purpose of
the Father. This himself witnesses by word and work: By word, I am come to
save the World, I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live.

By works, How many poor, lame, blind did he help, which he was after to do
spiritually; to heal the blind, etc. The afflicted he comforted, as the
Publicane, Mary, etc. And this Paul found in himself, and taught unto others,
That there is none other Name under Heaven, etc.

1. For nothing can free the spirit of man but he; for he dwells there; all
things else, only ease the flesh.

2. All other things prosper according to his presence, and not according to
the power of the Creature.

3. All other things are but miserable comforters, but only a putting off for a
time, and forgetting it: but it comes again with more violence, like a sore ill
healed.

1. And yet how do we in any strait, run to any thing, rather than this, For
first, The World says, Come to me, and I will relieve thy want: Be diligent,
apply thy mind to me: seek and get me by violence or any way, and I will ease
thee: and we run to it with love and confidence, and yet never a whit eased or
satisfied.

2. The Flesh says, Come to me, and I will rejoice thee, and lig^ten thy
heart, and put away all thy sorrow; I season all sadness with mirth and
delight, and we follow (...): and yet in the midst thereof, the heart is
sorrowful.

3. Reason says, Come to me, and I will guide thee, and let thee see Comfort:
Look at thy righteousness and ^olinesse, thy diligence and knowledge of the
Word: ^hou art so good, and so good above others: thou have ^o reason to be
heavy, and yet man is never the better. These are all the Promises of the god
of this World.

4. Nay, says Christ, But turn thine eyes from them all, and come to me;
believe and wait, and I will refresh thy heart, pardon thy sin, preserve thee
in trouble, and keep ^hee in death: and this never deceives.

2. And the reason why we come not after so many ^alls, is, because we are not
weary, or think to find ease elsewhere: and so long we never come, viz. till
the Word have revealed such a misery to man, of which he is now sensible, that
all things cannot remove: For while man's fleshly hope remains, he does not
respect Christ Christ has nothing to do with any, but sinful and miserable
man: Therefore, we come not because we are not burdened, or but so, as we
think: either the World shall help us, or we shall be able to help our selves.

Man's burden may be reduced to four Heads. 1. Temptations of Satan.

2. Guilt of our own Hearts, and Want of the Fathers Love.

3. Rebellion of the Flesh, and Corruption of Nature.

4. Want and Misery, and Affliction in the World.

Mind, and we shall see that one of these is always the burden under which we
groan: The three first properly to Believers, either entering the door of
Faith, or straying from the Faith received.

1. Satan's Temptations are a grievous burden and snare, when he crosses by
Reason the Truth of God: for so he possessed many in Christ's time: and now
prevails with many also: Sometimes, with strong and black Arguments: vexing
with fear, doubting and distraction, calling the Truth a lie.

2. Guiltiness of Sin by the Law, lies heavy urged also by Satan: filling the
Heart with fear and disru^^ the conscience unquiet, and the heart not
estabilished in Faith: but still has an eye to his own unrighteousness; and
thinks, if he were more holy and righteous, all should be well.

But the remedy is, to accuse thy self still; confess the Law, meet the
curse, and bear Indignation: yet turni^g from these Arguments of Reason. Tell
the Devil, thou never sinned against him, but obeyed him: but against Christ;
and that he has taken to himself, that all thy sins are now his, and his
righteousness thine. Then begins a spark o^ Faith to arise: saying, O that I
could b lieve: these groans are helped by the Spirit: and then comes the
feeling of joy and gladness.

3. Rebellion of the flesh is a burden to Believers: when he would do good:
Evil is present, drawing unawares to vile courses, still pricking him forvvard
to tickling Lusts; dravving still to look to the world, and so darkning the
light of Christ in him: But see that it be a burden, and whether it be not the
strength of thy fleshly will not yet subdued: that it is a burden rather,
because thou can not have thy own will, than because thou can not have thy
will subdued: Like a froward wife, which says, She will be content, and let
her husband, do what he will: but withal frets and repines, because the
husband will not yield: which he must do, or else she will never be quiet.
Here not the frowardness, but the crossi^g of her will is her burden: She is
not a burden to her self, but her husbands will is a burden to her, and she
unto him: so with God. But if it be a burden indeed, no remedy but Christ:
That thou let him see and know that it is thy greatest burdens and not
trusting thy care, diligence: or watching: nor fighting with fleshly weapons:
but lay down all, and wait on him who has power: and by whom only sin and
lust is crucified.

4. Want, trouble and misery in the World lies heavy on all: For flesh would
live in fullness, and see somewhat a fore-hand: and it may be thou art in want
and persecution even for Christ; no remedy but Christ and ^^e Word of Truth.
For here, thou see the promise to any burden whatsoever: Therefore, does sin
in thy ^^lf, or want of comfort, does outward Crosses: as a worldly husband,
froward wife, bitter enemies, sick^esse and provertie oppress thee? Sit still,
and say with ^onfidence, and bind Christ to his Word. Thou said lord, thou
would take away sin: crucify the flesh, ^ind Satan, bear all my weakness,
stand by, and be ac^used for me before Counsels: Here I am, thou know ^^y
burden, that these ly heavy on me; I am weary ^o bear them; I believe thy
Word, and vvait for thy ^elp.

3. So that it is not because we are troubled, therefor to think that he will
ease us, but by trouble being ^riven to him with cries and faith; for the
truly bur^ened heart, is a praying and believing Heart: and so a ^ender and
broken Heart, that all the World cannot ^ure. But these are hard: But we are
at ease in Sion: not ^roubled, not weary: and therefore have so little
fellowship with Christ, because we have so much fellow^hip with the flesh.

Take my yoke upon you: To live with Christ, then it ^s not to believe and live
in pleasure, case and wanton^esse of the Flesh, but to bear his burden and yoke
hea^ier than that of Rehoboams; whose little finger was hea^ier than his
Fathers hand. For this is affliction of Spirit, killing of the Flesh, losing of
the World, Life and ^ll: and yet the believing heart stayed on God in hope and
Faith in his promise, patiently suffering his will, shall find rest therein to
his Soul, though he be pinched and killed in the Flesh. So that,

Simple believing in Christ, and vvalking with him ^n the patient and willing
bearing of his cross and quiet, ^ubjection to his will in love, is the only way
of peace and rest to man's restless heart, Jer. 1. This is my burden and I will
bear it. Lam. 3. It Is good for a man to bear the ^oke in his youth. Mic. 7. I
will bear the indignation of ^he Lord, because I have sinned. If you will be my
Disciples, take up my Cross and follow me. Phil. 3. L^^ the same mind be in
you, that was in Christ; who, when he was reviled, reviled not again. Nay, he
prayed for them, 1. First If ye suffer wrongfully, and take it patiently, the
glory of Christ rests on you:

For its not the framing of the World, and all things to our wanton minds: but
our minds to Gods will, that'^ our rest; For when we will one thing, and God
wills and sends another; then the heart of man is vexed, be cause he cannot
have his own Will.

2. There is an unavoidable necessity, that when man begins to believe, and to
follow Christ in his Word, the World will cross him, Satan will tempt him, and
God will try him; which can no way be helped, but by suffering as Christ did.

3. Faith gives a foundation of rest to the heart i^ Gods Word: As with Christ,
who was the Word of the Father, but the Cross destroys the Flesh, and keep^
Faith in life, that Gods power may be perfected i^ man's weakness.

4. For to a believing heart, the Cross is no Cross: and to the unbeliever,
peace is no peace: For he has peace that seeks not peace.

And he that flies the Cross, shall have the Cross: For its no Cross to them
because it but weakens and crosses the Flesh, which he would have crucified:
But when man would have Christ, and ease, fulness and joy in the World; then
it is a Cross to him.

Now this Yoke must be taken upon us, not vowing willful poverty, in
solitarienesse: This is but to fly the World to get ease, but to bear it
quietly, when i^ is sent of God: Because we believe and know, that i^ comes to
pass by the certain knowledge of the Father, and so the Flesh grieves at the
Cross, yet the heart imbraceth the Fatherly will freely, and with a willing
mind: None bears the Cross willingly, that seeks eas^ in the Flesh.

Now the Cross and Yoke that Christ bare, was

1. The Wrath and Indignation of the Father, an^ want of feeling his love: My
God why have thou for^aken me, and he alone trod the wine press of his Wrath:
^his is an heavy burden, man must bear this, Mic. 7. I ^ill bear the
indignation of the Lord: So, when man is ^o sensible of his own guilt, that he
bears patiently the Wrath of God, thinking nothing too much that lights ^n him,
and so wai^s for mercy; For God lays this upon man: now he smiles, and then
he looks upon ^an as an enemy; all must be born in Faith, that man ^ay be
brought down.

2. The sins and infirmities of the people: They were ^oward, they were
rebellious, received not his Doctrine; ^ay, continued blind, and unfaithful,
after many mi^acles: They despised him, and his Doctrine; yea, many ^ell away,
and became enemies to him, and his truth: and yet all this he bare patiently;
He mourned for the ^ardnesse of their hearts, and wept over them, he prayed ^or
them. As Paul became all to all, he bare the care (...) fall the Churches: And
so, man not fretting and con^nding or justifying himself, and judging them, but
pa^iently bearing the evil; proving if at any time, that God will grant them
repentance. If all do not as thou would have them nor, are such as thou
expects: con^ider, thou art the same by nature; and what thou art ^od they
also, it is by the will of the Father.

3 The oppression of his adversaries, with wrongs, and slanders, and
persecution, prisonment and ^anishment; and yet he bare patiently, and prayed
^or them, though they did all unjustly: and so he suf^ered for righteousness:
They took away life, and ^ll: So that though man be persecuted, and reproa^hed,
and counted the offscouring of all things: Yea, ^o go through good report, and
bad report, and pass ^y all, taking no notice, knowing that God has sent them
to curse.

4. Want of worldly riches, and pleasure often in po^ertie: Yea, He had not
whereon to lay his head, he had ^o sumptuous houses, nor rich treasures, but
one poor ^^g in the hand of a thief: for he would not be troubled himself, nor
trouble no good man with it; he had not his variety of dishes, or costly
apparel, not yearly revenyes, nor certain estate: Nay, he had but for the day,
yet to believe, and to be content, its but an easy burden.

1. This Doctrine is foolishness to the World, which know none other good but
the World: Its hard to persuade a wordly heart, that there is so little good,
o^ certainty in the World, or that there is a freedom in forsaking it: for they
think it impossible for they have naught to trust too but that: but when man
has another to depend on, he lets it go, and looks for supply from him.

2. And its little known in the Church: We all profess the truth of the
Gospel, but not learned to suffer with him: We like an easy, full, joyful
Religion well, to mingle Flesh and Spirit: join Christ, and Mammo^ together:
but here is never pure believing: Hence many fall from the Gospel, others live
in daily vexation, o^ security; having not learned this lesson: So that we
presume, that we do believe, and shall stand, and yet, alace! when the Cross
comes, its a question whether we believe or not; As Peter.

3. So that Christ's yoke and Cross never hurts the Church, as in the time of
the Martyrs, it purified Faith. It is a practical divinity; it manifests man's
weakness, Gods power, and truth, which before man thinks not of, but now he
believes and feels.

4. Why then should we fear affliction? why do we grieve and mourn, and cark,
and care? Thou can not deliver thy Soul, thou frets thy self, and God has
set, that thus and thus it shall fall out to thee: which he will order, to the
good of all that trust in him. Rest then patiently a while, and the deliverance
shall be glorious: Learn of me.

If you will know the way of rest, hearken not to the Flesh, pleading for ease;
nor to the World pleading for wealth: nor to your hearts, pleading for joy, and
peace in the World: But I will teach you another way, which is foolishness to
the Flesh: death for the present, but life, and freedom for ever. So that,

Man comes to know, and walk in the way of life and peace, as he is taught by
Christ, and in subjection: learns and is guided by him, Ephesians 4.18 But you have
not so learned Christ, etc. he leads unto all truth: He is the Prophet of the
Church, and has all Wisdom, Matthew. 5. It has been said of old, but I say unto
you, etc. And in the new covenant, they shall all be taught of Christ, and
here, none knows the Father, but the Son.

1. For he only knows the mind of the Father, and i^ sent into the World to
reveal it to man: We know not the mind of God, but we have the mind of Christ.

2. All other handles the Word deceitfully, and is nothing but the teaching of
the Serpent, to draw man from God.

3. He has gone the way himself, others have but seen it in a map.

1. But there are many false Teachers and Preachers in the World: As Satan
preaches liberty unto sin, the World riches, and careing and fleshly
pleasures: But these are not the Doctrine of the Christ.

2. Others will be wise in heavenly doctrine by fleshly wisdom; and so think
by art, and learning to compass it: and so transcend above Christ: and lies
not low with him.

3. Others, teach Christ to be a Lawgiver, and so frame a righteousness, in
seeming obedience; but knows not the power of his death, and life.

1. As the drunkard, to wallow in pleasure, and live like a beast at the stale:
did thou learn this at Christ?

2. The wordling carking, caring, gathering: did thou learn that at Christ,
who had not his kingdom here?

3. The proud, vain, glorious, that looks for respect; did Christ teach thee
that? Who pulls down every high thought.

4. The malicious, striving, contentious man; did Christ so? Nay, the Doctrine
of Christ was. 1. To pull down man, and lay him low; and exalt God, and the
power of his truth. 2. To Cross the World, and stablish Faith, 3. To kill the
Flesh, and stablish patience: to destroy Lust, and stablish Love: But we like
no^ this doctrine, it gives no liberty to the Flesh: hereby all false doctrine
is detected.

For I am meek and lowly in heart, so should you be: So that,

Lowelie, meek-minded men, who are humbled in themselves, and daily judge their
own unworthiness, shall enjoy most rest unto their Souls.

Christ reviled not again, Mat. 5. Blessed are the meek^ And a meek and quiet
Spirit is much set by. He that humbles himself shall be exalted: the whole
Gospel run^ on this string,

1. For they are fitted to bear all estates.

2. Nothing vexes man but Pride, and unquietness of his own mind: when he
looks for this, and that: and strives, cares, and frets, and no rest.

3. He lives by mere mercy, having no good thought of himself.

1. This is not a softness of nature, and fretting within.

2. Nor a Pharisaical hanging down the head like a bul-rush, as Isa. 6.8.

3. Nor a lurking like a dog under a cudgile: But a true understanding of
himself, and his own vileness, which brings down pride: judges himself, and
justify others: applyant mind, ready to suffer all, and pass by them.

SERMON IV.
Luke 2.8, 9, 10. And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the
field, and watching their flocks by night: And the Angel of the Lord came upon
them, and the glory of the Lord shone about them, and they were sore afraid,
etc.
IN the former verses has been laid down the birth of Christ, and the manner
thereof: According to the prophesies gone of him before. Here is laid down the
manifestation hereof to the world. It was the greatest message that ever was
brought into the World, and the most unliklie to be believed by the World: That
a poor infant, born of poor Parents: so disrespected in the World, that they
could not be admitted to come into the Inn, but born in a stable, and laid in
a manger: wrapped in a few clothes: And this now revealed to the poor shepherds
in the fields: and by them reported to the men of Bethlem: When the Church
being then in trouble and bondage: looked for some great and glorious Messiah
to come, with great pomp, and power, to work deliverance for them: and this
must be the man, raised up by the power of God, to be the light of the
Gentiles, and the glory of Israel.

We celebrate this Feast, in remembrance of this great Savior, and worker of
deliverance: Like that of Purim in Esther: But we consecrate it to Bacchus, not
to Christ, in Rioting, and Drunkenness, in Chambring and Wantonness, etc. And
not in poverty of Spirit, and humility with Christ: but in pride, and
fulness of the World. Our joy is not in communion with Christ in his birth,
and death: but in liberty to the Flesh, and forgetting of all. O, if Christ
should come, as he will come, and find us thus: One swilling and drinking:
another carding, and dicing: another whoring: And all under pretense of love to
him: Would he take it well? O no!

Christ was born in a time, and manner, little looked for by the World, and yet
in a time of great need: For the Church was now grown to a low ebb: From
Ezra^s, and Nehemiahs time, after the second Temple; and one, during the time
of the Maccabees: They suffered great persecution, and darkness, as Heb. 11.
For now they had no more Prophesies, but a very vaiting on the word of
Promises: Yea, and now according to Jacobs Prophecy, the Scepter was departed
from Judah, and they Tributaries to the Romans: And now was the time, though
not known to the World, not expected, yet, now the fulness of time being
come, Christ is sent: Thus God deals in the Kingdom of Christ. So that,

God has a time reserved in his own purpose, for deliverance and redemption of
man, which he sends not, when, and how he lastingly expects; but only to be
waited one by lowly Faith, in the word of Truth, which shall come, when man in
Flesh and sense sees least reason, and least expects it.

When thou brought again the captivity of Jacob, or Sion: we were as them that
dream, Hab. 2. The vision is for an appointed time, and the prodigal little
looked for intertainment.

1. For so God deals in all, that he may be magnified: For to the wicked, he
comes in judgment, when they are eating and drinking, and cry, peace, peace:
and to believers in mercy, when they cry woe, and misery, bondage, and death.

2. He has given a sure Word of the Prophets to be attended on: For the time
he has in his own power, and that time is worth waiting on, in Faith and
Patience.

3. It is not man's device and work that can haften his time: Not going up to
Heaven, nor down to Hell, but abiding in the word of truth, being near, even in
our hearts.

Thus, we would all fain hasten the time: As in the Church, there was great
expectation; yea, Abraham desired to see this day: So we all would know where,
when, and how: But the Kingdom of Christ comes not with observ^tion.

1. If we be in misery; we think too long, and murmr: Thy desire God sees;
but thy Impatience he likes not: He will answer thy desires and longing: but he
will make thee, First, willing to bear his Indignation: Yea, and we no sooner
begin to feel the smart of our guilt a little, but we think Christ should
presently come; nay, but we must pay tribute, and be taxed, and feel
Repentance and the bitterness thereof: and wait in Faith, and then he shall be
born unto us: But man is loath to sit in darkness and death: and yet the
Kingdom of God never comes, but to repenting hearts: Repent, for the Kingdom of
God is at hand.

2. As also, When we think, because of this and that quality or diligence, or
repentance, or humility, he should come: Nay, he must not be bound by man, nor
to man, by nothing but his own Word; and he will thus cross man's fleshly
hopes, when thou thinks thy fell the nearest, thou art the farthest off; and
when thou find thy self the farthest off, then thou art the nearest.

And it is a thing to be noted, That Christ came into the World, when the Jews
went every one to his own City to be taxed: even when they went to
acknowledge their bondage and captivity under the Romans, then was Christ
born: which is also to be observed spiritually, viz. When every man in his own
heart lives in bondage, fear and captivated by Satan, and has no power to
redeem himself, but confesses his thraldom and lies under it: then is Christ
born unto the heart, for he came to deliver the Captives.

4. As also that the Church was now at a great want, for the Scepter was
departed from Judah, and no Prophet was left in Israel, as Psalm. 74. None the
guide or teach them: nothing left but the word of Promise, which seemed to be
void, and God to have forsaken them: And now Christ comes, and is born, so it
is with us. And there were Shepherds in the Country.

Here Christ's birth is manifested. First obscurelie, to poor Shepherds, and
these must carry the tidings of great Joy: wherein, note that wonderful
humility and lovv estate wherein Christ appeared to the World, though he was
the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, Wherein note Christ's way, viz.

That the way of Christ; from the first to the last in accomplishing Man's
Redemption, is in poverty, lowliness, and deep humility of Heart: far
separated from the World, and the riches and glory thereof, Phil. 2. He was
equal with God, etc. yet took on him the form, of a servant. Isa. 5.3. He has
neither form nor beauty; nothing seen, why we should desire him: he was
despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and had experience of
Infirmities; we hid our faces from him, and esteemed him not: the rich of the
world cared not for him: The gre^ Doctors and wise of the World, despised him,
he sough^ not his own glory, but the good of all; he was still among the poor,
and halt, and blind, and beggars; and had not whereon to lay his head: his
message was carried by fishers and ignorant men.

1. This was the Wisdom of the Father, that the eminence of the Parties, nor
the wisdom of man should not cause his Gospel to be believed, but the Evidence
of the Truth: according to the ancient Prophesies, He will not have the Gospel
to be credited because of Man, but Man for the Gospel.

2. This he does, to keep man low; that he may see nothing to lift him up in
the World, but the word of Truth.

3. And to show the difference betwixt his Kingdom, and the Kingdom of the
World, who only seeks high things and stands in glory and outward respects;
but his in poverty and misery. Though in that low estate God manifested such a
glory and power, as the World was not capable of: For He was a greater
Conqueror than Caesar, Pompey, or Alexander; for they subdued a few Kingdoms,
and yet slaves to their own vain glory and lusts: but he overcame the whole
World, and Hell too, that he cared nor a rash for it, and yet but lodged in a
manger. And this is the way that the mindly low, that it rise not after the
World: but so raised by Faith, that it tramples it under foot: For as the
Heathen man could say, He is valiant, not only who kills Lions and Bears, and
wild beasts, but he who overcomes his own passion: so in Christ.

4. For the daily life of man in himself is, repentance, or security and
pride: that he so live in himself, that Sin and the World is a burden to him:
Yea, that have still that opinion of himself that the World had of Christ: yea;
that as he was counted the greatest sinner of the World by the World, that he
was ignorant and a deceiver, so that man see and feel the sins of all men in
himself, that he beheld no good in anything, but in Christ; nor no evil in any
thing, but in himself. This keeps him in the manger, and among poor Shepherds.

1. How far then are we from Christ's birth or way, who only seek to be great in
the World, which all strive at: it is not a manger or a stable that will fit
them: but like Lords of the Earth seek pre-eminence. This poverty of Christ
becomes a stone to them, whom nothing can please but riches and greatness.

2. Others who imagine themselves to be born of God, because of this and that
good quality; and still strain at high things, thereby to draw near to God. But
this way they are farther of: for all Gods people are born in humility, and
live lowly and humbly even in the stable: that is well pleased with any thing,
and so advanced by Gods free gift, for which they praise him.

3. What though we be base, and fools in the eyes of the World and that we want
the glory thereof; it was so with Christ* nay, it is our freedom if we want it:
or having it, care not for it: Now, as it was the Fathers will that Christ
should be born in a Stable, and published by Shepherds; so it is his will that
thou art poor and despised, but he had a care of his Son, he will also bring
thee through it, though with less pomp, yet with as much ease, and at death no
difference; but only that thou with Christ will willingly part with it; and he,
with much grief and sorrow.

4. We hear many say, They would have succored Christ better, but thou hate
him in his members: What good do thou to them?

The Angel of the Lord came upon them. He came to reveal this great mystery,
and to show the truth of all the promises now accomplished, none able to do it
but an Angel from Heaven, viz. an heavenly messenger: so that

No understanding of the Mystery of Christ, or seeing the truth of the Promise
accomplished, but as it is revealed and freely given from above.

Man in nature perceives not the things of God, 1 John 4. There is an anointing
from above that teaches all things, and none can say that Jesus is the Christ,
but by the Holy Ghost, though we think that Jesus is the Christ and Savior:
Yet we think but after the flesh: but his wonderful Love, Truth, Power,
bitterness of Sufferings, Victory over Hell and Death: not known by
comprehending, but revealed to poor and miserable minds from above:

1. For the Father has hid all wisdom in Christ from the wise of the World:
and it is to be found in him, not in us.

2. Christ prays to the Father to reveal this to them, That they may know,
that thou have sent me.

3 And this was promised of Christ, that after his death he would send a
Comforter, that should lead them into all truth.

1. What a world of conceits have we of Christ, and yet know him not: because
we think we know.

1. Some know the History of Christ, and moved with natural passions by the
consideration of his passion.

2. Some strive to know the Mystery of Christ after the flesh.

2. We see that all knowledge comes by faith, and is revealed from heaven: as a
man that promises to free me, being a captive: I believe him, but I know not
that he will, till he reveal his will to me.

3. Where then is the power of man in the use of this general gift of knowledge
to come to know Christ? None knows the Son, but the Father; nor the Father, but
the Son

4. Would thou know the wonderful Mystery of Christ? Sit in thy own
ignorance, mourning in blindness: and wait in the word of Truth, till the
light shine, and thou shall understand, though not the mind of God, yet the
mind of Christ.

And they were sore afraid. The glory astonished them, the message brought fear
to humble them, so in all: so that,

The proper and kindly operation of the whole Word and Message of the Gospel,
in the mouth of Christ, is to bring man down: and the foundation of Christ's
Kingdom is laid in fear, to lay man low; that he may be exalted in Christ.

To deny our selves, to become fools, and lost; as Paul, I was alive, but when
the Law came, I was dead; all our Righteousness as filthy rags; the weapons of
our warfare are mighty to bring down: all the whole Scripture to man, as he is
man, speaks negatively and basely, only exalts Jesus Christ as the Lawgiver,
in thunder to shake the heart of man; the Gospel and the Promise made without
any respect of any righteousness in man; and the power whereby this becomes
effectual is from another, and not from our selves. Thus was Paul brought to
his knees.

1. For it ever brings man to fear and weakness, before it bring faith, and
preserves fear, that he may still rest on Christ; for when any Land has been
conquered, First, they weaken them, and bring them into fear, and then they
yield; so does Christ.

2. For the Word opening to man the Book of his own heart, as Acts 2. discovers
such a misery and guilt and weakness, that he cries, What should I do? And as
often as it opens man's mind, it discovers such a dungeon: so that hereby he is
driven from himself, and all boasting is taken away. But man stores himself
with better qualities and better conceits, and starts from himself; but if
Adams eyes be opened, he shall see nothing but nakedness, and the Gross shall
wear out all these fig leaves.

3. Every man is grown proud and wise and high in knowledge against Christ,
and has gotten either the W^rld, or knowledge, or righteousness, or
something that bears him up: therefore it must be a mighty word that must make
all these nothing to man, and persuade him that the world has no good in it,
nor no wisdom: nor in all creatures no life, but in another.

1. But we all pervert this word to our destruction, when we will needs
comprehend it, but are not comprehended by it; we judge it, and are not judged
by it: and so we keep off fear: for we are made wise and righteous,
according to the form thereof; and becomes men of high thoughts, but not men of
low minds, and thereby rejects the simplicity of the Gospel. The word known
after the flesh, and not believed, lifts up and hardens more than any thing;
but the Word believed, brings down, and lays low in weakness, and preserves
fear, and makes man nothing, that Christ may be exalted, but we believe not the
thousand part of that we know.

2. So that the Word of Truth is a mighty Word, it lays all low before it:
none is able to stand before it but Christ, not the holiest Pharisee: for this
shall judge the World, and cast out all the fictions of man, and all the pride
and glory of the World: and shall be a terrible Word to all that believe not;
when every tittle thereof shall be verified on man.

O that! we were all stricken with fear, and sensible of our weakness: for as
we fear, so we believe. But man has gotten so many coverings, that he runs
from one to another to hide himself from his own heart: Some by the Worlds
fullness, but that shall vanish. Some by knowledge and righteousness after the
Law? and bardened therein; but these shall not stand: no nothing shall remain
indeed, but Christ and the Gospel: Be not afraid, So that,

Christ and the Gospel only belongs to fearful, and weak men, that first see
death and danger, and no help in themselves to escape; and sigh, and cry, and
pray, and see no deliverance: Then in time, the Angel from God bringing the
message of the Gospel frees them, that the gates of hell shall not prevail.

It is not possible that the heart of man should be preferved from fear, but by
Christ only.

1. All the World is not able to free a worldly heart from fear.

2. All knowledge leaves the heart fearful though secure for a time.

3. All holiness, and qualities, and sacrifice, not able to purge the
conscience: but only the blood of Christ, and man fixed thereon: And this only
shall turn fear unto Faith, etc.

1. So that the Gospel, I fear, belongs but to few of us, for fear is banished,
weakness is grown strong, and gotten up again: Sorrow is turned into
lightness; sighing and praying into vaunting and boasting, so that we need not
say, we be afraid. But O man! look into that dead and rotten heart of thine:
observe that crooked, faithless, and worldly path: and be astonished, for the
kingdom of Christ was come near thee. But seeing thou despisest it, lo we turn
to the Gentiles: for fearless and careless estate is fallen upon all, and under
the cover of Religion, without Religion.

Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, viz. The accomplishment of the
Promise in the birth of Christ; therefore, seek no shifts to escape, turn
hither, and behold great joy, and freedom against all sorrows. So that,

The only ground of all joy, and freedom, to a troubled heart, is only Christ
made known unto man, in the truth of the Gospel.

Paul rejoiced only in the Cross of Christ, and counted all things else but
dung, and had no confidence in the Flesh, by our rejoicing that I have in
Christ Jesus; I die daily, all other things died unto him, and being justified
by Christ, we rejoice in tribulation: How was the mourning of Mary turned into
peace and joy by Christ, Isa They rejoiced as men in harvest, and that divides
the spoil, and they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

1. For all joy but this, is nothing but mistakings, and like a man that laughs
in Sleep, for want of understanding in himself, and feeding himself with
shadows and tidings that Satan brings to him.

2. All o^ e^joy, is but rejoicing in the Flesh. He only comforts the Spirit,
when Flesh mourns.

3. All other joys ends in sorrow, but this sorrow in joy. What is all the joy
the World can give to man, even as the cracking of Thorns under a pot: Thou art
rich and full of wealth, yet a careful heart in the midst thereof. Thou joys
to day, and mourns to morrow: So the vvanton, what cause of joy while his Soul
is more fettered, and guilt increased? Joy passes, and guilt remains; and
yet none so merry: Thus Satan has messengers to rejoice man, being sad.

1. The World brings tidings or wealth, and honor, etc.

2. The Flesh of pleasure, joy, and freedom, etc.

3 Reason, from self-righteousnesse and wisdom, etc.

But Christ, from the love of the Father, that is worth all: Now this never
springs, but from mourning in our selves: like that of Paul at his conversion
to Christ: So then the difference of these are,

1. First, One rejoices to gain the World; another to be freed from it.

2. One to have his own will; and another to lose i^.

3. One to have all things, and suffer nothing: another to suffer all things,
and to have nothing but Christ.

2. We see, that all joy that we conceive, that arises out of Religion, and
not hence: is but a fondation laid in man: which will die with him.

But as the Child is merry in his Fathers love, though he know nothing what
shall be done to it: and not because he is heir, and must be advanced to a
great portion: so it is with us, not from any quality in our selves, but in
another.

For unto you is born: So that,

Christ truly born unto man, is the only fountain of Life unto man in all
distresses. In the City of David, Mic. 4. So that nothing shall disannul the
truth of the Word of God, nor shake the heart that is stayed thereon

A Savior, You and the World seems to be lost and condemned: but behold, here
is a Savior at hand, even a Savior sent to you. So that,

The only stay and rest unto the restless heart of man, is assurance of a
Savior, and confidence of heart in him.

As Simeon, Mine eyes have seen thy salvation, and Zach. That we being
delivered out of the hand of our enemies, etc. And have raised up for us a
mighty Salvation. And he shall save the people from their sins: Such a Savior
was figured in Moses, and Joshua: And thus prophesied by the Angel, Thou shall
call his name Jesus, for he shall save my people.

1. For man is a lost and condemned creature, the word of truth has judged
him, his own heart has given sentence against him: For this has the Spirit of
man sought, since Adams fall: some in the World, some in themselves, but never
found, but by Christ. The very Heathens sought it, and we make many Saviors,
but all fail, save this. It is not with us, as it was with the Disciples: we
have found the Lord Christ: We go a seeking, and enquiring, but we have not
found the Lord.

He saves us out of the hand of our enemies, viz.

1. From the guilt of our Souls and temptation of Satan.

2. From the corruption of our Nature, and bondage of corruption.

3. From affliction, and sorrow, and crosses and want.

4. From death, and hell, and judgment at the last.

1. See those miserable Saviors that we frame, as the world or wisdom, or
self-righteousnesse: these we get, but yet we are in the hand of our enemies:
our heart's full of fear, and death's a terror to us.

2. This Savior is born and given to none, but condemned men; like a
murderer, that can find no way to escape, goes to the King, and confesses,
and cries for mercy; the King pardons for his own glory, etc.

3. But know that our Salvation stands in another, not in our selves; though we
store our selves, and provide great and strong arguments against that day, yet
all will fail; and only bearing indignation of the Lord, and committing to free
mercy, must be our salvation.

1. Pardoning of Sin. 2. In preserving the heart in Faith by the Word, to live
and dye with Christ, and go through all in Patience; not as most, who think
themselves the likeliest to procure a Savior, is to come with their own
righteousness and holiness, etc. But that we come sinners and condemned, not
bringing righteousness, but to obtain righteousness, not to offer sacrifice,
but to obtain a sacrifice, even Jesus Christ.

Christ the Lord, viz The anointed Lord, who was figured in that of the
Israelites, who had the holy Oil reserved in the Temple, sanctified by Moses:
wherewith their Kings and Priests were anointed. Now the Rabbis say, that this
Oil ceased in the second Temple, till Christ came: who was to be anointed with
the holy Ghost. So that,

God the Father, according to his eternal purpose, has anointed Christ to be
Lord and King of his Church, to rule in the heart of man, that God and his
power may he magnified, and man made happy in him.

He has given all judgment to the Son: All power is given to me in Heaven and
Earth, all things are given in me to my Father: he has hid all treasures in
him, and has laid help on one that is mighty, as Psalm. 4.8.

This is manifested in his Word, never man spoke like this man, and his
miracles, has it been said, that a man opened the eyes of one that was born
blind: This the Father did, by an eternal purpose, for the salvation of man,
that seeing man could not comprehend Gods purpose; he sent one in our room, to
whom he has given power, because that we could not ascend to Heaven, we might
have a God on Earth. His Kingdom is righteousness, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

1. But we have other Lords; the World rules as Lord, and we obey it; the Flesh
commands and we are subject to it.

2. Where is that power of man whereof he boasts, We would all be Lords, and
rule according to our own will.

SERMON V.
Luke 7.36, 37, 38. etc. And one of the Pharisees desired that he would eat
with him. And Jesus went into the Pharisees house, and sat down to meat: and
behold, a woman in the City, which was a sinner, etc.
AFter that Christ had preached to the People concerning John Baptist, and that
many of the People and Publicanes believed, and were baptized: He upbraids the
hardness of the Pharisees, which neither believed John nor him, but rejected
the Truth: and neither believed John to see their misery, and repent; nor him,
that they might receive mercy, but trusted in themselves, and kept all Truth
off. In the end, he leaves them with a sharp nip: But wisdom is justified of
her Children, viz. the Children of the Truth, will justify the Truth, though
against themselves, and though all the world besides should reject it: so that,

The Children of the Truth do in their hearts justify and bear witness, and
clear the Word of Truth, though it be to the condemning of themselves 1. Cor.
14. They fall down and say, of a truth Christ is in this man: so though the
Law, Romans 7. condemned and killed Paul, yet he justified it to be good holy,
just and spiritual, but I am carnal: So David, Psalm. 51. That thou may be
justified and clear, etc. So Abraham justified the promise, which prevailed in
him more than all reason to the contrary.

1. For it leaves that impression in the heart, which all the lies and shapes
of Satan cannot wipe out; though they may cover and hide: Yet this is more
powerful in him than all.

2. For this discovers the Intents of the heart, and strikes the heart down,
and whatever upheld it: against which, man is not able to stand; but as the
guilty fellon justifies the sentence of the Judge, so he justifies the
righteous sentence of the Truth.

1. But we see, that thousands which profess Christ, yet justifies not his
Word: Nay, we judge the Word, and are not judged by it: We rule and comprehend
the Word, and are not comprehended and ruled by it. We mince the Law and limite
the promise, and all to save our own skins, because we would not be condemned
by the Word.

2. Yea, such is this wise generation wherein we live, that a man will now
judge and limit God himself; setting a Law to his Decree, but he is justified
to every believing heart, though reason not able to comprehend it.

Nay, every man labor to justify himself rather than God, and his Truth; and
every thing, on which man depends; as,

1. The worldling labors to justify the world, and the ways thereof in his
thoughts.

2. Another justifies his own qualities of holiness and righteousness.

3. Another, his knowledge and fleshly notions; for they are the Children of
these.

4. Another labors to justify the Truth, by Arguments of Reason, against
others; but not by faith, against himself: as a Malefactor justifies the Law
from his own guilt, and not because he comprehends it.

3. No surer sign of a true man, than to justify the truth; for he sets to his
seal, That GOD is true: when man even swears in his own heart to the truth of
all the Word; as, that the Law is just, he is guilty: the promise is free, for
he is a sinner: when the heart lies bleeding under the power of the Word,
though he feel nothing but death in himself.

4. But we see, how we even deny the Word we profess: we confess that God
will have mercy, and preserve us: and yet fly to the World and something else:
and that repentance and denying of our selves, is the way to Heaven, yet hope
for it: and repent not at all.

The Pharisee desired him to eat with him. He ever was to spy some advantage
for further justifying of himself: so that,

That under the profession of Love and Religion, there lurks in most men base
and filthy ends and respects, whereat they specially aim; which poisons all,
and proves their Love and Religion merely nothing.

All the Pharisees guilty of this, as Saul and Simon Mag us, etc.

1. For this is to frame Religion, to serve our selves, and not to serve God.

2. This argues an unpurged heart, which turns all meat to ill humors.

3. Thus Religion is made a way to cover, but not to crucify the World, and
our fleshly Lusts and Self-will.

1. And this is plain in experience: What is it that man does in Religion, but
some base end is more powerful in him to produce it, than the simple power of
Christ's love in him? We run after the example of others for credit and
approbation, rather than out of simple love for our lost minds. Others talk of
Religion, so must we; that we may be known: Others show love, so must we, that
we may be approved: and nothing is said or done, whereat we have not an end of
our own: We judge the Pharisees, and justify our selves, and yet do the same
thing.

2. Hence we see, what a vain and vile thing man's heart is; that he meddles
with nothing, but he mar^s it: that though the thing be good, and the word
good: yet in us it is ill.

3 No simple and hearty Religion indeed, but when man dwells in the simplicity
of his own heart, and in the simple truth: else like a huckster, he makes
Religion but as a Trade to gain by, either from God or man.

Behold, a woman which was a sinner: both in the eye of the World, and in her
sell: judged by both, and condemned in her self: So that,

None flies to Christ in deed and truth, nor finds mercy with him, but he that
knows and feels himself daily to be a sinner: and through sin, is a lost and
helpless creature.

So the Prodigal and Publicane, and Paul, Romans 7. O wretched man that I am,
etc. and David, Psalm. 51. 1. Joh. 1 If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
our selves.

1. For then death and weakness, wrath and judgment lives in man: and
presses him down, and forces him to cry and to pray.

2. For else man lies covered from himself under some figleafe, and so flies
the judgment; that he may preserve his fleshly life alive, etc.

3. This preserves humility, and keeps down pride, and prepares for mercy; for
to these only does the Kingdom of God come. Now this is not a seeing of this,
and that action amiss; but that he see and feel the Original fountain and
guilt: That though all actions were restrained, yet he feels the Power and
Inclination, and sway of his mind against G^d, and his Truth; that though he be
prevented by Gods Power, and shall not taste of Judgment through grace; yet he
sees in himself such a power of corruption, and misguided passions, that he
cries out for mercy daily, and so is faith daily preserved.

1. But all men strive to appear both before God and themselves to be rich,
none would be found sinners: Therefore, when we have missed it in one action,
we mend it in the next, that we may appear to be righteous

As, 1. The pure moral honesty among men, though they have no great matters of
Religion to boast of; yet even that they offer to God as a Sacrifice for their
sin.

2. But the more devote men, they think they have a heart full of good
qualities and dispositions, and so cloth themselves therewith, for their
repentance, humility, faith, and love, etc. They look at, as good qualities to
cover sin withal: but the only quality that Christ loves, is when man comes a
sinner to him.

3. May, others indeed have seen themselves sinners, but now righteous and
holy, and their repenting days are forgotten; so mercy lost, and says fails.
For as it was sin, that by accident brought Christ into the World, so it is sin
in man's heart, that brings a Savior unto man.

4. Others see in themselves weakness and want of Power, that they cannot come
to that pitch of knowledge and righteousness that they aim at, which if they
could, all would be well: But their rebellious Will, Lust, and Pride and
Worldliness are hid from them. So that it is the hardest thing to make a man a
sinner; and to keep him to a daily sense of his own weakness.

2. But sin in man, and mercy in God; infidelity in man; and faith in Christ,
lays a right foundation of Religion; and is the daily continuance of the life
of all Religion in man: for thereby, Prayer, humility and says are preserved.

3 So that the word never prospers, but when it lights amongst sinful men: The
self-righteous have a covering yea, and all are grown cunning to put off the
evil day, and make a covenant with hell: for no sooner does sin prick and look
out at them, but they have a sore knowledge of a Savior, and so cure the wound
before it be made.

When the heard that Jesus was at meat. She being now brought into misery
within her self, and all her sweet pleasures turned into gall and worm wood;
she seeks for case and rest: so it will fall out to all: So that,

That all the pleasures of joy and peace, that man now enjoyes: in the world
and the flesh, will sooner or later be turned into sorrow, want and misery; for
death and judgment will lay all in the dust.

Where was the confidence that Paul had in the flesh, when he was stricken down
in the way to Damascus? Where is all the power of Pharaoh, Pompey, of Dives:
and wealth of all worldlings, Luke 12. Yea, Pompey and Alexander are laid in
the dust, Luke 6. Woe be to you that now laugh, for you shall mourn. Isa. 28. I
will make void your Covenant with death.

15 For there is a way that seems good, but the issues thereof are death.

2. Else man should insult over God and Christ, and his Word become a lie.

3. Thus does God make way for his mercy and love, that man may be capable
thereof.

4. All joy and life of Adam must be destroyed, that Christ may live in us.

1. Woe to the merry deceived wordling, who rejoices in his wealth, friends,
pleasure and respect: as this woman did: but behold, She is now brought to
weeping cheer. So we make our selves merry, and promise many happy days; but
sure, fear and sorrow, weakness and misery must first come, before man be
established in Peace and Freedom: for this will not last: We think ease good
while it lasts, and so we put off the evil: that we must taste, for we have
eaten sour grapes, and our teeth must be set on edge.

Nay, all our labor and care is to put away sorrow and fear: and therefore we
gather riches, power, etc. that we might sit above, and see no evil: Man would
do evil, but would not see it: rebel, but not take notice Did ever any rebel
against his Prince, but he smarted for it in the end. And though the King, of
mere grace would pardon, yet was he a lost man in his own eyes: and his pride
was laid down in the dungeon: so with us: for sin in man will cause smart to
man first or last: For,

1. Though we may put it off through blind presumption, not regarding what
shall follow.

2. Or cover our selves, and close up our hearts under the bewitching of wordly
profits.

3. Or to drink down sorrow like unto beasts for a while.

4. Or cover our selves from the Word of Truth, and simplicity of our minds: by
our opinions of knowledge self-righteousnesse, and the world underneath.

1. Yet either will the Lord find us out by his Word, and discover such a
wretchedness to man, as shall make him cry out, Woe and alace that ever I was
born! and that my mothers Womb had been my grave, or that I had been strangled
as soon as I saw the light: and so cursing his birth day, as Job.

1. Or man running on to his course to the end of his Shadows, Pleasures, and
fools Paradise: at last falls into the Pit, where there is nothing but weeping
and gnashing of teeth: weeping and howling for the days of their vanity that
are past, and cannot be recalled: For the guilt of his Soul presses him down,
and cannot be eased: when man is entered into Eternal misery, which shall never
be ended. Then alace! shall we see, that Husband, and Wife, or Children, were
but silly fading Earth, on which we so doted; that Gold and Silver were but
Dross, which we so served: and now all taken from us, and our Life too, never
to be restored.

1. No misery like to the misery of man; for no creature on earth has so
rebelled against God as he. Did not this woman account any creature happier
than she? and yet we sport our selves above all, and feel no smart, because
that we are so hardened in the flesh, that the Spirit is lost.

O then! that God would give us hearts to see that misery, that we might mou^n
in time, and break off sin by repentance. For what a folly is it for a man to
run on in a course still, that he knows will bring sorrow? like the thief, who
bewitched with present sweet, and seeding himself with hope to escape, becomes
hardened, and never believes, nor sees the sorrowing of his hanging day.

4. And that men in the days of mirth would think of the time of mourning:
every one seeing himself even ^ing on his deathbed, and bidding farewell to
all worldly delights: look for it, even the best. For Christ's heavy day was his
l^st day, even before his entrance into glory: so know, there is yet a more
heavy day to come, then thou have hitherto felt.

When she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisees house Notwithstanding
her own unworthiness, Christ's holiness, the Pharisees hard opinion of her:
Yet such was the misery that she felt, and desire that she had to the Word of
Christ: that she saw, that there was nothing that could ease her, but he only;
so that,

Christ and his Word are only sweet, and desired of troubled hearts and wearied
minds: but to others, it is wearisome, and little regarded, as Psalm. 119. I had
fainted in my affliction, but that thy word stayed me. The poor receive the
Gospel, and the halt and blind came willingly at the voice of the Gospel; and
how dear was the Word to the Martyrs in trouble; that one of Paul's Epistles was
a treasure from hand to hand: And what a wonderful power had it amongst those
sick and blind men, that he but spoke the Word, and they were made whole.

1. For there is nothing left to a weary mind that has any life, but Christ
and his Word.

2. For to others, whose present ease and rest it crosses, it is un-wellcome.

3. For none believes it but them; others know it, and talk of it, but the poor
and lowly mind only believe it.

1. We may then cry with the Prophet, Isa. 55. Who has believed our report?
for every heart is filled and fatted, and born up with something: none lies
under his own burden in the Dust; but one has the World, and lives by it:
another a witty and strong opinion of Faith and Christ: and Christ and his Word
not regarded. Do we not delight in any History, and witty discourse, rather
than this: do we not believe and cleave to any lie of Satan, though directly
opposite; for if he say, we shall die; We say, no, none will b^lieve death, but
he that seeks it.

And hence we see, what makes all unprofitable unto man, viz. Hardness of
heart, and presumption, when man can pass over Hell and Death so lightly, as
not belonging to him; and so Christ and his Word are a far off kind of thing to
him: He can have it, or want it; he had rather want it than a little portion of
Wealth; can live merrily in the fulness of the World without the Word, than
to want it, though he had Christ himself daily to Preach.

3. Well worth tender and troubled hearts, who like the distressed Orphant,
seeks for the Father; knows his own weakness, cries out, Who shall deliver
me: waiting daily at the posts of his doors, and sit at Christ's feet daily:
Christ has sent out a word into the World, that shall seek peace. O! how
joyful to them, that hear of mercy and pardon, when they thought there was no
pardon, and to be guided to the Father. This is deare^ than thousands of
Worldly fullness.

4. This we know in experience, when the minds of men are plunged into real
misery: when there was less knowledge, but more simplicity, then the Gospe^
sufferd violence, But now, that knowledge has covered us, we hid our selves
under the shadow of our own inventions, and none regards the Word of Christ,
Ezekiel. 7.19. Matthew. 18.23

She Weept, and stood behind him. So that,

Till Sin and Death become man's daily burden, grace and mercy are never
precious. As the Prodigal, till then he cast off the Father, Psalm. 5. Till
death entered, ^he weeps not.

Till the Law came, Paul is alive; but then he cries, O wretched man that I am:
and mine iniquities are a sore burden, Matthew. 11.18. Come unto me that are
weary and heavy laden, etc.

1. For man by wit and diligence, is able to help any wound, or heal any
misery but this: but the biting of the Serpent, none can cure, but the brazen
Serpent.

1. For hereby, Prayer, Faith and Humility is preserved in man; hereby still
seeing that his life and safety stands in another.

2. But these days are past, and burden is removed, only by a blind
foreknowing of the Gospel: For when a man is declared to be miserable, still he
has a voice, saying, Thou shall not die: and nothing is made known, but he
has a foreknowing of all: Yea, to the imagined, comprehending of God himself:
and this hardens more than all else. How comes sin and weakness to be less
burdensome, than before? Is man better in quality then before; or less
sinful? no, man is the same in the Flesh: and if prevented, it is by Grace and
Power of Christ, which might a make man more sensibly vile.

And yet it is the conceit of all: We think our selves better, wiser, and
holier than before, when indeed w^ ^re worse; only God is better than before to
us; Yea, and because of some qualities, he thinks his sins are not so grievous
as others, and because of these he conceiv^s hope; but in this woman, all
wrought her woe: no hope in herself but in another: Where then is the power and
free will of man? Man's power is weakness, when I am weak, am I strong.

In that She stood behind him, and washed and kissed his feet. Note the base
account she had of herself, as unworthy to come before him. So that,

A repenting heart of man, truly knowing himself; ever has a base account of
himself, what ever God is to him.

Psalm. 8. What is man, etc. In me dwells no good thing, and yet in Christ he
enjoyed much good, Psalm 16. All my righteousness is nothing, by the grace of
God I am that I am: The Prodigal, I am unworthy to be called Thy Son, make me
as one of thy hired Servants.

For there is nothing in man but weakness, and baseness: though in the World
among men, he be wise and upright: all high thoughts arise out of ignorance and
Satan's shows.

1. Whence then are those high thoughts, and justifying our selves, and
condemning and censuring one another? and whence is this seeking honor one of
anothe?

And when the Pharisee that bade him; saw it. Leave we the poor woman weeping,
washing, kissing, and anointing, and see what that holy man judged thereof, he
showed before a great love to Christ in his entertainment; but see what lu^ks
in his heart; a secret justifying of himself, through pride, and condemning;
no^ only the Woman, but of Christ himself. Wherein not^ the pride and deceit of
man's heart, So that,

That in the heart of all men a fountain of pride, and Fleshly deceit lies
lurking under the cover of Religion, whereby man becomes well conceited of
himself, when there no cause at all.

This was the sin of the Angels, doting on their ow^ excellency; and of Adam,
that would be some body; Yea, Saul would needs justify himself before Samuel:
And the Pharisees wholly carried away with this, and the Libertains, 2 Pet. 2.
Spoke swelling words of vanity yet under pretense of long prayers, spoiled
widows houses.

1. For man is unwilling to bear his own shame, and hence he gloseth, and
covers and shifts, and as he grow cunning in Religion to hide himself from the
Word o^ God, he goes for current; when within there is nothing but rottenness.

For this grows up with goodness it self, as Tares with White; For when God
bestows any notable blessing or quality on man, Satan turns man's eyes to look
at it, as an act, or quality in man, not as a gift of God, keept in Christ,
and thereby he covers himself in that silthin^sse within, and thinks himself
some body.

1. Hence arises all this covering, and cloaking, and seeking of approbation,
that we may be seen of men: for look what a man thinks, and how he judges of
himself, he would have all men to judge and think the same.

And this sticks fast in all, we judge our selves better then many others; when
we, in so judging, are worst of all, and yet God and thou knows, whether all
thy care and labor in Religion, be not as well to gain respect, as out of the
trouble of thine own vileness and weakness.

2. Nay, is there any thing that thou enjoyes, or does, but there arises a
conceit with it, of a betterness than before? that because of this good
quality, etc. judges well: which only shows the goodness of God to man, and
not of man toward God, and so it is this proud opinion that ma^s all.

3. See what a proud thing man is, that though a beggar, yet will needs be on
horseback: Have thou any thing that first, thou have not received it? and
then, why boastest thou, as though thou had not received it?

2. Have thou any thing properly thine, or, in thine own power; but in the hand
of another, or can thou stand one hour thereby.

3. Do thou not mar every thing that thou meddles withal? as the Word,
Prayer, etc. though good, yet in thee naught.

4. Do thou not dissemble with God, and thy self withal? that when thou
Professest to trust God, and seek his glory, do thou not chiefly trust
Wisdom, Righteousness, etc. and seek thy self? when alace I all man's days
are repenting days, that the Kingdom of God may be daily built up in us.

4. And the deceits of man's heart are endless; For f^rst, when he thinks best
of himself, then he is the worst

2. When it is the World indeed that gives all Life: He has a cunning shift so
to carry the matter, that Christ shall bear the Name.

3. And, what ever is revealed, and wrought by Christ himself in his, man has
a cunning trick to shape the like in conceit: only the one has them in his
head, and the other in his heart.

5. It is not Christ's Religion that puffs man up, but, that pulls down: that,

Christ may Live in him. 1. One sets up the World and himself, and casts Christ
off. 2. Another, sets up Christ; and casts himself down.


6. So that, truly to know our selves, and not to be beguiled, is a great
mystery; not deserved, but by him that knows the secrets of the heart: For with
man he goes for current, when God accounts abominable.

He would have known who, and what this Woman had been: Here together with his
pride: in regard of himself, he goes a censuring of others, even of Christ
himself: and he judged him, because, according unto their Tradition he did not
cast her off; Even indeed, because he was merciful to poor sinners: So that,

He that out of Ignorance has a good opinion of himself, has never a good
conceit; but a hard sensuring of others, and has pity and compassion on none;
he that is not partaker of mercy, never shows mercy to any: but judges all,
even Christ himself.

Thus the Pharisees justified themselves, and condemned all else: not like the
Publican, Isa, 65. Stand by, I am holier than thou. Col. 2. Touch not, taste
not, etc. And thus they accused Christ: why eats your Master with Publicans?
therefore not a holy man: The elder Brother of the Prodigal, I have obeyed thy
command: but this my Brother has wasted all; with whoors and harlots.

1. For pity and compassion to others arises, even out of feeling and knowing
of misery and weakness in our selves.

2. Comparative righteousness is a great plea, and argument to a rotten heart:
nay, man never arrogates any things to himself, but he judges hardly others:
Nor judges others, but has an approving of himself, or else: why judge thou
another, when thou do the same, or a worse thing?

3. For those men live by Sacrifice, and not by mercy: and therefore will have
Sacrifice, and not mercy for it: But Christ will have Mercy and not Sacrifice;
and Sinners, not Righteous.

And this arised out of mere blindness in man's self, which has covered his
filthiness with fig leaves: and so ties Religion to some certain qualities and
actions: which, whosoever wants, he judges: and sin in man, and mercy in God:
which is the foundation of all he feels not.

1. This shows there is more Pharisees than Publicans in the Church: and more
that live by sacrifice, than by mercy, when every one has a stone to cast at
another, preying into every failing: judging out of their own rotten hearts,
that to be a fleshly liberty, which flows out of mere love: as here in Jesus
Christ: Nay, this we all fall into, in casting off: or secretly judging every
one that is not of the same way with us: aggravating the fails and slips of
others: But, I demand. What see thou amiss in them, that is not in thee?
thou thinks Judas a traitor, and art not thou the same? how often have thou
sold and forsaken Christ for less: and caused him to be reproached, and
slandered and crucified: even for the satisfying of some base lust? but thou
shall see, when thou feels either his free mercy, or thy own misery: that thou will judge none.

2. Hence arises all Sects and Contentions in the Church, even because every
one has a good opinion of himself, and judges all that are not like him; Thus
every Sect condemns others: But, Christ came not to condemn the world, but to
save it.

3. Nay, And this corruption lives in us all: how apt is man to forget himself,
and fall upon others: not only to judge their way to be evil, but their very
estates with God. If God bring us before his judgment seat, who is able to
abide?

4. And thus we judge Christ and his Word, and are not judged by it; we frame
it to our own mould, and are not framed by it: as the Pharisees judged Christ
profane, because he was not more severe against her: would have had Christ to
have been a man of wrath, and judgment, and not a mediator for Sinners.

5. But Christ's Religion is a humble, pitiful, and merciful Religion: which
indeed is the life of it: For this man had Knowledge: and also Righteousness:
but no mercy nor love: which proved all to be nothing: Then said Jesus unto
him, Simon. Simon. Here, he first convinces the secret hypocrisy of the
Pharisee: So that,

Though man walk unblemeably in the eyes of all, and religiously and holily in
his own eyes: yet, in the highest perfection of man, God has somewhat to say
unto him.

As the young man, Thou yet lakest one thing; and to Saul, What means the
bleating of the Sheep: The Pharisees thought themselves safe, but Christ had
still somewhat to say.

1. For the Word of Truth searches the secrets of the heart.

2. God judges and condemns that which man approves: Yea, he will bring all to
judgment, and conclude all under sin, that no flesh may glory: for all mouths
must be stopped, and none able to justify himself.

1. So that all our secret hidings and co^ers will not serve: God has still
something to say to us: though we strive to make all so sure, that he might not
accuse us: yet all in vain: for we know that when we have hardened our hearts
in security, yet God; either by secret Testimonies of guilt, or by his Word and
Truth, is still pulling by the slieve: and though we slip away, yet he will
discover at last.

Two things keeps all men out of Christ, under a kind of cover:

1. Either Beastly, or Epicurian security; Or,

2. A Pharisaical pride: either man is drowned in the World, or Prided in
conceits, and hardened in both.

2. But know, God will bring to light every secret thing, though we put off,
and care not to meddle with him: though we flatter, and think to please him:
though we be righteous, and think to stand before him, yet he has somewhat to
say:

A certain man had two debtors. Here under a Parable, he shows the state of all
men in Adam, and in Ch is it: The first in the two debtors, that are not able to
pay: and so bound over to death and bondage: The second, in free grace,
forgiving both: with the effect of love thereupon. Two debtors, the one owing
five hundred pence, the other fifty: This difference he speaks according to
Simons judgment: for he justified himself before her, as much as five hundred
differs from fifty: though in respect of God, and Original guilt, all are
alike. Yet in the eye of the World, and by multiplying actual transgression,
increased the guilt and bondage, and so did differ; but both debtors, as all
men are: So that,

All men, yea, every Son of Adam, through Original sin and guilt of every
heart, are debtors to God: and bound over to death and destruction: which we
must pay, and suffer, unless Gods mercy and free grace in Christ do free us,
Romans 3. We have all sinned and are equally deprived of the glory of God. Ephesians.
2. We are all by nature the children of Wrath. Romans 13.2. There is a law of Sin
and Death from which we are fred, only by the Law of the Spirit in Christ
Jesus. Gal. 3. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, etc. And
to Adam, In the day that thou eats thereof, thou shall die, Romans 14.1. The
wages of sin is death, And see it in the Prodigal.

1. The Law of righteousness, which God cannot forsake, requires it: that he
that will not live in God, shall have no life: as to Adam: Much more, he that
would in his heart pull God out of his Throne, and sit there himself: as
Absalom.

2. All men in Adam; are so estranged from God in the ground of their hearts,
that they are direct fighters against God in all things: for when we should
trust, love; fear and obey him; man's heart forsakes him, and runs to every
thing rather.

3. For if there were not a debt and poverty to be suffered, there needed no
forgiveness: But we pray daily, forgive us our debts, O Lord.

4. Nay, all men know this: and therefore, fly from God and his judgment, as
the debtor from his creditor; who, though for the present he is quiet, and has
enough: yet debt and fear lies on him for future times, because he knows a
reckoning day will come; so we: Yea, the very Heathen fear this, that believe
the mortality of the Soul, and labor by moral righteousness to pay the debt,
but all in vain.

1. And know that this debt and death his not this or that misguided action:
but the very original springing fountain of rebellion, and guilt in the heart:
whence spring all these little streams from that great and filthy Fountain. For
all actual sins are properly against men, which may be discharged: As, if I
wrong any man, I may restore and make a mends, etc. But by this a man's heart
fights against God daily: as, when he says he is just and powerful, and fears
not; but thinks to shift it, that he is merciful, and we need it not: but shall
live in freedom, and will mend the matter, and pay him his own.

But the believing heart that knows himself, is still a debtor, because that he
feels, that although he guide well, and be prevented from many actual
Rebellions, and be partaker of Gods grace, that he shall not taste of
judgment: yet, he feels such a spring of Rebellions and mis guided passions,
that he is still a debtor, and daily cry^s for mercy, and so Repentance and
Faith are preserved.

O! What a vile and miserable thing is man, and yet dreams of no such thing,
Other creatures owe debt to man, and daily live in service and subjection, and
pay it; and when they die, all is discharged: But man lives in joy and freedom;
and when he dies, all is to pay, and he cast into utter darkness, to pay the
uttermost farthing.

2. Whence then is all this pride, and vain boasting? whence is all this
Sleepiness, Security and Peace in the World? whence is this judging and
censuring of others? whence is this boasting and high thoughts of our gifts,
and abilities? Is not bondage our daily burden, and death and misery the
portion that we look for and fear. Did not Paul cry out for deliverance from
the body of this death, and yet we live in life, and seeks no deliverance: Was
not he a dead man in himself, and Christ lived in him, and yet we alive to our
selves, and Christ dead to us. Therefore, till man believe and know this, not
by discourse, but believing the word of Truth, and finding it in himself, he
believes nothing at all, and if man believe this, it would lay him as the dust
in himself, and dash all toys, and joys in the World, and make him pitiful to
others.

3. But alace! man turns all believing into Fleshly knowing, and thereby keeps
off his own misery: like a drunken man, that besots himself, that he may ease
himself a while of the fear of that debt he cannot pay: For this fore-knowing
of man, prevents believing: and ever lifts up man, never pulls him down, makes
him righteous in himself, not a sinner; hardens the heart, but never humbles it.

4. But know, that man must know and feel this one day; when it will be too
late, when he shall know nothing but misery, like a debtor in the Guoile, who
runs his mis-pent time, must not see his friends, nor walk abroad, but pine to
death, and sorrow: so with us at death.

And when they had nothing to pay. Here comes greater misery, viz. That there
is left to no man power to free himself: So that,

No power nor possibility in man, by any witty invention, high speculation, or
highest holiness, to free his mind of guilt: to ease his bondage, to fly
misery o escape death; but in the sense of all weakness and misery, to cry
daily for mercy; and wait for deliverance in another.

We are redeemed not with corruptible things, etc. So the Prodigal; And because
there was no power in man, he laid help on one that was mighty among the
People; wherefore else came Christ into the World; but, because there was none
else able to tread the Wine press of his wrath?

1. For the wisdom of man is foolishness, and his strength weakness; his
righteousness as a filthy rag; His sacrifice abominable; Israel was not able
to help themselves at the Read-Sea,

2. Nay, the promise runs upon such, as have no money, or heavy laden, blind,
and poor in Spirit.

3. For Till man have nothing in himself, Christ has nothing for him.

4. Then is grace, and God magnified; his Word believed; but, while man has
any possibility in himself, or hope in any creature: mercy is little set by.

1. Away then with all those s ilts of man, to put off the evil day: as 1. One
with the full World: he will drown all misery in the Earth: but when the Earth
shall be taken away, where then is his portion.

2. Another with moral honesty, thinks it will do something.

3. The more devote, offers fat sacrifices of Righteousness to purge sin.

4. Another thinks, the time was, when he had nothing: but now he has
somewhat, viz. Faith, Knowledge, Righteousness, etc. And these he thinks will
go far; but Repentance is hid from his eyes: and Faith and Mercy shut up.

5. Another takes time, and promises to pay hereafter.

6. Another pays old, and takes new: as new fashions in Religion.

Thus man loath to live in weakness, and have hold of nothing, but feeds
security with some hope or other, and looking at himself, hopes that all that
is something: and commits not to free mercy. This is the hardest of all.

2. But, when man lives in his own misery indeed, and sees no way to get out:
it brings him to wait for mercy only: Like the debtor brought on his knees,
commits himself to the mercy of the creditor: So, that indeed, man's weakness
is his strength: the Cross his Freedom, Suffering his victory, and Death his
Life.

3. Where then is the power of man, that we so much talk off? Is it in man? a
talent given to man to pay his own debt; Nay, to manifest his grace: and it
shows how mercy in God is the daily life of man, and not in himself, and our
help in another: Yea, and it magnifies his mercy, that takes a Wife of
fornication: that has no good quality: as this Woman: and to such vile and
weak Rebels shows favor, that the glory may be his alone.

He forgave them both. Here is the Gospel, and free Grace of God unto miserable
man: that had no way to turn him, but falls down, and confesses the debt: for
he exacts nothing at them, nor enters into judgment.

Which of them will love him most. Here he propones the question to convince
him in himself So that,

Till man be convinced in himself, truly to see his own vileness and
wretchedness, all truth is but as a shadow without substance.

While the Pharisees stood justified in themselves, the Gospel was in vain,
Christ came to reprove the World, and so to make way for the Gospel: The Word
is profitable to convince and reprove.

1 For the first thing it works, it brings man into himself, as it did this
Woman.

2. The Gospel is given to none, but to miserable men: For though others
conceive, talk, and dispute of it, only these do believe it.

3. Then man clothes himself with it, and hides under it, but is not brought
under the power of it: to yield, and lay his hand on his mouth: For he is wise
above the Word.

1. And hence it is, that the Word is so lightly passed over, every man is wise
to keep off the blow: and though it enters his head, yet he keeps out of his
heart: and will not be guilty unless for fashion: And so for an lowly, lost
mind: we have a thousand wise and secure hearts hardened through knowledge: For
we have gotten a foreknowing of all Truth, and keeps off repentance; that when
ever the wound of sin is discovered, we have ready a plaster, by fore knowing
before the wound be made, and so Religion is made a mere matter of Complement:
For they see a remedy before the sore.

2. And hence see, that if man's heart believingly answer the Word of Truth, it
will put all men to silence; none is able to stand before it, or to argue
against it; It leaves all men guilty and none righteous, But when man gets
upperhand of the Word, and gets it under his wit: it makes all righteous in
conceit, and none sinners: as 1, by Christ.

1. Who cares for the sparrows and lillies? does not the heavenly Father? Why
then do you care; saying, what shall we eat? etc. Here all men are guilty, none
able to say, his heart is clean.

2. Is Christ the Son of God, and has Christ done that which never man did?
and no man spoke like this man? Why then do we not believe? but he believes
every lie of Satan: So that out of our own mouth and heart he will judge us.

3 So that one word believed with a simple heart, prevails more than the whole
Bible, only known of a hard, and fleshly wise mind.

Which will love him most. Or he: to whom he forgave most: So that,

Look what Christ is to man, even the same is man to Christ, and to others, and
nothing else.

We love him, because he loved us. First, the love of Christ constrains us.
For Christ lives in me: So that he only gives life in all things.

1. For if Christ dwell but in man's fancy, then he has only a fancy, and an
opinion of Love, Righteousness, etc. For what ever rules in the mind; all the
whole powers run thither.

2. For what a man is, or does of himself; he is, and does for himself, and it
is mere nothing, though he gave his body to be burned.

3. Thus Christ shows his Power in man, mortifies man to the World, etc. And
man as an instrument to do his will, as in every Officer of the Kingdom,
commands by the King.

1. Where then is that power and that wisdom to order man's heart, to rule his
passions, to frame his mind to the will of God, to mortify Lust? Is it in man's
good husbandry; no? It is in man's lying dead in himself; weary of himself,
waiting for help, and finding help in another; is losed at the bottom, and
loves Christ and all men; not out of any good quality in nature, or mortified
mind through his diligence: but that unknown power of the love of God ruling in
man, which separates man from himself and his own glory.

2. But this discovers a main want of lively Religion, and hearty Love, when in
every thing a man meddles with, he still has an eye to himself, his own ends
makes him forward: his own power and wisdom guides him: and his own good he
looks at: Nay, when Christ has freed the mind, how soon returns man to
himself, and begins the good thereby to himself.

3. And this shows that Christ lives in few: when we see that cankered malice,
covetousness, pride, envy: and whole brood of lusts fighting in man: See, He
that loves Father or Mother, more than me, etc.

4. Yea, All men's hearts without Christ are like to this man's: a cold
complemental courtesy, esteeming well of Christ: but better of himself, a
reserved affection without life, for neither do they stand in need of him, nor
feel any goodness by him, where he only lives not.

She has much forgiven her, and therefore she loves much. Here is the cause
and effect of Christ forgiving her sins, and she loving Christ: so that,

An heart truly troubled and lost in himself, and finding remission of sins in
and by Christ: loves and cleaves to him above all things in the world or
himself: and all men in and for him.

Paul esteemed nothing but Christ, Phil. 3.7. Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father
or mother: etc. 1. Cor. 16.22. He that loves not Christ, let him be Anathema.
The disciples being stricken with this Doctrine, forsook all.

1. For there is no life left in any thing to man, either in the world or
himself, but only in him: as the Prodigal: What is all gold and riches to an
hungry Stomach, in comparison of bread? So, What is all the World to a lost
heart in respect of Christ?

2. For nothing is, or can be such a burden, and death to the heart, as sin and
guilt: and so, nothing like freedom and life, as forgiveness. O, how sweet is
the voice of a pardon to a condemned man! Now, we all say, that we love Christ:
But know, it is the mighty power of God, in the truth of his Word, that
separates man from himself, and all things to Christ alone: for while when any
thing else gives hope, delight, joy, ease or peace to man: Christ is not
regarded, but in opinion only.

1. For there is a loving of Christ after the flesh: as the Disciples: who
could not abide to hear of his departure: so we have fleshly, cold affections
to the notions of Christ, but not to be ruled and guided, and live by him only,
but will be quartermasters.

2. And there is a love to the ease, and peace and comfort by him, which we
would still have: and fit at his right hand, or for works sake, but to love
him: and esteem him for poverty, want, forsaken, and persecution, etc. we like
not: Like a heartlesse wife, that loves and obeyes her husband, so long as he
pampers hers and keeps her fair and fine: But when he falls into poverty,
forsakes him, and takes another; as the rich Lawyer and Dives did.

So that Christ may well say, Who has believed our report, or to whom is the
power of Christ's death effectual? Seeing, all are so knit to the World and our
selves, that he and his word is not regarded.

1. The World we love, as Father, Mother, Ease, Fullness, etc. and these darken
the heart, and gives such a peace to the flesh, that we see not the misery of
our Spirits.

2. We love our own fancies, and thoughts and knowledge, and qualities, and
think these will help us, and plead for us.

3. We love our selves, and any thing that may preserve our fleshly Kingdom;
but the Kingdom of Christ we cast off.

1 One rather than want his will; another, rather than want the World; another,
rather than want ease and life, sets Christ aside: So that we may say? How
dwells the love of God in these?

2. But see, Christ is esteemed and loved of none, but miserable and sinful men
in themselves: who though he k^ll them, yet they will love him: these tread all
under foot all righteousness, for they see none; all wisdom, the World, Ease
and Peace, and Christ only is life unto them: And besides him, all things works
their bondage: yea, are wearisome, as all men are to a loving wife, but her
husband.

3. Away then with all Religion, where love is wanting: all talking and
working, where man does it to cover his filthiness; with them: Christ is a
judge, and they cannot love him.

4. And none loves Christ, that loves himself: for only such as condemn and
judge themselves, esteem of him.

5. And this appears in love to your neighbor, even of mankind, our very
enemies: which appears in parting freely with the World: helping the needful,
forgiving injuries, covering infirmities of others; suffering willingly: else,
how dwells the love of Christ in us?

6. So that it is not love that is the form of Faith, but faith begets love:
and love expresses faith to the World.

Thy sins are forgiven: So that,

Free forgiveness of sins in Christ, to a troubled heart, is life in death,
and the door and life of all hearty Religion.

Having forgiven us all our trespasses, This was life in the Prodigal, and to
the Publicane: And this Paul acknowledges, Psalm. 32. This is our blessedness.

1. For till then, the Partition Wall stands, and man sits in death in himself,
or life in the world only.

2. This opens the door of the Covenant unto man.

3. This is the daily life of man, who though he daily sin, yet God in Christ,
freely forgives, and this brusts his heart, and makes it melt into love.

1. But most enter not in at this door, but leap over this, and take for
granted, what they never felt nor enjoyed.

2. Others, offer sacrifice to purge sin, and cover with righteousness, wisdom
and opinion.

3. But O, What a life is this to a dead man, as a Prisoner condemned, yet
obtains pardon through the mercy of a Prince?

And this forgiveness is the free mercy of God, forgiving man's sin, for his
own Names sake, not because, they are lesser or fewer, nor because we repent,
and now turn, nor because, we are more righteous, or for good qualities.

Who is this that forgiveth sins? Here they begin to judge him again, because
he forgiveth sin: they looked that he should have judged and excommunicated
her, or set her to keep the Law, and wrought her own peace.

No says he, I came to save, and not to judge sinners and lost man: But this
was a Principle that they favored not, so that,

Unbelieving, Strait-hearted, Hard-hearted, and Self-religious Men, though in
Wisdom, Righteousness, they excel others: yet have they least favor or
feeling of repentance and forgiveness, wherein the life of all Religion
consists.

They tithe the Mint, Annise and Cummin; they look to the plucking of the ears
of Corn on the Sabbath Day, but mercy, they are not acquainted with, Mic. They
offer thousands of rams, etc. But to walk humbly with their God, they know not.
The first, they urge with all vehemence, but the latter, they never mention.

1. For, what is in man's power, by diligence; by his own ends he obtains: but,
what is Gods free gift, as this; he has not faith to embrace?

2. Do well, and have well; is the Principle all stick to: but resting in
Christ, when all things are lost, is a mystery, known to none, but he that has
it.

1. The worldling has no life, but in the World: and knows not, what
forgiveness and burden of sin is: So,

2. The Pharisees know all, and do all: but forgiveness and faith he savours
not; therefore, judges this to be carnal liberty.

3. All Sectaries, busy themsel^es about circumstances; but this never meddled
with.

4. So we talk and think of Religion, and run into many disputs, and
circumstances: and over-leap the foundation, viz. the Mercy of God in Christ
Jesus.

5. None knows the Power of Religion in deed, but he that has it; not in
himself, as a quality; but in Christ, by faith.

6. All Religion is nothing, where the Fountain is shut: no matter, what we
know: if we know not Christ from a troubled heart.

SERMON VI.
Luke 8.4. And when much people were gathered together, and were come of every
City: he spoke by a Parable: A sower went out to sow his seed, etc.
AFter that Christ had cast off the Pharisee in the preceding Chapter, and
received the Woman; whereby he manifested the freeness of Gods grace, without
any respect unto man. Great multitudes flocked to him, out of all Cities: and
he lets them see by a Parable, that all hearers prove not Christians. Wherein
note, 1. The occasion, much people met him 2. The Parable it self. 3. The
Exposition thereof: Much people were gathered together. Partly, by his
Miracles; partly, the power of his word; partly, for custom: but all came, and
yet after you see, fall off: So that,

The voice of the Gospel, and the publishing of it, gets many friends and
followers at the first; which afterward fall off, and forsake it, Joh. 6. When
all was gone, his disciples began to slink: and he said, Will you also go away.
It was great heart burning to the Priests and Elders, that the whole world went
after Christ, and yet at the end, all forsook him: and he trod the
wine press alone: So Paul had many Children and Churches, Gal. 4. You would
have plucked out your own eyes, but they all forsook him, and turns to the
false Apostles: thus beginning in the Spirit, and ending in the Flesh.

1. For, Est natura hominum novitatis avida: but when they have tried it, and
find not that sweet they expected: but that it crosses their lusts and wordly
Kingdom, and suits not with their ease and rest; they forsake it.

2 Many embrace and approve of it for company, and more forsake it for company:
it may be the example of many will draw one to it: but the example of one will
draw many from it.

3. Though man think, that a Nation is born at once: yet few truly proves good
ground, and sticks to the end: for he that endures to the end, is saved.

1. This is too plain in experience, What zeal and forwardness, what diligence
and care, is now dead and ended in nothing? and though once we wanted nothing
but Christ, yet now have forsaken him in the way of his cross, and ease our
selves in the world, and our own devices.

So that, the life of the Gospel continues but a time: for after a while,
security takes hold of some opinions and heresies of others: and the world
takes hold of all: and so the Lord takes it away, and sends it elsewhere.

2. To show the perverse nature of man, who is never weary of the world in the
ways of the flesh: and yet how soon weary of this.

He spoke by a Parable: Not in high and abstruse terms, or witty and unknown
Language, but in plain parables, as of plowing and sowing, of salt, and three
pecks of meal, of lost sheep, of debtors and creditors: things well known unto
men, and cast this simple seed amongst them; where, see the nature of the
Gospel: So that,

That it is plain and low, and simple; wants nothing, but believing hearts to
make it known: yet not understood of any, but such as stand truly in need
thereof.

Many great Doctors were ignorant of these Parables: the Parable was plain but
the mysteries was hid. Many wise men conceive truly of it, and defended it: but
only miserable men knew the power of it.

1. For Christ came not to set men at disputing about opinions, but about
themselves: to draw them to believe.

1. So that divinity stands not in curious searching of hidden things, but in
plain evidence of truth, to pierce the heart.

2. And hence we see, what good does all those disputes of high knowledge, of
contemplative men, viz. The greatest Idolaters, that ever was in the Church:
for they frame steps and stairs, to ascend to high Mysteries; and frame a God
at the top: and yet, ly in pride and base lusts: God gives us low and humble
hearts, and then a Parable will fet: the Gospel will be precious: and if ever
God bring us to see the need of Christ, one simple word of truth will bring
more joy, than a thousand witty discourses.

A sower went forth to sow. And this seed is the Word of God, which prospers in
some better, in some worse: and Christ therein ranks all men, according to that
power the word has in them; so that,

Every man is with God, as the word is to him, Joh. 15
If you abide in me, and my word abide in you, etc.

Saul cast away the Word of the Lord, therefore, the Lord cast him away: and
all the complaints against Israel was still, because they hearkened not to my
Word: they disobeyed my Word: and all the Plagues that ever came on man, even
from Adam, till now is, because our own wills and lusts rules us, and not his
Word: we believe not: but David lived thereby. And this is that frees man, thy
Word of Truth.

1. For God and his Word are one, such as his Word is to us, such is God in
every thing: for not one jote of his Word shall fail.

2. And all the Word is nothing else, but a Declaration of the Fathers will in
Christ: as the Law, that we should have no Savior but him, and the Gospel:
that he is a perfect Savior: and all our sin is but a transgression of this
Word, by making to our selves in conceit, other Saviors than him. This is the
Word that was given to Adam, Abraham, etc. and this is a mighty Word, for by it
all things were made and preserved. As with man, how deadly is the Word of a
King in wrath: that it has ever stricken a man with death? and so of mercy.
And the sowing of this seed, is nothing else: but the faithful Declaration of
Gods Will concerning Man and Christ, that man may see the deceits of Satan by
that Word, and so be brought to repentance: and may see the truth of the Word
in Christ, that the Kingdom of God may come.

And yet Christ may say, Who has believed our report: when we see this seed to
perish, and not regarded, but cast off as a fable: We believe and fear the Word
of Man: and the Word of a Father prevails with a Son: but God calls and cries,
and we regard not: He threatens, and we fear not: He promises, and we believe
not: But let the World threaten, we fear, or promise, and we rejoice: and so
comes man to be of a worldly heart. Does not the Father cast out the Son that
regarded not his Word. Mark, and we shall see, that the whole ear is stopped to
this Word: and he is but a dead hearted man: But know, that God has punished
more for this, than all other sins in the World.

1. Woe then to the deaf ear and hard heart of man, that can neither hear, nor
believe what God says; so that to some we see,

1. It is but a fable, and a thing of no account.

2. Others, reverence it: and seek to know, and cove^ themselves under it.

3. Others, are stricken with the Glory and Majesty thereof: but fleeing to
their own Inventions, are cured and fly high above it.

4. Others, are filled and revived, and live by it only: not minding, what the
world or the flesh says: but what Christ says.

2. So then, that which most opposes the Devil, is the Word of the Gospel: he
can deal with all but this: but this discovers his dephts: and draws men out of
his Kingdom, And if it live not in man, then Satan's Word lives in him: either
that of the Serpent to Adam, or that of God prevails, and we live thereby.

3. But know, this will be a heavy word one day to those that now cast it off,
and prefer their own Lusts before it, when the day comes, that the World and
all fails man, and with those. Luke 13. We knock, etc. He shall say, I gave you
my Word, I sent you my Prophets, I told you by them, that you were deceived,
and that the World would beguile you: I sent you my Son to make known my will,
he walked in the way before you: I gave him Power and Wisdom, to guide you by
his Word unto Life: I told you, there was no Savior to man, but only he

But this Word you despised, and would not regard: You believed me not, but
counted me a liar: you trusted the World, and the Wisdom of the Flesh: I would
have performed Life to the uttermost, but you trusted me not: but counted
Christ a deceiver: Therefore, now your blood be upon your own heads, and now
that Word which you have cast away; must judge you: For my Word must stand.

4. Happy he then that lives by his Word, and in whom it lives, for all things
else alter and change; yet this abides, if man stick to it, Though for the
present, we feel no sweet to the Flesh, yet in time, it comforts the Spirit,
and yet how often do we call it a lie, and judge the Word, and are not judged
by it, either framing it to our own wills, or lifted up above it, or basely
sunk down from it, but every way forsaking it, when indeed it is the sure
foundation to be waited on, until the day dawn, and the day star arise, and:

They by the way side. These are four sorts of men in the Church.

The 1. Are like the high way, which is so trodden by the daily path of men,
that it is hardened, and the Seed can take no root therein: Such are in the
Church; So that,

Those in whom the World, and Lusts has a daily and continual path and
custom, becomes so hardened thereby, that the Gospel takes little effect with
them.

So had Israel, Isa. 28. That they made a mock of the Prophets; so the young
Lawyer.

1. For hereby the heart is filled and sore stalled, Psalm 119. They are as fat
as brawn, and regarded not thy Law.

2. Hereby is the ear stopped, and the heart hardened: like a drunkard, that
they can hear nor mind nothing.

3. For if that every passage of the World leave such a wound as in David,
what a bondage when it has a path way and is become the very Shope: wherein
all vanity are bought and sold.

1. Hence it is that worldly hearts that are flesht therein, do least mind the
Word: How hardly do these enter; Like the high way, that is neither fit for
Corn nor Grass: And hence arises that damnable carelessness under the Gospel:
Who hear, and care not, whether there be a God or not: Satan has these in a
fare stay.

2. See what a distemper the World works in man mind, that it makes him
mindelesse of God and himself too.

3. Hence our very Preaching and Hearing, even lest labor for we cannot shout
so loud, but Satan will out-shout us.

4. But well worth tender hearts, that lie in misery: and every Word of God
sticks to the heart.

Lest they should believe. This is Satan's end: So that,

Satan's main drift to hinder man's Freedom, and undo him; is, that he may not
believe.

They on the stony ground. Here is the second sort i^ the Church, in whom the
Word has a certain Work: but note, 1. Effectual, wherein, 1. Their condition
is hard and stony. 2. The effect it had, They rejoiced and believed for a
time. 3. Their failing, in time of temptation they sell away. So that,

That an hard heart, bound and closed up in him-self, and his own self-love; is
altogether unfit to receiv^ any good from Christ and his Word, Ephesians. 4.17. (...)
of the hardness of thy heart: So Israel, they erred in heart: because of the
hardness of their hearts. Christ was cast out of their Towns, Psalm. 81. Psalm.
78. Wondrous things did he in the Land of Ham.

Two things chiefly harden; self-love, and self-wisdom: For, when man is lifted
up in conceit and opinion in doing something to God, and not poor and begerly
to receive, he sends the Rich empty away. For the whole Doctrine of the
Gospel, is not what we should do to God, but what we should receive from him?

1. For the Gospel is soft, and lowly, and tender, and must be sown in tender
hearts of Flesh: The Law was written in stone: but the Gospel in the hearts of
Flesh: This hardness is nothing, but the closing up of the mind in self-love;
or of the creatures, and depending thereon; loving, living, and delighting
therein, so that Mercy in Christ is despised.

1. Hence see, why the Gospel prospers not, viz. because of the hardness of
our Hearts: because, that we neither feel our own misery, nor trust in Gods
mercy.

1. Some so confident, and closed up in themselves; that they trample the Word
and Christ under foot.

2. Others know and comprehend it, but hard and bound at the bottom.

3. Others dispute and talk of it from a hard heart, no faith, no bowels of
mercy; but talk as Lords and Masters of the Scripture, and so nothing but
unprofitable found, and pride and vain glory are the bellows that blows it:
and in all these we see,

1. They seek themselves in all things, their own glory and good.

2. They have no Mercy nor Pity for others misery, except partial, in respect
of their own way and glory.

3. They censure, judge and condemn all but themselves.

4. The World and the loss thereof sticks deep, but not the Word. For our own
misery and mercy in Christ, only breaks the Heart.

2. We see then whom only the Word profits, viz. Tender Hearts, that ly low,
melting in Misery and Love: these pity others: these are killed and made alive
by the Word, as in Christ, who mourned for the Peoples hardness, was partaker
of man's misery: and yet saw Mercy of the Father.

3. So that all Knowledge, all Passions with a hard heart are nothing, and
nothing more hardens than that

4. And all things prosper, according to the disposition of the Heart, learning
etc. are the works of man; but says and a broken heart, the gift of God only.

This Word may and does work many Passions, and a light belief in many: and
yet never partaker of Christ therein, as Ezekiel. 33. They heard and showed love.
And Herod did many things; for the Knowledge thereof is glorious and the
evidence of the Truth convinces man, to make him inexcusable. But these are
but First, Stirring of natural passions. Second, Or, informing Reason more
clearly. Many such Passions we see stirred up; and all nothing: So that, fits
and passions, lights and easements come and go: but misery in man, and mercy in
God remains ever. And the life of faith, is not any strength or quality in man;
but a tender heart, and open ear, to hear and believe Gods Word, and live
thereby.

SERMON VII.
Isai. 57.10. Thou have wearied thy self in the greatness of thy way Yet
saidest not, There is no hope: Thou have found the life of thy hand: therefore,
thou was not grieved.
IN this Chapter, the Prophet first bewails the loss of the Righteous of
Israel, which was not laid to heart; but they presumed still of their own
strength without God. Then he calls the Rebellious to a reckoning, to convince
them of their Idolatry and carnal confidence: and to see the vanity of their
way and their misery, and captivity ensuing.

And all by a Metaphor of Adulterers, that have forsaken their Husbands, that
would have been a safeguard unto them: and joining themselves unto others which
would be their downfall. As first, that they had joined themselves to another:
than to him: and had made a covenant with them, and sed themselves with beastly
pleasures, in satisfying of their Lusts; sometimes covertly, behind the door:
Sometimes lifted up in their conceits, as upon a high Mountain.

Then their carnal confidence in the arm of flesh, in going to the King of
Assyria, and then when he failed, to the King of Babylon; and so concludes,
they have sought all ways of weariness: and yet returned not to God: Wherein,
he shows,

1. The frowardness of Man's Heart, and his many devices to nourish his fleshly
hope, and put evil from his thoughts

2. The ground of all t^is vain confidence; is, because he find the life of his
hands for the present; therefore not grieved.

Thou have wearied or toiled thy self: viz. Sought out all devices and ways to
nourish hope, even unto weariness: and yet saw not thy misery: So that,

All man's toil in the Flesh, wherein he wearies himself, is only to feed his
hope of safety without God: and to keep evil from his heart and eyes: yet all
in vain; for evil shall over take him in the end.

Yea, though man daily see the weariness, and vanity of his own ways, that
they prevail not to the satisfying of his own lust and desire; yet, he still
seeds his hope, and thinks he shall put the evil from his heart: As Israel,
though they saw they prospered not in their designs, by their fleshly power;
yet still sought to the arm of Flesh, and trusted it; Pharaoh, though God
wearied him with his judgments: yet, he was still hardened against him: The
Pharisees, though they saw they prevailed not against Christ: yet ceased not to
fight against his Kingd^m. The Wordling, though he toil in weariness and yet
still at a want, yet he cannot cast off care: but hopes to gain satisfaction:
And Balack, and Balaam, Is^. 62. They will not s^t, but they shall see. For man
has m^re confidence in the World and in the Flesh, than in God: and more
ground and reason to believe it, than God; For thought the World have sailed
him a thousand times; yet still he believes it, will help him; But if God seem
to defer his help a while, he runs to his old friend Mammon again: as Israel
did to Egypt, against Aissria: and contra: For man is loath to see any evil
toward himself, or the downfall of his Fleshly Kingdom; though it does fail
in his sense and feeling: yet he holds it up in his conceits and hopes: And so
would still have somewhat to look at, that he might believe. For nothing can
destroy the hope of man, but God, by the power of his Truth, and sensible Wrath
in man's heart: man can shufle and shift off any thing else.

1. For if guilt be revealed, yet there is hope: For he will mend his course,
falter Moses, and so hope for mercy.

2. If affliction and cross come, yet he will be more warry and diligent, and
so prevent or recover it.

3. If Death come yet he puts it off as long as he can, and says, While there
is yet Life there is hope of mends.

4. For there is such a sure covenant betwixt the World and man's Fleshly
Heart: that if one faill, he runs to another, and if one conceit hold not, he
gets another.

1. Hic labor, hoc opus. Thus does the Wordlie heart of man wear out his days
in weariness, and still feeds his vain hopes: How has the youthful mind
wearied himself, in one vanity after another, that now, they are weariness to
him, and if the old man were kept to those youthful dallyance, it would be a
burden: And yet, though there was hope in riches: and, how has the rich
Worldling fed his hopes with pulling down and building: and yet he is too
short: Nay, there is nothing but is weariness in all our ways, and yet we
follow them, as though in the end, when should gain rest: So loathe is man to
leave the pursuit of his fleshly hopes, and so little heart to bear the want
thereof; That he will try the utmost of his strength, before he yield.

2. Nay, See the weary passages man has in Religion, and yet will not deny
himself: he has gained knowledge, wrought righteousness, changed his course,
and all to beget a Faith: and yet his heart is fearful and distrustful, and
thinks by a new device or degree, to gain it; Nay, how often has God
confounded thy self-opinions and conceits, that thou saw it would not serve the
turn, and yet, have set a fresh upon a new one.

3. Nay, how often has God frustrate the fleshly conceits of believers, and
yet, they have not learned to trust him.

4. Thus the Flesh still deceives, for the wit of man shows him many great
ways of thriving, and all proves weary: great ways of believing, and yet
proves vain opinion: Man will have hold of something, that his hope may be
preserved: Thus is he still bewitched, and will not understand the fear of the
Lord.

5. But know, when thou have wearied thy self, and worn out thy days; all thy
hopes shall die with the^, and thou shall see the Truth of that thou will not
now believe.

1. When the World shall pass away from thee, or thou from it.

2. Thy friends forsake thee, or thou forsake them.

3. Thy Knowledge vanish, and thy conceits fail thee.

4. Death arrost thee, and lay all thy counsels in the dust and no hope of
returning, or staying any longer: no hope to escape the punishment of thy
guilty soul: then there will be no hope indeed.

5. This we see, what the life of man is, nothing but a wearying of himself,
and ^eeding his hopes, which end in confusion; and the greater the way is, and
more likely the project, the more deceived.

1 The way of the Pharis^es is a great way of holiness, and great conceits
arise hence: but all abominable.

2. The way of fleshly knowledge, and high contemplation: is a great and
seeming way of happiness: yet, an enemy to the cross of Christ.

3. The way of self-holinesse and good qualities, and joyful feelings, feed
hope; that he hopes it will be something, and so is not brought down to say,
there is no hope.

6. And here we see, what an evil rests in the heart of man; like a predominant
disease, overcomes all medicines. There is nothing that God does to him, or
that he enjoyes, but this evil destroys it both: that evil disposition
overcomes it, and the evil of misery falls upon him; which all his wit, and
weary toiling cannot avoid.

1. If he meddle with the Word, there is an evil Infidelity and Lust that eats
it out: and yet, he says, There is no hope.

2. If he pray: there is an evil of selfnesse and pride that conceives hope
from what he does.

3. If he seek to know and comprehend, yet, there is an evil stubbornness,
that he will not yield.

4. If he get the World, there is an evil of guilt and want that destroys his
hope and confidence: Nay, there is no evil befalls man, but there is a greater
with man which he sees not, but covers all he can: until God take him from
himself, and make him a new man in Christ.

And yet saidest thou not, There is no hope. Yet thou blessedst thy self in new
aid, and not brought to seek help at me: So that,

Till all man's hope in the flesh be destroyed, the help (...) God in mercy;
never relieves him.

As with the Prodigal, and those in the Ship, Lord, save us, we perish. The
hope that David had in his high mountain, turned away the face of God, and in
numbering the People 72. He was past hope in himself, that he hoped to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the Living. The Pharisees was strong in
this.

1. For till then, man never prays nor seeks to God in earnest: but to the
World, and to the Arm of Flesh.

2. For this sights against faith more than all, and nothing so opposite.

3. For this is the proper effect of the truth, to destroy the fleshly hopes in
man's heart: and to root it out, that he may seek to another.

4. For till then, man never denies himself, till he be sensible of his real
misery; and sees and finds no help in the World, or himself, to avoid it.

1. All the poor ease the World has, is to nourish his hope; for all the good
he has is nothing, but feeding him: self with hopes of more good: and so long
as he can keep this conceit alive in his heart, he will not trouble God.

1. See the ground of his hopes. First, One has the World, or thinks to get
it; and therefore, he hopes, he shall not want: But David hoped, because God
was his Shepherd.

2. Another has Religion and the World, and therefore he hopes, he shall do
well.

3. Another, he has much light, and many feelings of joy, and he thinks, that
all will be well; but none hopes in God.

2. See the endless goodness of God, that in crossing, blesses them; and in
destroying hope, stablisheth them in him self, when the restless heart is past
hope: saying, I have gotten the World, and looked to my ways: but the
Rebellion of my heart is that, I have no hope: Then says God, If thou have no
hope in the World, nor in thy Self; then hope in Me.

SERMON VIII.
Psalm. 81.10, 11. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it: But my people would not hearken
to my voice, and Israel would have none of me.
THis Psalm is a Psalm of Praise, ordained to be sung in the Feast of
Tabernacles; when from the fifteenth day, till the two and twenty, they feasted
in boothes; as Levit. 23. To put them in mind, how they dwelt as strangers in
Egypt, and were thence delivered: and after forty years in the Wilderness:
where they dwelt in Tents daily to be removed at Gods appointment: and they to
live by Faith in the Covenant: Showing the life of man, that though he dwelt in
Tents, as Abraham, and have no habitation nor succor, nor power to defend him:
yet God helped them in all these straits: wherein,

1. He exhorts them to praise God, with Psalms and Instruments.

2. Reckons up the great benefits of God in their deliverance, both in Egypt
and the Wilderness: where he gave them a Law and everlasting Testament.

3. Adding the promise, that he will be their God still: if they will trust and
fear him: of which,

4. He shows a reason, why they should have none other Gods, viz. because he is
their only God, that brought them out of the Land of Egypt, and confirms the
promise, that he will be the same still.

5. Then he upbraids them, and shows: how, notwithstanding all these mercies
and truth, they forsake and would not hear him.

6. And so the righteousness of his Judgment in forsaking them, with an
aggravation of his judgment; by remembering what they had lost, and might have
found. I am the Lord thy God. Why should thou have any other God? I am only
He: all thy devices have failed, but I was always thy refuge, none could help,
when I helped, So that;

When man has run through all Inventions and Lusts, yet none but God in Jesus
Christ, shall be his rest and stay: and the heart simply believing, and
acknowledging: this is only happy.

How often does he urge this in the Prophets? I am God alone, and beside me,
there is no other: Who can measure the Heavens, or gather the Earth into his
fist: who can tell things to come. I only have laid the foundation of the
Earth. The Prodigal would needs have others: yea, be a God to himself, but was
fain to fly hither; David, Psalm 73 confesses, I have none in heaven but thee.
Thus cried the People, when Elias offered Sacrifice: The Lord, he is God: the
Lord, he is God Paul's righteousness was but dross, none but Christ, and him
crucified.

1. All other things are but deceivable snares of Satan, and all our toil and
hopes are but our own sorrows; for to this we must: and he must either be our
best rest and friend, or woe to us. These may flatter a while, but he must give
life; or else we die.

2. All things live by him only, much more man's Soul, which has no life in
any thing else, as the body has.

3. This is the whole Law and the Gospel.

4. And God and the Faithful are joined, and made one in Spirit like Father and
Child, Husband and Wife, so that, offer what thou will: they cry none, but my
Father and my Husband.

1. But the dark World, which is blind, has incroached upon Gods Inheritance;
and shut him out of the hearts of men: that they cry, Any God, but this God: So
the Jews, any but Christ: Barrabas, or any Murderer: As,

1. See how the World and the Strength thereof is trusted and relied on, that
they say with Israel, These are thy Gods, which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt.

2. See how it is loved, and how it is sought and delighted in.

3. See how the want and the loss thereof is feared, and sorrowed for.

4. Yea, how willingly man serves, and becomes a slave to it; and yet this
great and terrible God, this good, kind and merciful God; and his sure word and
promise not regarded.

2. So that Faith is a simple and single hearted thing; casts off all power,
wisdom, and good of all things, but this only; and like a chaste Wise, cleaves
only to her husband; and cries out, with David against all Satan's temptations:

1. When he offers plenty and fullness nay, none but God and his Christ. 2.
When he offers Righteousness and Wisdom to look at nay, none but Christ.

3. When he threatens and drives man to seek to the arm of flesh: nay none but
God and his power: yea, when he draws to sin, through lust, yet with Joseph,
No, I cannot sin against God.

So that Faith is only the preservative: As in the Martyrs: wh^, for this God,
forsook Father, Husband, Life, and all to be joined to this God so good.

For, while God was a God to Israel, all Nations fled before them, and feared
them, no want nor misery surprised them; but they were filled to the full with
all good and satietie: and while man sits under his shadow simply, he is safe:
he needs no power of man to support him: nor riches to fill him: For he has a
joy, peace, and riches, and goodness, that the World knows not off, because it
knows not him.

3. Let every man try, who is the Lord and God of his Soul. One says, O!
riches is the only thing? another, Nay, drunken and merry company is the
only joye: another, Nay, youthful sports, and pleasures the only Heaven:
another, Nay, the great Babel, that I have built for my honor: another, Nay,
but I have none in Heaven, nor in Earth but thee alone.

Which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. I helped, when thou wast not able
to help thy self; I freed thee, when thou wast a slave, and I delivered thee
when thou wast in danger, and I supplied thy want, when thou was ready to
faint, and will thou have any other Gods but me

For they thought not of it: Moses, a weak man to deliver them, What straits
were they brought too, and still he fred them: So that,

God ever witnesses his power, and truth, and love to man, in his greatest
weakness and misery; and then does man ever find God to him the nearest.

What straits was David in all those bitter complaints: and Israel, when they
wandered in the wilderness, and had no City to dwell in, Yea, out of the deep
have I cried, and thou helped me. So when we were in Egypt, weary of that
bondage he braught us out Yea, the Prodig^l, what straits was he in: and was
received to mercy: This is the Type of our great Redemption, manifested in the
Gospel. 1. For then does man most purely believe, and Gods love most apparent.
2. These straits and wants God brings man into: that he may show man his power,
and man may believe him. 3. Then does he Seal up the truth of his Word and
Promise, which man in fullness calls a lie.

1. No marvel then, though we have but little appearance of Gods love, when we
are ready to brost with fullness, and satiety of conceit: sin bites, but we
feel it not: we can shift it off, and Christ came only to sinful man: want
presses us not: need makes us not run. We live in Egypt, but we would live
there and fill our bellies, and so seek no deliverance. For we feel no bondage,
but know, that this Pharaoh, a devil; will root as out at last, as to Israel,
when they fled to him for help.

2. So that straits and bondage in our selves, and the World, makes God great
to appear for, Where sin abounds, there grace also. O! what straits were the
poor Martyrs put too, when all was taken away. Their joy turned into sorrow,
peace and freedom into war, and bondage and jeopardie of death every hour, and
yet, How did he deliver them? how did the light break out of that darkness?
The wicked, who being in honor, Psalm. 49. Yet dying, pass from house to grave
with woe and welladay: These passed from the prison, to the fire with joy, and
with singing; I have seen, I have seen, says God, the affliction of my people
in Egypt. I remember my Word to Abraham, Come therefore, and I will send thee
to deliver them

But he cannot say so to us; I see the desolate and mourning Soul of my people,
lying groaning under the bondage of sin; Nay, they are full, rich, and
increased with goods, etc. Therefore, I will not cast my Word upon them in
vain: For they are not fit subjects for my mercy: A merciful man indeed has
ever an open heart and hand to the needy: So has God: But the rich he sends
empty away. The deliverance is more urged in the Old Testament than any work
that God wrought: both by Moses, Samuel, and the Prophets: And wha^ wonderful
Sacraments for remembrance thereof did God institut, as the Passover and
Pascal Lamb, because it was a figure of our eternal redemption. To teach,

That the life, joy, and comfort of man is continued still the same way of
faith, and promise: and power of God, whereby man's was first fred, that this
promise might still live in man's ho^^. I am the Lord thy God which brought the
out of the land of Egypt.

1. For man is as weak in himself, and Satan as strong as then: For as God gave
life to man, and be only continues it so he gives grace, and continues it: and
thereby we live. His Word endures for ever: Paul was received to mercy, th^^ugh
grace and the same Christ still lived in him. So he often exhorts to continue
in grace, and to be grounded and established in grace: and to live by faith.

1. Not as wise unbelieving men, who having tasted of the good word of the Lord
and knowledge of the Mystery of the Gospel, with Israel: turn back into Egypt:
or become wise and righteous in themselves, and so cast off the Covenant. And
thus with many, they were sinners: and God received them to mercy: But now,
these work it out: beginning in the Spirit, but ^nding in the Flesh. Alace! Is
sin less burdensome ^^an before, o^ thou less guilty? or is God more beholden
to thee, than formerly? Or have thou some store whereb^ thou lives, no? as this
was the first, so it must be the daily food to live by, even this promise,
never to depart from us: But that man, still seeing and feeling the burden of
his rebellious heart; and thence cry and pray, and he shall be delivered.

2. It is not preying, pratting or talking: or soaring high into the air, or
storing Manna, or lusting after Quails: but to attend on his hand who brought
us out, and will deliver us, if we be not lifted up above him, nor drawn from
him: but with Caleb and Josuah, rest constant in his Covenant.

Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. As I have been a God of mercy, so I
will be still: Ask, and I will give thee: renewing the promise, that they may
still believe, and cleave to him; commanding them, without any condition, on
their part: for his promise is free, that neither sin nor weakness, nor
failings: but open wide, and I will fill all th^se wants: So that,

There is an endless riches of love, truth and all goodness in God, to
satisfy all needs and desires of man: which shall never be wanting to open and
praying hearts.

With thee, is the Fountain of life, and in thy light, shall we see light, Isa
55. Come, buy Wine and milk without money etc. and let your soul delight it
self in fatness: Every one that thirsts, Come: drink of the Well of the
Water of Life, freely, Luk 2. He fills the hungry with good things Psalm. 63
David prayed, and he filled his soul as with marrow.

1. For he fills all things with his fullness. With him is fullness of joy he
sends rain to the dry ground, he seeds the ravens, he clothes the Earth with
herbs: all things flow from him: Nay, he has so filled the treasures of
Nature, that there is not, nor can be a vocation, much more, there cannot be an
empty Soul with whom he had nearer Communion, than with all creatures: Bu^ if
it be not filled with the Word, or something else, he fills it.

2. For all things live by him: take away his power, and man dies; his
blessing, and man wants, his Wisdom, and man wanders: But our mouths and hearts
are straightened We cry not, unless to the World, there we open wide: saying,
Give me riches, or I die, etc. So that the mouth of Lust is like the grave,
never satisfied: But to him we seek not: we are full, and our hearts are
straightened. We are like a man shut up in little ease: where he finds no rest,
and the Wall so thick, his cries are not heard, and so none pities him: So we
in the World, our hearts are pinched there, and yet the Walls of the World so
thick; that the cries of the Spirit is not heard.

When a man wants Bread, how plentifully does h^ cry: with an open heart in
true necessity, and yet like sleeping men, we dream of store, and beg not.

1. We are all knowing, wise, and righteous, devote men, but not praying
hearts. O! the heart of man, that has his senses so bound up, and benumbed as
with opinion, that he is fallen asleep and prayer not, nor wants nothing, but
to satisfy the Flesh, for, if ever the heart were open, and cried indeed, it
should be heard.

2. But know, that the time will come, when we shall cry, and call, knock and
weep, and not be heard: Like the foolish Virgins, and Israel here: No, they
were wise, and rich, and righteous: and they cried not.

3. What ever then straitens the heart toward God, and stops the cries of the
Spirit is a work of Satan; though the fairest gift that ever we received: But
alace! praying days are gone, the time was, when thou went mourning and
praying in thy Spirit all the day; and in thy very dreams, and now thy very
prayers are but dreams; and all thy store is but windy emptiness. Alace! have
thou not as much need of his grace as ever? is not thy pride, and false
knowledge as great a snare as ever? was thy wanton sins; yes sure, and as
odious to God

But my people would not hear my voice: Here is his upbraiding of Israel, for
their security and hardness: appearing chiefly herein, that they cast off his
Word, and would not hear; Nay, cast him off, and would none of him: This is a
fearful hardness, that casts off God and his Word and sought other inventions.
So that,

When man casts off the Word of Christ, all blessings and joys is shut up from
the Soul of man: and when he casts off God from being his God: death and
destruction must needs follow.

So to Adam and Saul: and this is complained of by the Prophets more than all,
Psalm. 50. What have thou to do to take my Word into thy mouth: and have cast my
Word behind thee? And this was a fearful sign always, of the hardness of the
Jews: That they would none of Christ, nor his Word, as Joh. 10. I told you,
but you believed not: nor they would not receive his Testimony: Nay, Joh. 1.
The Word of the Father was sent a light into the World, and to his own, but
they received it not. And here Israel believed not his promise, that God would
do thus to them: nor have God to be the ground of their rest.

1. For when man casts off his Word, and Christ: he is put to other shifts, and
seeks other inventions: and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes:
Like an unfaithful Son, who dare not trust the truth and love of his Father
that has brought him up: but lays up a portion in secret, and gets friends
abroad: and after a while, being thereby hardened casts off the Father quite.

2. For the life of the soul is hid and laid up in this Word, Ps. 3.5 Our life
is hid with God in Christ. Forsake this, and forsake life: It is the treasure
of the Kingdom, all good is promised here: the Soul has no certainty nor
foundation, but in this promise in Christ.

3. For God has sent his Word and Christ into the World to seek our the
forlorn spirit of man, that is misled by the flesh: and covered under the vail
of the World; saying, Go seek and find out that desolat stranger. Thus he
offers life, if it will return: But in steps the blind Reason, and Wit, and
Flesh of Man, secretly whispering: Now this is a blind way: First, lay a good
foundation: get the World, and something to look at, then trust: so also, be
circumcised and keep the Law, and then believe: Still the Soul a little
enlightened by the truth, says: But sure this is not the way; me think, I
hear, and see fair way opened, and that is, Christ is only the way of Life: no
faith the flesh, Unless we be circumcised Christ cannot profit

1. Thus in all unbelieving hearts, the Word of Christ is still cast off; for
first, 1 It is foolishness to it that a man should forsake the World, live by
faith, follow God with Abraham, he knows not whither, suffer the loss of my
own Will; nay, of my Wit; nay, of my Life: and all this is a foolish way.

2. And it crosses the heart of man (which he will needs have) for rather than
he will want that, he casts off Christ himself with him, in Matthew. 19. He went
away sorrowful: So that man's infidelity is still nourished by fleshly
Reason, and fleshly Lusts, which fight against Faith. 2. Thus the World trusts
any thing, rather than God and his Word: For, 1. The World says, Hearken unto
me, and seek me, and ply it, and be diligent, and I will fill thee with
fullness? and thou shall not want.

2. So lust calls, Come, I will fill thee with mirth, and put away sadness:
delight thee with pleasures: and yet the heart is sorrowful.

3. So Reason, I will lead thee the good and safe way, behold thy
Righteousness, Wisdom, etc. What needs thou fear These are the promises of
God, and of his Word.

4. Nay, says Christ, These will sail: but come thou to me, and I will ease
thee, and deliver thee, and redeem thee from all bondage.

3. Nay, We, that are traders in this Word, yet how is the heart slant from the
simplicity of the Gospel, and so gets no good thereby

For, 1 We gather conclusions from it by strength of Wit and Art. We frame it
to our conceits It begets strong opinions in us: and we frame tricks, and
self-holie devices all out of it: which are but the Froth of our fleshly
brains: But believing, not from a broken heart, tender and relenting. We call
opinion believing, and so as among men, it is too true a complaint. That plain
dealing is gone: So in Religion, plain dealing is lost. We profess the Word,
and trade in it, and cast it off when we have done.

2. Or we confound Law and Gospel, because neither has power in us. We set one
in the room of the other, and make the Gospel effectual by the Law: and not the
Law fulfilled by the Gospel.

3. Or we make the Word subordinate to man, and not man to it, laying a
foundation in our selves of good qualities, and building the promises thereon:
when it is free without condition. We judge the Word, and are masters of the
Scriptures, and are not guided and governed with it.

4. Or we seek a sign or a wonder, that may confirm the word to us, that we
might feel some joy and peace: that we might know some assurance: But he says,
I have given thee a sure Word, to believe that but in all, we cast away God and
his Word and hence it is we get so little good by it.

5. But happy he that sticks to this God and Promise, it shall not fail, speak
the Word, and my servant shall be whole. What a mighty Faith, that believed,
that Word, and was healed?

6. But this shall be a heavy Word one day, when the Son stands condemned at
the Bar, and the Father says, Now thou see, what is become of thy Rebellion.
I was thy Father, and never wanting, or did I ever fail thee. I promised, thou
should not want, and gave thee my Testimonies. I sent my Son, a man like thee,
he brought my Will to thee and my Promise, but thou would have none of me: but
thou would have the World, and follow thine own Will: Thou trusted in thy own
Power and Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Holiness: Now plead, if thou can:
therefore, not I, but that Word which thou have cast off, shall judge thee.

Then I gave them up to hardness. When man's heart is turned from the Word of
Truth, he usually hardens in some fleshly way, So that,

No greater judgment besals man, nor surer sign of Gods destroying Wrath,
than when God cease to call, and work with man, but leaves him to the lust
and hardness of his own heart.

Thus to the old World, I will no longer strive with man. Romans 1. He gave them
up to vile affections, The Gentiles, he suffered them to walk in their own
VVayes and Counsels, Joh. 17. I pray not for the World: These he leaves, if man
have tasted the good Word of God, etc. and fall from that Word, he is left
impenitent. Thus the World, when a man grows hardened, that the Father can do
no good, then he casts him off.

Two things hardens above all. First, Fullness of the World. Secondly,
Knowledge of the Word, without the power thereof.

1. What may we then fear, when all our former working hearts, are turned into
hardened knowledge and presumption. For First, where is our weeping and mourning
days? where is that melting and trembling of heart before the Word? Where
are those cries and prayers after Christ and his Truth. Nay, all is turned into
secure talking, or dead-hearted profession: that now it is but a dead Letter.
God is not with the Word, so that we may say as Deuteronomy. 5. I have heard all your
Words, But, O! that there were such a heart: we fear the plague and sword, and
tremble when it approaches: but no judgment like to this, when God leaves us
to all these, and suffers man to walk in his own course to his destruction.

2. But well-worth tender hearts, whose minds are drawn from the World, and
from all things of himself, what ever he feels, yea, though but death and
sorrow; yet joy and peace shall come, and he will soon confound all enemies

SERMON IX.
Exodus 12.21, 22, etc. Then Moses called all the Elders of the people of
Israel, and said, Choose you out, and take for every house a Lamb, and kill the
Passover: And take a bunch of Hysop, and dip it in the blood that is in the
basins, and struck the lintel, and the two posts of the door with the blood,
etc.
When God intended to bring Israel out of Egypt, viz. Man out of the bondage
of sin and Satan, and bondage of corruption; He sends Moses, Aaron, and the
Prophets to guide them according to his will; according to the promise made to
Abraham, and now to be accomplished by Moses. First, He sends him with assured
confidence of his assistance.

2. He hardens him against Pharaoh, and cease not to plague Pharaoh, till he
make him yield, though against his will, and so makes way for the deliverance
of Israel, Israel, a figure of the Kingdom of Christ.

1. As they lived in Goshen, where was light and plenty, yet in bondage under
Pharaoh: So we under the light of the Gospel, yet bound in infidelity, and lust
of the World.

1. Because, we stick not to the Covenant, or because the time is not yet come.

2. Though the promise was made to Abraham, and stood fast in him, yet for the
present saw little hope of deliverance, so we though the promise be revealed in
Christ, yet to our unbelieving hearts, little hope of deliverance, But still in
bondage under Sin and Guilt, and the World.

3. When they were past hope, after four hundred years bondage: God sent Moses
to deliver them, by an unlikely way; even nothing but the Word of God. So, when
we see least likelihood in the flesh, God sends a mighty Word to destroy sin,
and to restore us to freedom.

4. After he had laid many judgments upon Pharaoh, still less hope for
Israel; because he hardened and grew more raging.

So with us, after the Word has discovered man to himself, he sees no hope,
but burden, and bondage doubled

5. Yet after they were brought out of Egypt; yet far from the Land of rest,
because they walked not in the life of the Covenant, but after their own lusts;
So we have much to be suffered, and our Will and the World to be crucified: But
when he intended to bring Israel indeed out of Egypt, then he destroyed the
firstborn, even the strenght of Egypt, in whom their name and power was to be
continued, and so he deals with us, viz. When he intends to deliver the
captive Soul of man out of the hand of Satan, he destroys the firstborn, viz.
Our infidelity, and all that power and strength which Satan reared up in man,
and so brings Pharaoh low, So that,

God never delivers his people, and brings them into rest and liberty, till he
has first made them weak; and brought down their strength, and laid them low
in lamentation, and woe, Psalm. 107.12. He brought down their hearts with
heaviness. So with the Prodigal, and with Paul; He struck him blind to the
earth, and took from him all his Pharisaical strength, as Phil. 3. Yea, David's
high mountain must be taken away, that he may seek to God and be delivered.

1. For all that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and must be destroyed,
else, how can the Spirit live and be free; all that strength we have, whether
of confidence, assurance, joy, etc. arising from Riches, Wisdom Power, and
other gifts and qualit^s of nature, are but power, whereby Satan rules in man:
Pharaoh was Gods creature, but perverted against God, and thought to keep
Israel by strong hand; So all the riches, wisdom, etc. are his gifts but
perverted: when we think to live and stand by them: Therefore must down.

2. Yea, Pharaoh, and his host must be drowned in the Sea, even in that
hearty, sorrow and deep humility, that will drown all Pride, and
self-righteousnesse; or, what ever else lifts up man.

3. Thus does God bring man to trust him, by making void all other strength to
trust to.

4. For all divinity, power and strength is affirmative, or positive in Christ:
only negative in us: In denying, in forsaking, in crucifying, etc. So that
Christ may live, ^^sitivelie in us; which cannot be, till the chief of all our
strength be subdued.

1. But do we not with Pharaoh, still harden our hearts; and will not yield,
though God send Famine, yet, we recover, and harden thereupon; Though Plague,
we escape and live: and we depend thereon; We see and taste sore plagues: but
the World, or something creeps in and shuts us up in bondage and darkness.

Nay, though we feel smart, and want: Yet, we Pharaoh: Satan, Mammon lives in
us: and we cleave thereto: for Pharaohs hardness is in us all in the Root.

2. Well were we, if our Firstborn, even all our fleshly power and conceit
thereof were slain, and that we were brought low enough in the flesh, that
Israel: the elect soul of man, might pass on toward rest, according to the
promise.

3. But the worst of all is we feel no bondage; nay, we fear our firstborn
should die: The World is no burden, but a pleasure, Sin no sorrow, but delight:
We like so well in Egypt, that we dream not off, nor despare not a departure.

4. But if God mean us good, he will kill the firstborn of Pharaoh in us, and
that by his only Wo^d and Messenger. Moses, asilly man: and yet God performed
every Word that he spoke, so we fight against the power of darkness in you^
else, were it more pleasure to us to tell you of Life and Freedom. But it is
not our message, We must first destroy Pharaoh: and then Israel, the poor bond
Spirit of man shall fly and be saved.

5. There will come a destroying night to all men.

Then Moses called the Elders of Israel. Now before Israel was to depart: He
ordains the Passover: that seeing there should be such a destruction, lest
Israel should therefore doubt of the promise; he gives them a sign or token of
safety, As Christ did, When the Shepherd should be smitten, and desolation
s^en in the Earth, and that Christ was to leave them: then he gave them the
Sacrifice of his death, to assure them, though he should die, and they suffer
afterward: yet, this should be a sign and seal of their deliverance from death
and hell: Therefore, he 1. gives a command to keep the Passover, ver. 21.

2. He prescribes the manner, Take the blood, etc.

3. He adds the promise, For when I see the Blood, I will passover.

4. The stablishing of this as a perpetual ordinance to Israel.

In the first, he lays down the matter of the Sacrifice, the latter how to be
celebrated: This ordinance was called the Passover of the Lamb: the other was
called the feast of the Passover.

This was to be eaten in their private houses the fourteenth day of the first
month Nisan; the other was to be kept seven days, and was called the feast of
the Passover or unleavened bread: So that this is properly the Passover, the
other the Feast: This is the sacrifice of their deliverance that night: the
other a Feast of rejoicing for that deliverance, Wherein their was a holy
convocation the first, and last day, viz. A rememberance of the Lords mercy to
them, and a teaching it to their Children.

1. The matter of the Sacrifice was a Lamb of the first year, figuring Christ a
Lamb without spot.

2. The taking of the Blood and sprinkling, it was a figure of his Death, So
that all this, was but to lead Israel to Christ, and to wait on the Promise
made to Abraham, That though they should hear a cry throughout all Egypt for
the death that was among them. Yet that they should stick to that Word, and
behold this sign, that they should be preserved So that,

The whole Word of God, and all the Sacrifices given to the Church, are given
to lead man from all things to Christ; and the steadfast sticking to his Word
and Promise, whereby they shall be preserved in all extremities, Isa. 55.
Behold, I have given him for a ensign, or witness to the people. 1. Cor. He is
our wisdom, Righteousness, etc. Joh. 14. I am the way, the truth, and the
life; My servant whom I have chosen, My beloved, in him whom my Soul
delights: All the promises in him are, Yea, and Amen, They all run upon him
in Christ, through Christ, by Christ; And this was the Word of the Father, Who
was in the bosom of the Father, The Light and Life of men: He took flesh, and
dwelt among us, and God has laid help on one that was mighty: and as many as
believe this Word, shall not perish, but have life.

1. For such is the distrustful and unbelieving heart of man, that he has
given all things to draw him to believe, His Son in the flesh, and fleshly
Sacrifices and signs, that man may see the accomplishment of the Word before
his face.

2. For the whole Word of God is nothing else, but a declaration of Gods
purpose, touching his pleasure, toward man and that Salvation which he
determined in Christ; only declared to man, that he may believe: And therefore,
has given him the Word, Christ, Sacrifices, and many wonderful miracles and
great works on Pharaoh, and all enemies, that they may wait on that Word, and
stick thereto.

3. And thus Christ himself dealt with his Disciples, saying; You are all sorry
to hear that I must leave you, And believe not that I shall rise from the dead:
your heart^ will be shaken this night: but I shall die, and rise again* and
that I will be present with you by the Holy Ghost, whom I will send, and abide
with you: Take, and eat, this in rememberance of me, that so you may not fly
to any other help nor be discouraged with any temptation in the World: For I
will be with you, and not forsake you: Therefore, when ye meet together, eat
this Passover; and feast, and make merry in me. For though I will judge the
World by my Word, yet I will passover you that believe my word, and in my
Name.

1. But, woe to the World, because of unbelief: God has promised, and that
Word shall be performed in Christ to all believers. This he has Sealed by
many signs, and yet we believe any thing rather: The World promises, and
shows lying signs: and we believe: Satan promises, and shows lying
wonders, and we believe: But God has given his Son, and we believe not: This
is the condemnation, that light is come into the World, etc.

He has given signs, and yet we believe not, he has passed over others, and
saved us from great dangers: and still we believe any thing before him.

2. Yea, and of all things, men are least led hither: any thing but Christ: We
get knowledge by the Word, and depend thereon, and proud thereof: it lifts us
up, but brings us not down to seek hither. Nay, by this word we will needs
comprehend God and his Power without Christ: when all power was given to him:
Yea, of all other, the Righteous and Religious man could not abide him, nor,
walk in his ways, as Scribes and Pharisees: So we become righteous, and will
live thereby: We run into a thousand opinions, and devices, and inventions,
but Christ despised of all. We provide Lambs and feed on them, but not on
Christ.

And yet we see Gods way was always a low way: He, a silly Lamb, and now
ordinary food of Bread and Wine, that hereby, he might reveal the great
Mystery. They are poor and common, that he may cross Man's curious devices, and
that the flesh may see no beauty in them, but in him only.

1. There is outward Elements set before the common senses of man.

2. The Word, to inform the understanding.

3. And Christ and his Spirit to feed the heart, and spirit of man, that he may
believe.

4. So that all the Word and Sacrifices are nothing without Faith, as in Heb.
4. This leads past all figures: Yea, when nothing appears but Death, this finds
Life This gives a place in the heart of man for eating of the Lamb, Bread and
Wine, a silly thing, where the heart is not led further.

It is not knowing, talking, or doing the thing, but believing that Word, and
resting thereon: Now, the use and manner of the Sacrifice lets us see the life
thereof, the sprinkling of the blood, the death of Christ; that i^ his death is
accomplished our Redemption; The Lamb without spot, him, who was innocent,
doing good: loving all, hurting to none, in whom dwelt all righteousness, and
yet he must dye, that we may live.

In this, death is the assurance, that by suffering com^^ life: when this Blood
is sprinkled on the heart of Man that the eyes of man be still here, in all
wants and straits to wait in Faith, here to receive life: As also, by death and
suffering, the loss of all things in patience, we ar^ through faith made
Victors over all. The sprinkling o^ the Blood, was a sign to Israel of safety,
and of their deliverance to come: So to us, This Sacrifice is given to draw our
eyes from all other things to Christ only.

SERMON X.
Isa. 28.14.15. etc. Hear the Word of the Lord ye scornf^^ men, that rule my
people, which are in Jerusalem; because ye have said, We have made a Covenant
wit^ Death, etc.
IN this Chapter, is laid down the woes denounce^ against Israel, for their
hardened security, and contempt of the Promise of God in the Messiah; where
unto, through fullness they were fallen. For fulnes^ begot Pride, and that made
them even drunk as with wine: and so careless and secure.

1. He pronounces the woe, and then shows their present estate.

1. Under pretense of their privileges, they were lifted up in Pride.

2. Besotted with World and sensual pleasures, as men drunk with wine, and
hardened in all. Two things made them proud,

1. Their privileges of being Gods people.

2. The fullness of the World and long peace, and this defection was grown
general.

1. The People, they were lifted up with a singular conceit.

2. The Priests and Prophets were grown drunk and b^sotted.

3. Their Princes were high minded, and scorners: And so at last; in these
Words he proceeds to judgment against Israel; showing what shall befall them,
and so Prophesies of the Captivity following: In which, ^e declares formally as
in all Courts of justice, for the defense of the King his Crown and Dignity:
For ^herein the crime being notorious in the Country, and appearing so before
the inferior Officer: they are ^eferred to the judge, specially sent by the
King: before whom they are to receive their final trial and judgment according
to desert: Where, 1. They are called ^o the Bar, then the Judgment preferred,
and sound witnesses produced: so judgment and execution. So ^oth God here. He
calls them to the Bar: by their names, scornful men, that rule Israel. He
prefixes the ^nditement against them, because they had cast off the Word of
the Lord by carnal confidence and security, and so were hardened against God:
Which confidence ^ppeared in three particulars, wherein they promise sa^ety,
though God had threatened the contrary. 1. From Death. 2. From guilt, and Hell.
3 From the Cross, to^ether with the ground thereof, vanity and falsehood.

Three VVitnesses he needed not, for they out of their hardness confess: He
proceeds to judgment: wherein he, 1. He lays down the safe estate of Sion,
the Church: in that he has there laid the Foundation and Cornerstone, Jesus
Christ: and the safety of all that build thereon, He that believes, etc.

2. And then the judgment of the enemies, as 1, That they shall have right
judgment by him. 2. That he will disannul all their hopes of safety, etc. 1.
Note their present condition, and what had brought them to it, viz. Their
fullness, and peace, and conceit of their privileges above others; So, that
had made them now scorners of Christ, and his Word, by the Prophets. So that,

Long peace, and plenty, ease and fullness in the World covered with a conceit
of Redemption by Christ; does usually harden man against God, and cover man
from himself, that Christ and his promise: his ways and Religion are despised
and little set by: Which, for the most part brings a heavy day in the end.

Thus the old World mocked at Noah, and Psalm. the^ 10. Tush, there is no
knowledge in the most high, let him do his Word, that we may see it: Thus the
Pharise^ being full, despised the righteousness of God, and mad^ a mock of
Christ; See what end it brings, Prove. 1. Because they despised my counsels,
etc. Therefore shall the eat the fruit of their own ways. As in Constantine
time, when the Church enjoyed rest from their enemies: and that they had peace
through the Christian World: Men became wanton in knowledge, and fe^ from the
truth of Christ, into foul errors, to the ve^^ denying of Christ's Godhead, and
the Holy Ghost. S^ in times of peace and fullness, Religion is made but matter
of discourse not of practice.

1. For two things make all things esteemed, Necessity, Delight: But when the
heart is fatted up with the World, he feels no want of Christ. And for delight,
h^ has none: for he never felt the sweetness of his Lord and Reconciliation.

2. For the fullness of the World embraced, eats o^^ the life of Religion: As
the thorny ground choked the seed and David's high Mountain: And Christ says,
How hardly does these enter into Heaven. So that, though the World laugh and
seems pleasant for the present; yet in the end, it is a miserable comforter.
For, though Israel was now full, and despised the honny Comb of Christ's death;
yet afterward, were carried captive; they were forced to sit by the waters of
Babel weeping, and drink their own tears: as those, Psalm. 37. Who had what they
desired, yet were they set in slippery places: and suddenly went down to hell.

1. This is too plain in experience, peace and plenty have been our portion
many a day: We feed of the fattest, and baist our selves before the fire; we
feel no smart, as do others; nor are we pinched with famine, nor hear we the
fearful noise of the drum: nor are we affrighted with the terrors of an army.
We dwell safe under our Vines, and are not driven from our habitation, as other
our neighbors; who are glad to forsake house and harbor, lands and riches, to
save their own lives. We play with our Wives and Children, and sport our selves
with them for company, when others hearts are broken with cries and lamentation
of Wife and Infants: and knows not how to save them from that approaching
destruction that is coming: And yet, what effect has this wrought: even like
those in Zephaniah 1.12. which say; Tush, God will neither do good nor evil;
and tush, we shall feel no evil.

2. But look for it, for where this goes before, the other will follow after.
If Sodom mock at Lot, through fullness of bread, yet God will meet with them.
And if the Pharisees stumble at this stone, and will not have this man to reign
over them, yet the falling on them, shall crush them to pieces, and destroy
those his enemies: But Israel would never believe warning, till it fell upon
them.

3. To be crossed then in the World, and to suffer want reproach and
persecution: is a safer way than prosperity. For, by the one man is driven to
G^d; for want drove the Prodigal to his Father: and hereby, the flesh is
weakened and crucified, but by ful^esse made strong and no Judgment nor bondage
so great as this Security and Hardness and Slavery to our own Passions. But
woe and alace to the poor World, who have not the World, and yet despise Christ
most of any; For they are left to their own dissolute Wills and Lusts, and want
education in Gods Fear as much as meat: And therefore it were to be wished,
that the course begun might be continued.

4. But it is a fearful thing to make a mock of Christ, and set lightly by his
Word, and to be so far in love with the World, that we esteem not his Word: it
argues we find little good therein, and little comfort by the Promise: For what
we find any good in, we highly esteem of: and what would pull us from our
pleasant pleasures, we cannot endure: Therefore was the word of the Prophets so
unwelcome to Israel, so to us, For first,

1. The doctrine of Faith, we count foolishness and uncertain.

2. The doctrine of the Cross, impossible.

3. The doctrine of Obedience, bondage and needless.

4. The doctrine of Death, most unwelcome. Yea, what account do we make of the
World, what care and contending about it, and yet how lightly we pass over
Christ and his Word? But take heed, for this grows from setting light to
scorning, and then to persecuting of it.

5. Pray we then with David, that we fall not into presumptuous sin: For this
is that Word that must save thee, and that Christ, that must redeem thee: and
tha^ Promise that must comfort thee.

And thou little knows what thou scorns, even that, which at Death must be thy
best friend: but how ca^ we look for him to be a friend at Death whom we have
despised and scorned all our life.

Because ye have said. Here was their carnal confidence, Presumption, and
Fools-Paradise; wherein they blessed themselves under the shelter of Vanity a^^
Falsehood, they would not hear of Sin, Guilt, and Death and the Cross: but
thought they had a device in wit and the world to put off all these. So that,

All men naturally labor, by all wit and inventions to put off the evil day far
from them, and security and presumption: to give rest to their restless
hearts, rather than to feel the evil in themselves, that they may find rest
through mercy in another.

S^ the rich fool, much goods for many days, so David blessed himself in his
high mountain, and Israel by the Ark. Thus the Pharisees covered all under
pretense of Holiness, but all in vain: Nay, all cry, Peace, peace.

1. For man is loathe, to see any evil approaching to himself.

2. And man's mind must have something to bear it up, if not Christ, he runns to
vain shifts.

3. Man is fa^len into an evil estate of heart, which all creatures are not
able to help, and he put to his shifts to keep it off as long as he can, For
the fear of Hell and Death, is a little bell: These three evils pursue men,
first.

1. Guilt and Fear of Hell, l^ke a worm, gnaws daily: and but for these, man
would live merrily in the world: Thus he makes a covenant with either, by
forgetting or by flattering the Law, and stablishing a Righteousness of his
own, or presuming of mercy a far off.

2. The evil of Death presses upon us, and threatens to make an end of all
Joy, Pleasure, and Riches, and leaves no Hope to man: thus we put off many
days, and think we shall yet live long, when men of our age are gone and
forgotten: but it hastes upon us daily.

3. The evil of Adversity pincheth daily, now this Cross, that Loss, this
Sickness, that Want and Trouble: this we hope to prevent and recover, and bow
down in fear and baseness, and husband all so well hereafter, that we shall
enjoy better days, when it is impossible to order all things according to man's
mind.

So that, all these are but vain shifts and falsehood: But the only way is with
Christ, to take the evil day and cross upon us.

1. For guilt to see it, and bear the indignation of the Lord, and with the
Prodigal cry out daily, We have sinned, etc. And wait on Him that has overcome
Hell and Darkness, and now says, O Death where is thy sting? Hell where is
thy victory?

2. And for Death, no Covenant to be made with it: but seeing the vanity of the
World, to meet it joyfully, and say, Thou can do me no hurt, but take the
World and the Life which I esteem not, and open a door to that life which I
shall enjoy.

3. And for the Cross, no way to escape it; But Patience and subjection to the
Fathers will, who knows, what is best to tame our proud hearts, and to cross
us in that wherein we dote. And herein appears his love, that he will suffer us
to enjoy nothing that will hurt us; but even this shall turn to our good.

Thus we all strive to put evil far off, and to shufle over the fearful days.
We now think lightly of them, and play with wasters, but when we come to graple
with death, we shall find it no play game, Look for it, for an evil day is
coming: and happy he that is prepared for that d^y. Take heed, lest at any time
our hearts be oppressed with cares of this life, or luke warmenesse.

Thus says the Lord, Behold, I lay in Sion. Here, He first lays the
foundation of rest in the Church, that though it fare ill with his enemies: yet
is his Church built upon the foundation of free mercy in Christ, and his truth
revealed by him shall stand against all storms So that,

God has laid in his Church, and conveyed to his People a foundation of rest
in Jesus Christ, which shall preserve them against all cross of Death and
Hell, and n^ storm shall be able to overthrow it, Psalm. 125. They the trust in
the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion. Mat 7. They that build upon the Rock, shall
abide the Tempest.

David calls him a Rock of Stone, and Peter, the Cornerstone.

For this is prophesied of him, Isa. 9. His Name shall (...) called Wonderful
Counselor, The mighty God, the Prin^ of Peace, etc. Other Foundation, can no
man lay.

1. Thence it is said, Heb. 11. That faith is the grou^ of things hoped for:
because Christ, whom faith ot^ ^ests on, is unchangeable to his.

2. And the promise in him, is, Yea, and Amen: Though in us oftentimes it is
Nay.

3. This is that, whereby Adam was restored, and first laid in him: whereby
Abraham was preserved, and Paul delivered in greatest extremity.

This foundation is, Jesus Christ, the Son of God; Lord of the Covenant, the
ingraved form of his Image, given of the Father for the Restoration of man; to
whom he has given all power in Heaven and in Earth: and has hid in him the
treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge: and the heart of man built on this
foundation by says thereon, cannot fail.

But the Church of Rome has translated this foundation from Christ to the
Church: from head to members; from that, Mat. 18. Super hanc Petram: and so
they have the determination of all truth; and it to be received and believed,
because of their testimony.

And so, that Christ is to be believed because of the Church; and not and
contra. And thus they pervert one Article of the Creed, to bring all men's heads
under their girdle, and that they may sit in the Consciences of men, and do
what they list, without control. They say, We are not only to believe the
Church to be, but to give credit to it. To understand the difference, note
Austins distinction of Faith; in regard of the object.

1. Credere in aliquid, to believe and put confidence in one.

2. Credere alicui, to believe, or give credit to one.

3. Credere aliquem, to believe that one is; or after this manner.

To believe in one, has reference to God only: because, the object thereof
must be both verum and bonum.

To believe or give credit to one, has relation to his object; as to objectu^
formale, a principle for whose sake.

To believe one to be, has relation, as ad objectum materiale.

The first, we agree in. And as for the second, we say, The testimony of to
Church is of all humane the greatest, and can never err in the whole, nor
fundamentally.

They say, Creed Ecclesiae, as to the formal cause, for whose sake, we are to
believe all Truth: and some of them, that was inserted, tanquam meum, cum omnia
alia credendi. And so, they make it a foundation of faith: upon whose credit,
they wholly depend. And this is the difference, and this we deny.

1. Because, the Grammatical Constructions will not bear it: Credere, being
taken to give credit, is put with a Dative Case, and an Accusative Case: as in
the Creed.

2. Because, there is no such certainty in their Church for man to depend on;
but that which must be the foundation of Faith, must be a thing certainly known
and determined what it is: not the word but the thing. For says is not verbal
but real: But according to their own assertions, the Church is a thing to them
not certainly known or determined what it is.

Their Doctors divide the Church into the Church Essential, The Convocation of
all that believe in Christ. Representative. The By hops in a General Council;
Or, Council of Cardinals. Vertual, the Pope only.


And of these we agree not, which is the Church, on which we must depend. Some
will have the Essential, as Tried. Catech and Gloss. upon Gratians Decrees,
which are Popes own law.

2 Chap. 24 4.1. Some others, seeing this could not be, because it could not be
known; conclude it to be representative, as Bellarmine, Herson, etc.

3. But the Jesuits of late, fearing this would prejudice the Popes Supremacy
too much: concludes it is the Church Vertual, the Pope only or alone.

And so while they boast of the Church: their Mother: they mean nothing else
but the Pope, their Father. What foundation can there be here for man to rest
on?

But we have a sure word of the Prophets, and a sure foundation, Jesus Christ,
than which none other ca^ be laid.

1. The ground then of all uncertainty in all things is, because we build
without this foundation: One man lays a foundation in the World: another, in
Wisdom: another in righteousness: and uncertain in all.

2. Take heed of stumbling at this stone.

1. Either at his sufferings, as Peter: and the Disciples, at his death.

2. Or, at his poverty and low estate, as the Wordling, Matthew 19. and 21.

3. Or at his mercy and love, as the Pharisees that judged him.

4. Or at his Holiness, crossing our lusts.

3. See the certainty of believers. 1. They have a sure foundation, a tried
stone that abides the storm: a precious stone, full of treasure: a
cornerstone, that joins altogether in love.

He that believes, makes not haste: or shall not be confounded: For he seeks no
vain shifts, but sits in death and darkness, by faith, waiting and sticking to
this foundation, till the light shine out of darkness. So that,

The only rest to man in all straits, is the sticking to Christ by faith: and
waiting on the promise which shall be fulfilled in time.

Abraham waited four hundred and thirty years, Israel, seventy in Babylon, Isa.
30. Your strength is to sit still.

1. For God has set a time appointed for every work: like a nurse which hides
her self from the child: till it thinks it has lost her, yet still hears its
cries, and comes in time.

2. God knows it is best for a man to keep him under as yet, till his will be
subued and lust abated.

1. But the blind World will needs run before their guide, and will now have
it, and so forsake God and his Promise.

2. Weaklings, who would have rest as soon as they feel any disquietnesse.

3. Others that will see things before they fall, and stumble for the present.

4. Wait thou weary heart, make no haste: Fly not off to any other shifts; nor
fix on none other foundation. This will be able to keep thee from drowning: he
that has kept thee hitherto, is able to keep thee still; and he that comes,
will come, and will not tarry.

SERMON XI.
Isai. 39.5. Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah; Hear the Word of the Lord of Hosts;
Behold, the days come: that all that is in thine house, and all that thy
Fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried into Babylon,
etc.
When Hezekiah had overcome the great Host of the King of Assyria; he fell
sick, and received a message from the Lord, that he must die: Whereupon he fell
into great heaviness, and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. So that,

The sentence of Death is fearful unto man, if the great and mighty hand of the
love of God, do not mightily uphold him, so to Christ.

1. For this is the last enemy to be destroyed: this takes away all sta^s and
helps in the flesh at once. We all play with it, as with a dead snake: and make
a covenant therewith: but when it comes on us with open mouth, it shakes the
heart of the best; if God do not mightily preserve him.

2. But if the wrath of God, the guiltiness of our hearts, and the end of our
days come all at once: O, whither then shall man flee? O, that man but saw and
believed his own mortality! How would it pull down the pride of man, and make
the World little in his eyes; and that man would but see himself on his
Deathbed? How fearful is that destroying Angel, and Messenger of Death, or the
Plague; when it comes to any place to them, that are round about it? After
this, the Lord hard his cry, and saw his tears, and gave him assurance of his
life for fifteen years, with a sign of the Suns standing still for more
assurance, which goodness of God he acknowledges in his Writing, from chapter
38. and 9 to the end Wherein he shows, both the misery he was in, and Gods
deliverance: as ver. 15. etc. What shall I say, he has spoken unto me, and
himself has done it? I shall walk humbly in sense of my own weakness, as
knowing my life is in his hand. Then he acknowledges Gods truth and Power. O
Lord, by these, viz. thy Word and Power men live, and my spirit has life in
these, and that all this was of mere mercy, for in peace I had great
heaviness, but in love to my soul, thou have delivered me from the pit, and
cast all my sins behind thy back: Yet, after all these experiences and his
recovery; see how he falls to the World, to be lifted up in his fleshly
portion, in showing all his store to the servants of the King of Babylon; such
a vile creature is man. So that,

That after so many experiences of his love, power and wrath: yet by a little
ease and peace in the flesh, shakes hands again with the World, and becomes
lifted up thereby to the forgetting of his God.

So with Israel, evermore when they had ease. So with David, in the matter of
Uriah.

1. For the world blinds the eyes of man, and hides the glory of the Gospel: by
the glory of the world, that he is lifted up; and feels nothing of mercy and
power in another.

1. We see this in experience. How soon does man forget his misery and
bitterness of his soul, the goodness and power of God, the weakness of
himself, and dotteth in a fools Paradise: yea, and quite runs away from that
Word he once believed and sound life in: and fixes upon that store he has
gotten: when as, alace, all his store, yea, and life too was in the hand of
God, even newly delivered. How soon is that faithful confidence forgotten, and
those Purposes and resolutions of miserable men quite at an end. We cried: O,
that God would de^iver us, and he should be our God for ever, and pre^ently we
choose another.

1. So that, no keeping of Faith and Comfort in God: but ^y preserving of
humility and sense of death in our sel^es: for as we die to the World so we
live to God, but if ^e live to the World, we die to God.

3. See the danger of prosperity, viz. of raising up of a man's heart without
God, in carnal confidence: and turning the heart from God to his great gifts.
This World eats the Word out of Man's heart, that now he lives, as though there
were no God; and his Word a matter of no moment.

And now he comes with another message from the Lord to the King, that because
he had rejoiced in his store, God would take it away, and his children also:
and carry them to Babylon to be a prey and servants unto them.

In the Words, note two things.

1. His heavy message to Hezekiah.

2. Hezekiahs free subjection to the will of God, and justifying his Word.

First, He shows, that all the riches and store wherein he glories, shall be
taken from him: yea, and his posterity for whom he had gathered them, should be
carried Captives and nothing left, that he might return to his God: As if he
should say, Thou have showed all thy store to the King of Babylon, and sent the
news of all thy wealth thither: Even all this shall be carried away to
Babylon, and thy children also. Thus does God, to destroy the hope of man, So
that,

There is a day coming to man, that will turn all his riches and glory, and
pleasures, wherein he trusts and rejoices into want, sorrow and misery, and
death and doom will sooner or latter, lay all in the dust.

Where is now the glory and pleasure of the Old World? or the Power of Pharaoh,
the Weal^h of Job, or the Pleasure of Dives, the riches of the rich fool, or
righteousness of Paul? all laid in the dust. For woe to them that now laugh,
etc.

1. For there is a way that seems good to man, but the issues thereof, are the
issues of death.

2. For God will take away from man all stays in the flesh, that he may see
and know, that there is no rest but in him; for the life of the first Adam must
be lost, that we may live by the second.

3. Thus, God makes way for the manifestation of his mercy, and the delivering
of Man out of Satan's snare.

1 Woe to the deceived and bewitched heart of Man, whom Satan has beguiled
with the Luster of the world, and drawn from his God, who blesses himself in
his present portion and pleasure, and thinks he shall see no evil, but enjoy
many a merry day, but sees not the black day when all shall be taken away.

Nay, man thinks to join a perpetuity here, by joining house to house, and
laying a foundation in the earth, and then he says, Is not this great Babel
that I have built: And so shows his Wealth to the world, or at least feeds on
it himself, and says, Is not this a goodly portion, a loving wife, obedient
and fine children, a good stock and portion, a certain estate, and never a
f^iling way of increase: what hurt can come to me? Even like the thief, who
blesses himself in his stolen riches, and never thinks of his hanging-day.

But know, though we may put off the evil day a while; and first, either bury
it in forgetfulness, or drink down fear like beasts, or cover it with the
righteousness of the Law? Yet God will either sooner or later, strip up our
hearts, and either, first,

1. By the Word, discover that misery, that all our fullness cannot remove, as
before to Hezekiah, that with Job, we shall curse the day of our birth, and with
we had never been born.

2. Or if he suffer us to run out the course of our vanities with the Prodigal;
yet there will come a day, that will lay all in the dust and darkness: when we
shall be cast into the pit, and death comes, and will not be resisted: and then
nothing but wailing and gnashing of teeth: Wailing for the Time of vanity
misspent, for Guilt of heart not to be eased, for darling with the World that
was so esteemed, and our friends so dear to part with: Then shall we see, that
Wife and Children, Gold and Silver, that we see doted on, are but Dross: When
the Babylonians have ransaked our treasure, as now to the Germans, and life
taken away not to be restored.

1. Are not the fair and admired beauties now defaced with rottenness, and
consumed with worms: that were as smooth, ruddy neat, and trim, as thou art?

2 Are not the rich worldlings laid low in a poor sheet, and turned to dust?

3. Is not the wiseman dead as the fool, and all the counsels of his heart
perished?

4. Are not drunkards and wicked destroyed: and their name and posterity
forgotten and rotten upon earth?

2. Hence we see then, whatever man establishes in his heart and fixes his
mind on, but Christ, must down, and nothing must be left: We all desire to
learn something and to have something to look at: we will trust God, but we
will have something else to look at, some sign and token; thus, man is loathe to
part with all, but still he reservs some portion, some hope, some good quality,
some righteousness to look at; no, there must be nothing left, but the Brazen
Serpent: Nothing but Christ to look at, for all else must to Babylon.

3. Nay, we see how he takes away all excuses, we think to establish our
posterity, and gather for our children, that each may have so much, though we
fear not our own portion: but even these shall be servants, we feed them with a
coal stolen from the Altar: we leave them the fruits of our covetous hearts,
and so brings them into the snare for an hours pleasure, they also must into
the land of darkness: commit them to God with any portion; for if they may
enjoy any small pittance it is enough, for thou shall not know whether they
shall come to honor or low degree. Let all look for this in the day of
fullness, look for want and misery, for it will come; see thy self taking leave
with all thy Friends and Riches: for Pompey and Alexander are now conquered,
that conquered all the World: Yea, the best must taste of this; for Christ's
last day, was his heavy day, when Wrath and Death lay upon Him. So that there
is a more heavy day to be endured: only man's rest in this day is, with
Hezekiah: to cleave to the Word of the Lord in subjection.

When the Prophet had delivered his message, we see how Hezekiah takes it:

First, He acknowledges the Power and Goodness of the Word of God.

2. He submits himself thereto, in confidence and assurance, that according to
the Word, Truth and Peace should be in his days; So that,

The Word of the Lord is ever good to man, and his only treasure on earth, and
man's subjection thereto, his only freedom and rest, Isa. How sweet upon the
mountains are the feet of him that brings glad tidings of Peace. It is the
joyful tidings of Salvation, the Word of Life, and the Message of the Kingdom;
and that wherein David found more joy than in all riches or great spoils: The
Law is spiritual and good, the Gospel is the message of Mercy and Life; Wisdom
is justified of her Children: And Eli's subjection to the word of Samuel, was
his only hearts ease.

1. For though it fight against the World and Lust of man's heart, yet it is for
the freeing of Man from them.

2. For this Word must stand though it sight against Man, and man's subjection
must be his Rest; For the Word cannot be changed nor fail.

3. For hereby is made known the Love of the Father, which wh^le the Child
has, he fears nothing.

4. Herein i^ more certainty, than if ten thousands had sworn it.

5. And our Subjection is, our present denying our selves, and partaking with
Christ in his Death.

1. This carries the heart above all that he sees or feels, though he see
nothing but death; as here, yet hereby he knows that he shall be relieved, as a
man having committed murder, prays for pardon at the Kings hand: which being
granted, how good is that word of the King to him?

2. And yet we see the carnal heart of Man sees no good in this, delights in
any frivolous story more than this: believes any word rather than this, and yet
what footing has man's heart in any thing but this: By this we shall be judged,
and by this we shall be freed.

3. And yet we are all found fighters against this, as in Christ's time; the
whole world opposed him: so when God by His Word, that the Worldings and
Hypocrites shall not find rest, they tush at it, and will Evah think, they shall
have merry days, when he says, All thy high looks must down, and thy great
portion must be lost: nay, says man, But I will make them sure, and so he
trusts every thought of his heart, rather than his word.

4. But know, the day will come, when this will be more worth, than all, and
happy he that so esteems it now. And for our subjection, every man has a will
and way of his own, which he labors to uphold: and rather desires that his
Word, rather than his own will might be altered: Yet, God says, We must
forsake Father and Mother, and all: But man says no. God says, Be content
with thy portion: man covets more: So that

None loves the Word or Gods will, but he that is prepared to bear the Cross:
that man, seeing his own guilt and weakness, may submit in humility and look
for mercy: then shall Peace be established in his heart, though war and trouble
without: And truth shall preserve his soul, when all the World seems a lie to
him: yea, though God seems his enemy, yet this truth becomes a friend.

SERMON XII.
Matthew. 1.1. The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ; the Son of David, the
Son of Abraham: Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, etc.
THis Chapter and these Words contain the beginning of the Gospel and the very
sum thereof: When Adam had miserably fallen through rebellion, and become
guilty of death: it was promised (though obscurely) that a man should rise of
the seed of the Woman, whom Satan had deceived, that should overthrow his
Kingdom, and deliver man out of his hands: whereby Adam and the faithful was
upheld until Noah's time; then the promise was renewed: and the Rainbow given
to testify, that still God would be good to man till Abraham's time. Then did
God more clearly renew the same promise, In thy seed shall all Nations of the
Earth be blessed: From that time, the Prophets prophesied most clearly of this
Savior, and with strong prayers and desires, longed after this Christ; and so,
from Abraham till David, it was more manifest both in the promise to him, Thou
shall sleep with thy Fathers but I will set up thy seed after thee, and
stablish his Kingdom: and I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son. Psalm.
132. God has made a faithful oath to David, of the fruit of thy body shall I
set upon thy seat. Psalm. 45. Thy throne, O God, endures for ever, the scepter
of thy Kingdom is a scepter of righteousness. Whereby he shows, that a King
shall arise out of the root of Jesse, and the Government shall be upon his
Shoulder. Now, here is the Book of the Generation of this King and Christ so
long foretold off, which shows the wonderful consent of the Scripture, So that,

The whole Word of God declares nothing else, but the fall and daily falling:
death and condemnation by Adam, and restoring by Christ; both which, being
believed; become effectual to man's good and happiness. This Paul Romans 6. Gal.
1.

The first is renewed again in the Law, and showed in all the rebellions and
wanderings of men, that so man may see himself, and be ashamed: and the other a
wonderful and incredible thing, that man cursed and condemned, should be
restored by the birth of one man. Here needs faith, as much as to believe, that
the Word was made of nothing.

1. These are the two Principles of all Religion, that man see his daily
falling in Adam, and daily rebellion against God and his Word; daily forsaking
God, and setting up something besides Christ; which unless it be seen, and
believed, and felt; no Savior to man. For Christ was promised to fallen man.

2. This works death in the heart, and in this death and daily falling, is man
directed to the Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ: No believing of this
wonder but in death, that man's mere want and misery force him to believe this
Savior. For no reason can persuade a dead and cursed man, but the mighty word
of God, which man may not argue how like or unlike it is: but that is the Truth
of God for ever.

But these are two Principles that are least minded or believed. We frame a
Religion of high thoughts, and make a trade of many devices: so that the
simplicity of the Truth is hid by the wit and device of man. And herein, we
trade for our praise and gain; But to believe the Book of the Generation of
Jesus Christ, this too law for their deep judgments. No, they have learned
this long since, they have seen their misery, but they are healed; they were
wounded by the Word, but they have cured and covered it: So that now the Word
cannot fasten on them. They are wise, and foreknow all things: and so able to
awarde the blow. And for this book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, they know
it, and can comprehend it, and dispute and prate of it, and have mangled and
cut, added and diminished; but live not by it; and so full of opinion and
windy conceits of all Truth, but believe it not, that this Christ is the
Redemption of man only, and now join other books to this; We dare not rest on
this without something else to under-prope. Hence came in Circumcision, Man's
Righteousness, and Riches of the World through Reason; but to believe this
Book, as to commit soul and life, and all to this promise, even when sin and
death bites; is the great power of God to believe Christ to be the Savior of
the World So that the whole Sum of Religion, is truly to know what man is,
and what Christ is: truly to know sin and righteousness: the one read in the
Book of our own hearts, we need go no further: the other read in the Generation
of Jesus Christ When man utters forth but the frothe of his own ro^ving mind
and thoughts, the fleshly mind is tickled, but no certainty; but the book of
Jesus Christ is the Word of Truth, and assurance forever. O, that we had hearts
prepared to embrace this mystery. Here is the Fountain of Life.

Here is the Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ before prophesied, now
accomplished. Here note the Truth and Certainty of Gods Promise: So that,

No certainty to man's heart in any thing, but in the living word of God, and
the truth of the promise believed; this abides, all things else will fail,
Psalm. 26. Thy mercy reaches to the Heavens, and thy truth into the clouds.
Abraham had no hold left but this, and David no comfort in affliction but this
Word that sustained him. We have a sure word of the Prophets, which, though the
Fathers in reason might deny, because they saw nothing of Christ's coming: yet
they were to attend, till the day dawn: and then the Book of the Generation of
Christ shall come, and his star shall appear in the East: So though man feel
not the comfort of this Christ, yet attending in that death, on the sure Word
of Prophecy; the day star shall arise in his heart. But man would feel and
believe nothing, and so casts off the Word, and flies to many inventions.

1. For all things have their turns and changes, according to their uncertain
natures and disposition: and alter with fullness and emptiness, with want and
riches, according to the Worlds uncertainty, but nothing can change or disannul
the promise: not the power of Pharaoh, nor the malice of the Jews, nor the
treason of Judas, nor length of time, or alteration of Kingdoms; but at the
fullness of time, Christ must be born, suffer and die, etc. So in man?

2. This gives certainty of the Fathers Will and Love to wretched man, and he
being stayed by this: endures the time of Tutors and Governors, of banishment
and persecution: yea, of torment and wrath within: and tyranny of Satan: yet
waits in patience the revelation of the Gospel. How powerful is the word of a
King, that even by his word and wrath has stricken a man dead.

1. How vain the^ is the heart of man, that seeks certainty in every thing but
this? Has not Satan promised joy and peace and lo, at death, all is gone, and
man helpless? Does not the World promise certainty in its full portion, and
sure possession to thee and thine: And yet thou see, or still fear a decay
in all: Does not the Law promise life and peace, and yet when thou have done
thy utmost, thou art still guilty? Yea, does not God make void the counsel of
the flesh, and when man dies, all perish? and yet man will not learn nor read
in this book, which is life. Now the word is certain in it self? and so to man:
when the truth thereof is believed, and written in his heart deeper, than all
reason, or fleshly speculations.

2. And as this book is the book of a Savior to believers, so of death to
unbelievers, that have cast off this, and followed vain inventions: For both
Moses, in whom they trust shall judge them; and Christ, in whom they trusted
not, shall condemn them; for God shall judge all by his Gospel. Then shall God
say, I promised to Adam, Abraham and David, etc. and they found life therein: I
fore told by my Prophets: And in fullness of time, I sent my Son declared in
the Book of this generations But him ye believed not, counted him a deceiver. I
would have performed all to the full; he saved all that came to me him by: but
you were rich and wise in the World, and trusted that you were rich and devote
in your conceit, and despised him: Therefore, out of your own hearts, I judge
you.

Nay, without this: there is such a certainty of death and curse: that nothing
in wealth or wit, no qualities or righteousness can wipe out: but it sticks
fast in the bottom, till the Book of the Generation of Christ give certainty of
Redemption by him.

Happy he who sticks to this foundation, that is neither lifted up by high
wisdom, nor drawn down by base lusts: that judges not, but is judged by the
Word of Christ. We read this story: O, That we had hearts to read and delight
in this Book or Word of Truth: We profess this Christ, and we celebrate this
Feast in rememberance thereof. But anon, every man runs to his vanity; soon
weary of this, as though he either stood no need of this Book, or had it wrote
in our hearts: We rejoice and play, but it is not in this; nay, how little is
this Book looked on: or minded or read in our houses, or embraced in our
hearts? When that beastly drinking, liker liker Swine than Men; that unmanly
custom of Cards, sitter for Childrens Bables, than to be the exercise of Wise
and Reasonable men: which the good Moral Heathens could not suffer their
Scholars or Children, for making them too effeminate in their minds: and yet
we foolishly make them our meat and drink, and let Christ stand behind the
door. Well, this Book of the Generation of Christ will stand by man to his joy,
when those shall be all witnesses, of vanity and lusts of our hearts against us.

The Son of David. Now he comes to his Generation. David is here first
mentioned before Abraham, because the promise was most in him, and Christ most
usually promised by the Name of the seed of David: And so he goes on from
Abraham to Christ. In which Genealogy note, That most of the Men and Kings that
are reckoned, and of whom Christ came: were wicked men and Idolaters, as
appears in the Book of the Kings, Yet Christ was born of them, and the women
mentioned all wicked and sinners; save Ruth, who was a Gentile: and hated as a
Dog of the Jews; But Thamar, Rhab and Bathseba, all Adulterers. So that.

The promise is made and so effectual, and Christ born, and sent by the Wisdom
and Will of the Father, only to; and for sinful, lost, wretched and condemned
men: and none else.

I came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; ^^e leaves the
ninety and nine, and seeks the sheep that is ^st. When Adam was lost, then
Christ was promised. Moses was sent to deliver afflicted Israel: and Joshua
(...) bring the wanderers to rest: So Christ was sent to the ^ost sheep of the
house of Israel. And this he verified in his ^ourse, Publicans and Sinners were
objects of his mercy: the Poor, Weak, Halt, Lame and Blind, he was still
among: And the Rich he sent empty away, and the righteous Pharisees he regarded
not.

1. For if Sin should hinder the coming of Christ, he had never been born; and
if Sin should hinder the comfort of Christ from man, no Flesh should be saved.

2 Nay, Therefore came Christ to take away sin: which by no other means could
be overcome.

3. Hereby is the love and grace of God magnified, That he came to save
Sinners: When for a righteous man scarce any will die; yet he died for his
enemies. Object. Bu^ all are sinners, yet he came not for all.

Answ. All are sinners, but not sensible sinners i^ themselves, For there is
that say, They have no Sin, an^ justify themselves before men, and trust in
themselves to b^ righteous, and that need no repentance.

These are the opinions and conceits of men, and ye^ no doubt, but these
confess that they were sinners formally; There are sinners in general, but
covered. The^ are naked and bare sinners, whose iniquity brings Death We
confess, we are all mortal, but we feel not the pangs of death, So of Sin.

For this sinfulness of man is not acknowledged o^ this, or that actual
failing, but a feeling of the Origina^ spring, though he be well guided, and
that mercy i^ prepared: yet this makes him no more holy. But he see^ the
Fountain of Pride and Lust burning within, and s^ forces to cry and pray, and
look for mercy in another.

1. But all strives to appear righteous, even before God and so makes Christ
void: none would be found sinners but if they miss it in one action, they will
mend it i^ another, or the next: that they may be righteous.

1. The poor mindlesse honest man thinks, he hat^ somewhat to offer, if but his
honest meaning: and harmless course, and diligent working, he hopes this will
b^ one step.

2. The devote Pharisee thinks all his own, for his c^^ diligence and good
quality.

3 Nay, others think they were sinners, but now the are Righteous and Wise, and
so banish Christ and cast him off: and Repentance, and Faith is stopped with them.

But know, all this is but joining circumcision with Christ, for which he
thinks Christ shall become more effectual: as though he came to seek a
Righteousness in man, and not to bring a righteousness to man: Nay, but as it
was sin by accident that brought Christ into the World at first: Yea, that he
was counted the Master of Beelzebub, and one that brought false doctrine, so it
the sense of Sin still, that brings him to the heart of man.

2. Hereby is the hope of poor man preserved: that Christ came of the sinful
Seed of men, and for sinful man: if he had come only of the Faithful, and would
have nothing to do with sinners: then had we been lost: But he is made a man
like us, with whom we may talk as one with another: our Brother and friend Why
then should the fearful conscience fly him, and make him a judge: who thinks,
O! If I were a little more Holy, and less Sinful, I could have hope: Nay, if
thou were less Righteous in thy conceit, and more sensibly sinful, mercy were
nearer.

3 So, that it is not properly sin, that is the Rebellion of the heart against
God, and in-disposition to keep his Law, that hinders Christ; not because thou
art a sinner in thy own eyes, but righteous in thy own sight: These are the
enemies of Christ and of his Kingdom ever. So that the Gospel of Christ never
prospers, but among sinful men, you see Christ was born of them: but man grows
wise, and when sin appears he fore-knows a Savior, and so heals the wound
before it be made.

Abraham begat Isaac: And so one in Christ's Genealogy; where note, That as he
was born of sinful men, so there was a long tract of time after the Promise,
before he came: even two and forty Generations, therein alluding to the two
and forty Stations of Israel in the wilderness; where they pitched their
Tents, and yet removed: and all this time also the Church had great trouble:
Yea, none without: Abraham sore tempted: Isaac also taken, and denied his Wife;
Jacob, in servitude, and persecuted by Esau; The Judges and Kings always in
war: The time of the Maccabees, nothing but Bloodshed, and then the vision
ceased; Yet even then, when the Church seemed even wasted, and almost left
looking; The Sceptu being departed from Judah; then Shiloh came; But here was
long time, and much trouble, so with man: So that,

Man shall endure many weary days, and much trouble in the flesh, before
Christ be truly and indeed born in him, or he live by, and with Jesus Christ.

As in Isreal's stations, they set down often and might not rest there, but a
new enemy assaults them: David's eyes failed for waiting for the promise: O!
When will thou comfort me? why do thou delayed thy Promise? Paul desired to
be dissolved, but he must suffer terrors without, and fightings within; and
through many afflictions we enter into life: So did Christ our High Priest, He
was consecrated through sufferings: For he must suffer till his hour come, even
three and thirty weary years; but overcame through suffering.

1. For God has all times in his own Power and Wisdom.

2. Hereby he prepares the hearts of men to wait for grace.

3. It is worth staying, for having so sure a foundation laid; That He that
comes, will come, and will notarrie: even a most sure Word to be attended on.

1. But we cry out with those; Where is the Promise of his coming? or, with
those, Luke 12. We would know a sign of his coming: or with the weak, would
foresee him coming with fleshly eyes: If I knew that he would come I could stay:
when his Word is gone out as firm as Mount Sion: But by this knowing, we would
have a little ease: or would know rather, than believe; nay, know that yet thou
must pass many a pinch, fight with beasts at Eph^sus, suffer shipwreck, and
sight with many a beastly lust: one thief there was, that leapt two and forty
degrees at one leap: but look not thou for that, but know that yet thou must be
more vile: Long w^^ the time, and great was the trouble, the Church suffered
before they saw their Savior: So wait to the loss of all, for the vision is
for an appointed time: but it shall come and not tarry, speak and not lie.

2. Let none then look to obtain it by a fair, easy, smooth, quiet life: by
flattering the World and himself, pleasing his appetite, putting the evil day
far off from him, as we all do: Nor to sleep to Heaven, when first he begins to
know a little of Christ, or conform a little to his Word, no, we must pass
from Abraham to Isaac: so from Faith, to suffering, from believing to the
Cross: so to patience, so to experience, so to hope: But be sure we begin with
Abraham, to live by the Promise, and hold that ever fast: and so Christ will
come at last: when,

3. Thy Pride is destroyed, thy Righteousness pulled down, thy wisdom made
foolishness, and thou in thine own eyes be made the offscouring of men, and
the outcast of the people: when the World is become nothing, and vanished: and
thy security awakned: Then in the fullness of time, shall Christ come: in his
time, not in thine, Thy time is always, but his, not yet come: But he will
come, and swallow up death in victory, and bind the power of darkness and
death, and subdue thine enemies under thy feet; and then shall death, the last
enemy be destroyed, that God may be all in all.

4. Only in this time take heed of hardening in security and blind presumption.

SERMON XIII.
Heb. 2 24. Forasmuch, as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, he
also took part with them; that he might through death destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the devil.
IN the former Chapter, he had declared the great and divine power of Christ,
who was far above all Angels and Power: In this he shows, that now Christ
^^eing made the Prophet and High Priest of man's Salvation, it became him to be
a man like us, both to teach and suffer for us: which he proves by diverse
testimonies of the Prophets, as I will declare thy name unto my Brethren, and
Isa 8.18. Behold, I and the Children which God has given me: So that he was
made even ou^ brother: In these verses, he concludes and explait^ what he has
said before, as if he should say; Forasmuch as those Children which thou have
given me, were but Fle^^ and Blood, and not able to free themselves; but
through the same Flesh and Blood, were under the Power of the Devil, and by him
kept in bondage under the feared death: He took flesh and blood on him also, and
becam^ a weak man, that thus he might by death free his Children from that
bondage: these words declare two thing

1. What man is in himself, viz. Weak under the power of the devil, and thereby
kept in bondage and fear of death

2. What Christ has done for weak man, viz. Tak^ part with us, and by his
death destroyed Satan, and freed (...)

Forasmuch as the Children, viz. of Adam, or rather o^ the Elect, Were
partakers of flesh and blood; Weakness want, misery, and death: for through
the flesh we a^ subject to all those, so that, this is our portion, the l^^ of
Spirit is gone, and our Spirit dead for want of the life of God, so also for
life and salvation able to do nothing, but depend on another. So that,

All men, even the Elect of God, and faithful; have nothing properly their own
but flesh and blood, viz Weakness, Want and Misery; till they are supplied b^
Christ, and his fullness. Genesis 6. His thoughts and imag^nations are evil, Psalm.
8. What is man? He is a thing (...) naught, less than nothing, and lighter
than vanity, low^ than the Angels: and yet he found no stedfastene^^ in them.
Paul, though full of the gifts of God: (...) the least of all Saints, in me
dwells no good thing, not ab^ to think one good thought (Do our holy high
thoughte^ men judge so of themselves?) Egypt, but a Reed, an^ the strength of
Pharaoh, but a broken staff: and what (...) our Riches, but as grass: our
Wisdom foolishness: (...) Powers not able to make white or black: our
Righteousn^ as a filthy Rag; our Sacrifice, as the cutting off a Dog^ neck:
nay, all but grass, and as the flower of the field.

1. This is plain in experience: Does not the weak heart of man fly any
whither for succor, though it finds none? bows to the World, creaves help of
the arm of flesh: fly any whither for to hide himself: would do any thing for
to free himself from the fear of his own heart: danted with every noise: dead
with any loss, can do no good, not suffer any evil; and yet this silly
creature sits in his own conceit as a God, a Lucifer Queen, that shall see no
evil.

2. Whence then are all those high thoughts of judging others, and justifying
our selves, seeking honor each of other, but because we see not our own
weakness, and bondage? Nay: if our eye were returned inward, we should have no
boasting; if we saw but the spring of Lust and Pride, and how unable we are to
resist the least temptation: or stand in the least affliction, how good soever
God be to us; yet in our selves but flesh and blood, his gifts shows his
goodness: and they are in him, not in man: enjoyed from him, not from our own
fountain.

All high thoughts then are from the devil, for all is but flesh and blood: Thy
high Turrets and great Babels: and fair inheritance must come to naught, when
thy Soul shall be taken, and it may be thou shall see it.

This great portion gathered and daily increased, wherein thou boastest thy
self, must all be scattered, and ^hou not know what shall become of it; thy
deep wisdom shall fail thee; it is but fleshly, not able to see into the way of
life; to prevent, or deliver thee from death; Thy counsels must perish, thy
righteousness is but a ^ag, shall vanish, nothing continue: Nay, what ever
thou do, thou mars it, if Christ be not there? If thou pray, or ^alk, all is
nothing but fleshly; only to stablish a fleshly kingdom and peace to thy self;
Nay, bring out thy best quality, and it is but fleshly; such as the Heathens
have as well as thou: if Christ be not there, else, we needed no Christ, but
our Spirits being lost, he came to breath a new life therein to by his power.

Object. But God gives gifts to men.

Answ. True, but if he be not with those gifts, man marrs them. Where then is
the power of good motions, or, free will? etc. To know, believe, love, repent,
etc. Not in us but in Christ? And yet this makes not man secure: Does the
beggars poverty make him cease begging: or, the lame man to lie still, and not
cry for help: Nay, the feeling of this, keeps repentance and prayer a foot in
the Church, and so had we need of mercy every day, and to pray night and day:
That when this grass withers, etc. Yet, that the Word of God may abide in our
hearts for ever. Magnify Gods mercy, that unto us so poor and weak, that can
do nothing: vouchsafes his help and grace

3. So that all Religion is not any thing we can do to God: we are not fitted?
no, What can we add to him, but to receive still from him: both Faith and
Righteousness and all? for having none, he is made all these to us, that so we
may daily cry, Lord increase our Faith, help our unbelief.

4. But Religion never throve since flesh and blood, even man's fleshly wisdom,
and conceited power, and righteousness of man got pearckt up in Christ's room,
in the heart of man; nor will it thrive in any till this be laid in the dust
again, and that we begin at the very earth to abhore our selves in dust and
ashes.

He took part with them. That is, was made man, partaker of all wants and
infirmities of man: and ye^ himself conquered, being tempted, and helps all
that are tempted, So that,

Jesus Christ that living Savior of man is partaker and fellow-seeler of all
man's weakness, and infirmities that he suffers: and lovingly helps, and frees
man where all help fails.

Isa. 50.11. Isa. 63. In all their afflictions he was afflicted: and the Angel
of his presence comforted them. Heb. We have an high Priest subject to like
Infirmities, that he might be able to comf^rt us, he took upon him (...) sins,
and bare our infirmities, and he was counted the great sinner of the World.

Like a loving Elder Brother, who seeing his younger brother overladen, takes
the burden; sees him beaten; weeps: sees him want, gives him half. For though
he was the Word of God, and was God; yet he took the form of a Servant, and
became flesh, and dwelt among us: that we might see him a man in the flesh like
us: and suffering more than we all, and yet overcame: Thus, he was given as a
witness to the People, and the first begotten among many Brethren.

1. What then are all those high Contemplations that soar above, and seek
Christ in Heaven: and make him a high speculative Angel, and rack their
thoughts, and beat their brains in comprehending? When, alace! He is with us,
l^ke us, suffering, watching praying: poor, judged and reproached: and dying as
we are. He cares not for th^se high religious ones, but pure and contrite ones:
With these he has fellowship, and they with him.

2 What hearting is this to patience: that he as a husband, is ever with us in
well and woe? Thou thinks thy case singular: thou art poor, he poorer: thou
wants the Fathers Love, so did he: thou art afflicted, so was he: thou art
sick, he swate drops of water and blood for the sick: Nay, in all he was with
thee. But we have little fellowship with him we sport our selves, and are full:
strong and wise, and so strangers to him: We are righteous without him, so that
he has nothing to do, but with poor beggars.

3 And where Christ partakes with us, there he makes us also to partake with
others: to mourn with them that mourn, bear their Infirmities, and covers sin,
helps the needy, relieves the oppressed, etc.

All high flying Religion then, is not of Christ, but of the Devil: for Christ
therefore brings down all high thoughts, for they are against Christ. Then
Christ has little working among us, when every one is for himself: when we
judge and condemn instead of pardoning: spread others infirmities, instead of
covering them: laugh at others fall, and not mourn for them: robb and not
relieve the poor: nay, with the unthankful servant, take him by the throat.

4. Believers have a friend at back, He gives a mouth and wisdom: the world may
fail and friends, and wit too short, and riches perish, and the life gone: yet
he fails not as to the Martyrs, who had him in all troubles a Protector and
Captain, and in His power overcame all.

That he might through Death. Here is the second thing that Christ has done
for us, viz. Destroyed the power of Satan, and delivered man: and the way
whereby, through Death. So that,

Christ Jesus, the Son of the Virgin and Savior of the World, has vanquished;
and does daily overcome the Power and Tyranny of Satan, which he has, and
exercises over the Church and Souls of the Faithful: and by His Death, has
freed and delivered; and daily does deliver man from that bondage.

So it was promised, when Man had fallen from God to Satan, and was now become
a S^holl^r in his shool, viz by subtilty of Wit, and strength of Lust to sight
against God, and stablish his own peace in the Flesh: God promised to raise up
one of the seed of the Woman to crush this power, by disannulling that Peace,
and bringing man to suffer the Death and Loss of all things, 1. John 3. Christ
came to destroy the works of the Devil, viz. To turn that peace into War, to
pull down his high Mountains, to set man's crooked way straight, to bring man to
Repentance, and so to bring him into his Kingdom; He came to bind the red
Dragon, that made all drunk: and to this end, was the Gospel sent by Paul to
the Gentiles, To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan to God.

This was figured in the fall of Jericho, the City of Gods enemies and
Idolaters: the walls were high, the inhabitants strong: Israel few and weak,
the means weaker, Blowing with rains horns: Yet by the spirit of believing
Joshua, they fell. So also man is weak, the walls of Lust and the World are
strong and mighty and wily: but by the foolish way of Preaching, and shout of
the Gospel, the Towers fall: and Mountains fall at his presence, and Christ
enters. Also figured in the Victory of David over Goliath; he weak, means
weaker: but exposing himself to death, and casting his life into the hands of
God, by Faith in the God of Israel, he overcame, and took the bondage and shame
from Israel: And figured also in the victory of Hezekiah over Senacherib, that
great beast; he cried and wept, and spread the letter and prayed: and Senacherib
fell into his hands without lifting up a dart: even one hundred forty and
five thousand in one night. So when Christ prayed in the garden in his agony,
and embraced Death in subjection to the Fathers will: He overcame hell and
death. So st^ll it is, when man is weary of that bondage, fells no power,
spreads his heart before the Lord, even ready to meet death: then is he freed
by a great deliverance.

1. For though Christ by his power, might have delivered man, and not died: yet
this was not profitable for man, both that the power of God might appear, and
that He might be a faithful and fit High Priest to sustain man in the power of
Death

But this was an unlikely thing to reason, That a man by dying should overcome,
He ^ather seemed to be vanquished; yea so He did. But therein he tr^pt the
devil. For while Satan laid on stripes, he gave his ckeeks to the nippers, and
let Satan strike his full, and shoot his last dart, whereby he had thought to
have driven Christ from the father, or to have sought help of the world; but he
continued still patient, and at last rose and triumphed over hell, and death.
Nay Balaam could not prevail against Israel by all his curses, they still being
stayed on God; but by his wicked counsel persuading to draw them to sin, he
wrought their death: As by his wily drawing men to live by the world without
God, that way he prevails much: now Christ delivers by his death.

1. Having paid the debt, and answers the law: and became a curse for us. Who
has any thing to lay to our charge

2 In sustaining man by his grace, and upholding him in death; for if we die
with him, we shall live with Him: and if we suffer with Him, we shall be
glorified with Him.

1. But we seek deliverance another way, and think to escape death.

1. One by his gaining the world, not losing it: by saving his life, not by
giving it up: to that end is wise, diligent, careful to put the evil away.

2. Another by the first Covenant, and stablishing a righteousness of his own:
but that has nothing but death in it.

3. All hiding and covering, and increasing what they have: and tinkling their
old rotten hearts, not by forsaking all and Repentance.

2. But we see the way of Life and Freedom, is, by death.

1. By believing the great power of Christ, whereby he overcame death.

2. By patient submitting to the will of God, no way to overcome but by
suffering.

3 So that all this strong hearted Religion, and high flown thoughts, bear out
all danger through hardened presumption and a stiff conceited Righteousness,
or high and lofty knowledge: like those, Isaiah 28. that put the evil day far
off, and hide themselves under vanity and falsehood, is not the way of Christ:
no, His way is a low and dying way, They reproached Him, and He bare it: they
banished Him, and He had not whereon to lay His head, and He cared not: They
apprehended Him, and He lift not up a sword against them: they accused Him
falshly, and He said nothing: they crucified Him, and He prayed for them: and
when they laid Him in the grave, in darkness, and that the power of Satan
could do no more, He rose and revived, and shut the mouth of hell, death, and
the grave th^^ they should never hurt any of His: But by death he overcame
death, and brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel.

4. And this shows the miserable captivity of Sin, an^ vileness thereof, that
nothing can loose but Death: (...) the Wife or Brother that has committed such
an offense, that nothing but the death of the Husband or Brother can save her
life: how may this break the heart with sorrow: we pity Christ, that so
innocent a man should suffer death so unworthily: but see Christ's answer to the
women that wept for His death, Weep not for me, but weep for your selves. He
needs not thy pity, but weep for the death and desolation that thou and thy
children must suffer.

Him that had the power of Death. For this was left to Satan: he had power to
tempt man in the heel, and loss of all things, even of life: and was the
executioner according to the sentence of the judge, but not beyond his
commission: So that,

Satan has a large power and dominion over man to tempt and vex man with all
calamities and loss of the dearest object, yet cannot make void the Redemption
of man to his destruction.

Thus with Job in all things, but his life, and yet by Faith and Patience he
got the Victory: when once he laid his hand on his mouth, and repented in dust
and ashes. Thus he reigned in malice against the Martyrs, even unto death: but
their Kingdom and Peace he could not take away from them: Thus against Christ.
And he is called the old Serpent, and Satan's, the accuser of the brethren.
Thus, Satan brings Death in all things, where the heart is not freed by Christ.

All unbelievers are taken captive to do his will as:

1 To the worldly heart, he ^ffers the Kingdom of the world, and life by them;
but death lurks under.

2. To the lusting heart, by satisfying that; but shame and guilt follows.

3. The hypocrite, by high thoughts and self-righteousnesse: poisoning his
Religion with a false opinion, like an angel of light; that he may cast off
Christ: Others he follows with troubles, to drive them to seek help in his
Kingdom. Nay, when he offers life and ease in any thing, he thereby intends
death, and brings it in the end: and when he threatens death, it is to seek
life in him: So no way to overcome, but by taking away that life of his by
death, and to overcome this death by suffering and by the life of Faith through
Patience.

2. The greatest snare of the devil is, in all thriving ways: for he is farely
covered with pretense of good, peace, and fullness, etc. But beware, for death
is in the port: if he cannot draw Christ to doubt and deny God, then he grants
as much as Christ says, True thou art the Son of God, and he will keep thee
still, thou art now on the Temple, the hight of Holiness; cast thy self down
on this, if that prevail not: Then he comes with all the world in his hand,
confessing still all that Christ urged: No I see thou will not tempt God,
therefore use thou the means to live and bow thy heart to the world; that thou
may live well and do good: So trying always to work death to the mind of
Christ: and when this would not prevail, then he sets all the world in malice
against him.

3. No way then, but living by the Word and nothing else, he can deal with
every thing but Gods Word, and unless he can steal this out of the heart: he
can thrust naught else in. This keeps out of all things else but Christ, but if
we begin to hearken a commune with flesh and blood and believe his promises, he
will promise life in things, when death is sure to be in the end* Which for
fear of Death, were all their lifetime through sin and guilt; So that,

The fear of death and destruction is the fruit of Sin and Guilt, which keeps
all the hearts of the sons of men in bondage, until they be freed and delivered
by Christ.

When the Law came to Paul, death came Death went over all, because all had
sinned: And how do these in the Revelation, cry for mountains to cover them:
these in Isaiah 28: were glad to make a covenant with death; and Adam made
aprons of sigleaves to cover his shame: Nay, this is that which all labor to
prevent and flee, as hell.

1. For man is guilty before God; though by sore-knowing of a remedy, he
thinks to ^over it, and as often as this guilt is naked and bare, fear possesses
the soul.

2. For death leaves no Hope, dasheth all at once; so that if the worlding
could escape this, he were a jollie man.

1. Thus we see, what an uncertain ease man is in, that fears death every
hour; especially, if man were made sensible of his condition: but this Satan
has covered for a while, and says, Thou shall not die. And so we sit quiet
and fear no evil, but how fearful is the plague or sword where it lights.

2. Nay, but what a tosling of heart there is in a dying man, betwixt fear and
hope, which is worse than his pains; now he hopes, then the disease pincheth
him: and he fears again, then has rest and hopes again: But note, That this
remains all our life long, even still in the heart of man: O! that it were in
us all, it would waken security, and set the heart a seeking and praying: but
we live, as though no danger were toward us; but the time will come, when we
shall call for the mountains to cover us, and not find ease.

SERMON XIV.
Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said to Simon; Simon, Satan has desired to
winnow you as wheat: but I have prayed that thy faith fail not, when thou art
converted, etc.
When Christ had now finished his course, and was now ready to suffer that
fearful and bitter hour, he foretells the disciples what to look for, and will
befall them: viz. He will strike the Shepherd, and what then will become of the
Sheep: they had lived with Him in peace, or at least such a trouble as was
easy to bear, but now must all be shaken, and so sore-warns them of the Cross
that they must suffer: he sorewarns them of the Cross and miseries to come,
and that by the Instrument of Satan, amplified by a Metaphor, he assures him of
help, and that by faith he shall be preserved, and that he hearten his brethren.

After Peter's brag, and Christ's answer, First, He shows how Satan as an enemy
stands waiting and seeking to overthrow Christ and his Kingdom, by which he
might shake the says of all his followers: for if he had overthrown Him, then
Faith and all had been dashed; So that,

Satan's main drift to work man's eternal destruction, is to overthrow Christ
and his Kingdom, and to drive man from Christ, and to seek help elsewhere.

Thus with Job, thus with Annanias, and thus with Christ in his temptations;
still granting what Christ alleged, and still laboring again to trap him in
that: for still he traps man in that wherein he stands; as the worlding, he
fills them with fear, and pleases his lust, and the weak to work it out, and
he laid load upon Paul, fightings without, and terrors within: And thus he
lays reproaches upon the Truth, and blazeth the failings of the Faithful, to
slander the Truth: for he is the accuser of the Breth^en.

1. And herein stands the salvation of man, that he can deal with any thing but
Christ; the wisest or holiest he can catch, and keep him in his sna^e, and fill
them with fear or hope, that he sifts them and keeps them in his b^g.

2. For he has power over man to tempt man in the heel and to sift man, and
leave him nothing but brane: For when he has ground man to powder, he sets his
servant, the flesh, to sift him, and he reasons and looks from what he feels;
and sues no help left, but all is gone: but Christ through patience overcoming
him: Thus he Winnowed the Martyrs, and left nothing in the flesh to uphold
them: and thus he works their good against his will to purge man of the flesh,
and to drive him to Christ.

3. The whole truth is revealed by Fire: First, Thus he drives all another way,
and he cares not what way he goes, so he looks not this way.

1. The Worlding he keeps in fear of want, or failing, or decrease, or
uncertainty: and so keeps him closse, like Israel in Egypt.

2. Others that look after Christ, yet keeps the World alive in the heart
through Lust, and that all is theirs, they having right, must provide for
honest things as that all is theirs, etc. and so he makes Fig-leafe-coverings
but the heart Rotten.

3. Others he lifts up above the simplicity of Christ and their own minds, by
great, and high speculations, to falsify the Truth by false Doctrine: and all
this to hide Repentance from man's heart, that so the Kingdom of Christ may not
come.

4. Others, by joining something, as Circumcision with Christ: and the Gospel
is perfected by the Law, and not the Law fulfilled by the Gospel.

5. Others he pursues with calamity and misery: as in ward Lust and
Rebellion: frowardness of their own will and indisposition to any good, that
so man might get ease thereby.

6 Others by losses, crosses, wants and troubles that he may distrust God, and
cleave to the arm of flesh; and so consent to Rab^^ekeys Letter, saying, Thou
trustest and believe in Christ, he will deceive thee; thou art forlorn and
forsaken, it were best to look after other helps a little, and then trust God;
so that, whither he offer Life, or threaten Death, he intends Death, and
forsaken of Christ: for Paul he knows, and Christ he knows.

2. He never prevails so much as in a thriving way, whereby the heart becomes
lifted up, he never overcomes to much by misery, let him fain as much as he
will: all this is but to weaken the flesh, and to bring down high Mountains,
and bring Job to lay his hand on his mouth, and repent in dust and ashes: So
that, nothing preserves man, but a simple repenting heart.

Sensible of weakness in the midst of greatest gifts.

1. The simplicity of the Gospel written in man's heart.

2. Simple believing and patience to suffer, and overcome: so with Christ, He
was the Wisdom of the Father; he patiently bare the Wrath of the Father for man.

To winnow you like Wheat, This was a coming, when the Shepherd was smitten,
all friends forsook him: the Earth shook, Darkness was over all; Peter
accused, the rest fled: Christ crucified like unto a murderer: laid in the
grave: all gone, so that nothing was left: but the Wisdom that Christ had given
them, and Faith in that Promise to believe, that he would come again: So that
Ranson saw little to trust to, So that,

There will come a Winnowing day upon all Flesh, good and bad, to destroy: and
take from men all confidence in the Flesh, in which the Faithful shall be
preserved by Faith, and Repentance and Patience.

The Lord will in righteous judgment winnow the wicked, and Satan that
falsifier? Where is Pharaohs Power, and Pompejy, and Dives, and Wealth of the
Worldlings: and righteousness of Paul? Is it not all found too light? God has
had his Fan in his hand, and no unrighteousness shall stand before him: For
they are like those chafe before the Wind: Woe to them that laugh for their
covenant of Death shall be disannulled or broken.

1. For God maks way hereby for his mercy, and purifieth faith, and drived man
to himself, though grievous yet wholesome.

2. All joy and life of Adam must be taken away, and nothing does that, but
Christ.

3. Then though Satan now insult and triumph like a King, yet he must be cast
into the bottomless Pit, and all that obey him.

4. There is away that seems good bu^ it must be tried and proves death: as
that of Peter to Christ; save thy self: but this is not good.

1. Know then, that this day will come. We laugh and Feast and Drink, as though
it would last always: but know as to a Scholar or idle Servant, that when he
has sported all these days, there will come a black-Munday and hard Work.

So that, though we sport our selves in quiet, cover our own guilt, delude
sorrow, and drive it from our hearts, put off the evil day, play the Wanton
with our knowledge, and Feast a while with Christ dainties; as he dealt with
the Disciples, who brought them on by immediate power and love: but in the end,
he must be taken away: So know, that these will fail; and nothing left, but
naked Christ, a poor despised man: Let the Worlding know, that there will come a
scattering night: where thou and thy guilty portion must part, and horror
possess thy mind: which all thy Wealth will not quiet: Yea, thy Father and
Mother, Childern, etc. will be found too light in that day; Yea, thy joy, in
thy Works and Knowledge. Then will he say, Bring out thy Righteousness, and
all thy qualities of holiness, thy joy and comfort: thy Manna laid up: nothing
then will serve, but praying to escape that hour, and yet shall not: but
believing that his grace is sufficient.

But we drink down sorrow like beasts, or we hide as under the World, or we
make an aggreement, and put it off: We call for Mountains and high devotions to
cover us, but all this would not free Job nor preserve Jeremiah, but down they
must.

So the time will come, that God will either by his Word and affliction try us,
as by fire; and then shall we curse the day of our Birth; or else try us at
Judgment, and say, What have I done unto thee? Wherein have I failed thee?
what have thou wanted? I warned thee of this night, and told thee of this time,
but thou would not believe, thy Blood be upon thine own head.

But I have prayed for thee. How shall man do in this day of Wrath? yet here is
a friend at back, Christ praying, as to the men in the Ship, and he gone into a
mountain to pray, So here he knew the sorrows of his people as a Man of
sorrows, and so prayed for them; So that, here we see the brotherly care of
Christ: So that,

That in great Dangers and Weakness of man, Christ does and is readiest to
help.

What care had he of his Disciples and how earnestly prayed he for them, Isa.
63. In all their afflictions he was: afflicted, he leaves the ninety and nine
in the Wilderness* and seeks* the lost sheep. Heb. 6. We have a faithful.
High Priest touched with our Infirmities. Like a loving brother, if his brother
be overlaid, he pitieth his weakness and helps him: if he be beat, he stands
by and cries: if he want, he gives him half: Or as the husband helps his Wife,
runs and rides to do her good. For though he was the Word of the Father, yet he
became a High Priest and fellow-feele, of our infirmities: he was given as a
Testimony and witness to the People, and the first begotten of many.

1. What then are those high mystical Speculations and Comprehensions of
Christ, making him so high: like speculative Angels? This is but an airy
Christ, but our Christ is low and among us, suffering, watching and praying
with us and for us. He comes not for these high thoughts, but for pure and
contrite spirits.

2. What a hearting is this in trouble to endure, when Christ, like a husband
is present in well and in woe? We think our case miserable: we bear the burden
of sin: lo, he was forsaken and sick: he swate water and blood, he bears our
weakness: but who feel it? he pities our tears, but who sheds them? he hears
our cries, but who makes them?

So that all high thoughted Religion is not of Christ, but of the Devil He came
to bring down high mountains and Imaginations: We see then, that praying
believers have a Friend at back: praying, when we are suffering. Friends may
sail, and Riches may vanish, and life taken away: but he endures yesterday to
day, and the same for ever. If then, we are weak and miserable, Christ is never
wanting.

That thy Faith fail not. And then let him do his worst, while thou sticks to
me, and goes with me through death and hell: So that,

The only way of safety in all straits: is a praying and believing heart: and
while these continue: nothing can prevail, Psalm 107. They cried in their
distress, and he heard them: we are kept by the power of God through Faith
unto Salvation 1 Pet. 6 8. When steadfast, resist in the Faith. Psalm. 9. They
that know thy Name, trust in th^e.

1. For them, their cause is wholly committed to God, and to his Mercy.

2. These are the weapons that overcomes by suffering

3. These overcome the World, and crucify the flesh, which only work our
bayne.

1. But our mouths are stopped, and hearts straightened. We live by conceits only:
we are full and pray not: Want makes man pray, and weakness, him believe: And
so Satan never overcomes: none but wise and strong men, these Christ rejects

2. But the time may come, when we shall cry, and not be heard: whatever stops
straitens and hinders prayer, is a snare: But O, Praying days are gone! But,
Lord, increase Faith in all our hearts.

When thou art converted, strengthen thy ^rethren. This is the monition that
Christ left, and thou must go through much fear and have experience of sorrows:
yet faith shall overcome, though Infidelity seem to overcome: yet shall faith
discover it, and then by renewing Repentance, Faith shall restore thee: So that
note:

That the faith and comfort of a man being overclouded, and covered; is renewed
by daily Repentance, as in David and Peter, and the Incestuous man.

1. For as Christ's Kingdom comes only to repenting hearts at the first: and as
Sin in the World by accident, brought Christ into the World: So sense of sin in
man's heart brings Christ thither.

2. Here is way made in man's heart for mercy and joy in Christ, and the heart
driven to seek him in earnest.

3. Though man build hay and stuble on this foundation, yet God will destroy
them by Fire and the Cross, and bring back Israel with joy that went out
weeping.

1. But herein it is, that our Faith is turned to a dead and fleshly security,
because repenting days are gone; we did repent, and felt the bitterness of
sin, but it is all removed, and joy and freedom is come, and thou become
secure: so that thus turns the eye from our selves, and Christ too: and so
repentance is hid from our hearts. Is sin less odious to God than before, or
does he more tolerate it in thee than others? Art thou not more guilty, having
felt his love, to turn from him: Is not thy Pride, and Self-Will and Love thy
security, and high thoughts as odious to him: and as great rebellion in thee,
as was the wanton sins in the days of thy Ignorance. Have not thou as much need
of his grace, and power to preserve thee, as ever thou had to receive them?
Shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but under grace: Nay, as hard
shall thou be sifted: but I will bring thee back by deep Repentance, and thy
Faith shall revive, though for the present it fail.

2. So that Faith is not preserved, but by deep and daily humility and
repentance: As Saint Paul, though he was partaker of great gifts, and more
experience of Gods love and power, than thousands, yet hereby was it preserved:
He still rejoiced in infirmities, when he was weak, then he was strong: Great
Knowledge, devote Holiness, and high Thoughts, chooke Faith: only humility
preserves it. The one lives by opinion, as light as wind; but the other by
Faith and mercy, he feels nothing but weakness and guilt.

3. Well-worth weak and repenting hearts, that weep with Peter, We deny him
often, but repent seldom: What ever knowledge, or other thing they have, yet if
this be kept lively, Faith shall not fail: though it be seemingly lost, and he
turned his back, and he sees no way to peace: Yet wait a while, and light will
spring out of darkness, and well-worth Cross that preserves Repentance in
man, when he sees his own beastly guilt how he has forsaken God, and run from
him: and sees how all fails: then he returns: So it is hard to preserve Faith
lively in prosperity. It is a great point of simplicity to enjoy all gifts,
and yet look at none: We see then, whereby man is preserved in all straits, viz
a praying and believing heart: all else vanish.

4. But praying days are gone. We have wept, but now rejoice: We were weak,
but now strong in our selves.

Strengthen thy Brethren: Pity not me, nor weep for me: but weep for thy self:
and pity thy Br^thren: So that.

As the life of Faith is in Christ only, see the practice of Faith is in love
to the Brethren, David, Psalm. 16. My goodness is nothing unto thee, but to the
Saints that are in the Earth. Thus all rules of practice after Faith, that are
stablished by Paul, are such like as help the weak, admonish the un-ruly, etc.
and Christ left this his last Law, Love one another, and Faith works by love:
This was Christ's practice all his days in doing good, and this is a free
disposition of a Redeemed Spirit, the flesh seeks its own, but love does not.

1. Thus is the Fathers Love spread abroad, and the Truth of the Gospel; and
the Church increased, and herein is the Communion of Saints.

1. But we all walk in the thearick knowledge of Faith and Christ, and nourish
our thoughts therein; but we foresake the practice of Faith: for self-Love, and
Pride has drowned all hearty Religion. Do we help the poor, and relieve them?
nay, we spoil them; do we bear with the Weak? nay, we judge them? do we cover
the sins of others? nay, we spread them: Do we love our Enemies? nay, We hate
them.

2. I wish we had less Knowledge, so we had more Faith and Love. Is it not a
shame to see how Drunkards are linkt together, and every Sect as one man; and
yet, we that profess to believe in Christ, lead every man to his own gain: So
we thrive, we care not who loss; who grieves and bears the burden of others.

I will go with thee, though all forsake thee. Pride of heart, and over-weaning
conceit of our own power, because of some singular gift above others is the
ready way to fall before all; so its in the Jews, Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar,
Lucifer: So that,

There is a presumptuous and proud carlesse confidence from the arm of flesh:
which goes under the name of Faith, and lifts man up in security a while; but
will fail in the end. Thus David, Psalm. 30. And his numbering the people.

SERMON XV.
Dan. 3.16.19. Then Shedrach, Meshach, and Abedneg^ answered and said to the
King, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.
IN the former Chapter, Daniel had interpreted the Kings Dream, concerning the
Image of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Clay, and the destruction of several
Monarchies, by the Stone hewed out of the Mountain without hands; that is to
say, The power of Christ, whose Kingdom should overcome all the rest, and be
everlasting, never to be destroyed: by which the King was convinced to
acknowledge the great Power and Wisdom of the God of Daniel: and sell into
admiration, but understood not the Mystery of Christ therein, nor the downfall
of his Kingdom, and therefore presently returns to his old Idolatry; So that,

The Word of God from God, and the great work of his power, does for the
present put man to silence, and convinces him: yet, where the heart remains
hardened, and that the mystery of Christ is hid from man, he soon returns to
his old vanity and Idolatry of his own heart.

Thus they are often convinced by the great Works of God, Psalm. 16. Yet forgot
how they were brought out of Egypt, and walked not in the Covenant, but
returned t^ their Lusts: And the Pharisees in Christ's time often put to
silence, but soon grew wise again to maintain there own Kingdom.

Yea, how many of his followers, who saw his great Works, and confessed never
man spoke like him, or did the like; spoke with such power and assurance, and
yet forsook him: see the stony ground, and those of Judea.

1. For ease and peace, and prosperity being offered, and a man loathe to live
without them, they choke the Word.

2. The Knowledge of the Gospel without the power of Christ and his death,
hardens above all; none such enemies to the simplicity thereof.

3. For if the Truth and Power of God be revealed, yet if God keep not the
Promise of Repentance by the Cross, and so bring man under the power of that
Word, he soon starts up and becomes Wise, and Righteous in himself: not in
Christ in the flesh, not in Faith.

4. Though for the present it dash man, and convince him that he confesses and
swears that it is the truth; yet when it both crosses his present ease and
liberty, and brings no life but death for the present: he grows weary,
unless the great power and love of God pursue his Soul by his Word and Cross.
Hence comes so much backsliding in the church, that men admire the great Power
of God, yet not living in Repentance under the Cross. Every thing starts up,
and so, they turn to the old way, or a new device of their own; but do not
believe the down-fal of their Kingdom for the present. For most men, when they
have talked and showed abroad their Wisdom, Righteousness, and increased their
Glory: they are the old men again: The World is welcome, and sweet, Sin as
light, themselves at ease and secure, as they had never known such a thing.

1. And yet they know their ease and security arises not out of simple
confidence of Faith, but hardness of heart: and clothed under a vail of
Religion.

2. So it is a fearful thing to grow hardened after truth revealed; that man
join hands with the World: and that sin become less sinful in conceit. This is
a mere security and not Faith: for if a man fly off, and that the Word cease
to judge man, arraigned at Gods judgment seat: For Christ has two judgments
in man's heart, viz Judgment and Mercy: so it is said, Man must give an
account of what he has done, Yea, of every ^dle Word: which is true in man's
heart: for they are judged, and man tormented, until he apply to mercy. For
if he be not before one of these two, he is secure; may, this we see too common
in all men.

1. For though they must be brought at one time or other, to be judged in
themselves, and confess that it is ^he way of Faith: Repentance and Love it is
the way of Life: yet how soon become hardened, and cast it off, cares not for
it, but gets a life elsewhere: that they cannot say that their joy and
pleasure, and life is in Christ, but in another: in his knowledge: and
righteousness, and none abides: but with this Nebuchadnezzar falls off. But
know, that this Word shall judge thee one day.

2. Hence we see, what a Fountain of Lust and Rebellion is in all men,
believers and others, how often has God expounded our Dreams, restored our
freedom, given Life in Death? and how soon are we returned either to the Worlds
shifts in straits, or forget the Lord, that brought us out of Egypt: and feed
our selves with pleasure.

Nebuchadnezzar made an Image of Gold, fifthy cubits high: He had forgotten the
God of Daniel soon, and now makes an Idol, for his own glory: and
preservation, even thus does all; So that,

When man's heart turns away from God and Christ, that he is not known, believed
and loved: every man set up the idol of his own Imagination in his heart: and
forsakes the God of Heaven: that is to say, a God, a Christ: and a
Righteousness, and Wisdom in Im^gination.

Thus every Nation had their Gods, all reasons are (...) God framed or
comprehended in the wit of man (...) Therefore, God gave this great Law, Thou
shall have no other Gods but me.

1. Thus Satan is called the God of this World, wh^ sets up his Law in man's
heart. For there is in every man the sins of all men in the root, so that as
the Heathen, that know not God indeed: yet had many Imaginary Gods: So all men
that know not God, or forsake Christ, make many Christ's: though not all of o^^
fashion, yet such as man's Imagination leads him to.

2. For man's heart must have something to uphol^ it, either real, or conceited;
therefore, in want of the God of life, he must have some God: and somethi^ to
trust to, or sometimes for which he must trust G^^ the better: in all which,
though it be nothing but the Idol of his Imagination, yet Christ must bear the
Name

He confesses the God of Daniel, but has an other Idol whom he worships. For
doubt not, but all the Heathen had a general confused conceit of God: unto whom
they then framed God a kind of relation in their conceit. For reason could tell
them, that a creature could not save them: neither could Nebuchadnezzar
believe, that any creature could yet save or deliver him when he counted
himself the most patient creature in the world: but had a conceit of God, unto
whom he owed Worship: Some acknowledge the true Christ, but he is not the
Savior by whom they live, but something else: So that,

Thus the World and the Church is full of Idolatry, every man setting up the
Idol of his own heart.

One sets up a Golden Image, as the King did here, and makes the World his
great God. This he serves and trusts and worships; yea, in all his laws and
threats, he fears the loss of his labor: For if this God smile, he laughs; if
he frown, he grieves; if he threaten, he fears; if he promise, he believes: and
this is the greatest God, most worshipped in the World. The rich adores it, the
poor prays unto it, all bow unto it: But the great Idol in the Church, is man's
knowledge and righteousness. This is that the false Apostles set up. This he
decketh with Devotion, Ze^l and Charity, but yet not much of that; he worships
God before this Idol, he acknowledges Christ, yet with circumcision joined,
this we make only God, we bow down as unto it: Nay, the Idols of man's
imaginations are endless. For the greatest contemplators, says Luther, Are
the greatest Idolaters, for they make an Idol of their own imaginations, or
their speculations: Christ and Paul was none of these, they lay in misery, they
believed God, they practiced love, and went about doing good.

1. For by how much any goes about to comprehend Christ and his Word, not
believing in him, from a broken and repenting heart, but from strength of
imagination he is the great Idolater; but know these ar^ cursed and the makers
of them, they have mouths, but speak not; eyes, but see not the way of life:
noses, but savor not the things of God; feet, but walk not in the ways and
love of Christ; and they shall not all help in time of need. Thy Knowledge
shall vanish, the Righteousness be judged faulty, thy gold perish, and thy
pleasures be turned into sorrow, and shall this God deliver thee? And all these
are framed by man, that he may have ease and freedom elsewhere in the flesh,
and have something to see and feel, that so he may live i^ peace; but the true
God is found in trouble, not at the sound of Music, but in woe and sighing:
then is God present with these men, as, Daniel, Shedrach, Mechac^ and Abednego,
were accused by the Officers.

This added to their Captivity, for that herein is doubl^ bondage, though they
were advanced as Rulers in Babylon, yet brings them into bondage: that they
might not fit in Babylon, but upon their God and his Word, So that,

When God intends good unto man, he keeps him under the Rod of misery without,
and weakness^ within: that Faith may be kept pure, and the flesh a^^ man may
have no stay but in him.

Thus with Job, David, Psalm. 107.39. He brings dow^ their heart with sorrow,
thus with Christ

1. For till man be thoroughly whipped, he flies to so^^ new shift, and God in
love chaseth him from all hold^ that he may not setle in carnality.

2. For Abraham had no Child, then Isaac was bo^^ and then hope of him seemed
to be taken away. Thi^ was ever Gods dealing with his Church, they had some
breathing time: yet he renewes his rod, when they gre^ wanton and turn from
him: Man would lay hold i^ any thing, rather than drown: but thus God plunge^
him into the deep, and then he prays.

1. Thus we all seek rest in the flesh, and find it: ar^ say, We shall not be
moved, the Pipe and the Tabr^ is in our Feasts, but sorrow and repentance is
hid from us: But if God intend thee good, he will keep thee from fleshly ease.
Thou thinks it an heavy bondage, to lose wife, husband, world and all: but when
guilt shall appear within, and God is departed, and death at hand; who shall
comfort thee?

2. But we are altogether for ease and peace: Our Church is fleshly. The Church
in Canticles, sought and enquired after him in the night, but no such need with
us: we feel not the grief and captivity of others. They are now full, anon,
taken away; Now in health, anon stricken dead. Children cries, wives lament;
husbands slain, none left to comfort them: but cruel enemies to make an end of
them: which shows the cursed strength of flesh, never well but under the rod.
This made some ^un into Monasteries.

We are not careful. That is, we seek no shifts, but trust ^n our own God; and
fear not the fire, nor afraid but God will deliver us: So that,

Faith only staying the heart, only Christ makes man ^old again from death and
misery: and purges the heart from fear.

This was promised by Christ, Be not afraid: so the Midewives of Egypt feared
not the King, seeing him that is Invisible. Thus the Martyrs not afraid to
answer their Adversaries.

1 For it overcomes the World, gives joy in tribula^ion, after patience,
experience; Isa. 58. A Smith lif^^ ^ot up a hammer, but by me.

2. Man fears only so far, as he trusts himself or the ^reature.

3. Faith keeps the heart safe, whatever becomes of ^e flesh.

1. Now there is a fear natural, from Constitution.

2. A fear wordly, because we trust and love it.

3. A fear spiritual, either of wrath or judgment, or ^f fear in regard of
himself and his own weakness and ^bellion^ but fear makes man-believe.

1. Why does man fear, but because he believes not? ^ence our shrinking hearts:
that when trouble approaches, he devises and invents how to answer and escape
and recover. For affliction indeed shakes all frothy faith, but purifieth the
rest as gold.

2. But woe to the hardened hearts, that fear nothing, because the World is
strong in our hearts, but like blind byard run into a pit.

3. See the safety of believers, who have a friend at back; that when flesh
pleads with Saul to David, thou art not able: and Jonathans man: they are many
judges nor after outward appearance, but believes and waits for deliverance:
Be not afraid, only believe.

4. And this is the Fountain of all, the careful life of an unbelieving man:
always caring to increase theirs: to be delivered, because they trust not in
him that's able.

Our God is able here, opposes their God to the cumber and wrath of the King:
we seek not thy favor nor life, nor ease: but our God whom we serve is our
only ^tay: So that, The believing heart, so f^r as he believes in Christ, and
Christ in him; in all extremities cries from a believing mind, None but Christ.

Thus Solomon when he had tried all vanities, Psalm. 73. I have none in heaven,
save only thee. Eliah against Baal, The Lord he is God: And the Prodigal,
Father, I have sinned against thee, therefore I am no more worthy to be called
thy Son. Phil. For we are the Circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

1. For there is he that gives life in death.

2. They are one by faith, as the husband and the wife.

3. This is the Law accomplished by the Gospel, against the world, who worship
one God, and trust in another; nay, all have any but thee. Faith is a simple
thing separate from all: Christ only lives in m^n, and answers Satan with this,
Our God is able to deliver us. If he see it best. He can: to which will we are
subject and believe his power: yet, if he see it not good, we believe his
power, He is able to uphold us in suffering; and we are pleased with his will
whatsoever: So that,

So that simple believing of Gods power, and free subjection to his will in all
things, is the only stay and hearts ^ase of man in trouble and misery.

As in Abraham, he believed that he was able to raise him up from the death,
though he know not that he would; in that he submitted to his will, Romans 11.
Concerning Israel, God is able to graft them in again, and David, When he was
driven by Absalom, God can bring me again to the City and Tabernacle, if not,
here I am: let him do what seems him good: So says the Leper, If thou will,
thou can make me clean; and God can save by few as by many.

For he that comes to God must first, believe that God is, that is to say,
there is Power, and Truth, and Wisdom in him; who, by his Power commands the
Heavens, and they were made: who causes light to shine in darkness, Thus he
argues in Isaiah and Jeremiah, Its I that measure the Sea in my hand. He that
made the Heavens and the Earth, that does lead through the Fire and Water, and
brings down to Hell and Death. And this he has promised, that he will not
leave man in distress, but all shall turn to good.

So that, to deny all creatures and strength of man, and believe his power: to
deny our selves, and be subject to his will is our only ease. For Christ so
knew his Father was able to save him from that hour, yet was subject to his
will, not my will, but th^ne be done. But Man has a Will of his own, which God
does not always answer according to his fleshly appearance, which man seeks to
accomplish by his own; or, because man sees not always a sign or way of
deliverance in himself, he fears and thinks all is lost; when God in Wisdom
hides all from him, and takes away all stays in the flesh, that he may
despair in himself, and trust in another, and deny his will, that he may be
made subject.

Thus, we all deny the Power of God, and think there can be no comfortable
living in the World without fullness of the World; nor that Wife and Children
cannot live when we are gone, unless we leave them full portions: but who fed
Elias, and the Widow of Sarepta? who fed the Ravens and clothed the Lillies?
Nay, we do not see, that all the care and power of man cannot make him prosper,
when Gods hand is against him: and do we not see how many he raises out of the
dust, and sets them with Princes: and yet this we trust more than him: If we
have friends and riches, we believe: if not, we fear, as though his power was
limited to this.

1. Nay, thus in the way of Religion, we deny his power and will needs help
God, as that he cannot save us without our help, Works, Wisdom, and
Rigteousnesse and these must be set up to look at, and we behold Christ through
these, and Circumcision: and so we stand not as Beggars to receive of his
fullness, but as Traders in Religion, to bring something unto him, as a
thousand Rams.

2. But what safety to the City, if God watch not, or what ease by rising
early, if God bless not: so that none believes the power of God, but he that
knows his own weakness, and of all creatures: For still God manifests his
Power Wisdom, and Mercy in the Weakness, Foolishness, and Unworthiness of
Man, and this believing Gods, Power, never more seen than in trouble; For while
we are full, we believe, because of our fullness: but when all fails, then we
deny him and limit him by, that we see, or feel; and hence, we deny him in
our hearts: I shall never get out of this Misery; I cannot tell what course to
take, I see no help, I have no friends: the enemies is full of Wrath and Power,
I cannot escape his hand.

Did he not put a Bridle in the Lips, and a Hook in the Nose of Senacherib,
slaying a thousand and fifteen hundred in one night: Has he not Promised to
give thee a Mouth and Wisdom, therefore though thou can not tell what to do,
commit all to him, and see what he can do: As we do in any trouble, when we are
weary with striving, we give our matters to another, to make what end he will,
and we are content: So do with him, as Job, laying his hand on his mouth, and
see what an End God made.

Obj. Yes, I know God is able, but yet I know not that he will.

Answ. In this nothing but subjection brings peace, for it is not our curious
searching that finds it, We all lost to know and see, rather than to be subject
to his Will in patience, We would all know the time when, and by what means, we
would have it now and by Fire from Heaven. He has promised and is able to
supply our wants, but we would know and feel it, and have it in abundance.
Thus, Man would be a chief Lord in the Church, and leave nothing for Christ to
do, he would have all things in his own hands, and yet for ought I know, when
man has most, he believes God the least, and when he has most confidence in
himself he has least in God.

But these argued not with God, nor tempted him, but cast all upon him, he is
able, and if he will, he can, and if not, his will be done. Thus man in
strength of his own will fights against God daily; we pray, Thy will be done,
but we never think of it: but rather that our wills might be accomplished, that
His will might be the fulfilling of our lusts, rather than suffering want to
believe Him. We profess that he will turn all to the good of His, we believe
not truth, for else how comes this murmuring in want; but we think nothing can
turn good, but that wherein we find present good: We would know and feel all,
but believe and suffer nothing.

And he will deliver us. They stick to the Promise, and are delivered: So that,

Faith and sticking to the Word of Promise, gives assurance and frees man, when
all else fails.

Be it known, However He do, yet we will not forsake Him; So that,

The believing heart willingly suffers all misery, rather than forsake God, or
trust any, but Christ.

As Paul, For I am not only ready to be bound, but to suffer all things.

Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury; When he saw his power contemned, his
will crossed, his glory thus opposed by these, and of another which he saw not,
nor believed: his rage was kindled, and he grew mad, and commanded the furnace
to be made seven times hotter than before; So that,

The way of Faith does most cross the power and wisdom of the world, of any
thing; and therefore does the World cast it off, and grows furious and mad
against it.

John preached Repentance, and they cast him into prison because he told them,
that their high mountains must be cast down: and that in that way they could
not be saved. Christ preached faith, to the convincing of the world, that they
should believe, and they look at nothing but Him: And they hated the light,
because their deeds were evil: Therefore, were they mad against Him. Paul
preached Salvation by Christ, and overthrew circumcision, and they stoned Him.
And so the elder brother, the prodigal; Luther preached free justification by
faith, without the righteousness of man, and the whole army of Antichrist was
up in arms against him. So these stick to God, and the King is furious.

1. For this leaves nothing for the heart to fix upon, but Christ, a thing
unknown to flesh and blood: If man would fasten on the world and rest there,
Christ shows it is a vain and a broken staff, and that a man's life stands not
in that, for moths corrupt it; and as the rich man builded his barnes, this
night will they fetch away thy soul: So that the worlding hates it in his heart.

2. If man will fasten on his righteousness, and knowledge, opinion, or any
quality, Christ's beats it down, and Paul makes it worse than nothing; and
leaves all under sin: And so the wise and righteous men are always the greatest
enemies to Christ: for they think much that all that which they have gotten
with such labor and cost should serve for nothing: For man would have a life
out of all things, but flees death in all things.

3. Nay if man think to store up joy and peace and ease by believing, and so
make his mountain strong, by his revelations, gifts, and great joys. Yet then
Christ also comes with darkness and sufferings, and seems to forsake these
men: and this makes the stonny ground to fall off: and these for a time
rejoiced in his light, but forsakes him after: So that, Christ may well say,
Who has believed our report? for of all other things this is least welcome to
man: Nay, all hearts rise against it, but he that is down already. The Worlding
is tied in his lust, and worldly confidence, and his ears stopped, and his
heart rises against it: for he would sit at ease and enjoy his portion: So
also the righteous and religious man, that excels others, and professes
Christ; yet lives by circumcision: He storms and argues and disputs against it,
and gets strong conceits and opinions to join the world, and ease, and Christ
together, and none embraces it, but the poor and miserable heart.

SERMON XVI.
Jeremiah 48.34 56 Thus says the Lord God of Israel to thee; O Baruch; thou
did say, Woe is me now, for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I faint
in my sighing, and I find no rest: Thus shall thou say unto him, The Lord says
thus, That which I have builded, I will break down, and that which I have
planted, I will pluck up: even this whole land.
THese are the words of the Lord to Baruch by Jeremiah, to comfort him in the
heaviness of his soul, because of the present persecution of the King and
people of Judea against the word of the Lord, and the Book which he had
written, from Jeremiah: As also, for the ensuing captivity which he saw: He
expected peace and ease, when he had read the book to them: but for that they
persecuted both Jeremiah and him: He looked they would have repented, but they
are more hardened, and he has less hopes than before: Upon which,

1. The Lord comforts him by the Prophet; wherein Baruchs sorrow and grief is
renewed and multiplied, and he left without any hope of ease or rest.

2. The Lord comforts him in his heaviness, he renews his threatenings against
Judea, that He will pull and pluck up that which He has planted: ^he shows
wherein is the cause of his sorrow, because he sought great things for himself.

3. A promise of safety, when evil shall fall upon all flesh; yet life shall be
given him for a prey. Woe is me now. What is the grief of Israel, had Baruch
the book, and cast the Word of the Lord away, and hardened himself in his clear
sight revealed, so that judgment must come? So that,

No sure sign of judgment, than of hardness of heart under the clear sight of
the Gospel of Christ, Luke 13. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee: How often would I have
gathered you together, as the hen gathers her brood under her wings; and ye
would not? Mat. 22. The unthankful guests were bidden, but hardened against it.
T^is is the ab^sing of his long-suffering through hardness of heart that
cannot repent, and yet judging others: as the unthankful servant, that eats
and drinks with drunkards. In such security was Israel fallen now, for which
Baruch mourned, that they cast off the words of Jeremiah, saying: It is false,
and God would not cast off his: And so follow the Idols and Imaginations of
thelt wicked hearts. This is the turning of Grace into Wantonness, like, those
in Judea, for which judgment was prepared: they fed their bellies, and filled
their purses by the Gospel, but not souls with Faith and Love. And it is a sign
of death when Physic works not, but that the disease grows strong against it:
so of the soul, when the Word of Life prevails not.

This is a casting off God, whose goodness we have felt; so that now we live
of our selves, to work our own peace, procure life, prevent danger: for that
is not now called to for counsel, nor is help called for as of old: and this is
the hardness wherein to we are all s^llen, as woeful experience shows: And
this is the condemnation, That light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light. John 3. and this appears, when sin and rebellion is
the same or the greater, and yet less burdensome, and evil than before. When
knowledge of the Gospel has shut up repentance from the heart, and pride has
drowned humility and love in himself, when God of his Judgments are not feared
nor selt but we put the evil day far off when iniquity is grown great and
impudent: and become as ordinary as our trades and callings are with us. Now
the time was, when the disciples of Christ, and Apostles flocked in abundance
and left all, as Alexander and Demas: but after a while they hardened and fell
to the World and ease thereof. The Galatians would have plucked out their eyes,
but after turned enemies in legal righteousness, but we to dead security,
even thus with us: Time was, when the Word was precious, and prevailed to rule
in us: but now we can abide it through wit and foreknowledge, and sleep
quietly.

1. But well worth tender hearts who eat and live by the Word, whether it speak
life or death: it prevails above all; and hence see the greatest provocation
that ever was raised against God, whereby his own people had tasted of his
love, and grown wanton in the flesh, and more fearful judgment fell upon them.

So now, the silly ignorant wretch, when he hears but of any judgment, he
trembles and blesses himself after his own poor sighing fashion: but the wise
and great devote ones they mock him, and say, Tush, this is nothing, we shall
escape it, and call his word a lie: so that we may justly fear the sequel of
these fearful signs, these more certain signs, than in Sun and Moon: For where
is the mourning, weeping, and repenting heart? Where is the lowly, believing
mind, that joys in tribulation? Where is the open, loving, single heart
without respect.

Well, nay, we cry, Woe is me now, for Israel has cast off the Lord, and we
fight against his Word: our long peace has made us secure. The Word and Works
of God are become a dallying to us, and we sing pe^^^, peace, and yet forsake
the way and despise the Kingdom of peace.

God has added grief to my sorrow. New grief to my old sorrow, one grief after
another, that I find no rest: though I faint in my sighing, see Gods dealing:
So that,

God usually tryes his to the bottom, and adds one affliction to another, to
all which he loves, and suffers them not to find any ease and rest in the flesh.

As with Job, Psalm. 78. He brought down their hearts with sorrows, Psalm. 77. He
wept all night. Thus Paul had fightings and terrors: thus Christ, and the
Martyrs even persecuted unto strange Cities: thus Abraham nothing left, Psalm.
4. One deep calls another; thus the ways of Christ, and our conformity to his
death; For until man be thoroughly whipped, and beat under, he runs to some new
shift.

1. And so God in love chaseth him from all holes, as Abraham, though he was
brought from his Country, yet he had no Children, then was Isaac given; then
he had hope in the flesh, but he took that away.

2. Thus was Gods dealing with the Church, though they had some breathings
given: yet, when the flesh b^gan to grow wanton and rejoice, and so they forget
and turn from the God of their Life, th^n he sent his Rod to waken them, that
they might not setle on their fleshly ease.

3 Thus will God work good out of evil, He lets Satan loose to whip and
torment his for the destruction o the flesh.

4. Man will lay hold upon any thing before he drown, yea, even a Lease, or
Reed, but God plungeth him into the deep, and then he cries, and is heard.

5. Light afflictions makes man more wise and wilily to escape in the flesh;
but sound and deep grief added to sorrow brings down the heart, and makes him
pray: Thus we see all seeks rest in the flesh, and we have gotten the World to
seed us, and Religion to ^^ver us, in prosperity and peace: and say, Soul take
thine ease, and ^^t as a Queen, and say, We shall not be moved.

We add joy to mirth, the Pipe and Tabret is in out Feasts, we drink and care,
and laugh in the midst of our finning, but Sorrow and Repentance is hid from
us: We have not resisted unto blood, nor affliction has taken us, but such as
with a little time of Wisdom could remove, or at least forget.

1. But know, if God intend thee good, he will add grief to thy sorrow: Thou
thinks it a heavy thing, to lose Father, Husband, or Wife; but it will be a
heavier thing to feel the burden of thy Spirit, when God has turned his Face
away, and taken all from thee: that thou fe^lest nothing but guilt within, and
death approaching, and yet God absent: Then will grief be added to sorrow: Who
then shall comfort thee?

2. Thus the Faith of our Church is all fleshly; fleshly joy, prosperity,
cast, the Spouse of Christ, Canticles 1. Is black: and her Locks w^tt with dew
in seeking her beloved in the night, and with weeping in the streets, but no
such inquiry with us. Others endure grief upon grief Now full, anon taken away
now in peace, anon Drumming, and Cannons roaring in the streets: now in Health
and Lusty, anon struck dead in an instant: Children crying, Wives bemoaning,
Maids ravished; Fathers and Husbands slain and none to comfort them; but unrully
Soldiers to spoil them: These are days and places of Prayer: No ease in the
flesh, but crying in the Spirit.

3. We see also the springing corruption of man, like the springing Willow, by
the water side; cut it now, and it shoots out the next spring.

4. So that believers needs abundance of purging through affliction: For still
we retain something, and gathers some hope from thence, and so flesh still
renews again.

This was it I think, which led some honest minds to betake themselves to such
austere living: thinking thereby to tame the flesh; and voluntarily denying
fleshly case, but yet it sprung up under a more spiritual form: but in a
greater mystery of wickedness: For, look how far a man afflicts himself he is
able to comfort himself: but if God add grief to thy sorrow, and lay it on
indeed, it will fetch tears, yea, blood.

5. The way of man never sorrows till it be kindly, such as all flesh cannot
ease: it was so with thee once, and why not now? It is but a light and fleshly
sorrow for want of ease, that is eased by any thing in man: but a wounded
spirit who can bear? but we take wounded flesh for spirit: For that is, when a
spirit is wounded with guilt and want, because it has followed and believed
the flesh, and then as here is no way seen for recoverie, but sighing and
fainting therein, till God beyond hope, come.

I will pull down that which I have builded. He will cast Israel away, whom He
once choose for his only people: I will send them into Babylon, whom He
appointed to dwell in Canaan, and to worship in Jerusalem, and all because
their hearts were lifted against him in their imaginations: So that now he will
pluck up all, that he may cast down their vain confidence, because they were
hardened in security, and lifted up in pride: So that.

God will certainly destroy and cast out the fairest gift given to man, when
man's heart is lifted up thereby, and hardened therein.

Thus he pulled down the confidence Israel had in the Ark: Thus he brings down
David's high mountain, and Paul's rebellions: this was John's office to destroy
high mountains: Paul had confidence in the flesh, but G^d laid it in the dust:
So that after he confessed, That in me dwells no good thing, but is given only by
Christ, in such humility and baseness, that man might not be lifted up, his
kingdom not be here: He arrogated nothing to Himself, but to his father, Not
mine, but him that sent me.

1. For Christ will pull down all other kingdoms, that he may erect his own, as
in Daniel: the kingdoms vanished one after another. This is the stone hevven
out of the rock without hands, and therefore Christ came to destroy the kingdom
that the law had builded in man, and to convince the world of sin, because of
righteousness which they had established: of judgment, because the Prince of
this World judged falsely of Him.

2. For man is clothed in his gifts, as the Angels: and became strong and wise
without God: He has built him a city, provided a portion, working
righteousness, full of knowledge, a God in his own eyes: but God will pull all
these down that he may be God.

3. The weapons of our warfare are mighty through Him to pull down strong
holds, not through our selves: And this he does by the power of the word, It
is a mighty voice, and thereby lays low all man's thoughts for the present, and
by the Cross kindly together.

4. All gifts that God gives to man are to show his power and love, for the
good of others: not to make them the Idols of our own hearts, and say, These
are thy Gods; O Israel.

1. Woe then to the Pride of man, who is lifted up by every gift: exalts
himself, judges others, despises the weak; but such boasting must down: yea,
whatever God gives them, he will take it again if you begin to store it up.

2. It is a great point of simplicity of heart, in the fullness of all gifts
the hearts be lovv, and lifted up by none: when he has seen all secure, he
sees none: and enjoys freedom, yet vvalks in fear: as the Child, though he
want nothing, yet he has nothing properly his own: God is and will be the
keeper of his own gifts, which we put into the hands of flesh: O! therefore,
lay your foundation on a Kingdom.

3. But know there will come a pulling down, as to Israel, when they sat by
the Rivers of Babylon: What foolishness, when it is us that builds and
plaints, and gathers and makes sure that which must be cast down and
scattered? when thy mouth shall be filled with gravel, thy portion scattered,
thy honor buried in dust: thy strong confidence perishes, thy Soul carried
into the land of darkness.

4. See the perverse heart of Man, and strength of fleshly heart, Who the more
God bestows on him, the less he cares for him: like an untoward, Child keep
him bare in Faith and dependence of his Fathers love, and he prays, and
believes, and is obedient: but fill his hand, and let him have his Lust, he
sets his Father and Mother at naught: Yea, thus the Flesh makes advantage of
the most excellent gifts: as b^re, even the joy, peace, and assurance God gives
man: for man retains nothing, but is lifted up by it.

And believes that it is God, but not man more humble and low to see his own
vileness, saying, What is man, that thou regardest him?

Do thou seek great things for thy self, seek them not. Thou mourns and
weeps, that this desolation must come It is because thou finds ease and peace,
and great matters: no, all shall be taken away: Seek them not, for this is the
cause why thou art so troubled, thy fleshly lusting, not thoroughly mortified
and prepared in faith and patience to wait: So that,

The main ground of all our misery and sorrow is, our lasting expectation of
great ease and peace in the flesh, not faithfully prepared to be subject to
Gods will, or content with his present portion.

David looks that Absalom should be spared above all and therefore was so
grieved at his death: yea, more than at the death of all the rest. Peter
expected to have his life: and continue there in peace: therefore so wishing,
that Christ should not go up to Jerusalem, when Hezekiah had overcome
Senacharib: he thought he should live in peace, which made the message of death
so heavy, Luke 12. He said, Soul, thou have goods laid up for many years: Take
thine case, eat, drink, and be merry: therefore death was that night so fearful.

1. Thus we see in experience, and say: I was finely set, I had paid my debt,
gotten a good portion; built an house, provided for wise and children in a good
way of thriving, and very like to have risen: and now all is gone. For look
how far the heart is lifted up in experience, so far it is cast down in the
want of any thing.

2. Lust leads out the mind beyond present state, and sets a seeking great
things, not content with present: and so both wanders in desires and uncertain
hopes: and when they have gotten them with much toil, they are left in (...)
moment, and he laid in the dust.

3. This deprives man of present good and what he has, because of the want and
expectation of what he would have. But subjection is necessary in all estates,
thus we are carried still in expectation of great matters, that we forget the
present one, of great riches, and certain inheritance for himself and his; and
it may be; he or they dies a beggar.

Another of great joy and comfort, and good will: keeps low his heart in
sorrow. All expects a mending of their condition, which till it come, they pine
and languish: The way of rest is to walk faithfully for the present, and
reserve the issue unto God.

SERMON XVII.
Isa 64.6.7. But we are all as an unclean thing: all our righteousness is as
filthy rags, and we all do fade as chafe or a leaf: and our Iniquities like
the wind have taken us away.
IN this Chapter is laid down the earnest desire of the Prophet, for taking
away their rebellion and healing their pride and security: that so the
judgment might be removed: wherein by a Metaphor; that nothing can reform
Israel but God: descending by his power, and bringing down their high mountain.
For he acknowledges that God is faithful and wonderful in his mercy to them
that wait for him, and seek him in his way: for whom he has done such great
things as were never heard of, and then confesses where the fault lies.

In the former verse he shows how ready God is to meet him that rejoices and
works righteousness in his way, and that yet now he is wroth, because
they have ^nned: but that in his way there is continuance of his mercy and
goodness: and that man vvalking constantly therein, shall be saved.

Then in the sixth verse, a map and a plain description of man's estate without
God: and that is laid down.

1. Generally in their natural disposition, as filthy rags

2. In their holiness or devotion, all-our righteousness are as filthy rags.

3. In their failing and fading in all goodness, like a leaf.

4. In their misery, their Iniquities like wind takes them away.

5. In their hardness, none calls upon thy Name, or stirs himself to take
hold of thee.

6. Gods absence from them, because of their Iniquities.

7. And last, they commit themselves to God in submission, as clay to the
Potter, and so after, cries for mercy and reconciliation, and of restoring
their captivity: In those is continuance and we shall be sav^d: In thy way
there is safety and continuance, of comfort, if we had hearts to continue
faithful therein. But we are: So that,

Mercy, Love and Truth are a continual act in God, and never fails to man: but
when man turns to himself and his own vvayes.

But if man could continue constant in faith, he should be preserved in all
dangers, His mercy endures for ever, and his truth from generation to
generation, etc. Mic. 6. Israel testify against me, wherein have I been
wanting or failed thee. How did he continue his love to Israel? though they
sinned, yet he continued a Father: though we sin, yet he abides saithful.
Christ continues ever a faithful High Priest, and never ^easeth to make
Intercession.

1. For with him there is no shadow of turning: he changes not as man: God is
not yea and nay: as a man in war with his enemies: who has a Captain wise and
puissant to overcome, if they bear their station and fight in confidence: But
if he out of his pride and infidelity run out into a way of his own, and trust
his own devices, shall fall. It was, because he stayed not with the Captain:
so it is with us, because we stay not with him, but run after some lust or
device, and think to prosper, which skill fails. For when Israel stuck to the
Covenant, and endured hunger and thirst: and drunk bitter waters, and waited on
him in his way, they prospered: But when they began to lust, and turned from
him, they fell through Infidelity.

2. For no length of time nor work of man, can alter him or his word; but man
running from him, deprives himself.

3. For it was Adams running from God, and the Prodigal from his Father: and
the Apostates, for denying and forsaking the faith: that was their undoing.

1. Hence we see, why our joy and peace continues not, viz. because we
continue not faithful in sticking to him; But,

1. Either bless our selves with hearing of Redemption, and yet live by the
world and the flesh.

2. Or tasting of the joy and freedom in the way of faith, thinks all is
perfected, and lives not by faith, but the World creeps in.

3. Or receiving joy and assurance from God, thinks to store it up in our
selves: which was Adams sin: For he that thinks to store up faith and love,
etc. in himself; and thereby to please God, or to receive from God, is
deceived. For there is faithfulness in God, and continuance in God, but not in
man: So that, here is our error, we think to store up these by wit and
diligence, and by faith; for there is no continuance or keeping of holiness in
man, but in Christ; for He is our Holiness, and Redemption. Charge not God
then, as those in Isaiah 58. as though he failed: for there is no failing in
him, but condemn thy self: And yet God charge not man as though he had been a
wanting to him, Isaiah 1. as though man can do any thing to Him: but because we
are not fit to receive, O that my people would have heard: Because he has not
an ear to hear, and a heart to receive what God would bestow on him: Being
fore-stalled with a conceit of his own gifts, the sin of the Angels.

3. Hence we see, how hard it is for man to continue in any good way: with God
is continuance, man fails often, for man is loathe to ly in the dust still, and
to suffer affliction, and mourn, but he will have some merry days: and if God
give it not, he flies to the world, and seeks it there: And yet we know that
man never finds life but in death, and Paul never rejoiced so much as in
infirmities: which argues, we are abundance of flesh, but little spirit; for
one hour that we live in the misery of our own spirits, we live then in
pleasure or hopes of the flesh.

But we are all as unclean things. He confesses what man is, without God, viz.

That man separated from God, and not guided by Him, is but vileness and
vanity: a lump of filthiness, and good for nothing, till he be restored by
mere mercy, and made subject to God, and live in Christ: Psalm. 6 What is man,
that thou art mindful of him? In us dwells no good thing, man is a thing of
naught: Romans 3. Their throat is an open sepulcher, etc. no steadfastness in the
Angels, and who can say, My heart is clean? So David, Psalm. 5. Daniel 9.
confess what man is.

1. For God is the life, soul, and being of all creatures, and none lives but
by Him: none but men and devils, but are subject to him, and obey his will:
only man has a will of his own which he would have to reign as God.

2. This is the common eye of the world: what malice and danchour, not the like
amongst brute creatures; even minds to devour one another, wrong, murder,
covetousness, pride, lusts, and all evil is committed amongst men, but all
flowing out of this pit.

3. Nay the experience of every heart, understanding it self, sees it, do
thou not find in thy self a heart stuffed with pride, vain glory, lust, and
filthy desires, that if the world did but know them thou wart ashamed for ever.

4. And that which makes him worst of all, this beggar will needs fit on
horseback, and boast and proclaim himself to be some body.

1. But if man's eye were turned homeward, we should have no boasting: where
thou may see in thy self the sins of all men in the world, Pharaohs hardness,
Cains murder, Saul's doubling, Judas treason, the fools worlding: for we do the
will and lust of the devil.

2. So that all thy good thoughts of thy self are from the devil, the father of
lies: nay, when ever thou medles with any thing that is good, if it be not God
that works in thee, thou m^rrs it. Thou talks of Religion from a proud heart,
and makes Religion to stink: thou prays out of a rotten heart, out of
self-love for ease, and it is abominable, etc.

3. O that man saw the filthiness of his own heart! What a hase thing he is?
It would both bring dow^ his high thoughts of himself, and make him charitable
to others.

1. Whence then is all this exalting of our selves above others, as thinking we
have some excellent gifts above others? is it not because we know not our
selves.

2. Whence is this seeking of glory one of another? but because we know not our
vileness, we are loathe to see any ill in our selves, and thence so many
excuses.

3. Whence is this judging and censuring of others? but because we think well
of our selves.

Object. But God has given excellent gifts to men, as Knowledge, Wit, Joy,
Comfort, Faith, and Love, etc.

Answ. This declares the goodness of God, not of man, this rests in God, not
in man: this makes not man better in himself, but shows that God is better to
him: for when man chokes himself with conceits of Gods gifts as his own, he
becomes proud. True it is, God restrain and orders man for good of others, but
if he take good to himself, he is deceived.

4. Where then are all these good qualities that man brags of? True it is, for
matters pollitical, God has given gifts and fitness to man; but for the
Kingdom of Christ there is no power, no fitness: all power is in Him, both in
heaven and earth: For as in a Kingdom there is no power, no will but in the
King, so in this: so that we greatly err in our conceits.

We think Faith is a virtue, and quality, and power in man; but it is indeed
the weakness of man trusting in another, when the weak, dead, and beggarly
heart of man flies to and lives in another; so that, there is no goodness in
man, but sight of vileness etc.

5. O! how much need we then to stand in need o^ mercy who are vile, filthy,
and rebellious?

6. And magnify we Gods mercy and love, that on us, so vile, and wretched,
has showed mercy, and still keeps and preserves us.

And all our righteousness is as filthy rags. 1. Here he shows, what man is
naturally, in the general nature of man: and here he shows what he is in his
better reformed qualities of Righteousness and Holiness: wherein he labors
to bring down the high conceits of the Jews: Who accounted themselves the only
Holy and Religious People: and that therefore, God would carry them into
Captivity: But he tells them, that even all their righteousness, that they
boast off, in respect of God, is nothing but filthiness and vanity: and so
the Righteousness and Holiness of the most perfect man, whereby he labors to
root out of man two things.

1. The conceits of all Righteousness in himself, and so pride and boasting,
that man may know himself. 2. All Righteousness before God: but

1. For first, he does not draw man from Righteousness, but from the opinion
of Righteousness.

2. He speaks not of Righteousness toward man, but toward God: So that,

Man's best Righteousness, and perfection of Holiness with God, and before
him; as also all man's conceits of Gods love and blessing in respect thereof, is
nothing but filthiness, and iniquity, not able to uphold ^is heart, or
preserve his peace in fyrie trials.

No 'stedfastnesse in Angels, Paul counted all loss and dross, Psalm. 16. My
goodness extends not unto thee, when we have done all that we can, we are
unprofitable servants Isa. 66. Their righteousness is like the cutting off a
dogs neck; where there was not a humble and contrite Spirit.

1. For the whole depraved nature of man is a like lust in all; and the
restoring of Righteousness is, as man is: and abides in Christ, not as he is
partaker of new qualities in himself, for Christ is the bringer in of
everlasting Righteousness, and the King of Righteousness.

1. For the whole depraved nature of man is a like lust in all: and the
restoring of Righteousness is, as man is: and abides in Christ, not as he is
partaker of new qualities in himself, for Christ is the bringer in of
everlasting Righteousness, and the King of Righteousness.

2. This doctrine stablisheth and preserves Faith in the Church and heart of
man: but man's righteousness destroys Faith, but Faith establishes the
Righteousness of God, and it is called the Righteousness of God, and infinite
Righteousness, which swallows up all sin in a moment, so that Righteousness
is preserved by Faith.

3. Faith by Righteousness, a Christian is not righteous formaliter, according
to his substance or quality: but cretum praediuntum ad aliquam: In respect of
the divine grace, and free remission of sin, Psalm 32. Blessed is he whose
unrighteousness is forgiven, and not who is made habitually righteous.

4. Man's righteousness is in another, viz. in Christ, who is made our
Righteousness through Grace: For take Him away, and there rests nothing but
Death: ^or the Law does not make man righteous, but sinners and lost men.

Now Righteousness is twofold, Politia divina, Morale divinum.
The first is that the Philosophers treat of, which is a Righteousness of just
and equal disposition of mind and carriage of our actions toward others, doing
right to all. That is called in Scripture the Righteousness of the Law, which
is the righteous work of it in man; but that is nothing before God, for it is
not wrought by God, nor for him, but man attributes it to himself, and thinks
God should be pleased therewith also. Now this is good and sweet amongst men,
but if man bring this before God, it is abominable.

But the righteousness of Faith is another thing, viz. the righteousness of
Christ made ours, standing in free remission of sins and the free grace of God:
Therefore it is, that Christ is our Righteousness, as a thing out of man's self
in another.

1. How far off from life are they then which well unrighteously in all things,
both toward God and man.

2. Also those that hold the Truth in unrighteousness, which acknowledge the
Truth of the Gospel; but submits not to the righteousness thereof, but run out
after their own unrighteousness, and will never regard Go^ nor his word of
promise.

3. And such as makes themselves righteous, an^ stablish a righteousness of
their own, and thence seek a ground of believing.

4. Others fall off from the Faith with the Galatians and when God, through His
love, has made the^ sometimes obedient in love.

1. Fix their eyes upon that, and imagine themselves something, and that now
they being made subject a^ obedient, do look for a blessing the^^upon: when,
ala^^ it is not one good thought of twenty.

2. But know, that all our Righteousness is in another, that man see no good
thing in himself, but Sin (...) Rebellion, and Death, etc. but all good in
Christ, Wh^ is made our Righteousness: For if man turn from Hi^ he fails, if
he abide in Him, he lives; Therefore a^ Paul says, I live not, but Christ
lives in me.

3. But most lives by conceit of Christ, not Christ living in them; so that our
power over sin, death, and hell, is not in our selves, but in Christ, who daily
crucifies the world; not any quality or disposition that we are brought to,
but living in the sense of our own unrighteousness, and flying from our
selves, and so becomes Righteous in Christ.

4. Hence we see, that Faith, and all good is preserved to man, in daily and
deep humility, when he daily lives in the life of Repentance, and is weak, and
unrighteous, and unthankful; but daily waits for mercy: But when man becomes
righteous in his own eyes, either because of that quality of Faith, or of
Love, or Righteousness, then he is lifted up, and it becomes his own
righteousness, and therefore filthy and nothing.

5. Walk in Righteousness, but take heed of looking at it; let it extend to
man, that thou may justify thy self before them, else all the world shall
condemn that, and the Gospel be slandered, but in respect of God, who is of
pure eyes: bring nothing but Christ and his mercy, and then shall we see the
Righteousness of God upon us.

And we all do fade as a leaf. All our Righteousness being but hypocritical;
and so we with it does fall to nothing; So that.

Where the Grace and Love of God by Faith, is not continued to man, there Faith
and all Religion fades, and where Religion fades, there all joy and peace and
happiness is lost, and comes to nothing: as Heb. 6 They tasted of the good
Word of God, but yet fell away in the end: and Hymeneus and Phletus, and those
in Jude: and Ephesus and Laodicea, Revel. 2.3.

1. For it is God only, that both by his grace both guides and preserves faith
in man, As the tree planted by the Rivers of water, Psalm. 1.

2. When this fades, man daparts from God, as Israel in the Wilderness, and so
never comes into the the land of rest.

3. All things have a passage through man, and he gets a taste of good in them,
but they fade in time: only Gods love and mercy endures for ever.

4. When man returns into himself or the World, he soon grows weary; as the
leaf, when the sap is descended into the root in the earth; so we, when the sap
of God is descended.

1. Hence it is, that so much fair shining Religion comes to naught in the end,
being but the work of man, it fades and dies in man; but that of God abides for
ever. Thus have we seen much Religion dye; What zeal and sorrow of heart? What
love and affection to the truth it self? and now all is drowned up with a
fleshly speculation of these things, but the life is gone.

1. Love is forcible, which if it rise but out of a strong stirring of natural
affection it is soon lost; but if from real misery and distrust of himself, it
abides with God, though clouded; but the foundation abides in God.

2. And even so will all our joy and peace and freedom fade: Where is that joy
and sweet rest we have had, that earnest hunger and desire after Christ? Nay,
it is gone, and we grown proud in knowledge: and for the simplicity of
believing, turned it into an opinion of knowing; edifying one enother in love
into fleshly honor, seeking it one of another, or censuring each other, or
love and liking of the Word of Truth, into a judging and despising of the same:
our love to each other into self-love, our love to Religion, into the love of
the World. So that, hence it is, that our joy is departed from us, because we
are departed from Christ: We joy in our fullness, power or knowledge, etc. yet
will all fade as a leaf, and we also shall in the and fade with it, we see it.
Where is the glory and pleasure and fullness of our neighbors? is it not
faded away, and turned into want and sorrow, and death it self? the youth and
suckling, strong and aged, mother and child are all fallen into the dust; and
it will be our portion, if righteousness and religion lie in the streets
despised as it is.

And our Iniquities like the wind has taken us away. When we thought under a
color of righteousness to go on in the ways of vanity, and enjoy the World:
yet at last, our Iniquities have prevailed and taken us away: So that,

It is sin and rebellion against God which is the only way and cause of the
destruction of man, and nothing but sin undoes man.

Your Iniquities have separated betwixt God and you. Thus he complains against
Israel in all the Prophets, because they sinned against me; and yet they sinned
more and more, they are a stiff necked generation: for nothing makes God our
enemy, but our running from him.

2. Loss and want never hurts man, but this perverts the mind.

3 Nay, this makes a man a slave to Satan, lusts and to worldly vanity which
he secures all his life, and then dies, and they forsake him. Now this
iniquity above all was their Infidelity and pride, denying God and Christ.

1. Thus are we all in misery and bondage and sees it not: nay, account this
our happiness, and rejoice ^herein: We feel want of the World, riches and
honor: but of the Word of Truth no want at all: but that wherein we most
delight, shall be our overthrow.

2. Thus has he dealt with our Land and Nation, it has swept away whole
Families and Towns, and yet we ^egard it not. For it is this that sets all
plagues on fire.

3. We cry out under plague and death: O, when will ^his ill weather cease? But
when will thou leave sin^ing against God?

SERMON XVIII.
^sa 65 2 3.4 I was sought of them that asked not after me, I was found of them
that sought me not: and I said, Behold me, Behold me, to a Nation that called
not upon my Name.
IN this Chapter is laid down the calling of the Gentiles, and the rejection of
the Jews; the freeness of Gods mercy to the one, and the righteousness of
his judgments to the other. Showing the constant dealing of God in his Church,
calling in by the Word of Truth such as have been aliens and enemies thereto,
and casting off such as have enjoyed it: yet walks stubbornly in pride after
their own ways.

The Jews were a people particularly chosen to God by a special Covenant, and
preserved by his power, according to his promise: But the Gentiles were Heathen
aliens and Idolaters, who walked every one after his own way; that had nothing
to do with the Covenant and special blessing: Not that they were restrained
from enjoying happiness, but that none should be blessed, but that cleaves to
the God of Israel and became a Jew. These were turned from their own ways to
Gods, others fell from God to their own; for they retained his Word and way
before them, yet did cleave to their own wits and wills, and thereby would
accomplish his righteousness. The Gentiles enquired not after, nor sought God,
till he sent his servants with the Word of Truth to them: finding them in their
Idolatry and vain ways: said,

Behold me, Behold me. For though some in all Age^ were called in, because the
Word light on them; yet this was the general and ordinary work: So that,

See by that way^ that seems most unlike to man^ Wisdom, and most opposite to
man's carnal Judgement^ does God work and stablish His Kingdom, and man^
happiness: that his Power and freeness of his Grace may appear.

For they were grafted in contrary to Nature, so tha^ all his Works are
contrary to Nature: for though he ^estroy not Nature from its being, yet he
destroys the Lif^ and Kingdom that seeks in the creature without him: S^ that,
so long as man runs after his natural Inclination as we all do; he wanders from
Gods way therein. For what an unlikely way is it to reason that by dying w^
shall live, and by losing life, we shall find it: and by suffering, get the
victory; Not that by dying in our selves, we shall live in our selves, but in
another.

How unlike, that Abraham an Idolater should become the Father of the faithful?
For he sought nor nor enquired after him, yet God called and he obeyed: And
Paul, the great enemy of Christ, yet was made the great Champion of Christ.

Christ's way of suffering, is a way few do willingly embrace: We profess
Christ and talks of Christ, but we s eek other ways to come by it, and keep
this only alive in conceit: like a h^llow hearted friend, who bears fair and
speaks well, but when it comes to it, will part with nothing. Thus Paul
confounded all those reasonable ways of the false Apostles, and of their
knowledge and righteousness, etc. and brings all to simplicity of Babes and
helpless hearts; for they kept all alive in conceit, but their hearts covered.

1. Thus God makes man a depending creature, to wait only on his Power and
Grace.

2. All the ways of God are wonderful to a believing heart, but whatever is
within compass of reason is not wonderful.

3. This he does, that he may hide pride from man: ^or so the Jews were grown
haughty when they had ^elt his way of Faith, and wrought their own safety: For
that way that man thinks to get life by devising, he shall not. Man grows wise
to believe by it, and righteous to believe from it, and humble that he may gain
^he promise. But here simplicity of heart is lost: This ^s not the way but by
being a fool, and sinner in himself: then he is found.

Now this is abused by hardness of men's hearts, who therefore cast off fear,
and says, God will find me if I ^eek him not; and be merciful though I seek
him not, and follow not so hard after him: and so musled in se^uritie, because
he says, He can do nothing: this is the ^lead of a senseless heart in
security: he says, He can do nothing, abusing his absolute power and freeness
of ^is merc^.

But I may say, Have they not heard? Yes, the sound is gone through the World,
so with thee: Has he not sought thee, and called thee daily, and yet thou
hardens thy heart against him? Thou have not sought him, but he thee: and yet
thou hidest thy self from him all thou can.

Thus does every believing heart that knows himself, find in experience the
wonderful power and mercy in Christ, when thou wast wallowing in thy gored
blood? yea, following the sway of thine own will: yea, feeding thy heart with
fleshly pleasures; then God knocks at thy heart, when thou little thinks of
him: nay, ever since, when thou felt nothing but guilt and death, and saw no
other reason, yet then he gave life.

Nay, when thou had in strength of wisdom, not from a troubled heart: thought
to establish thy thought of happiness: yet he beat thee down. Yea, when thou
thought thy self in the likeliest way to become happy, then proved it most
cursed: and when thou seems most wretched, it becomes ever best from him: And
all this God has done, that thou might for ever believe him, who has
chosen and called thee one: thou knows most vile, rebel, lustful, covetous,
unlikeliest of thousands.

This confounds all the reasonable ways of fair projects which man has framed
to himself, either out of the world, or out of Religion to establish his
thoughts of ease and happiness: for we see the offers of grace and his great
works, and then reasons a posteriore: and thinks to ascend thence to
happiness. But his grace is free out of our compass, and it is to be attended
on.

We would know a reason of God in all his works else we hold him not just. But
what reason is it tha^ ever the Gentiles should believe but his mercy?

And thus, all Religion almost is but the fruit of man wit and brain, and not
of a troubled heart, but for a^ end of man's self. Gods mercy is simple, and his
work simple also: but all Religion that has an end in man heart toward man,
is not of God simple.

So man is busy in seeking and working to make himself rich, searching and
knowing to become wise and glorious; Nay, man labors to mortify the flesh, to
get life thereby: but mortification to daily dying is life, but to get life
thereby is death: for where man kills the flesh, to quicken Life, he loses
both: for all mortification so much urged by Christ and Paul, is only that care
and diligence, according to that Wisdom given to us: that thereby the flesh and
daily lust may be kept under, that the heart harden not by fleshly ease, and
fullness, and so grow wanton; but not to give Life to the Soul, and so are all
ways of mortification.

It is good to restrain appetite, to keep out the World, to walk temperatlie,
and soberlie, and diligently in our calling: These are good and honest ways
to be chosen, to keep under the rebellious Flesh: But to do these with an
opinion of Life thereby, is most base and double dealing: for while we pretend
to be humble, (...) inwardly proud, while we seem to mourn, we laugh in our
selves; he that deals with Christ, must deal with a single mind, and shut all
out at doors but Christ, and thou and Christ argue the case: What thou can
plead for thy self, and thou shall see all reason dumb, and nothing in thee,
but a poor prisoner praying daily for pardon; and in nothing the freeness of
his grace more appear, then in calling the Gentiles. This is it which Christ
says, They shall come from the east and west, etc. And the Children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out: So they are not happy whom man accounts, but whom
God accounts so: What he did to those that knew nothing: but gropping after
goodness, even sought it in man, and so thought that the Souls of those
excellent men ascended, some into the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and became Gods;
persecuted Christ evermore, even to those blind men he sent his speciallest
messenger, that even was to open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to
light; So that,

Whom God intends to make happy, he sooner or latter calls and brings his
heart by the Word of truth out of the World and himself; and all to rest simply
on him and believe, as Matthew 22. Psalm. 45. Hearken, O daughter Sion: thou must
leave thy Fathers house, and Abraham, Genesis 12. etc.

For man is gone out into the World and himself, else should we never have
stood in need of this Word, but it should have lived in us for ever: but being
gone from God, he sends out his message, saying, Go carry my will and promise
to lost man, and bid him behold me. For this is the execution of his purpose,
this calling is outward and inward. Outward in the outward dispensation of the
Gospel, he lays before man his Will and Promise: and so man understanding and
fixing thereon sees a kind of good in it, and approves of it.

Inward, when through the inward power of the Truth, he finds out man's heart,
and brings it to it self: separating it from the World and its own devices, in
sorrow and misery: and to attend on his Promise, though man see nothing but
death and misery: S^ (...) this calling is not as most think, a mending of this
or that Action; but a destruction of all, and calling man from it, not to make
him wise to fulfill his own will, but to lose it.

The Word is Evocare, viz. Call out, as out of Egypt, have I called thee.

Woe then to them that are daily sought and called, and have not an ear to
hear: Like these Guests, Matthew. 22. Their minds are shut up, they see not their
own wants, nor the beauty of the Brid-groom set before them: God calls man to
partake of his love: but man says, I have another, and so the righteous Wrath
o^ God lights on him. For though some expound that (...) Matthew. 12. Calling
those that were bidden: That this bidding is the universal grace given to all,
and that callin^ is a further grace added to the free will: Yet, I take tha^
adding^ to be the Covenant made with the Jews, t^ whom he offers the light of
the Gospel; as, Acts the 18 This calling abides still in the use of the Gospel,
as: First To d^lly Repentance.

2. To believing.

3. To do his Will, in obedience of Love.

4. To suffer in Patience.

To a Rebellious People. Though they pretended Holiness, and the service of
God: yet they were grown Rebellious against his Will and Word: So that,

There is in all men a Rebellious Will and Lust: yea, even in believers, which
it ever leads man from God into misery, and bondage, as in Adam, and David.

And Paul complains of it, Romans 7. Gal. 5. This fights against the Spirit,
though the will and desire of man be natural qualities, yet when they are set
upon vain objects, and come to rule and draw, they ever bring into bondage.

For, hereby is God more denied than by any: for though they know him to be
true, they trust him not: and as for a stranger to deny and distrust a man is
nothing, but for a Child it is Rebellion, and Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, it denies God, and makes a Covenant with the Devil, and works
through envy ever to destruction.

Thus, unblief ever Rebels against God: yea, raises up arms against him: When
he would be a King, no say they, This man shall not rule over us; but would
reign as King themselves.

But believers most of all, who dwell in the Kings House, and profess
alledgeance and service, and yet underneath, practice and labor that they may
be King, and wear the Crown: and so are still drawn from God by Lust and
fleshly Wisdom: And this may he say to our Land, he has stretched out his
hand long over us, but we still Rebel: witness,

1. That common trade of iniquity, as common as breathing.

2. That hardness of heart under the Vail of the Gospel

3. That heartlesse dealing betwixt Religion and the World.

4. That casting off the Word we profess, and believe not that to be true
which we know, etc.

This makes man an enemy to God, and this is it which makes thee cast the Son
out of doors; we walk in a way that is not good, after our own thoughts.

So the Lord may say: They have forsaken my Covenant. They follow their own,
which leads into an ill way of Life. So that,

When man forsakes the simple Word of God, and cleaves to the devices and
inventions of his own thoughts, and follows them: he forsakes the way of Life,
and chooses the way of Death which never prosper.

It was the Curse that lay on the Gentiles, That he suffered every one to walk
in his own way, as Psalm. 18. They would not hear, nor would have none of me, I
gave them up to their own Counsels: Thus Adam and Israel forsook the way of
the Covenant and Promise made to Abraham, and made a Calf, and murmured against
Moses, etc. The wicked walk in a way that is not good, There is a way that
seems good, but the Issues thereof are the Issues of Death. For though man was
made righteous, yet he seeks many inventions, to save him: but not by the way
of righteousness: He has sold the Birthright, and Covenant, he has forsaken
with Esau: and now he would have the blessing by any means: He mourns and weeps
for the blessing, and would have it though by killing his broth^r, and living
in an hunting way.

For man's way in himself is not able to guide him to happiness, for lust
blinds him, and leads him to something that is sensual: reason is proud, and
leads into all things visible, but Faith is the ground of things neither seen
nor felt.

But Christ's way which was the way of Life, was not after his own thoughts, but
as the Father commands, so he speaks. He sought not his own glory, but did the
Will of the Father, stablishing his Kingdom, and so his way was a new and
living way, though the Vail of the flesh was rent: And so it is with man, not
by a way of the Flesh; but to break through the Flesh, and by crucifying it,
enter into the Holiest of all by Faith only.

1. This was the way prescribed to Israel, God brought them out by a strong
hand, and weak means: as always in the whole course, that no power of the
Flesh might appear, as David confesses, they got not the land by their own
power.

2. Then in the Wilderness, from one place to another, where they took no
rest, but in the Covenant only.

3. Then through Jordan, the River of Tears.

4. Then overcame the enemy.

5. God left them a Law of love to walk by.

6. Commands not to join with the enemies, but to destroy them.

But all these Israel forsook, and at the last grew so presumptuous in regard
of their prosperity: and so wise in Religion, that they would not be beholden
to God, but would save and free themselves by ways of their own, till at last
they fell from God: and still they thought this was a holy and likely way: Thus
the old course of the World is fallen upon the Gentiles, every man walks in
his own way, and yet every man thinks his way is good, and like to prosper: as,

1. The Worlding, by getting, and gathering and making sure for future time:
seems a safe way: but Christ's way was to forsake all the World, and had none of
these.

2. The Wanton thinks his way right, because of his saint way of Repentance,
and yet he fears, Ecclesiastes, That it will lead to a fearful end of judgment.

3. The Pharisees and false Apostles walk in a seeming way of holiness with
Christ: but this makes Christ and all in vain, to join any thing with him: For
Christ was to deny himself, and cleave to the Promise of Faith, yea, though he
was to be taken from them, yet they should wait for the Promise of the Father:
who should send the Promise of the Father within few days.

Nay, we are grown so cunning in Religion that we can choose our Christ's own
Way, and approve it, but walk not therein by the Spirit of Christ: but so
follow Christ in our fleshly thoughts, but not by Faith alone, giving up our
selves in love to the good of others.

So, we see Gods ways is not our ways, yea, and our though^s and his words
never agree together: one of these must be forsaken: either we must cleave to
his Word, and forsake our own ways, or follow our own ways, and forsake his
Word.

But we live by thinking not by believing: Invent, devise and comprehend, that
we may guide our selves: but not rest in patience to believe another: Like the
Prodigal: but see the good and safe way of Christ's; that stands in simple
believing from a troubled heart, and in subjection to the Fathers will in love,
in patience to bear his Cross. But this is grievous to fleshly thoughts but
sweet and safe to the Soul.

A people that provoked me to anger continually. That are hardened under the
Love of Religion, and so presumptuous, that they rebel with a stout and stiff
neck. So that,

When man has gotten the World into his heart, and some competent way of
Religion to cover his rottenness, he ^^lls into herdnesse, security and
presumption, and so sights against God with open face. Isa. 1. I have nourished
a People, and they rebelled against me, and in Jeremiah, They murder and
steal, and all under a collar of the Temple of the Lord: They have gotten a
brow of brass, like those; Psalm. 10. Pro. 1. Tush, there is no knowledge in
the most high, For the knowledge of the truth without the power thereof,
hardens above all, But the Truth in the power thereof; beats man down, and all
things in man: to live in another, or not to live at all: not that the World
and Religion can grow up together for then it choaks the Word, and we bec^me
Rebellious as Adam.

For now they sin with an authority, under the soreknowing of a Savior: Like
a man in the Kings house, that robs and oppresses under the hope of Pardon.

For wh^tsoever makes man strong hearted, is not Christ, for he melts the heart
in sorrow and in love: For this is the greatest disgrace that can be; if a man
must bring Christ to help forward his Lust, As to steal and oppress, and
Christ must help us. Thus with us.

God has holden out his hand, but we dare provoke him to his face, and call
his Word a lie, and run to other shifts; as though we seem to flatter a while,
yet Religion is but made a way to bring about our own Lusts, as,

1. Do get the World more freely: or advance our glory, or keep peace: but
all these covers a Rebellious heart: For if it were seen as thy Face, thou were
a shamed for ever. This is the greatest Rebellion in the Church, covered under
Religion, and God most provoked thereby: For here man tempts God, and lays all
blame on him, blindly waiting for his Power: yet has no heart nor desire to
return, storing himself with Riches and Righteousness, that he may not repent.

But do we provoke him to anger, or rather our selves to our own confusion? for
we see how he dealt with Israel, led them captive, and then cast them off:
Doubtless he was never more provoked, they sacrifice in Gardens, and burn
Incense on Altars of Brick, which should have been on Altars of Stone, without
a hammer.

Thus he shows how they choose their own ways, that is to say, They sacrifice
in Gardens when the Law was at Jerusalem: burnt Incense on Brick, which should
have been on Altars of Stone without a hammer; as Christ the Stone hewn out of
the Rock without hands: they lay among the groves there to enquire of the dead
for the want of things, and not waiting on God, and the Words of the Prophets,
They eat abominable broth, and swines Flesh, both which were forbidden by the
Law

So that in all, they forsake Christ signified by all those and choose their own
ways: and this is man's way in the Church: We offer not at Jerusalem, sitting
at the door of the Tabernacle, weeping and confessing. Where is the Mercy
Seat, and Ark of the Covenant: but in Gardens of Pleasure, in serving God at
our leisure, and not on the Cornerstone, Christ Jesus, but on the Altar of our
good qualities, which we have hewn to our selves? We wait not on God, and his
Will and Word, that we may know it: but in the dead groves of our devotions,
and run back to these rotten effects of care and diligence.

If the World show good signs, we believe: if we see signs and Wonders, we
trust; we feed on Swines Flesh, Flesh and broth thereof: That is, we feed on
the Flesh and filthy World, which begets nothing, but phlegmatic and cold
opinions instead of pure nourishment to Faith and Love.

Stand by, for I am holier than thou: So with all these abominations, there
went still a poisoned opinion of holiness and high thoughts, which made all
stink in his nostrils. So that when with Religion there goes a high thought in
man, and exalting of himself above others because of his Religion: it poisons
all and stinks before God, and will bring man to a fearful fall at the last.

Thus it was with the Pharisee, I am not as other man; as this Publicane, Col.
2. Touch not, taste not, handle not. It was their practice when they had been
at the Market, they washed: and the false Apostles thought themselves more
acceptable to Christ, because they were circumcised: And those Gadders in the
Church that went about talking, and thought because of their Religion, they
should be respected and relieved, which Paul writes against, that they should
not be suffered. Thus is Religion turned into man's own glory and not to Christ's
glory.

This flows from pride and self-love, which had its beginning in man, and
ending in man, as all things do. This makes men Judges in Religion, and not
Christ a Savior: and so with all Religion, there grows up a cursed opinion and
seeking of respect, which poisons all. But well worth that Religion where man
is not listed up by it, and has nothing, but all laid up and enjoyed in
Christ, not in self.

SERMON XIX.
Isai. 63.1. Who is this that comes from Edom with dyed garments from E^zra?
This that is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his
strength? I that speak in righteousness, and mighty t^ save.
IN the tenth verse of the former Chapter is a large promise of Man's Redemption
by Christ, under the Type of Isreal's deliverance out of captivity: as, Prepare
the way of the Lord, cast up the highway, gather up the stones, lift up the
Standard: The Lord has proclaimed to the end of the World, to Sion: Behold thy
salvation comes, his reward is with him, and his work before him: That is to
say, Make ready the hearts of men by repentance, and then salvation is at
hand, and thou shall be a holy people prepared of the Lord: Prepare the way,
that is, let not Israel settle in Babylon, but come out: Remember Jerusalem,
that you have lost the signs of my presence, the Ark of my Covenant, the
Mercy-seat, and all the tokens of my Love: and that you are now strangers to
me: so bring down their hearts, and make a way for my mercy, that I may do them
good: that they long for my salvation, and they shall find it ready at hand.
Let them not trust in their strength, nor rely on the favor of Babylon, the
world, the Flesh; for they will still keep them bound: but return to me, and I
will deliver them: so that;

No mercy to man nor salvation from God, nor redemption by Christ, nor holiness
by the spirit; but where God makes way in man's heart by daily repentance, and
daily turning man's heart from the world, himself: and all things in true sense
of his bondage, and longing of the soul after Christ.

Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Psalm. 107. He brought down their
hearts with sorrow, and then had mercy on them.

For all Isreal's wanderings, he plagues them, till he made them yield and cry
and pray: and then helps them in distress. It was John's office to make way for
Christ; For what should Christ do with an hardened heart, filled with conceit
of Wisdom, righteousness and the world or riches: For all afflictions that God
lays on man, either in the world, or in himself by the word; is but to bring
down the heart, to let him see how the World has deceived him, sin has
beguiled him, and his conceits brought him into a false surmise; and so lets
him see, what a little power he has in himself: that so forsaking and turning
to another, he may find mercy

For though God give gifts to man, yet they are kept only in the hand of
Faith: else man turns to them, and forgets God and himself: and so becomes
proud and conceited, and becomes a Savior to himself.

But the salvation of God is never given but to repenting hearts, that are
ashamed of themselves, and their own cursed and rebellious hearts, and in
sighing and sorrowing, pray and seek for mercy.

But we all would have salvation another way than by repentance, as one by
knowing, another by dying, another by gathering strength; but none by denying
themselves. Indeed we daily pray, Lord, forgive us our sins: but sin is not our
burden, we would all have mercy to our hardened hearts. Nay, how far are we
from the salvation of God, whose hearts never felt the bitterness of
repentance, or are again hardened through knowledge.

We all dream of being saved, but alace! there is no way in thy heart: Thou
knows how little thou minds God or Christ at all; how little thy heart is
troubled about life or death: but carried away with present loss. Where is the
place that can witness thy sorrow and heaviness of heart, thy sighing and
folding of thy hands? how little is it in thy thoughts? What have thou done,
and daily do against God or thy self? How little art thou troubled about thy
eternal being? no Repentance being wrought in thee, all Religion is but a
matter of discourse and circumstance.

But woe to us; for repenting days are gone: and so salvation hid: the time
was, when we were sinners, and went mourning and weeping, and all our days
were repenting days.

And then were we ashamed to look into our own cursed hearts and vain vvayes,
and all night our very dreams were on misery; and then light rose in our
darkness: but now we are wise and righteous, and see not the pride and lust,
and worldliness of our own hearts, even drowned in pride of our own hearts,
and have a conceit of salvation in our selves. Is sin less sinful than it was?
Stand we not as much need of salvation as before? nay, our hearts are not
prepared for mercy, but claim it as a due, and therefore is salvation far
from us.

But know, that before salvation or freedom come from Christ to our hearts:
these high looks must down, and we carried into Babylon. God never casts his
mercy upon hardened hearts, but the poor and mourners shall be comforted: So
that faith and holiness is daily preserved by repentance and deep humility,
when God opens the high way of our hearts, he gathers out the stones: and all
his mercies, though they bring comfort, yet still more humbleness, that he
should daily be so good and we so vile and rebellious; still so is mercy and
salvation contained

Who is this that comes from Edom. That is, from the land of captivity, from
Bozra the chief City of the Edomites, representing the great power of Satan,
Flesh and the World wherein man is bound, and now comes the Prince and Captain
of our Salvation out of our captivity and death, and is consecrated through
suffering, even in death overcoming all things: and his garments red with the
blood of the Sacrifice.

Laying it down by way of admiration in the question and answer, containing
wondering and Christ's answer.

For the whole Chapter is a Prophetical Declaration of Redemption by Christ,
and the state of man to be redeemed: as,

1. The Person or Redeemer, even Christ discovered by his power and strength;
traveling in the greatness of his strength, and the rest: etc.

2. By his truth and righteousness, I that speak in righteousness.

3. The way and means how he has done it, viz. First, By death under a
Metophor, of Trading the Wine Press

4. What he has done, viz. Trodden them in his Wrath.

Who is this that comes. This shows the expectation of the captive Church,
waiting for a deliverer according to the promise, after seventy weeks: so man
after his long bondage under hell and Flesh, and seeing Christ a weak poor man,
and that all in blood crucified, dead and buried: seems an unlikely man to
reason, but in his answer, he puts away all doubts: and that he is the only man
and Redeemer: So that,

The weary waiting and forlorn heart of man, though he see little possibility
to obtain life by Christ in sense and reason, but many more likely devices; ye
shall never find freedom but only in him.

For he was ordained of old to break the Serpents head, and prophesied to bind
up the broken hearted: Yet, what a do had he with his Disciples for to
persuade them that He was He? but still they cried. Is not this Joseph's Son, is
this likely to be He: He only was Jobs refuge in all his afflictions, when he
saw nothing but death, yet his Redeemer lives. This he witnesses by word and
work. By word, I am come to save the World, I am the Resurrection and the Life.
By works, How many poor, lame and blind did He help, which He was after to do
spiritually: the afflicted he comforted as, Mary and the Prodigal: The
Pharisees cried out, Who is this that forgiveth sins, that destroys the Law?
Nay, others said, Except ye be circumcised, Christ cannot profit.

1. For he came to destroy the flesh, and redeem the spirit: therefore was he
weak in the flesh, and strong in spirit, that he might cross the curious wit
and pride of man: who looked for great things.

2. All things prosper according to his presence with man, and not he according
to the power of the creature; all other things are but miserable comforters,
only puts off for a time, but it comes again with all violence: like a sore
that is ill healed.

Yet, who has believed this report, Nay, in any straits we look for other
helps. The World says, Come see what riches and certainty: I will relieve thy
wants, be diligent, ply thy mind to me, and I will ease thee; and says, Man:
This is that comes with full hand and good gain: This is like to preserve so
much Inheritance, so much coming in: and is yet never a whit eased, but a slave
still. The flesh says, Come to me; I come not in sadness and sorrow, but in
mirth and pastime, and pleasure: I will put away sorrow from thy heart, and
season all sadness with mirth: and yet for all this, in the midst thereof the
heart is sorrowful. Reason says, Come to me, and I will show thee a likely
way; do good, work righteousness, see thy great knowledge, and good
qualities: then believe that Christ may profit: but simple believing stands not
in this, but in another thing: and when thou feels nothing in thy self, Reason
would judge this but a blind way.

Nay, says Christ, But come hither, look on me, believe my Word: I am poor and
needy in flesh, and so must thou be: I will deliever thy Spirit, and free thy
mind: these deceive thee, but I speak in righteousness though I seem base, yet
all power is given to me, and I am mighty to save. So that, he that looks for
salvation by Christ had need of Faith, more than Wit: When the poor captive
Soul sees nothing, but death and bondage, no power to free himself; and sees
nothing but poor Christ, all wallowing in blood, shut up in the grave, sits
mourning at the Sepulcher: and yet look for salvation in him: had need to pray
daily, Lord, increase our Faith, and help our unbelief.

And to this end would Christ confirm his Disciples in expectation of the
Promise and Life by his Death, and to wait for the Holy Ghost by the Sacraments
and pledges of his love and truth which he left them, saying, I know ye doubt
and fear, and hereafter ye shall see me forsaken, judged, and crucified, and
buried: and then will your hearts tremble: but that I have spoken in
Righteousness: take this as a pledge of my love and truth, when ye come
together, eat and drink this, and believe my Promise, and rejoice in me, and in
my death: for though I must trade the Wine press alone, yet I will trade it in
my Fury.

I that speak in righteousness.

The word of Christ is the word of righteousness to believing hearts, and shall
be assuredly fulfilled to troubled Spirits.

Mighty to save. So that,

All power of saving man is in Christ: no power in man to procure or p^eserve
his own safety.

I have trodden the Wine Press. So that,

Jesus Christ has under-gone the wrath of the Father for man, that he might
redeem man from wrath, and by his suffering has wrought Redemption for man.

I have trodden the Wine Press alone. So that,

None partakes with Christ in the work of man's redemption, but he is the
beginner and finisher of man's happiness.

Mine own arm brought salvation. So that,

When all power in man fails, and misery strikes: then is the power of Gods
spirit still at hand.

I will trade down the people in my wrath. I will afflict as I have done my
son, and bring down their strength, whereby they now stand without me: they
shall taste of my wrath and see how good it is: So that,

All shall sooner or latter taste of the Indignation of the Lord, that God may
prepare man for mercy, and bring man out of himself and the world.

Jobs spirit was drunk up with wrath ^aul was slain and stricken down to the
earth (...) ^ade light of God, was brought under (...) that wrath did David
suffer, even pains of he l; that made him cry out, and so was his joy restored:
yea to Abraham, he seemed an enemy: yet in his subjection was the Covenant
renewed, and Christ above all was sorrowful unto death and his soul a
Sacrifice, and then he arose and ascended.

For God will destroy all his enemies in man, that man may be freed, and those
that stick to them shall be destroyed with them: that we may be conformed to
our head, and so fitted for mercy in him, who came to sustain man under
wrath: For how is he saved from wrath that is never under it? This were to
save him in his fleshly way and hardness of heart: That just Law which man
daily breaks, Thou shall dye the death, must be true in all, and kill man, that
the second Covenant may live in man, and he thereby.

God does this to bring down man's heart and make him yield, for man can shuffle
off many things, but this bitter hour past all help. But we all strive to go
to Heaven with hardened hearts in beds of down and worldly fulness and
ease: we make an agreement, and think we are harmless and innocent: and
another, that he is a friend of God and his Word and Gospel: and another, that
he is diligent, careful and righteous; and therefore thinks that he shall
escape, and so would live and die without Repentance, Wrath and Misery; and
yet Christ could not do that, and so none would drink of Christ's Cup

But know, thought we can jest and talk it out, and clothe our selves with
conceits, and opinions: yet God will trample all these under foot: When his
Wrath shall be revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of men, that
hold the truth in unrighteousness: either by his Word and Spirit in man's
heart, that he shall say: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death.

When he shall knock at the door, or call for mountains to fall upon him: then
shall he see what good he has gotten with sticking so hard to the World, and
to himself, but all too late.

But yet to a believing and yielding heart, that judges himself and not God,
in midst of Wrath, he remembers mercy: and even in this, he aims at man's good,
though he see it not: For it is to whip and to beat man's proud heart, and
fleshly confidence, and to cast out that proud and worldly Devil, and destroy
the enemies that are in man's heart.

Thus the wanton heart of man fights for ease in the Land of captivity, and
would see no evil, but flee from wrath, through hardness of heart that cannot
repent: and so heaps up Wrath against the day of Wrath.

We would do evil, but would not feel it, nor hear of it: we would rebel
against God, and follow our own Lusts, that we may live, and yet would have him
to put up all: Nay, but the wise Father knows that this is the way to undo the
wanton child, and therefore casts him off, leaves him to himself, that he may
return by Repentance, saying, Thou know that I have been a Father to thee, I
have provided for thee, when thou wast young, I mantained thee: When thou wast
of age, thou would not be ruled: I was forced to cast thee off. This now
justly come upon thee, yet seeing thou judge thy self, and justifies me, I
will take away my Wrath, and receive thee to mercy, that thou may praise
me. But, first, he makes them drink of his fury: but our cursed hearts cry for
ease and rest, but God will keep on the Rod till the heart be broken, and
brought down, and make us like a drunken man, that is besotted with wine, that
minds neither Wife nor Children, estate nor credit: So with us, when his Wrath
lies on us, we can neither mind Wife, World, nor Children. For this sticks
closse, and nothing can ease? Riches are vain. Pleasures are gone, laughing is
turned into mourning, and nothing can ease the heart but mercy: but how will
these escape, when time of mercy is gone

I will bring down their strength; So that,

Gods saving way to man, is to bring down the strength of man in himself, that
he may be exalted in another.

I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord.

There is an endless Fountain of Truth and Righteousness in God, and
incomprehensible mercy, which is never wanting to praying and miserable hearts.

But man's forsaking and turning from that, is the cause of all misery unto
man, as Psalm. 81. Deuteronomy. 23. For he said, Surely ye are my people, etc. Here, he
mentions his dealing with them in particular, that is to say, He ever had an
eye over them for good, at least to testify his mercy, and,

1. He remembers their Adoption, with the truth and simplicity of their
hearts; and though now fallen, yet they were his people, and would not lose
their preservation.

2. He was their Savior, and delivered them out of afflictions, wherein he was
also afflicted.

3. There guide and governor, He led them all the days of old by the Angel of
his presence, and then shows their Rebellion, and his mercy again in pardoning.

They are my people. This he spoke in regard of his first choosing of them, and
uprightness of their hearts then, and safety they were in through his Power:
So that,

True hearted simple minded men, were and ever shall be blessed of God, what
ever gifts they have, when double and shuffling hearts shall be accursed.

See David's plain and simple heart, when Nathan had opened his eyes, he did not
shut them again; but though a King, and a fact discovered that might shame him,
yet he goes not about to excuse it, but confesses plainly, and does penance
to all posterity; yea, God is near to all that call upon him in truth, and the
good ground are good honest and simple hearts; but the Pharisees that say they
have no sin, do lie, and deal not truly: and a man is a liar to the Holy
Ghost, to think to join with the Disciples in love, and yet keep the World in
his heart to trust to; and in Christ was found no guile; and God loves truth in
the inward parts.

For this is the opening and uncovering of the heart to be capable of mercy,
and so hence comes confessing and believing with all the heart: For covering is
a greater hardness added to our former sin: It was sin in Adam to forsake God,
but it was greater to cover it: and in Saul to spare Agag, but greater to
excuse it, and lie to the Holy Ghost.

This is a fighting against Christ, and strengthening our selves in something
else, that we might not stand in need of him: Like the malefactor, that has
done evil, and yet will excuse it, and justify himself, he will be hanged
indeed.

For God is a God of truth, and works truth in the inward parts, and the power
of truth is to discover the subtilitie of man and the Devil, and to convince
the World, and to lay the heart naked and bare before God.

Away then with all doubling lies, let God be true, and the Devil and every
man a liar: From the beginning we all profess to love God, and believe in
him, but we lie. But, Whence, then is this care and confidence in the World,
this fear, and sorrow for loss: this pleading of our own Righteousness, to
keep up conceit? We profess to love God above all, but we lie: Whence then is
this self-love, and of the World? and we forsake him for a Morsel of Bread;
that we love our Brethren.

Whence then is this malice and revenge, this oppressing and grinding, this
cusinning, and circumventing, and that we love the truth, and yet believe it
not at all, but sell it for our own wills, and that God would change his will,
and rather than we want, our Lusts.

We are all knowing and devote men, but honest simplicity is lost among main,
plain dealing is gone: So in Religion, truth and simplicity is gone: simple
praying and believing from a troubled Spirit, is gone, simple love one to
another, is gone: and every one judging another; and locked up in secret
surmising: not bearing with infirmities, but blazing abroad the frailties of
others.

But God will find out all our falsehood one day, when all our excuses shall be
as shiftlesse as to Adam: When he shall open the Books, and that are hid, laid
open: Then shall thy Hypocrisy and double dealing be laid open, whither thou
have trusted God, or thy self; loved Him, or the World: Then shall it be seen,
whether thou believed indeed and in truth: For true evidence shall come against
thee a malefactor which thou can not deny.

It is not our simple sinning that hinders our happiness, for God will pardon?
but it is our lying and covering it that hides us from Christ: As the Child
that has not only made a fault, but hides and covers it, is beaten double.
This his Father cannot abide.

God gives us true and simple hearts, we seek great gifts and qualities, and
become wise; but lose innocence, and run from our selves.

In all their afflictions he was afflicted. And the Angel of his presence saved
them. Here is Christ suffering, who bare the infirmities of man in all
weakness; So that,

Christ the loving Savior of man, partakes with man in all his misery; and
lovingly helps when all fails, Heb. 2. Forasmuch as the Children were partakers
of flesh and blood, etc. Heb. 5. He is a faithful high Priest subject to like
infirmities; And was partaker with all that was miserable: but the Wealth and
Glory of the World he had none of: Like a loving elder-brother that sees his
younger overburthned, helps him: beaten, weeps, and hungry gives him meat.

For he was the Word of the Father, and was God, yet he took upon him the form
of a servant, and became flesh, and dwelt among us, that we might see him
affl^cted, suffering, forsaken; and yet he overcame all.

For he came to help the afflicted, therefore he came in the flesh, that he
might destroy flesh; and by enabling man to suffer, destroying fleshly lust in
man.

Thus was he given as a witness to the people, and the first-begotten of many:
What then means these high thoughts, and soaring conceits that seek Christ in
heaven, and think Him to be some angry spirit: and so rack their thoughts and
beat their brains in comprehending Him, but lo, He is with the poor, afflicted
and forsaken this high and full Religion he cares not for, nor has any
communion therewith.

What a hearting then is this to patience, that like a loving husband, is with
the wife in well and woe: thou thinks thy case singular, none like thee: thou
poor, He poorer; thou wants the fathers love, so did he; thou art persecuted,
so he; unto death; thou sick, so ^e swa^e blood for sickness: But we have
little fellowship with Him, for we are full and rich, and at ease; He bears our
weakness, but who feels it: He wipes away tears, but who sheds them; He hears
our cries, but who makes them: Nay, we are all Christ's to our selves; therefore
He is a stranger to us.

All high flying Religion then is not of Christ, for he has no communion with
man, but in affliction, therefore Paul desired only to be partaker in his
afflictions, for he has not to do with rich men at ease, and he that says, He
has fellowship with him and not in his death lies and deals not truly.

It is not affliction that hurts or hinders man, but want of Faith; for he is
afflicted with us, but because we do not believe his power and truth, nor are
we patient to want rest, therefore are we crushed under afflictions: we have
not learned to lose the world and our selves with him; the fire cannot fear
them.

And where man is partaker with Christ in afflictions he makes him also
partaker with others, to mourn with them that mourn.

But we are little disposed to the practice of Faith, while we judge others in
stead of pardoning, we spread abroad their Infirmities, we spoil the poor: but
believing miserable men have a friend at back that is with them: giving a mouth
and wisdom, when friends and world fail: yet then He abides and fails not, but
when they have least hope, they have readiest help and when they are weak, then
are they the strongest.

And the Angel of his presence. When they were brought low in affliction, and
sat in sorrow, and helpless repenting hearts, then his love breaks out; So
that, i^ Christ is only present to afflicted spirits, and His love and
compassion only, is the stay of repenting hearts, and nothing else.

As here he alludes in the presence of the God of Israel, in their Redemption
out of Egypt, when they knew not what to do; the Angel brought them out, went
before them, and though they fell into many straits, yet the Lord pitied and
helped them: yea though they rebelled daily, yet He afflicted and pardoned
them: And His love and mercy is never seen so much, as in daily pardoning: for
it is a burden that all the World cannot remove.

For he was given to bear the infirmities of men, Mat. 11 If any be burdened
he shall find rest to his soul: As in the Prodigal and the Publican, like a wise
tender father, whose child has want only run away, yet the father seeks him
and finds him; First, le^s him sit forlorn in the wilderness, and seems to
take no notice: then when he sits crying ou^ of himself, O wretch that I am,
that has thus abused my good father, cast away my self and know not what to do
but die and perish. Then he appears, and ^owns on him a while, but after, his
heart be brust with sorrow, the father can no longer refrain, but smiles and
comforts him, as Joseph to his brethren.

For He came to seek and save that which was l^st, He came to redeem the
captive spirit of man, that was locked up in fleshly bands and his own guilt:
Not to ease the captive flesh of man, for many great afflictions ly on many,
whom He never ease^h, because man cannot have his own Will and Lust and World
and Ease and Glory: but these he pities not.

But when the spirit mourns after God, and cannot be comforted by all the
world, but sits in ashes, and cries in the night; the Sun then breaks out, and
joy comes in the morning. But nothing is a burden to the spirit of man, but
sin and guilt, and weak^esse: for other afflictions are burdens to the flesh,
and they are helped: But in the afflicted spirit, there is such a depth of
misery, that nothing can help but His Love and Spirit that He has promised:
As nothing can ease the heart of a rebellious child, but reconciliation with
the Father, all that man can do to help, can but strengthen ^^^^^m, His Love
only stays the heart by Faith: all things d^ but only put off, and that by
st^^^gthening conceit: bu^ it returns again with greater violence, like ^ wound
ill healed.

But this shows that we have little of Christ's com^any, save only His name
among us: we talk of Him, and dispute and follow Him up and down to the Temple
and seem to sat by His side, but w^^h proud hardened hearts. Nay, I judge
whether thou art as well with Him as without Him, for any good thou have by
Him, save only a heartless and helpless hope: if thou may have the World, thou
seeks no more: If thou have no more joy, than thou have with him, it will prove
but small.

Nay, we are not for His presence, like an adulterous Wife that cares not for
her Husbands presence: but if ever that heart be turned by Repentance, and
possessed of its own guilt, then none but He. Others thinks to procure His
presence by trimming and garnishing a fair outside profession of Christ, and
think, if they were more holy and righteous, then He would surely come: but we
thus make a Christ to our selves.

But woe to that Righteousness that hides Repentance, and hardens the heart:
Woe be to that Presumption that is lifted up above Mercy: Woe be to that
Conceit of believing that joins hands with the World, and shuts man up in
self-love: and woe to that Hardness of heart^, that despises long suffering,
and heaps up Wrath against the day of Wrath.

And hence we see, that where Repentance is hid from man, Gods love and pity
are far from him; whatever we have, it matters not, how Wise, Righteous, and
Holy, Rich or Youthful we are, if any Hardness of heart goes with all: But we
are full and sit as Queens and want nothing. Yet the day is coming, when we
shall seek Him and shall not find Him: when all shall fail us, and we afraid to
hear of His presence; when He shall sit as Judge, to judge the World, then
shall we cry.

O where is he now that we despised and set so ligh^ by? And then weep with
Esau, and say, Father, have the not one blessing left? Bless me, even me also:
Then shall he answer, nay, These are blessed, and shall be blesse^ thou have had
the fullness of the earth for thy portion: b^ my love and mercy thou regarded
not.

In his pity and love he redeemed and bare them. He^ is the continuance of his
love, notwithstanding their daily falling off: yet he guided and bare them as
(...) nurse in his arms all the ancient days, as he choos^ them in love and
pity, and remains faithful to Abr^ham and his seed: So that,

As Gods love and pity without any thing in man, is the first fountain of life
to man and only cause of his happiness; so is the same Love, Goodness and
Power, the daily preservation and guide of man in the way of happiness through
Faith.

As Paul, by the grace of God, I am that I am, not I, but the grace of God in
me: therefore does the Lord so often remember Israel of his deliverance out of
Egypt, the promise to Abraham that they might look at that Law, and depend on
that Promise.

How came Israel out of all these straits, but that God still pityed and
forgave them, as David, how he prayed to be guided and preserved and relieved
daily from God And this the Apostle strove for, that nothing might stand in the
heart of man after grace received, but the same grace still: and further beats
down all things else but this.

For is not man as weak in himself, and Satan and the Flesh as strong as ever?
Is not man as sinful, and His grace and help as needful as ever?

For Paul of himself could not live, but Christ lived in him, and he waited
therein, He has delivered, and will deliver me.

Christ did not work properly for himself, for man to guide himself by his own
power: for this is not in man but in Christ, who is his Safety, Peace,
Righteousness and Holiness, and all: for Israel was not able to stand before
any enemy when they forsook the Covenant, for what shall uphold man under the
cross, but his love and pity when all fails,

As the Martyrs, was it their wit, or power, or strength of heart that
preserved them? No, but the Power and Truth of Christ through Faith: For as the
child has nothing of his own, but lives at the fathers appointment and
providence: so we.

See then, it is not as wise unbelieving men imagine, that after the mystery
of the Gospel be revealed, and apprehended in flesh, turns back with Israel and
become wise and righteous and strong in themselves; so it is with many that
were sinners: but God received them to mercy, and now they work it out,
beginning in the spirit, but ending in the flesh, and then think to recompense
God.

Is God more beholden to thee than before, or rather is not thy sinful lust,
and pride, and worldly heart, and hypocrisy as hateful to God now: when thou
have the knowledge of his will as thou think.

But these are commonly the greatest backsliders; For though they stick unto
Religion, yet they fall from Christ in Religion and conceit, and clothe
themselves with his gifts: The World is in their hearts, Repentance gone,
Prayer dead, Faith only in name.

So that, to those he shall have just complaint; one is rich in the World, and
cares not for his blessing, but he will turn it to a curse: another, is wise to
guide himself, but will prove a fool and wander: another, is Righteous and rich
in Knowledge, but a thief to God, and his mercy most shut from him: Whence,
God shall judge and say, Thou of all others should have trusted me, thou
professed my Name, sat by my side: but thou art the great thief of all, for thou
have robbed me of my glory, thou ran from me in pride: therefore, thou of all
others art the farthest off mercy.

See the wonderful love of God toward man, that pities man, that pities not
himself: When the sturdie Child has run away, yet having wrought his peace, he
calls him back by his Word and pardons him: when the weak heart of man feels
Danger and Wrath, and feels no ease to comfort him: when he is persecuted, and
knows not what to answer, God puts a Word in his mouth.

What a fool then is man, that has such a pitiful Father attending for his
good in all, and yet runs to the World and flesh, those cruel Tyrants, and
seeks help there.

So daily mercy in God, and misery in man, and Faith in Gods Word, is man's
preservation.

Pray we then, that the Truth of the Gospel, and Faith may be preached in the
Church, that man may have nothing to lean to but mercy; but how hard is this
new way to continue, but we would still have something to feel and lean to, but
not his mercy.

But they rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit. Such is the cursed nature and
rebellious flesh of man: So that,

Such is the rebellion of the fleshly nature of man, that the more goodness
and love God shows to man, he is the more rebellious and wanton against God,
and forgetful of himself to the losing of all.

Israel, Jer. 2 David casts off God, when his mountain was strong and Jude:
They turn the grace of God unto wantonness: And I nourished a people, and they
have forsaken me: they abused the Patience of God.

This is plain in experience, though God has given us all enough in the World,
that we see, or may see his blessing; who might have frustrated thy labor? yet
how l^the to depend on this blessing, but would have all sure in the flesh by
extremity. He has verified, and yet we have not trusted His Word, but would
have all in possession.

For the flesh grows wanton by ease and fullness and it is the hard^st thing of
all to enjoy fullness, and yet the flesh not to be hardened thereby.

T^ keep Humility, Repentance, and Weakness a foot, when we feel rest and
peace: but then man thinks it will never be night again: Like a wanton child,
when he has gotten what he would have, casts off the father, as the Prodigal,
till he had spent all: How may we see it in children, when parents have
cockered them, so that now they are the greatest vexation, and they wish they
were dead or had never been born.

For man dots on every thing, that he quite forgets the fountain, and makes it
a foundation of future hopes

Hence comes so much looking at what we have seen and felt, and reckoning up
old store, and thence arguing our present happiness.

We are grown hardened and secure, and it may be, shall never taste the like
again.

But what a cursed thing is the heart of man, that God can do him no good, but
he turns it to evil? as in all: thou never prays nor seeks heartily to God, but
when need pincheth thee: then thou cries: but if he ease thee, thou casts Him
off: As Israel, both in the wilderness and Canaan, to Dan and Beth-^l, and
made agreement with the Canaanites, and after led captive, to killing of the
Prophets: and afterward to persecute Christ himself, till they had lost all,
and all under a color of Religion.

And so in the Worlding, God has given all it into his hand, and he has let
into his heart, and made a god of it, and that World and worldly mind as God,
he trusts it and loves it above him, saying, This is it that must ease my
heart, so he grinds the poor, and oppresses the needy.

Others having tasted the goodness of God in Christ, have cast off fear, and
thinks all is their own: under pretense of Religion they are grown wanton and
worl^ly outright.

Others, he has pardoned a thousand times, and they are grown wanton, hardened
and presumptuous to cast themselves down: thinking, but not believing that he
will pardon, what ever they have done.

Others, have health and strength; and do nothing, but serve their own Lusts:
So that there is great danger in prosperity: there Satan traps man, than man
grows secure, forgetful, and wanton: Watch, for there is danger of the Devil;
shutting the heart in that fulness, and so stops the current of his grace,

No thriving in Religion but under the Cross, for man is never ought but then:
What a rebellions creature is man, and untoward child; that because God is
good, therefore he will be naught: The Father cannot smile, but the child grows
way-ward, but when God seems evil, man is the best: but do we provoke him to
anger, or our selves to our own destruction; for he will say, I did thee good,
and sent the Wealth and Health, and Riches, and would never have failed thee. I
sent my Spirit which thou grieved, therefore, thou must want the comfort
thereof at need.

SERMON XX.
Genesis 22.1. After these things God tempted Abraham, and said, Abraham,
Abraham, and he said, here am I.
WE have heard of Christ's birth according to the Promise, and the wonderful
treasure of all good, that was to be conveyed to the Church by him: the Church
conceived joy, because they expected a Messiah was to come, and great hope
offered by him; but no sooner was he come, but he was hunted with miseries, and
never had rest in the flesh, till death was conspired and accomplished, that so
man's faith might not be in the arm of flesh, but in the power and mercy of
God. This we may plainly see in this story figured, than which not a more
lively typ in the Scriptures; for Isaac being born, according to the Promise it
could not be but Abraham rejoiced, and might have great hope even in Reason,
that the Promise might go on: but that God might purge this, he takes Isaac
away in the flesh, that the purity of Abraham's Faith might appear to all the
World.

In this Chapter is laid down the Story of Abraham and Isaac his Son.

1. The offering of Isaac at Gods Commandment.

2. The Confirmation of the Promise, and renewing of the Covenant.

3. The posterity of Nahor, and family of Rebecca: in offering of Isaac, note;

1. The Purpose and Commandment of God, as a trial to Abraham.

2. The expectation of the Commandment, and Abraham's obedience in the Command.

1. The Time after these things.

2. The Author, God said to Abraham.

3 The scope, that is to (...) Abraham. In Abraham we note

1. The expectation of the Commandment.

2. His obedience against nature in both overcoming: as, 1. His great power of
Faith against Reason

2, Flesh which assaulted in diverse circumstances.

After these things, that is, after the many trials that Abraham had, now comes
the greatest of all: for he had been sore tossed by nine trials, as the Hebrews
note, and this is the tenth.

1. Forsaking his Country and all.

2. Fleeing into E y^e for Famine.

3. Loss of his Wife and danger of his Life.

4. War with four Kings for redeeming Lot.

5. Desparing of Issue, be married his maid.

6. Is glad to put her away and Child too, to please Sarah.

7. Is circumcised being old.

8. Loses his Wife to Abimelech.

9. Cast out Ishmael and his Mother.

Thus Abraham, after he believed the promise, and was assured of Gods
protection, was still exercised under the cross, that he might thereby have
daily experience of Gods truth and love, and that no fleshly reason might arise
in him: and now behold, a greater than all these: for these are but as the
prick of a pri^ in regard of this, but now G^d comes even with a dart to strike
him to the heart; So that Abraham had now more need of Faith than ever: yea,

After all these things. So that,

After man be brought to Faith, and believing the Promise: yet such are the
sufferings to be endured hereafter: yet no constant safety and peace, but by
the daily exercise and life of Faith, whereby he is to be preserved in all
future dangers and temptations that in the flesh will light upon him.

The just shall live by Faith: What wonderful assaults had David, what fightings
had Paul? Satan seeks to devour who persist in Faith.

1. For the rest of the sufferings of Christ are to be accomplished in the
flesh.

2. Many are baptized into the truth, that have not drunk of Christ Cup, nor
baptiz^d into his death: but slipping the hand of Faith, lean to the flesh, and
overturned.

3. For there is a fleshly heart to be purged, and a World to be overcome,
whereunto the power of God and Faith of man are as requisite as all these:
Isaac must be slain.

And can the fleshly will of man overcome these.

4. Thus God daily weakens the out-ward man, and renews the inward, that he may
draw man to simplicity of Faith and Love, and to have his abiding in God:
therefore will give him no rest elsewhere.

1. Thus is man deceived, when having had some light and love of God to shine
in his dark Soul, thinks all is done, and Heaven obtained, and so grows
presumptuous instead of believing.

2. Either proud, because he imagines to have power over himself in all, which
is only in God, or securely presumes on Gods power without either fear of
Weakness, or Life of Truth upholding him, and so is daily led into temptation.

1. Thou shall sometimes see the World smiling, and offering a fair bait and
portion, and thy flesh gaping after it, and thousands ensnared thereby.

2. Sometimes good conceits, and by thoughts from that thou know, or from
thy well qualified mind, which thou thinks adds much to thy Faith, but after
these Isaac must die.

3. Or sometimes want, fear and trouble, looks grim at thee, and threatens the
downfall of all, and if Faith do not uphold thee, how will thou stand: nay, thou
shall see secret lusts and desires, and delights in thy heart ease, and peace,
etc. Which must all down, so that if God keep not Faith alive in man, weary
and uncertain is his way.

But let all lock for it, after many temptations still greater behind: one deep
calls another, for man by the abuse of the liberty of Faith grows secure and
proud, and that must down by the cross: we think when it is fair, it will
never be soul, and when we are rich, we shall never be poor.

Nay, but know that a quarter cross must come to pull that down: for that
great enemy, that is, Death, is not yet vanquished, skin for skin, and all for
life; so that the safe path of man is, to settle in nothing, but dwell with
God, for Abraham might think now all is safe, seeing Isaac is born, and well
grown; but no safety in that, for after a calm comes a storm, as we see it in
the course of all things: so in man's heart day and then night, light and then
darkness.

God does not take delight in afflicting his people, but rather than they shall
return to the world, and delight and be deceived by the Flesh, that his truth
should seem a lie, he will beat and strike the flesh, to the death, with one
cross after another, till it be subdued.

4. Thus we know, God has com'd near us with many afflictions, and like
Israel, when it is past, to fall to our courses again; but he will come nearer
at last, till he bind us to himself that we dare not desire to start from him.

5. And we see what brings temptations and crosses, that is to say, when flesh
makes use of Gods truth to its own advantage, that man begins to think of ease
and peace in the Flesh, then must the cross come or else thou will be lost.

6. But where will be our refuge when Isaac must be slain, for this will come:
we have now fullness, health and peace, and prosperity and mercies of God on
every side, but the day of temptation must come, when we must part with our
dearest sons and careful father, thy kind mother and loving sister, thy beloved
world and life it self: What then shall stay thee, or whether will thou flee?
For be sure this day is coming on all Flesh. O happy he that has the Truth of
God to sustain him, and an obedient heart, a subject will, and a patient soul
that day: for to him only shall Isaac be raised from death, and be life in
death.

God did tempt and prove Abraham. This a temptation of trial, for otherwise God
tempts no man, Jam. 1. Not that God was ignorant what was in him, but that God
might manifest to the world the power and simplicity of Abraham's Fai h, and to
show what is the deliverance in all straits, that all believers may be blessed
with faithful Abel and Abraham: So that,

God sent this temptation to the purifying of his faith, and weakening of the
Flesh, that nothing might be left to Abraham but God and his power and Truth to
rest on, but God alone: thus to Israel, 1 Samuel 4. Deliver them into the hand of
their enemies, that their trust in the Ark might fail: Thus to David, when he
had numbered the People, and Psalm. 107. When his mountain was made strong.

For hereby he purifieth Faith like gold, 1. Pet. 1. Peter must be winnowed as
wheat: for then all rejoicing is taken away in the flesh, when World and all
fails.

1. For he sees that man is apt to join with flesh against God, therefore he
keeps this down by daily suffering: for man is loathe to lay hands on
himself, therefore does he fight against it in man, both by Word which if it
prevail not, he adds blows to weaken the Flesh, that so man may see what a
weak staff he has trusted to: and often he crosses his children therein when
they have forsaken God: He takes away the World, because thou have run to and
trusted it; he suffers thee to fall because thou trusts to thy Righteousness:
He hides his face because the Flesh grows wanton by his comforts: Thus God
daily crosses us, and we take no notice, and lay the blame on this or that,
and flee to the World for help: but then he will come and whipe thee yet more.

2. If the cross ly long on thee, the cause is, because there is yet some
looking for help from Flesh, or some lust that will not yield: thy stubborn
heart is yet hardened by fleshly hope: For when God has accomplished his ends,
then shall freedom come.

3. God sees, that if we should prosper still, we should be undone: for
fullness of Flesh, and simple believing, seldom go together: nay, he will still
keep to such a diet, as thou shall still have: So will he keep thee under some
cross or temptation, that thou shall still need his help, and by this Faith,
see his power and truth.

4. That is Faith then and Religion that holds out in trial, for afflicti^n
detracts nothing from a man, but shows what a man is; if thy heart be not
upheld by Isaac that is to say, the World, but by His Truth: what matters it,
though Isaac be slain, therefore, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation, that when temptation comes ye may stand and watch, that is, wait in
Faith, pray and seek help in him that is mighty to save, so shall we be
preserved; no hurt to man by the cross but much good; for,

1. Thereby Faith is purified.

2. The flesh weakened.

3. And love increased, for then is man pitiful to others

4. The word prospers, but never thrives but when the cross goes with it: For
full hearts are unfit to receive it, and man at ease easily shuffles it.

Take thy son, thy only son Isaac, whom thou love. This God saw in him, and
would bring it under, to separe his heart from his dearest object to him only,
Isaac was the only son of nature and of promise: So that,

So there is in man, some only son by nature, of some dear object, which he
loves, and wherewith he is entangled, which must be slain before man come to
live in constant peace and fellowship with God.

David and Absalom had great possessions, there it in the world a lust of the
eye and flesh, etc.

1. For man fixes on something in want of God.

2. While this lives, the soul lives in and by it.

3. This must die or man must perish.

4. And so far as man's heart fixes on this, it separats from God.

1. So that the promise of Faith, and living thereby, does sepa^at man from the
dearest object of nature, and makes man obedient to the will of God, even to
the l^sing of all; as, He that loves father or mother more than me, is not
worthy of me: He that will lose his life, shall save it: And Paul says, My life
is not dear, so that I may finish my course; for Christ loved not his life unto
death: Paul could die at Jerusalem. Acts 21. For there through the world is
crucified, and nature brought into subjection.

2. For not to love Isaac is unatural, and yet to dote on him, or to be tied to
him, or place felicity in him, is bondage, and argues a self-will and love not
mortified, as in David to Absalom; hereby,

3. God does wonderfully free his people when by faith He knits man to himself:
He lays nature under foot, that man may so enjoy all things in God, that his
eyes may be still toward him, that he uses and enjoys, as not using.

4. This is to enjoy all things as lawful, that is, a lawful use of all things,
and yet not to be brought under the power of any thing.

1. Away then with all halt and heartlesse obedience, when man out of fleshly
knowledge seems to flatter God with a few sacrifices, which are nothing but the
overplus and superfluity of thy peacefulnesse and fleshly will; but when he
comes to be tried to the bott^m, starts back, as that obstinate dis^bedience in
all; when man's lust has ceased on an object and will not part: but is a law,
that therein he fights against God in the way of Faith and Love, and man in the
common way of Equity, that so have it, he will: though to his own and every
one a beloved Isaac, that is, the treasure of his heart; which though he will
communicate other things, yet this he keeps in his closet.

Yea, man has not only a natural love to the creatures, but further, thinks
while it is but so, all is well: as to love wife and children, riches, etc.

But know this, when it exceeds reason, the Philosophers call it, Dotting
affection; it brings man into bondage, but more when it separats from God: For
there is a love natural^ which is soon satisfied, and there is a violent
affection that ever breeds bondage; which places a happiness in that thing
loved.

2. Thus we see, every man has his Isaac that must be slain; for as Isaac was
the natural son, yet must be sacrificed: So man has not only the fruit of his
own natural wit, but even the joys, peace and freedom that comes by the
promise, that must be slain, or at least be offered to God, that man may not
depend on these, but on the promise: that so he live not by high Revelations,
but by the grace of God which is sufficient, as in Paul.

3. All obedience that issues not out of the ashes of Faith, or from the power
of Gods love rested on by Faith, is nothing: for not to obtain or coin a Faith
thereby, but as a true expression of a believing heart: And this shows Gods
goodness to man, crossing him of his chiefest object, that so he may not cleave
to it, but rest in God and his Truth alone.

And get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there. Here is the great
trial of Abraham, that he must offer Isaac in whom the promise rested: So that
he takes away from his people all stays in the Flesh, yea, not only his
beloved Son in nature, but also the Son of the Promise: and every part in whom
the Promise should be accomplished: So that now Abraham has nothing left but
bare promise, and all those means whereby the promise should be accomplished
taken away: So that,

God will sooner, or latter take away from his people all stays in the flesh,
though never so likely in Flesh or reason, that the believing heart may be
bared and weakened, and rest purelie and simply on God and his Truth.

Thus he took from his Disciples, even Christ in the Flesh, also from Gideon,
his great host: from the Jews their Temple and Ark, wherein they trust: yea,
Jerusalem it self, that Jerusalem might come from Heaven, which is the Mother
of us all, from David his high mountain.

1. Thus God keeps his Children weak and poor in the Flesh, that they may seek
to him, and be strengthened by his power and Spirit.

2. Thus he makes way for believing, for while man has any thing to look at,
his eyes are turned from God nor does he purelie believe in him.

3. O! This promise is only open to the weak and poor, as Matthew. 5. For none
tastes of Wrath that fears it, nor none fails through weakness that feels it:
The sturdie Oaks are shaken with the storm, when the bending Reed escape
through yiedling.

4. Though God have given Isaac, yet Abraham must not trust to him: so God
gives joy, and Peace, according to the Promise yet may we not leave the
Promise, and trust to these, nor tie the Promise to them.

1. Vain then is the stay of them, that have no other foundation, but what
Flesh yields, which is nothing but shame: as also, those that tie God, and
limit him to these, and believe only because of these: as the Worldling,
because of Riches, the Pharisee, because of Righteousness: and Believers,
which turn from the Promise, and fix on these only, are deceived: For God
gives these at his pleasure, but his Truth must rest as man's Foundation.

2. But how will man do, when Isaac must be slain, and all thy hopes in the
Flesh taken away: As thy Riches, Liberty, Joy, Peace, etc. Where will thy rest
be then, as it was with the Martyrs.

3. Thus we see, how God in crossing man, blesses him, by causing the outward
man to perish, so the inner man is renewed.

4. Happy he, that enjoyes all things in the Flesh, but fix on nothing, but
enjoy, as not enjoying: rejoices, as not rejoicing: uses, as not using: But
if man fix on any thing after the Flesh, it is the ready way to lose it: as to
the Jews Temple, and David's high Mountain

Abraham went three days journey. And all this while he showed not the place,
that Reason and Affliction might work their utmost spite in trial of Faith: So
that,

So does God with man, he often defers deliverance to man, and hides from him a
long time the purpose of his Love, that man may wait in Faith, and be weakened
in flesh, and in waiting be delivered.

Thus he made Israel to wait four hundred years, the Church wait^d long for the
Promise of the Messiah: God has put tim^^ and seasons in his own power, and
the Jews for a Messiah to come with worldly power: but God sent his Son in
poverty, and weakness: This made Mordecai so confident, that if Esther
refuses, God would send deliverance some other way, For the vision is for an
appointed time, H^b. 2.

1. This he does to hide Pride from man's heart, and to make the World a fool,
that when man most expects it, he defers it.

2 God has a revealed will, which man is to believe: but a secret will, man is
to wait on

3. God, first works all things down in man, and separats the heart from them
before he comes

4. For God has an end, and man has need of sore afflictions, and when these
are brought about, then will God come. Thus the husband man waits for the
harvest: First, it is buried in the earth a long time, then appears a little,
but subject to many frosts, blasts, and disasters, yet he waits thus.

1. Man draws on his misery, by anticipating God his thoughts, We think now,
and now with David. O! when shall I come and appear before thee, and mine eyes
sail with waiting, and yet he withholdeth: For thou art not yet subject, when
thou sees the Wisdom and Righteousness of God, that thou can as willingly lie
under, as wished to be delivered, then shall thou be freed: but so long as there
remains a Will of thy own crossing his, this must first be brought under: For
God sends light in darkness, life in death, therefore, because we are not yet
dead, nor in darkness, the Promise is deferred: it is not enough that thou
have a foundation of Truth, but thou wild needs have a sign and assurance in
flesh for the Spirit to rest on.

2. God has given his Word and Promise that man is to wait on, but we are loath
to travel three days, and stay till God show it: God has said, I will deliver
thee, but we would see some sign of it, he says, I will deliver thee, but we
would have some other assurance than his Word of Truth, that is, Man would have
some other stay beside Christ.

3. Wait then thou weary Soul on God though thou see no means, for deliverance
will come: the weakling cries out, because he is not now delivered, he is quite
forsaken: but God knows, thou have a wanton wit and rebellious will to be
subdued.

4. Nay, when God shows nothing but death, and to the eye of man, that life is
farthest off: then is it the nearest: Abraham might be weary, but God stayed
him: but patience with hope, preserved him: Man is weary of Gods hand, even
almost before he feel it, and dreams of nothing but deliverance: even like an
impatient man, that feeling the biting Corassue, would have the plaster taken
of, but the Wise Surgeon knowed, that the rotten flesh must be eaten out: so
God will have the Flesh to be quiet, and the Spirit strengthened before he
remove his Rod.

For a whole burnt offering: By which he was to be consumed, that there should
be no memorial left, for so was the laws of the burnt-offerings: So that,

Gods will is to be believed and obeyed of man without reservation, and the
Flesh and World to be crucified without sparing any part thereof of all these
that would rest in God.

He will be loved with all the heart, and we must have no God but him: For this
is the great Commandment, Israel must not leave a hoof behind in Egypt, he
will be loved above Father or Mother.

1. For look what a man reserves to himself, he draws from God, and denies
him: acknowledging some other Gods besides him, and so the mind runs after it,
as Adam did: and so we halt betwixt two opinions.

2. If it be spared a little, presently it gets strength, and will arise
again, and so is a halting betwixt two.

3. Man spairs and reserves, but that wherein he thinks there is a good besides
God, and so the heart runs after it, and so destroys Faith.

1. Some indeed wholly spare Isaac the World, and cannot abide to be touched.

2. Others offer their refuse with Cain, but reserve Isaac, nay, believers will
still have some hold in the flesh, some reservation; so hard a thing is it to
sacrifice all, they would have part of the World: some ease, peace, freedom,
some assurance of Life and Gospel: but all these must be sacrificed.

4. Religion that is true, is then a simple thing and cannot mix it self with
any thing, like quicksilver, or the turtle-dove.

5. Then the obedience of Gods Children if it be simple it is total to all his
will, though never so hard to flesh and blood.

For these cannot enter into the Kingdom, and if it be in God and for God, why
then not one as well as another: for all are a like in him, that is wholly
given to God by Faith in him.

So Abraham went three days journey. And yet saw nothing, that Satan might all
this while tempt and try him, and yet God still preserves him: This is Gods
dealing to believing man: So that,

God usually tryes his to the bottom, that they may be saved in the Faith, and
show forth his power of truth and promise to all.

Thus Job, and David, Psalm. 77. Thus Paul; Christ and his Martyrers: thus was
Satan let loose upon Abraham,

1. For while man is but crossed a little, he runs to other fleshly help, from
one shift to another, as here Abraham might Reason though I be banished, yet I
have the Promise, and though it be long deferred, yet Isaac is now born, but
here God strikes down all these proppes at once.

2. God does thus work good out of evil to man, he lets Satan loose to beat
and canvisse man in the flesh; and drive him out, for he is the God of the
World, and must rule there, that he may drive man home to God, but if man will
make a Covenant with him, and stay there, he will be his Lord, and reward him.

3. Man will catch hold of any thing before he be well drowned, even a Leaf or
Reed, but God plungeth him into the deep, and then he calls from thence.

1. We have not yet resisted unto blood, no temptation has taken us, but such
as man can remove with the World or Reason fixed on the Truth revealed, or
qualities: and so we get sin a hiding place in the flesh.

2. Believers need yet a great deal of purging through affliction, for still we
retain something, because of which we hope and believe; but this is not plain
dealing with God, nor pure believing.

3. But know, that day will come, when God will try us to the bottom, and
leave neither Father nor Mother, Wit, nor Wisdom: we shall be put past all our
shifts in the flesh: So that,

4. We see what a do God has to bring man low enough: hence it is, that we
are not enlivened, enriched and made free in God, because we are not poor, weak
and blind in the flesh, but find ease there and rest.

5. Thus God secretly upholdeth his Children in affliction, though themselves
see not how they are preserved, he still sends Life in Death, who know not how
they are raised.

Stay here, and I and the Lad; All left him, and he left these behind: So that,

If man go to ascend to God, and meet him comfortablie in any strait, no coming
with Flesh and blood: but leave these, and fix on him in naked belief.

So David with Goliath: so Christ was left alone, and none to assist.

1. For flesh and blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, and His ways
cannot be comprehended.

2. Fleshly affection draw men to their own ends, but Faith only lays hold on
Christ: these harden the heart, and give a hope without Faith, which God will
not accept

3. These destroy Faith, for the Soul cannot live on both: thus would worldly
men fain take the World to Heaven with them: yea, all are loathe to leave all
behind, but would have something to bear them company, what ever makes for
hurting of man's flesh is man's death, let Flesh know nothing, nor rule nothing

Then the Angel said, Stay thy hand. Here Abraham is brought to the pits brink,
and sees no deliverance, but only is preserved by Faith, they saw nothing but
death before them; Isaac willing and Abraham ready and content, both preserved
by Faith, and subjected; So that,

It is impossible for man to meet death willingly, or think thereof: but only
when lively power of Faith upholds, and has killed and crucified the Flesh and
will thereof by the sufferings of Christ.

This made Paul willing to leave this tabernacle: David to commend his spirit
into the hands of God, and Christ his life to the father, and Martyrs to the
fire.

1. For Flesh fears destruction of it self, and if it be not overcom'd and
preserved by another power, it dies before the time; death makes on end of all
and leaves nothing, neither father nor friends, land nor riches but destroys
all: for as here, Isaac is gone, all Abraham children at once, the means of
promise, and also if that his life had been herein, he had utterly failed.

2. This is the great lust and enemy to be destroyed, for, skin for skin, and
all that a man has, will be give for his life: and yet to this we must all
pass, it makes death so fearful to worldly hearts, it leaves nothing to hold
by: other losses leave some hope of recoverie but this without Redemption; and
yet this will come, we see it before our eyes, even death coming when thou must
part with thy dearest husband, loving wife, ^e^der children and kind brother,
friends, lands, world and all, and see thy self gasping upon thy deathbed;
here see Isaac on the Al^ar, and see how thou will hear it.

3. Yea, this makes death fearful to believers, because the Flesh is not
mortified, but lives in them, and desires to live: and because they live not in
God, would yet live in the world. All put this day afa^ off, one is yet lusty
and strong, or is yet weak, hopes to recover, and yet never willing to commune
with death, because we live not in and by the death of the World: another is
old, yet thinks he may yet last many years: So that,

Only the believing man, in whom life is already overcome, shall die cheerfully:
as Paul, who said, I can die at Jerusalem: He sees that death shall free him
from the world; the Flesh, lust and all.

Stay thine hand. Now God comes with help at a pinch, when it is not expected;
if Abraham had a de^iring expectation of due deliverance this way, God would
yet have tried him further: but seeing past help, and yet believing, he comes:
So that,

God comes to help his people in the fittest time, and when man in reason sees
no help in the world or in himself: then is God ready at hand.

As at the Red sea, so to Elisha, when the King of Assiria had besieged him in
Dothan, there were mountains full of Chariots of fire: So to David against
Goliath, Psalm. 107. Hungry and thirsty, then they cried unto the Lord: The
Publicans cried, Lord, be merciful to me, etc

1. For at first, God made all things out of nothing, and so brings light out
of darkness, and the poor to confound the rich.

2. When the heart has passed all fleshly power, then he rests in faith: for
he has nothing to trust to. etc.

3. Thereby are the sufferings of Christ accomplished in the Saints in earth,
as with the Martyrs; when friends mourned, strangers bewailed, acquaintance
pitied, their adversaries boiled in all wrath: and all hope of life past: yet
then was God with them, and they joyful; as with the man that cried, Austin, He
is come.

4. Yea, thus does God weaken Flesh, by dissannuling the hope thereof: and
makes his power known in fleshly weakness: for he both secretly upholds at
present, and sends help when all is past hope.

SERMON XXI.
Isa. 9.6, 7, 8. For unto us a child is born, and unto us a son is given: and
the Government shall be upon his shoulders.
IN this Chapter he comforts the Church against all darkness and desolation,
threatened in the seventh and eigth chapters: and that by promise of the
Messiah: alluding to these calamities, that came both by Tilgath Pileazer, 2
Kings 15. And that great Salmanazer, King of Assiria, where all Israel was led
captive, 2 Kings 17. And thirdly, yet greater, when Zenaucharib came upon them,
in the days of Hezekiah, with two hundred thousand soldiers, and railed on
the living God, even in that darkness, when they had no hope of safety. Then
Hezekiah spread his letter before the Lord, and Isaiah the Prophet brought the
message of safety, and that without the power of Israel or any man God would
overcome: and so sent his Angel, and slew one hundred fourscore and fifty
thousand of the Assirians Armies: and here says he, shall our deliverance be.
He shows, it shall not be by man's power, no more than that: For thou
multiplied the Nations, that is of Israel; they had a greater Army than before,
yet more afraid: but now they rejoice as men in harvest. He shows the reason,
for the yoke and burden of the oppressor is removed, and that without the power
of Israel, even as in the day of Midian: then,

A comparison of these, every battle is with blood, but this shall be with
consuming fire: Thou have multiplied the Nations, but not increased the joy.
Jerusalem had again gathered strength, yet behold, greater fear than before, 1
King. 19.

First, for he never left afflicting, till he had wasted all their strength,
and put them past it; till they bowed down in humility and fear, and spread the
letter before the Lord; then comes the Angel; so with us: So that,

It is not increasing our strength, wisdom or any gift, that eases or
rejoices the heart indeed: but man walking in faith, fear and humility and
love, shall be comforted in God.

Thus the Philistines and Goliath, and David, but still worse thereby: So the
fool, Luke 12. Jerem. 10. Let not the wise man rejoice.

1. For we are kept by the power of Faith unto Salvation.

2. It is the mourner that is comforted, not the joyful: yea, the poor that is
enriched, and the rich sent empty away: Sow in tears, and reap in joy.

3. For hereby is the great power of God manifested.

1. Thus we see the World still multiplies riches and wealth, but not joy
increased: so we all strive for this and that guilt, knowledge, righteousness,
etc. And so we multiply our strength and conceit of Power in man, as though he
would overcome the King of Ashur; yet this still rises in man, but is the
greatest opposite to Faith of all things. 2. Happy is he that casts down all,
and spreads the heart before the Lord, who in himself trembles in every thing,
and flies by faith to God; the Angel shall come in time, and man shall
overcome, as Gideon did, Judges 27. God took from him all his strength: a^,

1. All that were fearful, and all that lay down to drink; so with us.

1. He takes away Infidelity, which was fearful.

2. Earthlinesse, and moves man to suffer, and then in that wearied and tired
estate, he gives victory to Gideon. So that,

Man's victory is obtained in weakness of man by the power of God: and till
God have taken from him that strength and wisdom whereby he stands, he never
conquers: as Paul: When I am weak, then am I strong: of my self not able to
think a good thought, but through his grace able to do all things.

1. For fear and weakness goes before faith, then faith follows: and if faith
be preserved, then man is safe: but if a man wax strong in conceit: then
farewell faith and fear, and then hardness comes.

All the whole Scripture works to bring man down that he might rest in God,
though he feel no strength, though he feel no reason, though be be in
darkness; yet the promise in Christ dwells in all these.

2. For God is not in thunder and earthquake and winds, but in the soft, still
voice, and resting heart of man in him

1. But man has wit and lives by it; will, and follows is power, and
guardes: but all will fail: For where Infidelity is, or those that went on in
worldliness, these were sent back: for there was thirty two thousand, but ten
thousand went: and of these all, but three hundred that kneeled down to drink.

So with us, most turn back from Christ's battle through infidelity: and others
that seem to follow Christ most are subdued by the World: only a few content
with present state follow the Lord in Faith: For in the most things we do fear
through distrust, or else are stopped and cast back through the love of ease
that we overcome not, as in the day of Midian.

God sends his spirit into tender and soft hearts, but all things else are dry;
and then when the heart is refreshed and strengthened, he sends his blessing in
all he takes in hand.

To Hezekiah the sign was, this year eat whatsoever grows of it self, and the
next year without sowing; So to us,

He feeds us his own fullness without any help of man or nature, and then
enables man to be a husband in the Church of Christ: and this shall be like joy
in harvest-tide, Psalm. 33.

These battles were with noise and tumbling in blood, but this by the feeling
of Wrath and Indignation, which at last shall fall upon the power of Satan
through the love of Christ, and consume them: For unto us a child is born. Here
is a Prophecy of Christ and his Kingdom and Government.

1 His Person is described unto us, with his Title and Office.

2. His Kingdom and manner thereof.

3. The cause, or fountain of all this zeal of Love unto us: h^re he shows the
Propriety and Right that believers have in Christ, and by this Union the
Victore comes: So that,

Christ truly born to man, and living and ruling in the heart of man, and man
subject to Christ, is the Food and Fountain of all good, Wisdom and Happiness
to man.

He is the Seed of the Woman that breaks the Serpents head: He is our Wisdom
and Righteousness, and Peace and our Life: For all live through him, Paul
through him was able to do all things, He is the way, the Truth and the Life,
Joh. 14. If you abide in Me, and my Word abide in you, ask, and it shall be
given you: Christ is that Word of Faith by which all things are established and
made: He is the Light and Life of Man: So that,

When the ministry of the Word is formed to the Image of Christ, and that Word
lives in man, then enjoyes he all that good and freedom promised in that Word.

For look what Christ was, and did actually and bodily in the World, that he
is, and does spiritually in the heart of man: He came by the will and promise
of the Father, he was born, not of the will of the flesh: He wrought miracles
to the believing man, so in us; gives sight to the blind; He taught and made
known the Will, Love, and Purpose of the Father to the World: So in us: He was
subject to live in love, so in us. ^he suffered freely, so us he enables and
makes conquerors

So it is plain, that the birth of Christ is the beginning and Fountain of man's
happiness and freed^m: and the Life of Christ with the Father, the life of
happiness: and the Death of Christ, the accomplishment of man's blessedness
and victory.

See then, how all the whole truth of God begins and ends in one. That which
was promised to Adam, and Abraham, is Prophesied of: Here is born in time, and
sent to every believer, therefor, all our running about conceits, buildings
and thoughts, and imagina^ions, and inventions, are but vain blasts; for here
is all that is substantial.

But who has believed our report, may Christ say; for. First, We hear of
Christ born, baptized, persecuted and ^rucified, etc.

But not to us; ray, we know this Christ after the ^^esh, we think well of him,
and love the thoughts of ^im, but not born to us.

Nay, we frame a Christ, and seem to worship him, but not given to us; nay, we
have a conceit that he has done all for us, but not born in us: we defend him,
and plead for him, we dispute of him, we talk of him, we read of him: but not
born to us.

This teaches, that Christ was promised of God, and sent in fullness of time,
and then his spirit sent into the hearts of men.

So there is a waiting for the promise under the Law: but in the fullness of
time he shall be born and given.

For he came, when man was out of hope; for there was nothing but vexation
under the Maccabees, and the Romans, and then came a deliverer, and so to all
men: When Sarah was past age, and without hope, then Isaac is born.

So, when thou art past hope, and sees no Reas^n, then shall Christ be born to
thee, for that is the fullness of time, and till then, the fullness of time is
not come: And we see that Christ is nothing to man, till he be born in man,
that the living Word of the Father live and rule in him beyond all Reason and
Imagination of Flesh: For no Reason can be given of Christ to be born of a
Virgin: nor that man should believe life in death, or a guilty man to be
delivered.

A Son is born; Here is the promise of a Messiah, and this already
accomplished, both visibly to the World, and spiritually to believers: So that,

No power of the adversary or Flesh is able to mak^ void the Word of Truth, and
Promise, nor shake the heart of man: stayed thereon by Faith.

As Abraham believed the Word against plain reas^:

So the Promise of Caanan, Pharaoh on the one side and enemies in the way, and
forty Kings in Canaa^ resisted; yet thither they must. Heaven and Earth mu^^
pass away, but not that Word of Truth.

1. For this purity of Faith, under the Cross, wh^^ all sights against it,
yet it stands.

2. By this, God is magnified, and man has assuran^^ of rest therein: as when
man believes Gods trut^ though never so unlike; God preserves that man: For can
any man stay a shower of Rain: take heed of fighting against God.

3 Be subject and stay here, though thou see no likelihood, not striving what
thou would have, but waiting what and when God will do his Will.

4. Here is the stay of believers, though they see no rest, yet they wait on
God, and know, that in fullness of time the Child shall be born.

5. But though we have a sure word, we are loathe to stay the fullness of time,
but now man would be comforted, and then eased; but thou must be more weak, thy
Wisdom and Righteousness must be trodden down, that nothing but God and his
Truth may live in thee.

A Son born: Some will have this meant of Hezekiah, or Isaiah: but it agrees
not with the Text, but only of Christ the Word of the Father, which took our
nature, that he might redeem us: and let us see the subjection and loss of all
to way of freedom: These two natures joined in Christ by an Hypostatical Union,
made a perfect Christ, as flesh and spirit makes in Moria a Christian: these
not by confounding their natures, but by right ordering of both, yet remain
distinct; the power of the Godhead shining through the Manhood, Ordering and
Ruling, and Guiding in subjection to the Fathers Will So in us,

Religion or Christ born in man, is not the confounding of nature in man, as
with most beginning in the Spirit, but ending in the Flesh; as, First,

In our glorious notions not rising from Christ, stirring up our present
passions only flesh.

Man's freedom is not helped by Flesh at all, but subjection only. Many Sons
born to man, but Ishmaels or Esaus; few have Christ formed or born in them.

The government is upon his shoulders. That is, the whole Rule whereby his
Kingdom is ordered, is in him only; J^h. 5. The Father has given all
government to the Son: So that,

The whole power of governing and guiding man, ^ests in Jesus Christ, and is
enjoyed by Faith in him.

All power is given to me both in Heaven and Earth^, to him belongs dominion
power and glory.

1. For why he is King and Head of the Church.

2. By him only the power of Satan is subdued.

3. He is the cornerstone of all buildings.

Now his power is not of the Flesh, for that was kept weak in him, and at last
so dies in us; His Kingdom is not of this World, but Righteousness, Peace and
Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. By righteousness of Faith and righteousness
of Love: as peace in the heart, with subjection under the Cross, joy in
assurance of the love: and joy in tribulation.

But most are not governed by Christ, but by their own Wit, Will, World and
Flesh.

Where then is the power of man, whereby he thinks to obtain Life? It remains
in Christ, only enjoyed by Faith from day to day: else how does Christ rule?

But most will have the government upon their own shoulders: He rules all by
the Word of Truth, Psalm. 45. His Scepter is a right Scepter, his Word returns
not in vain, he bears up all by his mighty Word.

He shall be called wonderful. Here is his title and of admiration, and to be
referred to all his Wonders in his Wisdom and Counsel, in his Power, Love, and
Peace: So that,

So the way of Christ in bringing man back from death to life, is a wonderful
way unknown to the World and Flesh: only known by Christ in the Word of Truth,
Isa. 55.

1. My ways are not your ways, but look how far it is a wonderful way, that
he prescribes in Matthew. 16.

To deny our selves, to take up his cross, lose our life: It is called the
mystery of the Kingdom, for Genesis 3. He ordained that man should never by
that way of the flesh enter into life, but by another way that kills the flesh.

2. The way of Christ is opposite to the way of the World, that his glory may
appear: For Israel, by want of Faith, stood in fear of the Army of the
Philistines, but Jonathan and his Armor-bearer only discomfited by Faith, a
wonderful power of God.

3. Thus God makes himself known in the earth by his great wonderful works: now
Christ's way is wonderful, not only in his birth in earth without a Father, in
Heaven without a Mother; but also in his miracles which were great: As in
disputing at twelve years old, and fasting forty days: but also in his
ministry, that a silly man opposing the whole Hirarchie of the Pharisees and
Jews, yet spoke with authority to the subduing of all, so in his Apostles for
the wonderful evidence of the Truth, does for the present, dash all contrary
power, though afterward it rise again: He is also wonderful in the
administration of his Kingdom, as he came to give us light, that sat in
darkness and obscurity.

1. To give Life, and yet he dyed himself: and in Reason, was overcome in
death, but that Faith believed the Resurrection.

2. To make us Rich, and yet he himself Poor.

3. To make us free, and himself bound.

4. To comfort us, and yet he himself cried out for comfort, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me; It must needs be some wonderful way that Christ has
to work a Redemption for me, and this by an unspeakable power and love, which
is seen in all man's straits; as in prayer and affliction, temptation and death:
as,

1. Man cries and prays to be eased like Paul for a prick in the flesh, God
hears by a secret power, and grace and says in Paul.

2. In affliction he lays Load, and yet preserves by feeling the Fathers love.

3. In temptations justifies, and yet we feel no killing of the flesh.

4. Death comes, and yet we live in him,

1. Away then with that reasonable Religion, Christ's way is above, that man
has a ready way of Religion to do well, and know much, and so has an opinion
in Flesh, but not a stay to the Soul: also, a reason of love, as his neighbor
and friends, but no reason to love Enemies: It must be a wonderful power of
Christ that must separate man from himself in reason: it were likest that man
should speed best that comes righteous to him, but not so he that comes a
sinner.

2. We see then the necessity of Faith and the nature of it, that it is not a
reasonable persuasion, but a powerful cleaving to Christ: and no dealing with
God but by Faith: for Reason can make nothing of the ways of Christ.

3. M^rvel then not though the World cannot away with it, the Wisdom of the
World counts it foolishness, but Faith knows that Reason is a foolish
counselor; this is another title and property, or declaration of the Wisdom
of the Father that was with him: he is the Counselor, the Prophet of the
Church, to teach it Wisdom, and guide it in the way of peace.

So that the Fountain of all wisdom and counsel is in G^d, and none wise in
matter of Religion and God, but they that are wise in, and truly know Christ.

In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, which are conveyed
unto man as he believes and waits for he is made of God to us wisdom and
righteousness, etc.

If any obey my will, he shall know, whether this Doctrine be of God?

1. For he was in the bosom of the Father, and sent out to counsel and advise
deceived men to turn to God again.

2. Man is blind, even the wisest of the World: and the cross of Christ is
their greatest misery: for it is foolishness to them; and they cannot approve
it: but the World thinks not so: for, who are counted so wise as the children
of this World, who fight against God.

1. So God has showed the way to prosper, that is to believe, trust and obey:
but the wicked say not, bu^ cark, care, and oppress: but the way of life, is a
denial and loss of life and will: But they say, Save life and will: for man
will either find a way of his own, o^ help God in his way.

2. Some are wise above the Gospel and Christ, and will needs see into Gods
Secrets with their fleshly eyes: as Arminius, who will needs set rules and
laws to God, which neither Arminian or witty man can do; and it is the very
quintess^nce of wit that under-propps man, and this more crosses faith than
anything: the greatest Contemplatives, the greatest Idolaters: says Luther.

2. How loathe is man to be a fool, but he would appear to be somewhat: how he
strains his Wit, and vents his conceits, that he may appear to know: Such a one
knows more from curious searching and bat^ing his brains: than from Christ in
the heart. There is two Counselors to man.

1. Satan advises the Worldings to care and deceive, and the Wanton, to follow
his pleasure: the Drunkard, his pots; the Hypoc^ite, his righteousness: yea,
as an Angel of light be shines, as a false light to puff up himself.

2. But Christ counsels otherwise.

1. To forsake the World and all.

2. To believe in him alone.

3. To love him.

4. To love one another. Wisdom without Christ can do nothing, but fill the
heads, and that with conceits and opinions: but he is wise that is counseled
by Christ, yet attending on him in that blindness of his Soul by faith, he
shall be enlightened and know the will and secrets of the Lord: but man will
needs know these before the time.

An Exposition of some Verses of the fifth Chapter of Matthew, the Quality and
Disposition of these that are Blessed
BLessed are the pure in Spirit, consisting in what state.

1. The quality, is pure in Spirit: that is, whose Spirits have nothing to
rest on, not comfort in it: but worn out of all hope and stay in the Flesh, is
destitute of all help: but waits only on relief on God: So that,

He only, whose heart is purged by the Word from all stays and hopes in the
Flesh, is truly a Subject of mercy, and shall be enriched; and the only Guest
at his Supper.

So the Prodigal, we see the poor receives the Gospel the full stomach lotheth
the honney-comb, Isa. 66. To him will I look that is of a contrite heart and
humble spirit; Isa. 55. He that has no money, come and buy.

Poor, blind, miserable and naked: but on the contrary, as the Elder-brother,
all is mine, I am rich enough: So not many rich, not many mighty, etc. but poor

A small thing is welcome to a poor man, when the rich despises great gifts:
now the poor man is naked, nothing to cover him: famished, nothing to fill his
belly, as the Prodigal was, unable to help himself: and thence hopes for help.

Rich and full hearts have no room for Christ, when man conceits of some
quality in himself, and whereby he hopes. The cause why we are not helped is,
because we are not poor enough.

See the bounty of God, who is ready to help the needful; the misery of poor in
the world that find no help, is, because they seek it in the World.

Blessed are they that mourn. Here is the second sort of blessed men, not the
merry Pharisee, but the mourning humble and dejected men: this follows the
former, like an Orphan destitute, poor, none to help, mourns: So that,

He that mourns and weeps in himself, and finds no comfort in himself, or the
World; he rests in God by Faith, but shall be comforted in Gods time.

God looks to him that is of a humble Spirit, as Hagar sitting and weeping at
the Well, because she was comforted. In the Law they brought sacrifice to the
door of the tabernacle, and there wept and mourned till the atonement came,
Psalm. 102. They that go forth weeping shall return rejoicing.

For this argues a repenting heart, and forethinking of the time misspent,
therefore the Kingdom of God i^ come near; These men reverence the World and
themselves, and finding no hope thereby, cry and weep for help: for these
hearts lie open for comfort, when the light merry hearts despise God and
promise.

1. This is not a mourning for loss or cross.

2. Nor a howling because of misery only.

3. Nor desperate as Judas, but a sight or sensible beholding of guilt and
weakness, and time misspent condemning himself.

2. A burden lying on, and seeing no means to recover.

3. With strong cries for mercy and pardon, but most are far from this; for
fullness has made us merry, every man rejoicing in his portion: First, the
Worlding is merry in his thriveing.

2. The wanton in his pleasure and lust, the Hypocrit^ in his conceited
Righteousness: Now, we all go forth rejoicing, and come in weeping: and
believers often overtaken with this, that is, in a fond lightness without
sense of themselves: sometimes resting securely, because they think God will
come, but mourns not; sometimes lifted up with a conceit of what the Spirit
enjoyes not.

But happy he that sits mourning like a turtle-dove after his God, and never
merry without him; so he shall be comforted: This is reserved in Gods time and
hand, wherein, see the impatience of weaklings: who, because he comes not now,
are ready to cast off all: and others, who will needs appoint the time, and
loathe to stay the fullness thereof: And this God will do according to his own
will, and not thine limiting God; destroys and crosses Faith: there must be
a going forth of thy self, weeping that thou have so long fought against God,
and returning to a God, who will meet thee with joy and gladness: that thou
have found him whom thy Soul loves, but it must be as in Canticles.

When thou have lest expectation thereof, we all desire to know that God loves
us, thence believe, that he does love us.

Blessed are the meek: This is opposed to the pride of the Pharisees, who are
lift up above others.

1. But lowly and meek minded men, who are humble and lowly in themselves, are
the only happy men, Isa. 66. With such God dwells. They are Gods Saints, as
the Publican, and he that humbles himself is fitted for all estates, his mind
framed to all: not seeking to bring things to his mind, but things are brought
to his mind.

2. He only is capable and lives by mercy, that has no good thought of
himself, this is not a softness of nature, and freting within, nor a
Pharisaical hanging down the head, nor lurking quiet, like a dog under a
cudgel: But a simple and true understanding of himself, his weakness and
vileness, and so adjudging of himself, and justifying others.

This reproves that high minded pride and conceit of our own, yea, because we
think basely of others: thence we have a good conceit of our selves: This is
not simple plain dealing, but the most quiet way is, when a man is kept low in
himself, and still exalted in God, hereby nothing happens: but he sees he has
deserved it, he justifies God in all his ways.

He shall inherit the earth. That is, the good of all blessings; and be blessed
in all his ways and creatures on earth, for his mind has no far reach, and so
he is content with any estate: again proud minds, who enjoy no good in any
thing, their mind is still above their estate, and they still in want, and they
that are lifted up in all they enjoy, are like beggars on horseback. The way of
prosperity is, when the mind is low, for then it is out of Satan's reach: as
Christ was by suffering, as a Lamb overcame all.

Bl^ssed are they that hunger and thirst. Hence the mind feeling a want and
hungering after Righteousness in Christ, is blessed, and shall be satisfied,
Isa. 55. Psalm. 63. Which hunger is,

1. A panting of the stomach for want of moisture.

2. A desire of food above all

3. A l^nging and fainting t^ll he be satisfied, and how sweet is Christ to
him: Th^s Righteousness is.

1. Of Faith.

2. Inward rectitude.

3. Outward holiness, that so he may be one with Christ in the Covenant of
love, unity of Will, and life of Christ, to the glory of the Father.

But we all faint after the World, nothing can satisfy: these men are never
satisfied, but the other shall be satisfied: he shall have an hundred sold
here, etc. Jam. 4.5. They ask me, and obtain not, because it is to spend on
lusts: Wait, thou hungriest, and in his time he will come, and that shortly:
when thou art separated from all other: Thy Soul can be satisfied with no
other: thus like a loving Wise, longing after her husbands coming home.

Blessed are the merciful. Here is another sort of blessed men, that is, whose
hearts are brought down: that out of sense of their own misery and weakness,
sin and rebellion: they become tender hearted men, and pitiful and merciful to
others that are in any strait: So that,

Tender hearted men are blessed men, and fit for Gods mercy, Psalm. 41. Blessed
is the man that considers the poor and needy. Psalm 112. A good man is
merciful and lends. Isa. 57 1. Merciful men are taken away from the evil to
come; I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat, Mat. 25.42. And Christ so pitied
poor, blind and lame, desolate men: and was ever ready to help, that he might
draw all men to depend on mercy.

For he whose heart dwells in love, dwells in God: in nothing do we more
resemble Christ, who was ever disposed thereunto: even when his Disciples would
have hindered him: See what this is.

1. There may be liberality out of pride, and yet no love, 1 Cor. 15.

2. There may be a tender and open nature, and yet no mercy.

But this not a tender hearted disposition from nature, but from a true sight
of our own vileness and unworthiness and sense of Gods mercy in Christ,
sensible of others miseries and willingness and readiness to help, according
to our power, without pinching, grudging, or base respect: such is Gods and
Christ love to us.

1. The ground, Gods mercy by Faith; breaking the heart and working Life in us.

2. The nature is pitiful, free, open-hearted, helpful.

3. The object is Want, Misery, Wrong, Injury, Woe.

Then woe to mercielesse worldings, who are sensible of no man's misery but
their own, as a hard-hearted userer: a closse fisted niggard, grinding
Landlord: yea, mercieless, who, with Judas grudge at parting with any thing,
and though they profess kindness, yet when need comes, hearts and purses
pinch together.

See that heartlesse show of Love and Faith without the power thereof, when it
comes to-tryal, that when it comes to part it and Mammon, that was never
parted; it goes to the quick: as if a man should part with life and all; and
hence so many excuses: as I have not, now I have a charge, etc. When, if a man
would forbear idle expenses and his surfeting, it would provide for all the
poor in a Paroch.

Object. They are all lazy people.

Answ. It is for want of thy education but maintenance is love.

Thus we see Christ is full of talking, believing men, and worldly knowledge:
every man full of opinions and high thoughts, but no love. This Religion is in
vain; yea, most men love all men till they grow poor, but then casts him off,
like those, Luke 5. That called rich friends, etc. So we lend, give and help
those that need not, but to further their covetousness: but from poor, turn
away.

But man has such love for himself, that he has none for others, but Paul
bids, put on bowels of mercit and tenderness, etc.

1. Consider the estates of others, and put ours in their case.

2. Gods mercy to thee, thou rich, and they poor.

3. That thou shall never be poorer for it: and that thou shald obtain mercy
both of God and man, not for this but the word is such. So that,

Gods mercy and goodness shall not be a wanting, and man's heart shall be open
toward merciful men and they shall nor want, Psalm. 37. I never saw the
righteous forsaken; That is, merciful men.

1. For the hearts of all men do bless them.

2. They live in sense of misery and weakness, and so sensible of mercy, but
most men live of and by themselves, and find no need of mercy, and so mercy
is shut against them.

3. Happy he that waits still for this, it cannot be wanting, for these judge
themselves, and justify God.

4 Suffer all things patiently.

5. And are open-hearted to pray to God, and show mercy to others.

Blessed are the pure in heart. These are opposed to the Hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, which under show of Religion, reserved to themselves rotten hearts
and the World therein, which so musled their minds, that they saw nothing:
Purity is a metaphor taken from neatter metal, etc. Which it not mingled with
any filth, but clear from the Fountain: So we say, Pure water like gold, and
that is separated from all other things, and is simple: So that,

Poor and simple minded men, who walk in simplicity of Religion, is blessed
therein, James 3.1. Wisdom from above is, First, pure, then peaceable, that is
the seed in good ground, that is, good honest and simple hearts, 1. Joh. 3. He
that has this hope purges himself as he is pure, for the heart joined, or
mixed with any other thing, mars it.

2. This was Adams simplicity that is joined to God only, which purity is a
mind cleaving to nothing but God only, and simple truth, like a wise to her
husband, expecting nothing but what he is.

3. Intention upright, though occasion failing, there is a purity Legal, and
Evangelical, the one is in Rules, the other in Faith and Love; singling out the
heart to Christ only: the heart is pure, when it is not mingled with its own
desires and lusts, and the pure Faith believes God without this or that, a
pure love without condition, or end.

4. A pure zeal for God only. Away then with all glistring Religion, to cover
rotten hearts with.

But we deal not simply in any thing, but have self-respects and seekings,
seeking our selves: for we deal not simply in any thing. The pure heart then is
he that sees that iniquity in himself; that he lothes himself: and so is
purged by the Laver of Regeneration.

They shall see God. This is not by curious comprehension but by simple
believing: that is, that God would show himself in mercy, love and wisdom to
them:

So that, The poor and simple believing heart truly understands the way of
God, and sees him in his goodness: and God reveals Secrets to them that fear
him, and to none else: Psalm. 25.

1. None has seen God but he, none knows the Father but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him, Psalm. 36. In his light we shall see light, for
selfknowledge and lust blinds the most of all. 1 Cor. 8. He that thinks he
knows something, knows nothing at all: he that will become wise, must become a
fool: God chooses fools.

2. If the mind cleave, or look at any thing else, it draws a vail that is sees
nothing. There are some that imagine a shape, and so seem to see blindly,
attending in says upon them: the light shines.

Thus we are all full of knowledge and false light, but have not pure hearts:
we must be wise, as Serpents and innocent as Doves. For, if man see God by
Faith: he trusts, loves and fears, and is subject to him; all knowledge else,
leaves a man whore he was, save this: it lifts him up against God.

See the way how man is blinded, he has a self desire of his own good,
overruling, which sets wits a working to find that good under the Sun. This
bears off God, and so lights hold of Religion: and so strains all his power to
comprehend this God and good in him, and becomes a Master: and so rules and
orders it, according as he thinks it may best make for his good not knowing
what it is to receive freely, and live by Faith. Give me then a pure heart, and
a simple believing mind; for that's worth all knowledge: without this, all
knowledge else leaves man, that he date not trust, nor love that thing which he
sees: Yet, this is all that he hunts after, rather to know after the flesh,
than to believe by faith.

Blessed are the Peacemakers: Opposed against the Pharisees busy pride, and
judging others: Yea, Christ could not be quiet in life for them: So that,

Christ's Religion is a peaceable Religion, and makes men peaceable, James 3.
Wisdom from above is pure and peaceable. 1. For it pulls down pride.

2. It sets man at work with himself, and none else.

3. It lays low the World, which sets all at strife: yet this quiets all.

1. Yea, though not of the same opinion, yet peaceable.

2 Though not familiar, yet peaceable.

1. This is against that Religion, that's nothing but busy quarrelling for
victory in this or that opinion; and that only in opposition to Church,
striving about Christ's coat.

2. These that are busy with others, not themselves: that starts quarrels, and
suits for trifles.

3 Religion is not against peace, but for the peace of a Land.

4. They are at enmity with none, but themselves: yet bold and stout in Christ's
cause, as Martyrs.

5. Decay of Religion is the cause of all contention: walk peaceably, and
meddle with thy self.

Seek peace, and prevent variance: and lose any thing rather than peace.

SERMON XXII.
1 Samuel Chap. 15 Ver. 13 And Samuel came unto Saul, and Saul said unto him:
Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have, etc
THis Chapter declares Gods dealing with Saul, for his double dealing in the
matter of Amalek: These Amalekites were those enemies which first withstood the
passage of Israel as Mount Seir, as they passed toward Canaan: against whom,
Moses and Aaron and Joshua warred, who would have driven Israel back again into
Egypt: against whom the Lord threatened that he would destroy them from off the
earth, and have War with Amalek, from generation to generation, Exodus 17.14. To
those the Lord sends Saul to destroy them: and he deals haltingly therein,
and for that is cut off. Further note, that these Amalakites were of the seed
of Esau: For Amaleck was the Son of Elyphaz, Esaus eldest Son, which he had by
a concubine, Genesis 36. So that they were the Edomites, who were still enemies to
Israel. Here is Esau against Jacob still, that is, the of spring of the flesh
hated of God, hunting after the world: So that,

Such and so are the corrupt will, and fleshly lusts of man: like these
Amalekites: born of the flesh, hated of God, and forsaken; hunting after the
World, fighting against the spirit of man; heir of the Promise, and hindering
in the way toward the Lord of rest. Nay, and when they were to enter into
Canaan, they stopped the way; and after, when they were entered, they disturbed
Isreal's peace, as here: So that,

Those enemies must be subdued and routed out, before man can have any rest in
the Land of the living, 1. Pet 2. Fight against the Soul. Gal 5. War against
the spirit. These have fleshly reason for their kingly will, and affections
for their Captains.

1. These like Amaleck, one while seeks comfort to the Flesh: cannot abide to
want.

2. Sometimes to deny God through carnal reason; nay, in believers, when we
should walk with God in assurance of Faith and subjection of love: then starts
up some fleshly power or other, either a man has some worldly power to follow,
or some fleshly will to stick to: or quietness, ease and peace to preserve:
or, something that he dotes on, and follows not God according to the Covenant.

1. This shows that we have not rest in our God only: because the Sons of Esau:
the Edomites yet remain in our Land, and oppress the way of God and of Christ:
And why not peace in thy heart? because the Amalakites yet live in thy heart,
enemies with in thee: Thou sighs without, with this want and that wrong, this
inconveniencie and distrust, that do daily vex thee. For take away these, and
rest will come in all losses and crosses. O that man would once war against
himself to destroy these enemies! Thou art busy against every body but thy
self, when thou should be against no body but thy self, or else against
something else; as avoiding this or that: Nay, stay thy self and take up these,
and so shall thou have peace; but these must be destroyed without any reserving.

1. If it first draw from the Covenant and Faith in Christ.

2. If it strengthen thy own will.

3. If it make flesh wanton, and so harden the heart, kill it.

Nay, Christ will destroy that kingly reason, which will need fight against God
and all his people: And that when God has said, Israel shall rest: Amalekites
says no. So this turns the truth of God into a lie.

We see then that the Church need not fear her Enemies, for God will root them
out of the earth, and have continual War with them that withstand his Truth and
Covenant: so that while thou sticks to him thou art safe: nay, and he will war
with the seed of the Flesh in man. Does he war against lust, and will daily by
his word? Nay, God is, and will be an enemy thereto; for the Law condemns it to
death, and the Gospel is the Executioner of the Law, and kills it in the heart
of man: but if man will spare these, God will destroy man with them, for they
must be destroyed, do thou what thou can to save them: for all Flesh is grass,
and thou thinks to preserve them, yet they must down, or else Israel and Saul
himself must perish.

But the power whereby thou see, that is Moses, praying and crying to God,
gave them one blow; and then at last Joshua, even Jesus, the Captain of Faith,
hewed them in pieces: So that the power is,

1. Prayer.

2. Faith waiting on God, when the heart is turned to pray: then victory, but
not by the power of Israel, not sword of Saul, but by Gods grace and arm; verse
7.1^

Blessed be thou of the Lord, I have performed the Commandments of the Lord.
Now when Samuel came to see what Saul had done, and to make known what God had
determined: Saul begins to justify himself, though he knew himself guilty:
and to keep peace within and approbation without: So that,

So it is with all naturally, that when God finds ou^ man by the light of his
Truth, that man labors naturally to justify himself, and to cover his guilt,
though to his destruction, rather than to confess, that he may have mercy.

So to Adam: so the Pharisees and the Lawyer willing to justify themselves.

1. For there is no power in nature to condemn it self.

2. Flesh cannot be, but it must needs have hold of something.

3. And the Soul must have something to uphold, for the natural of iniquity is
in every one: We all desir^ approbation. Thus all the World is busy in sewing
fig leaves to hide their own guilt.

And this stops the course of Faith and Prayer, every one labors still to make
good what he does get; peace within, approbation of others: Yet this
approbation we all desire: and so make best of the worst, if we may keep credit.

Hence so many excuses as here in Saul, when w^ seem to condemn our selves,
then we justify our selve^ and hope, because of our confession to find mercy.
I^ is a great point of simplicity to do good, and not t^ have an eye to it: but
still here arises a thought o^ being something, because of that: everyone is
approvin^ of the good, but thinks none of the evil in themselves, (...) so
imagins a power in themselves, which destroy Faith

It is but a poor comfort that man gets by his obedience to the Law: nay, God
will find out many (...) blaiting Lust, and Iniquity in thy heart, as
hereafter.

What means then: Here Samuel discovers his Hypocrisy, for he discovers,
wherein he had failed: So that

When man has justified himself, and hid himself in the depth of his own
counsel, yet there remains in man a Legion of Rebellion, which hinders his
peace, and which God will find out in the end: as to Adam, and the Young Man,
and the Rich Fool.

1. For man's pride arises from ignorance in himself.

2. Adam slips over these easily, and with little notice.

3. After Faith, and a desire to obey God, yet there remains a rebellious
flesh, and ease, and peace, which he would preserve.

Thus we all keep up a conceit of our selves: but then what means this
following of the World, this envy, hatred, these wringings, and pinchings, and
covetousness?

What means then Saul seeking to justify himself?

Samuel discovers his Hypocrisy: And that by bringing before him the spoil
that he had reserved underneath, and as in Saul, so in us: Saul had done
something, but there rested a whole herd to be destroyed: So that,

When a man has tasted of Gods love and mercy, and it may be has inclined to
do Gods will, yet there is a troup of rebellious lusts and affections
underneath, which both darkens the light of Faith, and keeps man's Soul in
bondage: and either they or we must be destroyed.

Thus to the young man, Matthew. 19. The rich fool, and Adam.

1. For all men, like Israel, think they should have rest, so soon as they are
passed the Red Sea; when, alace, there are bitter waters to drink; hunger and
thirst to be endured, and the Amalakites to be slain.

Here is the daily exercise and power of Faith and of Christ in man, in
subduing these enemies under foot, to the perfecting of our freedom, and
establishing everlasting Righteousness.

That man daily feeling these Rebels within him, may see his Weakness and
Rebellion, and may flee daily from himself to God for victory: For he that
partakes of Christ's death once through Faith to his Redemption by the power of
the same death, dies daily; that so h^ may live into God.

Thus deal Hypocrites, when looking upon the^ own righteousness, grow high
minded, and strongly presumptuous, not feeling these base filthly lusts, be^
lie underneath: nay, thus we imagine to our selves a^ opinion more by a
thousand times, than we enjoy indeed: Thus are those deceived, who tasting some
sweetness of Faith and Gods love, sit down and thin^ all things is done, and
Heaven obtained, when indee^ they then shrink from God, and themselves too; an^
then arise a Legion of Lusts that are unkilled.

There is then a beginning of steadfastness in going on in Religion, these
beginnings may utterly fa^ where the others follows not: there is a believing
(...) Righteousness, but there must be a believing by the same faith, and a
daily feeding on Gods goodness and truth.

1. And hereby appears how apt man is to flatter himself without cause,
thinking all is well, when it is nothing so: When the Prophet comes, and by the
Word of Truth divides betwixt the marrow and the bone: For thou say, Thou
believe God and thy confidence is in Christ, and that he is, and will be a
Father unto thee; but what means the leaning to, and looking at the works of
thy hand, or quality of heart, and increase of confidence thereby: Why then is
there such seeking for, and trusting to thine own power? why art tho^ then so
vexed for want, joy, peace and fullness? Why then do thou so dote upon the
World? so lifted up it fullness, and cast down in want? Thou say, Thou lover
God and Christ, and his Word; what means then this self-love? wherein thou have
always a self aim?

2. This casting off Christ: and seeking ease in the flesh; What means then
this little respect to the Gospel and so careful for all things else?

3. What means this censuring, and judging and condemning others, this opening
their shame, and this preying into their faults; this back-bitting and
insulting, ^his hardness of heart, and unmercifulness to them in ^ant? this
pinching and grudging, and grinding their ^aces; this contention and
unwillingnesse to forgive? ^hou say, thou hate the World, Sin and Lust;
but, ^hy then is thy willing serving of it, and this rejoicing (...) it, and
mourning for want, and this total employment about it: and these burning lusts,
and fiery ma^ice? Thou say, Thou will suffer any thing for Christ, as
Peter: but, what means then thy swearing and fore-swearing, for these great
vexations, for these ^arthly crosses, and this fear of loss, and danger of
Death? So that it is not as we imagine, when the Word of Truth comes.

O! that men would cleave to this Word of Truth in Spirit, it would either hew
Agag in pieces, or else Saul should be cut off thereby.

O! that we lived daily in the true understanding of our selves, this would
destroy vain glory and pride: We think because we have now a good motion, and
^hen a sweet joy, and feeling, that God must needs love for these; but we see
not the lowing and roaring rebellions of the heart that fight against Christ.

And thus most men deal with Saul, by halfs in Religion, because they begin to
look with Flesh at the conquest that they have gotten, when thousands are
behind, verse 15.

We have brought then from the Amalekits. Here Saul again excuses himself, and
pleads their intent to offer Sacrifice, as afterward, verse 21. So that,

So thus in all men not mortified through Faith, would still have both Joy and
Faith, and a Will and Word of his own.

So with Adam, so with Peter; He would have had case in the Flesh, and Christ's
company too, so the young man, Matthew. 19. see all unmortified.

For, till by the power of God in the cross, the Flesh be subdued; it seeks to
live as well as the spirit, and save it self: For there is a self-confidence, a
wisdom and a love: which would turn all to its own advantage, which indeed
should know or effect nothing at all, and so draws the mind after it.

Thus, we dally with God in the way of Faith, by sparing things that are
profitable pleasures.

And thus man excuses this, or this: I do to follow the World that I may be
better sitted to serve God, and to do good to others: and so it appears? that
it is the end indeed: nay, thus we dissemble with God: For when we say, We
would live in freedom and joy: that in that joy we might better praise God our
maker: but the end indeed, is for the good and ease of our selves, and the
flesh especially, in things that perfect our ease and peace: and though the
mind be thereby ensnared, we yet deal easily with it, and thus we still reserve
our fat things, and deal favorably with them, and these are our greatest
enemies.

Then Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own eyes: This is Gods
message wherein he reckons up his favors to him: and secondly, his rebellion
against those: I raised thee up of nothing, why did thou fall on the prey as
though I would not have rewarded thee? This Message and Word was to convince
Saul of his disobedience: and,

1. He shows the door of mercy.

2. The way of Life; So that,

The free grace of God is the fountain of life to man, and when man is vile and
nothing in himself, then is the power of God most shown.

He that humbles himself shall be exalted, He has filled the hungry, and sent
the Rich empty away.

For so is man capable of grace, and the power of God is magnified in
weakness: What is it that stops thee free grace of God to man, that is that
strength and worth of man, that thinks he has; for were man little enough, he
would pray, cry, and believe, and fear: all mischief enters in at the door of
pride, or rather, this is the door that shuts our Christ: we still muse what we
are, but not what God is: Then in this little and low condition to wait on God
in the Word of Truth, and by Faith to walk in his power, shall destroy all
enemies but when we fight with our power, and so cut and carve to please the
flesh, and when we depart from the Word of Truth, we never prosper: not that
man by thinking basely shall procure peace, but when simply he is so: so God
is, and will be with him, but man's perverse way is, to turn from his God, and
fall upon his prey.

So that, the daily way of misery to man is his disobedience and forsaking the
way of Faith, and turning to the prey.

So Adam, so David, and Paul to his Revelations, so the Prodigal would have the
prey; so Demas turned to the prey; nay, almost all have been caught in this
snare:

For such is the force of sensual lust and imagination, that where God does not
mightily preserve, man still turns hither.

For the Word of Truth is the Life of man, which, while it lives in man it
suffers nothing else to live in him: but when man turns from this, in comes a
Legion of lusts and base affections, and imaginations, but this lays all low.

Thus we fall on the prey of the World, which ensnared all men, even believers
themselves, thus God bids flee the filthiness that is in the World through
lust, and promises that he will be with us, but this we forsake and gather
Mammon before hand, and fall on the prey, and this choaks all.

So believers dots also on the liberty of the Gospel, and turns it to
wantonness, and turns to the prey; yea, whatever God does to man, man turns to
it, and simplicity of Faith is foresaken.

But see our safety, God being our portion and freedom and his Word our Life;
so shall we live for ever, verse 20

And Saul said, I have obeyed: Here is Saul's second excuse, wherein he defends
himself, that he had done the Commandment of God, which indeed he had done in
part; for he had killed many of the Amalekits, but yet with reserving part of
the Spoil to himself.

1. He sought honor of Samuel. Therefore he brought Agag alive, and slew him
not.

2. The Riches, in sparing the Cattle, under the pretense of sacrifice: so it
is with all double hearts in Religion: So that,

Man by the light of the Law, shining into him; and working fear by the light
of the Gospel manifested, working freedom; may restrain and rectify many
things with a seeming obedience: yet still with a reservation to himself: and
some gain to be gotten, which mars all.

As the young man, Matthew. 19. Had done much, with a reservation of false
confidence Ezzra, 3.3. Their hearts ran after covetousness; so those
Libertines, 1. Pet. They promised liberty, they had great swelling Words, etc.
Satan is as a Saphira, Acts 5.

For nothing goes through flesh but Faith in God, and the power of God in man,
this purifies all: but flesh would still have something, and that makes our
obedience not simple.

For man is seldom so separate from himself in pure love unto God, but some
self-love there is, that is to his fleshly will sticking to him, and purloyning
something into his pouch to feed flesh with all.

For man's natural power being enlightened by the evidence of Truth, discovering
both the happiness of believers: and the misery of the rest: does produce in
man an obedience according to his apprehension: and so far as the blind light
works upon him: but he never c mes to a real and actual denial of himself: but
there is a building up of his hope thereby: not to a simple hearty believing,
and so living: but still with a reservation of believing his own work and love
of himself, and such is the Religion of the most.

We spare the King and far of the Flock: for there is a reservation almost in
all: For, when man would bel^eve and lieve for ever, and with all their hearts;
see what a reservation hangs on Righteousness, Reason and self-Conceit, so we
believe God, but neither because we are such and such.

So there is a stop in our Faith: we still have an eye to something else in our
Faith.

And so for love, we love God, but with this limitation, not so much, because,
it is good in it self, and truly manifest to us: and that it is good to us, and
so man's self still comes in, for want of mortification: For hardly do we any
thing wherein we have not some respect to our selves.

And for the Word, we see Religion is the only way, and God the only good, but
still there sticks in us a great lyking of the World: we hope for a good in it,
and find a marvelous sweet therein.

So that none has any reason to be proud in Religion, though he have obtained,
and done that which many have not done, yet there is still more that he knows
not, loves not, does not; it may be thou have a little Faith, and now and then
trusts God, but for the most part denies him, and trusts thy self and arm of
flesh, or trusts him for this, or that reason: so a little love to God, but a
full love to the World, and thy self. And here we see, that in all Religion two
things poisons all, viz. vain glory, and a beloved World: for, First, we still
would have it; therefore we limite all to this only, for we have so many
reservations for the World, as a care, time, love, delight, etc. Yet God is
shut out of all; yea, after experience of Gods love, how freely do we return to
the World again.

Religion then is an absolute yielding our selves to God and his grace, without
reservation of thoughts: that Agag, that great Captain of michief even
Infide^itie, and fleshly Confidence, wherein Amalekite ^rusted: yea, the Infant
and Suckling in broad Lusts, and ^pen; these outward objects must be slain, and
that by (...) pure believing, and loving obedience to the Fathers ^ill: here we
see, that all coverings will not serve the turn. For when Samuel comes, all is
destroyed; well-worth him, that is open-hearted, to confess and live by mercy.

See the difference of men's double hearts, that are still building up and
excusing, and always on their own side to build up man: But Faith sets a man
against himself, and always on Gods side, pulls him down, and all things in
man: For often greatest noughtinesse is covered, and hatched under pretense of
Religion, as that of Jezabel to Naboth.

See in the World, what covering of lust, and oppression, what greediness,
when man thinks that for Religion he should be respected, but Faith and Love
teaches no such thing?

Then Samuel said to Saul, Has the Lord as great delight. So Samuel pursued
him still by the Word of the Lord out of all holds, and yet by the Word of the
Lord, opposes his good seeming intent: laid down by a question, that Saul
might make answer, and be convinced in himself.

1. He casts out all conceits of a Sacrifice to please God, while the heart is
not subject.

2. He illustrats it by way of comparison of these two, that is, Obedience is
better than Sacrifice.

3. He amplifies it by the contraries, for Rebellion is as the sin of Witch
craft.

4. He denounces Gods righteous judgments against Saul, wherein the cause is
in Saul: to declare the quality thereof: The judgment it self, has rejected
thee, etc. First, note, how Samuel pursues him, till he make him yield at last
to the judgment? So that,

This the proper effect of the Gospel, viz. The proper and kindly working of
Gods Truth in man, is still to bring man down and all things in him, to lay him
low in himself: that he may be exalted through mercy i^ Christ.

Let man deny himself, and become a Fool: saying In me dwells no good thing, I
am not able to think an^ good thought; all our Righteousness is as a filthy
clout, Phil. 3. All these are but dross.

Thus the Word brings all Sacrifice to naught, the Law given in Thunder to
shake man's heart: the Promise made freely, without any respect of man's
Righteousness, that man may purely believe.

Nay, and the power whereby all is accomplished is in God, not in man; that
man, li^e a beggar, daily may wait there: Thus it brought Paul to his knees.

First, brings man to fear and weakness, before it bring him to Faith, and it
keeps him in fear, that he may rest in God.

For man is grown proud and wise against God, else, he had never stood need of
his Word; for it should have been a living Word in his heart for ever: as Paul,
The weapons of our warfare are mighty, to bring down strong holds.

But see the very truth is perverted by man, for though Samuel come to beat
Saul of his hold, yet he still finds other shifts: l ke a wily Fox: So men
grow wise and cunning, and are listed up thereby: yea, most yield fleshly
obedience to this spiritual truth, and thereby becomes holy in conceit.

Others conceiving gloriously of Christ, and thence grow high minded: for
knowledge puffs up, and so becomes a man of high thoughts: but that man in whom
the Word lives, and man by it keeps the eye inward toward himself, and keeps
down all high thoughts in a quiet sense of their own Weakness and Vanity, to
attend with a crying and praying heart for mercy: which is sweetly enjoyed and
not lifted up: but man freed and not hardened thereby: but out of feeling of
himself, is pitiful toward all, judges none but himself.

This shows the wonderful power of Gods truth that it will make Saul to bow, so
of any man, even Pharisees for the present, though afterward they get up again:
Now it is not Sacrifice that he looks for, but a believing loving heart: So
that,

All Service and Sacrifice that men seem to offer to God, not flowing from a
loving heart, are nothing with him.

These are like the cutting off a dogs neck, Isa. 1. Who required these things
at thy hand? Psalm. 50 I reprove thee not, because of thy Sacrifice, wherewith
shall I appear, etc.

For he stands not need of thee, neither can he be moved by them, unless we
think as Balaam, with his seven Bollocks and Rams.

These are born of the flesh, Children of the bond Woman and not of God, nor by
promise: Righteousness is nothing, when we make it away to Faith, but when it
is an expression of a believing heart then it is sweet.

Now it is not Sacrifice that he condemns, but the cursed opinion that goes
with it: Like that in the Law, a daily singing, a daily sacrifice: so with us,
when we do it with an evil intent, and not out of a simple mind.

But we have one sacrifice that is Christ only, who has sacrificed life and
all, and that is it that pleases God.

Thus it is with us also, our obedience is but to sacrifice to our God at
Gilgall, that is, to purge sin, and to please God: that we may get an opinion
that God is well pleased for that: but this opinion ma^s all, it is not our
obedience that is any thing to God in the Work, but our yielding heart: For
most have looking to that which they have done, some looking at it, as Pharaoh.

This crosses the free sacrifice of love; it is a great point of simplicity
in the hight of our obedience still to be more vile, and this is the power of
Faith, for it shows from whence we had it, not by our own power; Nay, when even
in our own selves, we are opposite to God: he has vouchsafed his grace.

The only sacrifice of God is a broken and contrite heart, sacrifice thy self,
and it is in stead of all thy lusts, desires, case, peace, life and all; and
when thou have done that, thou shall have, as Christ, had victory over all; a
Resurrection, a Freedom and a Glory: and so shall sit at Christ's right hand by
Faith till all be subdued to thee, and then man offers sacrifice of praise,
confessing his name, not to purge sin, but in expression of Gods love and
manifestation, and that in love and mercy and not in sacrifice.

Obedience is better than Sacrifice; So that,

That which is accepted, is an obedient heart, subject to the Fathers will in
love, is the Life of all Religion, and better then a thousand Sacrifices, Isa.
50.

God opened mine ear, and I was not disobedient, and Samuel said, Speak Lord,
for thy Servant hears, Christ yielded himself to the Father: Also David, the
will of the Lord be done, and Christ to the Pharisees, Ye tithe mint, annise
and cummin etc.

Psalm. 8. If my people had hearkened.

For God is the sole Lord over all, and man a silly creature, and as the life
of a subject is in obedience to a Prince, so here, is man's happiness in
yielding to Gods will; for that must stand whether man be obedient or not, for
disobedience was that which cast off Adam and Israel: that is, because man will
needs be God.

Now obedience is twofold, of Faith and Love. Obedience of Faith is, when the
clear evidence of the Truth of the Promise, and man's Reason and Wisdom ^eelds
to that Truth: as Moses at the Red Sea, and Abraham: When man sees no reason in
himself, that God should or will keep promise, but the contrary, he seeing
nothing but rebellion and iniquity, and yet stick^ to that, where all
reasonable ways of the World, and all threats of Satan are overcome, though
the World threaten want: yet he believes fullness, for this is the will of God
that ye believe.

But most believe not, but rebel in this, for though God has promised, yet we
obey not, believe not, but give the promise the lie: and say, That God will not
do, and therefore fear.

So that infidelity is the great Rebel that strikes at the Truth of God, which
a man cannot endure.

This Faith also mars not obedience, in neither limiting God a time but
waiting: nor a measure, but believing that it shall be our rest. Obedience of
love is the end of the Law, where the love of Christ enforces man: and this is
a sweet and free yielding up of a man's life unto God, as a Sacrifice, Romans 12.
Which cannot be till our bodies and flesh be sacrificed. and then in the Spirit
of our minds we are revived according to the will of God

This is not to be a foundation of Faith, but a necessary expression of the
love and goodness of God to man: This flows from Faith naturally, there is
nothing but rebellion and lust, if Faith fail to wait on God: God does this
obedience, and man flees, and man seeks shifts, or some device.

The intent is, doing what he commands not, because the Law forces so many
thievish hearts are bound to be true, but not from the heart.

And warms of Gods love in the heart to suffer for his sake, what ever befalls,
as the Martyrs did: but this shows the little obedience in man: For indeed
neither will ye yield, but the old contention remains, whether shall be God:
Faith and Love is the obedience and life of man, and when man lives in (...)
yielding temper, nothing can vex him: let impossibility come, and he is
obedient and suffers: And so was Christ, obedient unto the death of the Cross.

But, while man has a will and love of himself, he is never freely obedient,
but would frame Gods will to his: and to hearken to Satan's voice raither than
Gods: So that,

An open ear to hear, and a heart to believe and obey the voice of God, and the
Word of Truth, is better than all seeming sacrifice a man can offer, Isa. 45.
Incline your ears, etc. Then shall ye hear the voice of God, and he that hears,
shall live: He opened mine ear, and I was not disobedient.

So to that end, God has given his Word to man, that thereby he might be
called back again to God: Therefore God says, cry aloud to man, and bid him
return and come and live for ever, and so he that has an ear to hear, let him
hear.

When God sets his love, and mercy, and truth to, or before man: and when man
attends and meets God here, then is that Word accomplished to man.

But Christ may still say, Who has believed our report, as to Israel, but
Israel would not hear: for man has two Preachers before him still.

1. Satan, who by his Ministers, the World and the Flesh daily, whispers, and
calls man to obey: as to Christ, Satan says, I will give thee all those: the
World calls, here is Riches, the flesh calls, here is peace, ease and honor:
God calls, and says, Here is all in me: Now look whose voice takes place, and
is believed, so man prospers.

Man hears as God manifests, and herein is a reasonable mystery and spiritual
power: by the one, man grows wise, and by the other, faithful and obedient.
For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft.

Man through rebellion of his own heart, and stubbornness of his own will, runs
away from God: forsakes the Covenant of peace, casts off obedience and himself
to misery in the end, as Pharaoh and Saul here.

SERMON XXIII.
1. Sam 4.3.4.5. So when the people were come into the Camp, the Elders of
Israel said, Wherefore has the Lord smitten us this day before the Philistines.
When God had governed Israel by Judges for many years, and manifested his
power and truth by his Priests and Prophets, in bringing them into the Land of
Promise, according to the Covenant; and given them many victories over their
enemies. Israel grew secure and presumptuous, yea, the Egyptian Priest himself
grew so careless of the Lords sacrifice: yea, even Ely himself, committed them
into the hands of his Sons, who filled their bellies and lusts, and that
without reproof: Whereupon the Lord intended to destroy that vain confidence,
and to proceed against the house of Ely, which he fore-tells in the second
Chapter, by a man of God; and in the third, by Samuel, which in the fourth
Chapter, he brings to pass. First, by giving Israel into the hands of their
enemies once again, and then delivering the Ark into the hands of the
Philistines, destroying Ely and his two sons.

After Israel had received the overthrow at the hands of the Philistines, they
make way for a second, by running further from God; So that,

This is the way of man, for man by every affliction is either brought nearer
to God, or else driven farther from him, and so makes way for greater evils to
befall him.

As David, who to hide his shame, ran into murder: so Adam having sinned to
hide his shame, hides himself from God; so Saul to the Witch of Endor; like a
child that grows more cunning, after the whip, more w^lly, but not more wise:
And this through stubborness and hardness, and pride of wit. But Joshua, when
they f^ll before Ai, never ceased till he had found out the curse from God, and
cast out the execrable thing.

Many things light upon man that touch not his heart but is so blinded with
lust and self-love; that the light of the truth leads him not out, but his wit
will needs guide him; God does nothing in vain

If man regard not Process, or any hatchment that is coming, he shall see that
a writ of Rebellion is coming: and if he regard not that, than a Bailiff comes,
and to prison he must: and that God by the righteousness of the Law may bring
down man's high heart, that he may depend on mercy.

Thus man grows more vile after a judgment to prevent it, but no more yielding
and obedient to ^scape it. It may be, God has taken away thy wife, thy husband
and father, thy stay and rest; and yet thou only invents new devices to rise,
but returns not to God that smote thee. But look for it, if God have com^ near
thee and thou yet blind, he will come nearer thee yet, if he intend thee good.

Shall God be still mocked, to see that nothing does man good, till his heart
be brought down and flee all, that he may rest in God? For he has as much to
do, to bring down thy wit, as thy will, and to destroy thy carnal confidence,
and draw thee from thy object. All misery come in at the door, that is by
fleeing from God.

Yea, thus does God deal with his people and children, he delivers them into
the hand of their enemies: and then they think to work it out: and still God
makes their works void; then they seek to know all, and he makes that void,
etc. and suffers naught to prosper, till man rest in Faith.

The Ark had remained in Shilo three hundred years, from J^shua's time: as Jos.
18.7. All the time of the Judges, and now must for the security of Israel be
removed away: So that,

The long continuance of the Gospel is no argument to prove the perpetuity
thereof in any place.

As to the Jews and Churches of Asia and Corinth. So when man grows more
secure thereby, God must remove it, even so to man,

Thou have lived in the light and peace with God, but if a man grow wanton
thereby, the light will grow to darkness: If with Israel thou grow confident
of these in thy self, because of these privileges, they will not stand.

In the words, note Isreal's fainting and trouble ^f heart upon their overthrow.

1. Their fleshly device for future safety.

2. Their vain confidence in that device, that it might save them.

3. Their vain joy arising thence.

4. The fear of the Philistines.

5. Isreal's overthrow, and loss of the Ark, when the Lord had not given them
the Victory, they fainted and began to enquire and murmr, as they did by the
Word of Samuel, but not by believing hearts; but now, because they had a
Prophet, they were strong enough: So that,

A faithless way is a fearful fainting way, and a fainting way is always
vexed and tormented at the heart by every cross, where faith waits not in
subjection to Gods will and truth.

So the Disciples, Why do you fear, O you have little faith?

But says David, I will not fear what man can do unto me: no, not if ten
thousands compass me about Mat. 16. Peter was compassed with fear when Christ
should suffer, because he savoured not the things of God.

Nay, Experience teaches us, that faithless men are ever afraid at every
rumor of danger: At the last day, men's hearts shall fail them for fear of that
day: When a believing man, with David and Paul goes through all dangers with
courage: as those, Heb. 11. And the Martyrs, nay, in man's self he shall find,
that when faith is darkened, he fears every thing, but when he believes, (...)
overcomes all.

For man walks in darkness, therefore is the way so fearful: as crosses
threaten some ruin to man's fleshly Kingdom, which lust would not part with
all, and he sees no other. This is it that makes the World so full of f^ar:
yea, other faith, fear or security fills all: nay, every cross to the
worlding gives a wound to the heart: But, What shall his case be, when all
shall be taken away.

Even so is all the Power and Will of man, whereby he stands full of fear,
because he trusts not God. Not a fe^r in regard of our weakness, and so
attending on faith, but a bottom fear, for want of God and his power: and
therefore, a running to man's shifts.

No safe way to man then, but by believing under the cross, and never to judge
according to our selves, but still s^^ing and feeling the weakness of man to
wait on him in patience.

Come, let us fetch the Ark from Shilo. Here is their device, which seem like
to them: but prospered not:

So that, All fleshly devices of Man's wit, without sim^le-hearted believing,
may gain a brain hope: but shall fa^l and come to naught, when man comes to his
(...)

Fleshly wisdom is a fool in Gods matters, ever leading man to a way that will
not prosper, though it shape like to the eye of man.

By this, Satan beguiled Eve, and thought to have seduced Christ to argue the
Fathers love by Wisdom, that is not subject to the Law of God, when Israel
believed, Gideon, Jonathan, and David overcame with a few, contrary to all
reason: When they eyed reason only, then Saul's Armor and David's one hundred
and fifty thousand could not prevail.

1. For God hides his ways from the wit of man, and reveals it to Babes.

2. Satan lurks here to oppose the way of Faith, God has revealed his Wisdom:
but hereby Man becomes wise against God, and gives him the lie.

Thus man devises a device against God, and thinks thereby to thrive: and
Satan thereby befools man, propounding unto him a likely way, great power and
approbation, that he may fix thereon; and yet has not God in the very eyes of
the World frustrated their devices: as when thou have great Riches, Land,
Wisdom, Friends, and what not, had built him an nest that he might never want:
yet, he had never good days therewith: but either he has spent all to
beggerie, or a slave to it while he has it: or a languishing of sickness: had
not Gods foolish way of faith been better.

Thus Satan casts a mist before the eye of Faith when he would bring God and
his way within compass of man's wit.

Now in the Church, we grow wise to comprehend the very purpose of God, and
give a reason of his will, and set a law to his justice: and feign a reasonable
way of believing, and his free will and the foreseeing of Faith: God choose
man: but it is so reasonable a Doctrine, it cannot prove true: for Gods truth
was ever foolishness to wise men.

See the difference of Gods way and man's wit.

1. The one is always dark and uncertain.

2. The other sure, the one forsakes God and his Word, the other cleaves to it;
The one seems well and ends ill, the other contrary.

The safe way of man is not to trust the device of man, for thou have seen
these fail thee; nay, when they seem likest the other quiet contrary,
therefore never dispute how like or unlike, but lay down all and believe.

Had thou no Lust, nor Will, nor Wit to trust to: then had Satan no power
against thee: For either thy Wit, or thy Will draws thee, on thy Will, when
thou art not subject in patience: thy Wit, when thou will do Gods Work, thine
own way is here.

They would fight Gods battles, but would not attend on him at Shilo, his own
place. But would draw him from thence to them, so we would have God with not
but not wait on him: we would have the promise fulfilled, but not wait the
time; So that,

The sure way is to wait on God in his way, though we see no way out of Reason.

Abraham abode in Canaan as a stranger, Moses and Joshua at Jordan, etc.

For the vision is for an appointed time.

Thus man works his own woe, when he either invents a way of his own, and will
not stay: or joins fleshly Wisdom, for the furtherance of Gods will; or
impatience of delay, appoints a time: Take heed of preserving any thing before
God, and his Work and Promise. Many are never well, unless the Father be still
playing with them.

That it may save us. Here is self-confidence, not that they thought the Ark
could save them: but because if they had the Ark with them, God would save
them: This is not simple believing, but with relation to something else than
God; So that,

Such is carnal confidence in man, it is a snare of Sa^an wherein he intangles
men to draw the heart to look at some Work or Gift of God, and so to believe,
because of that; and not for his simple truth and providence.

So David thought, that because of the thousands of Israel, he should preserve
himself; and Israel in Aarons time, These are thy Gods, O Israel, Psalm. 30.
Thou have made my Mountain strong, it shall never be removed. The Pharisees
they were righteous.

For this is to build a house on the sand, for there is no cause that moves God
to do good, or man to believe God, but his simple Word and Truth, though God
shine and manifest himself in all things; yet when the Soul is turned from God
to them, they become snares, as the brazen Serpent, for the mind must have
something to rest on.

So that, when God is wanting, Satan the God of this World brings in the
fullness of the World, and the certainty thereof, and presents them to man.

1. Fullness of Riches and Friends will supply.

2 Self-righteousnesse, and many lusts and failings of love; saying, They will
preserve thee.

3. Or, a carnal beholding of Christ, as here to the Ark

4. Yea, believers are thus drawn, when Christ lives not in them, they suffer
with him: but in all there is a bottom darkness, and fear of hardness and
self-pride.

Here, Satan lays the foundation of all iniquities; for why does man covet,
oppress, deceive; but that the World may be his stay, and his confidence? as,

1. Either a blind security, from little meddling; or, a blind presumption,
because he has this or that more than others: and yet no more certain, nor
better satisfied.

Thus, the blind World is deceived: every man staying his mind, by looking at
something that he has, or labors to get, something that he has not; that it
may save him, as the rich fool; nay, were it for thy riches and friends, where
were thy believing.

Thus, all things become snares, when the mind is fixed on them, and man ties
God to them: which is not a believing of God, but of that portion.

We should work Righteousness, but not look at that Righteousness, attend on
the Ark, but believe not in it, but rejoice in it with God.

Adam might use all creatures, but not see a good in them, it is a great point
of simplicity to enjoy all, and not to depend on it; but rejoice in it with
God, and thereby to see the Fountain from whence it flowed, and the weakness
of man: Nay, such is the deceit thereof, that it lifts man up above him self;
man shouts before the victory. But there will come a day of mourning to
Israel, this Ark and Riches shall be taken away:

SERMON XXIV.
1. Samuel 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Then the Philistines took the Ark of God, and carried
it to Ashdod from Eben-ezer.
THus we see the fall of Israel for trusting in their inventions, and forsaking
the power and truth of God. The Ark is now taken from them, and Hophnie and
Phinias the Priests also: and now they are lest desolate, for Eli is now dead,
according to the Word of the Lord, which we see must stand: So that,

No power or device of man shall be able to dissannul, or make void the Word of
God: but it shall stand and be accomplished both to believers, and against the
wicked, though man fight against it, and seek to escape it.

He has spoken, and shall he not perform it: Yea, Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but his Word shall not pass: He has said, That Saul shall be cut off,
all the World cannot uphold him: He has promised to Abraham, nothing shall
hinder: neither four hundred and thirty years time: nor the power of Pharaoh,
nor difficulties in the Wilderness; nor forty Kings in Canaan: Has he said,
That Messiah shall come, he shall be born in the fullness of time? Has he said
He will preserve David: all the power of Saul, or Goliath shall not kill him?
Has he promised Life to believers, then though Satan rebel and rage, yet the
promise shall be Yea, and Amen? For he is not man, that he should lie God shall
justify his righteous judgments, that he has done nothing to man, but he
has told it to man before.

Hereby appears the purity of Faith, and power of God, under the cross: that
though man think to shift it, yet judgment shall come: And though man see no
Reason, nor help, yet abiding by the Word of God: he shall find help and be
delivered: For David says, Psalm. 15. An honest man will keep his Word though
to his hinderance, much more God: For there is nothing to hinder him, He rules
man and not man him.

But man fights against this, and rather strives to make the Truth of God a
lie, than to yield and be subject; God has said, He will destroy that man,
that runs on in wickedness: and that the wicked, that forget God shall be
turned into hell: and yet these men believe it not, but make God a liar, as the
Serpent did to Eve, and say, Tu^h, God regards not good or evil: or that he
is not that he is: or does not that which he has spoken: So the stubborn casts
off his Fathers threats, till he be cast out of doors.

Others think they shall devise some way hereafter to escape: they take any
course, rather than believe him: and yet we have seen it with our eyes: Did he
not say, He would cut off Saul, and destroy Jerusalem; cast off the Jews, and
call in the Gentiles: Remove his Candl^stick, and take away his Kingdom, and
has he not done these? Nay, has he not said, That the drunkard shall come to
poverty, and shame: and does he not say, That the userers and oppressors shall
not prosper to the third generation, and that the generation of the just shall
be blessed, and do we not see it well.

Know then, though thou make a mock of it, and of us poor silly flesh, as thou
art: and cast it off, and thinks to escape: Yet be sure; it will meet with
thee, He should not be a God of truth if thou perish not, holding on thy
course: but thou will reply, Does he not say also, That this brings a heart
that cannot repent, and thou more unpat than before? But he did not excuse his
Word to the Ninevites: yet, for the condition of Repentance was understood his
general promise; If he return and forsake his way, he will have mercy. So that
the alteration was in the Ninevites, not in God.

Nay, how often does believers start from this, and believe rather their own
devices than God, has he not said: That nothing but Faith and Love avails: and
yet we fix our eyes and hearts on something else: Nay, we believe the truth,
because of something else, and not all things for the truths sake; neither
because of this or that: raither than because the truth has spoken.

S^ that the way of safety is to believe God in faithfulness: shall he speak
and not man regard? Therefore, if thou have never so likely means to uphold
thee in the flesh, yet if thy heart run from God therein, it will not prosper:
and though thou see no way of safety, yet abide patiently by the Word, and
wait not what thou would have done, but what he says: For the vision is for an
appointed time: but though we have a sure Word, we are to stay the appointed
time: for we would be now eased, then comforted; yet rest: thou have a sure
foundation, and it may be thou must become yet more weak; Thy Wisdom
Righteousness and Power must yet be more trodden down: that so nothing may live
in thee, but truth only: As with Abraham, when there was nothing but the truth
of the Promise left.

The Philistines took the Ark of God. The fear of the God of Israel, was upon
all Nations, as upon the Philistines here in these Words. 1. The Philistines
taking the Ark and carreing it to Ashdod, one of their chief Cities.

2. Their setting it up by Dagon their God, the fall of Dagon at the presence
of the Ark.

3, Their repairing and setting up again.

4. The second fall, with the loss of his head and hands.

First, the Ark was taken away, for Israel was grown secure, because of Samuels
words. The Ark, and Eli the Priest, they were proud, and fat in their own
conceit: and so had turned Faith into a blind presumption, and security:
therefore, it was taken away: So that,

When Man by reason of any gift, or privileges: grows proud and secure in
himself: not sensible of his own weakness and power; and the promise of God:
this is the way to lose it.

When David was lifted up in his high mountain, he was soon brought low: and
when Paul was lifted up in abundance: he had a prick in the flesh: When Israel
made a Covenant with death, God disannul'd it. If Nebuchadnezzer be lifted up,
upon his Babels he must be brought down amongst the Beasts: The Jews being a
people always boasting, they came to be no people.

1 So thus we forsake God, and cleave to the creature

2. Hereby simplicity of believing is lost, and changed into vain and fleshly
confidence.

3. This is the way to purge the old heart, and to bring in the heart to God,
or else would man never return to him; if he should prosper.

4. Nothing more opposite to the grace of God, than the pride of man: This was
the sin of the Angels, being so proud, and doting upon their own excellencies,
they despised God in whom they should have been preserved.

And yet this is the snare we all fall into: we enjoy nothing, but the mind is
fixed on it, and grows proud of it, and imagines our selves to be strong and
safe, because of it: when it is only in the hand of God to be given, and taken
at his will, and pleasure, all gifts are to be rejoiced in, but not to be proud
of; while we rejoice only, the mind is kept humble: seeing the fountain, and
feeling his weakness: but pride hardens and makes secure.

Nay, what gift is it we look not at, and think our selves the better for it:
and that our Faith and Hope is nourished by these as much as Gods truth and
love is enjoyed: Has not the rich man more confidence, that he shall not want
than the poor man? has not the righteous man more confidence, his state is
good, than the desolate wretch? and yet his righteousness, as his own, brings
no ground to believe, but only Gods free grace.

Is this any thing but Pride and Security? and making the arm of flesh his
stay: Yea, thus are believers drawn: take we heed, that this be not the way for
our Land to lose all: we shall bragg of our peace, till we lose it, and of our
pride, till we be subdued: yea, of our wealth till we have lost all: yea, of
the Gospel, till it be taken from us, as here they did the Ark.

But it is Gods goodness to cross all his, in that wherein they are misled;
that man may see what a weak creature he is, and what a weak staff he has
trusted to, as the World, and now is gone; as knowledge, and now as he had
neither known God, nor himself.

But know, there will come a parting day from thy dearest object; thy careful
Father, tender Mother, dearest Infants, loving Brother and Sister: and all,
because thou dot^st on them: The way of safety, is to enjoy all in God, but
trust nothing else, and forget all behind.

They brought the A^k, and set it by Dagon. They thought the God of Israel was
a terrible God, and all Nations stood in fear of him; therefore, they set him
by Dagon: thinking now, they should be sure to overcome: This Dagon was their
Idol, from the navel downward like a fish, and upward like a man; but this
prospered not them to win God; and Dagon, to trust to the World, and conceive
on this God, as they did on Dagon, it would not serve; So that,

No joining of the Ark and Dagon in our house, nor God and Mammon in our heart:
nor fleshly Wit, nor Gods Truth cannot suit together in Gods Kingdom.

Christ says, Ye cannot serve two masters, God and Mammon, Christ and Bellial:
Christ and Antichrist, if God, be God, serve him, Romans 5.6. Know you not to
whom ye give your selves Servants: his Servants you are. This is putting new
wine into old bottels: Christ gives the Reason, either he will love the one and
hate the other: or else forsake the one and stick to the other: The Soul cannot
intend two objects at once.

For, look what respect we have to the one, it draws from the other, God is a
spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and truth, trusted and loved with the
spirit of our minds; else no communion with him.

For as a man has a Garment, a Body and a Soul: So Religion, the garment is
the outward form of Actions, Righteousness, Holiness, the body is Truth:
Righteousness revealed to the Church, apprehended by man, but the Soul of it
is the Spirit, even God himself: as the Garment and Body without the Soul, are
but dead Corpse, and so this without God: So Paul distinguished man, into Soul,
Body and Spirit: by the Body, the outward Mass of flesh: the Soul, the vital
power and sensitive appetites, and natural understanding: by the Spirit, the
immortal, or inward part, in right disposing of which, stands man's peace and
happiness.

For if the Body be in health, and the Soul in Life amidst the fullness of its
natural objects: yet no rest, unless the Spirit be satisfied also: now when
the Spirit of our minds is drawn by sensual power to bodily objects, it wants
Life: But leaving all these, being guided to, and joined to God and Christ, it
is then satisfied: and the body cannot be nourished with the pleasure of the
Soul without food, nor the Soul with the food of the Body without its objects:
neither can the Spirit without them both, without its proper objects and food.

So that the confounding of these is the confusion, and unrest of the Soul.

And yet alace! it is thus in the World: men will needs join God and Dagon;
Christ and Mammon, without any trust, or thought of God at all, like beasts:
Others keep a form of God after the flesh: as they acknowledge his power, and
see his justice, and fear and worship him, with a far off worship: but the
heart bows to Mammon, loves and cleaves to him above all.

Nay, believers join these together, some put confidence in God, but more in
the World; yea, how soon after God has showed himself to man by his truth and
love; does he join heart and hands with the World again? So that indeed this
eats out all Religion amongst us.

And for fleshly Wisdom, how does this draw from simple believing, and asking a
reason, disputing with him: and joining the power of man and the power of God:
and so making man's free will a worker with God: So that it is, that man
believes not God.

True it is, that man is the subject in whom God works, yet the life and power
of believing and working is in God, and given to man by Faith according to the
Promise: and though Paul say, They are workers together, yet it is in regard of
manifestation, not of any power they had over the hearts of men.

Nay, let this God of Israel be our only stay, and lay Saul's Armor aside: so
man abiding in his simple and naked heart, full of weakness, like a Child,
waiting on Gods simple truth, the Father will come: but when man thinks to help
God, he mars all.

Neither is this a way to security, but only unto those that pervert all
truth unto their own destruction: For this is not a secure resting at all
adventures, as though the forlorn child could sit down at all adventures, and
say, It cannot help my self, my Father must come or I must be lost, but not
sensible of his own misery, and forlorn estate: As the Prodigal seeks, and
cries, and prays, till he come: this keeps him from sleeping: so with us.

So that, Religion is a simple thing and cannot mix it self with any thing,
like the Truth, that joins to none till death: but simply waits on God with
Faith and Love.

But when man brings in Dagon, and sets him up: the Soul of man abhors it: or
is joined to it, or is deceived: Then no bringing in of Religion into a fleshly
mind but first, Dagon must down: then Religion will stand.

If ever it be offered to a Worldly mind, it is not an unwelcome guess, for
the Life of that Soul is elsewhere: It is in the World and pleasures thereof:
but the Spirit is dead within them.

Dagon was fallen, Thus the power of God destroys the Idol; So that,

Thus the Truth of God prevails against the Idol, and will not suffer any thing
to stand equal with God in man's heart.

Paul destroyed circumcision from Christ, and Christ and the young man, his
weapons taken from him, his high thoughts pulled down.

And thus Gods warriors pulls down groves, and destroys Idols.

That God may thereby let man see the weakness of all power in the creatures.
This is the proper work of the Word to pull down high imaginations, and lay
them low as the valyes: This truth discovers the vanity of all the rest: but
we, with the Philistines, are still building up Dagon: nay, the Ark is not yet
come to us, because Dagon is yet standing.

But know, that it must down: So that man's happiness is in the fall of the
flesh, and all the power thereof.

SERMON XXV.
Mark 14.27. I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered.
CHrist by his death, has brough life; this death was spoken of by the
Prophets, and often foretold by Christ: and spoken of more at large, and now is
come by suffering to lose all: that he may gain all: after that he had
comforted His Disciples, and left them the pledge of his Love: he Prophesies of
the trouble that shall come to them hereby: that they may now begin to suffer
with him.

1. Grievous wants and persecutions to the offending of all.

2. That man shall not stand at that day by any power at all in man.

In the same he lets them see, that this is the way they must still follow.

This is a sacrifice of his death, whereby the same through Faith is confirmed
to us: He shows what shall become of the head; and that they should be offended:
So that,

Though we live in the light of the Gospel, and Sunshine of Gods blessing: yet
there will come a day that will dash all, and lay it in the dust.

So to David, Abraham, and the Rich Fool.

For life gotten by the creature must be laid away; Christ is the common stock
of believers.

Woe to the World, for all high mountains must down, thy dearest object and
thou must part: When Israel was boasting of the Temple, then was the Lord
removing it from Shilo, or destroying: that new Jerusalem might come from
heaven.

See how thou will do, when this night comes, we provide light, fire and
houses, against cold and night: but forget this night.

Let believers look for it in their greatest fullness and prosperity, for then
will God take away these, that he may be perfected in God.

I will smite the shepherd: Yea, Christ in the flesh, that he may rest solely
and simply in God. Abraham, and the Prodigal. Paul, I know none after the
flesh, by taking away fuel from it: So that,

This is the way to bring man to God, to purify Faith, to subdue the World,
and make Gods power known. This he does.

1. In that great tribulation that lies all on heaps.

2. By his love that kills all at the heart, but then we grow wise in the
flesh, to separate the confused heap.

3. By the cross that wears out all the flesh also.

Woe to them that have none other stay, how will they do, when their Shepherd
shall be smitten, like an Orphant, when the Father is dead?

See the vanity of man, that would still have some hold in the flesh.

But herein does God bless his people, when by clearness of his truth, he
destroys all imaginations: and by the cross, destroys all lust: and leaves
man nothing, but God and his Truth.

4. The freedom and happiness of man in knowing and savouring nothing after the
flesh, Romans 8. This is not to walk after the flesh but after the spirit.

For that which man thus knows, he knows not: and that which he loves not, thus
he lusts after; for thus to know God, or to love him, is not to know him: but
to know, will, and love all things in God, is to know him indeed: for that man
which knows in the flesh, it is not of God, but his own imaginations.

And there will come a scattering day to all fleshly imaginations, as to
Jerusalem, and David's high mountain, when knowledge shall vanish, and man's
fleshly hopes shall be destroyed: Where then will man appear? Thy Husband, thy
Child, thy Idol, thy Portion, thy Idea, thy Shapes of Fancy, all shall vanish;
yea, thy shepherd too, and nothing left, but God and his Truth: Where then will
thy fleshly heart rest? So that,

To believe and trust, when all is scattered, is to believe simply:

For to believe, when all is joy and peace, is rather to believe after the
flesh, and because of them; which is a turning from God, to his gifts, and then
we loss them: but to believe, when we are killed, as Job, and the Martyrs:
this is to believe God in and from God, and to love in and from him.

When Peter said, Though all forsake thee, etc. Here is Piters blind
confidence, wherein, note this comparison of his; though others shall, yet not
he; So that,

Pride of heart advancing it self above others, out of a self conceit of some
singular gift or power, is the ready way to a fearful fall below all.

As Proverbs, Pride goes before destruction, Luk 18. The Pharisees, So Israel,
So Pharaoh, The Jews, Nebuchadnezzar, and Lucifer.

For this is a turning away from God, and becoming a God to himself.

These conceits arise from the devil, and sets God at naught, destroys Faith,
and sets up man's fleshly conceits like a Queen.

These have been the ground of all factions in the Church.

God will leave this man free to himself, and others that dote upon him.

Thus we see, that man is a proud creature, he gets nothing but he is lifted up
by it: nay, most labor for abundance, not for necessity: so much as they may
excel.

This conceit sticks fast in all, arising from blindness in regard of our
fullness: for thou may see the iniquity of all men in thy self.

But faithful men fear and distrust themselves above all, relying on God.

I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Peter had a blind confidence, not
knowing the weakness of man: So that,

Man that is presumptuous and bold through fleshly confidence, and his
self-power shall never stand nor prosper.

There, this is David, Psalm. 30. and Israel against the Philistines: but David's
boasting elsewhere was in God only, through God, we shall do great things.

For man's standing and preservation is not of himself.

This is a sandy foundation, for as it was but flesh, so it boasted: So, when
the foundation was removed, the flesh feared.

Thus man walks presumptuously in all things thinking; I will do this or that,
when often he is prevented, and yet will not see it.

But that man walks safely, that walks in fear: for he trusts none but God, and
as he fears, so he believes: Faith in God makes man humble in himself.

No surer sign of a fall in believers: than when they begin to boast: nay, this
man denied above all; So that,

How far a man is lifted up in any thing, so far he must fall.

SERMON XXVI.
Mark 13.35.36. Watch ye, therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the
house come; whether at Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing; or in the
morning: lest he coming suddenly, find you sleeping.
WE see it verified in this our Brother which we heard the last day, viz. That
there is no confidence to be put in man; Neither for his wit, power, wealth, or
continuance: For we see it daily to be true, That his breath goes forth, and
he returns to his earth, etc.

Which is here apparent before us: For was not he with us at our last Brothers
burial: and behold, we are now come to accomplish his.

It Is not long, but even one day since that he was in life and liking as you
are, he sit as you sit, in place and credit of the World, as you are: he heard
where you ^ow hear: he prayed, where you now pray, he walked strong and lusty
upon this earth: which must now devour and shut her mouth upon him: and yet
could neither the Riches of this World, nor the cries of his Children, nor
favor of Friends beg him of Death, or keep him from the grave; but down he
must, to accomplish the Will of, and Purpose of his Maker.

And thus we see what a day: yea, what a night may ^ring forth, to make the
House des^late, the Children Fatherless: to separate the Brother and Sister:
never to ^ee each other any more, in the flesh.

And thus we see the Lord comes daily amongst us, though we think our selves
secure, because as yet we ^ave escaped that common judgment, so frequent in
^ur neighbor towns: yet, God lets us see that he has ^oe destroying Angels
than one which are kept in the ^cret of his Counsel, and stricks according to
his pur^ose; and will sometimes, by a long easy str^^k: ^metimes; by a sharp,
and shorter blow; sometimes: (...) a sudden stab of his providence, that cannot
be re^ted: yet not sudden, in respect of God, with whom (...) things are
determined: but in regard of our securi^: For as one says, Non subito
minantur, qui semper ^tant se esse morituros. Nothing sudden, but what is (...)
expected. Only this learn by Gods dealing with ^n. That we have no surer time
of life, then he had.

And that it is neither wit, nor wealth, strength nor health, that can prolong
thy days: or put off death or secure thee one hour.

Therefore learn by him, to watch till our master come, which is the lesson
Christ would teach his Disciples in these Words, and in this whole Chapter,
which is a Prophecy, and fortelling of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of
the coming of Christ; the one, a figure of the other: From verse 24. He shows
the s^gn of the end of the World: and thereby, stirs up all to wait, because of
the uncertainty: not known to the Son o^ Man, which verse 34. He amplifies, or
illustrats, by (...) parable, of a man going into a far Country, leaves his
house, and appoints work to his Servants, and command the Porter to watch, and
thereupon applies the parable and renews the caveat, in these words: wherein.

1. A caveat for all to watch, and wait for death and doo^

2. His reason from the uncertainty of the time thereon

3. The danger of being taken unprepared, lest he sin us sleepping.

1. The master of the house, viz Christ is gone into a f^ Country, viz. Far
from the knowledge of all huma^ fleshly wisdom, and given authority to his
Servants viz. to his Ministers, to guide and govern his Chur^ and Household, by
his Word and Discipline, and to eve^ man his work, viz. His Word to husband,
and to wa^ in love and do good to all: to further his glory and kin^dom, as he
gave the Vineyard to husbandmen, viz. H^ Gospel: and commanded the Porter to
Watch, viz. (...) Ministers to watch ^ver the flock: Therefore, he b^ both
Ministers and people watch; and attend his comi^ in faithfulness; that so, they
waiting in Faith, may ^ceive mercy: So that,

The work of a believing heart and faithful serva^ here is nothing else, but a
daily waiting of the will (...) pleasure of the Lord, by Faith and patience in
love, attending his coming by death and doom.

This Christ often gives in charge as Luke 1.21. M^ 24. Luke 12. And this Job
practiced, 14.14. This P^ saw, and waited for, 1. Tim. 4. I am now ready t^
offered, and 2. Cor. 5. We sigh and groan, desiring to go hence, and he with
the Lord, and the Martyrs.

1. For here we have no habitation, but like Pilgrims in tents.

2. For God has sent us hither a while, to accomplish his Will according to
his Word: but our abiding hereafter is eternal, not to build a rest here: or,
think our houses shall continue; but to wait on his coming: when we shall have
the reward and doom, that lasts for ever.

We see it in all faithful Servants, how careful they are to have all in a
readiness, when the Master comes home: and the Maid, how does she sweep, and
wash, and scour, that her Mastres may find all right: but the careless, they
sport and ravel, and spend and waste on their Lusts: and when they have done,
lie down and sleep, and say, Nay, the Master will be long before he come.

1. And thus it fares with the secure World, we watch all opportunities but
this: When a man has a great business to do, O! how he museth, and thinks,
and studieth night and day; be it su^e in Law, or an other project, or danger
upon the event; whereof depends his making or undoing? how does h^ neglect no
inferior business? He runs and rides, b^ spares no pains against that day,
that he may be pr vided for good issue

And have we any greater busi esse than this; yea, when he has a sum of money
to pay; how he cares and casts about?

And is not here a great account to make? nay, how do we watch for a fair day
in harvest, and ply our time: and yet this great business we heed not?

2. Nay, nothing ill make us wait on God, but the Cross: as to the Disciples,
Do we watch to get out of the World: or rather, to run farther into it: As it
was in the days of Noah; so now, nay worse: For now the World is drowned in
carelessness, witness, our excessive drinkings, and endless drunkenness; our
too common trade of userie, and oppression; our neglect of the Word and
Sacraments: that we watch nothing, but our lusts, and pleasures: Mammon and our
own Wills: and like these waste our Masters goods, and strike our
Fellow Servants, and withold a portion from the poor. Will not the Lord of the
Church call for a reckoning for these: and if we be taken in these, woe unto
us? We know what is the hire of such faithless Servants. We watch the plague to
prevent death, but we wait not on God to meet death: we watch the enemies of
our Land, that we be not surprised: but we have an enemy within, that will
overthrow us: We provide against famine, and yet our selves pine.

Now this watching is not any power in man to preserve himself, but sensible of
his own weakness to preserve himself, and longing to be with Christ.

1. That we wait in Faith upon the Word of Christ, believing the promise,
though we see nothing but misery; and death, yet expecting life and freedom
according to that Word.

2. That we be working in love, and obedient to his Will, not seeking, or
serving our own Lusts: even so, as we would have Christ to find us, when he
comes.

3. Truly knowing our own danger, and the strength of the Devil, and the World
over us, daily drawing us to forget this day.

That which Christ said, come, is, or should be the care of all our Watch.

1. If our love were to Christ, would we not wait for him as the Wife for her
Husband, and the Child for the Father?

2 If we knew our danger, we would not sleep, and suffer our House to be broken
up.

3. If we b^^leve the nearness, or uncertainty of his coming, We would watch
better.

For we know not when our Master will come. So the in this we see the reason,
viz. The uncertainty of the t^me of his coming.

1. The certainty of his coming, that the Master will return; Death and Doom
shall light upon all.

2. That he will come at an unset time, when the World is secure.

3. That none shall escape it.

4. That every one shall be accountant.

No escaping of this day, for as the balliff, it pursues man though he flee as
a Traitor, and having arrested him, Phisicians nor friends: cannot bail him,
but he must dye.

When the Scripture speaks of this day, it seems to hasten it, a^ though it
were at hand, even on our necks, as, Dan. 7.9 10. And Paul, upon whom the ends
of the World are come, And Peter, The end of all things are at hand, but of
that day, knows no man; The Father has put them in his own power; So that,

The days of man are only numbered of God, and the hour of death unknown to
man, but he will come when he thinks least thereof.

When they cry, Peace, peace, etc. And yet it cannot belong to any: and for the
general day, all the Prophesies of Christ are near fulfilled, as the spreading
of Error; and Heresies, Wars: Plagues and Prodigies are now abroad; Faith
scarcely found, trade of iniquity in growth: Love extinct: And if the Gospel
be preached through the World, it may be before we part this place.

1. How fond are they then that will calculate this day: as the Heathen of old,
by their Chimick year, and golden number, fifteen thousand years: as also the
Chi^eans in Austins time: Who said, It should be four hundred years after the
Ascension; and Papists by the ^oming of Antichrist; who was to be of the Tribe
of Dan, and reign three years and a half in Jerusalem, and subdue all the
World, and then shall the end come; But let God be wise, and all men fools and
liars; for this is not to be known; but waited on in all straits and wants.

1. He will come it may be in the first or second watch or at the dawning.

2. At death, not as thou lustest: for we would all have him to stay till the
dawning: But attend, and he will come. O! What a day will that be, when thou
looks for Life and Wealth, etc. And Death comes and will not stay?

Lest ye be found sleeping.

None so great danger to man, as a sleepie security, and mindlessenesse of his
own frailty, and the judgments of God.

Thus, Sodom, and the Old World, And so shall the coming of the Son of man be:
Wealth and Riches make secure, as Luke 12. Pleasures of the flesh makes secure,
as Sodom: yea, the freedom of the Gospel makes secure, being turned into the
flesh: nothing keeps man waking but the Cross: and thus the World is fallen a
sleep, only dreams of these things.

But a waking day will come: when the sound of the Trumpet of the Word sounds
in thy heart: or if not, the sound of the last Trump; and then happy he, whom
the Master shall find waking.

FINIS.
The Preface of Mr. BRIERLY.
I Wot not what quaint humor now of late,
To write these numbers, set my Pen agate;
But whilst my drooping Muse, in sundry fashions
Was drawing Portracts of some private passions:
There was presented, to my troubled thought,
This Worlds wide Sea, which fiercely raged and wrought
Thereon Christ's Ship, fore toste with gast did blow,
By Satan raised, the same to overthrow.
I much, much longing, e're the Sl^^ should split,
To find the Jonah that did trouble it.
First here at home, did set my self to see;
And ask my Conscience, if I were not He:
Which, though it showed me cause enough, and more:
Yet, not for any message that I bore.
What hurt, if others, to themselves would try,
And each one in his heart, say, Is it I?
That all might join, their best endeavors more,
Peace to pursue: then they have heretofore.
My flesh presented me, with many wrongs
Of lots cast on me, by some adverse tongues;
Who pressed me much to tell, what Country ground
My breeder was, and whither I was bound?
To whom, I say, that I from Canaan came:
Of which both coast, and language too, I am:
And would posterity to understand,
I serve the Great GOD, both of Sea and Land;
Or at the least, I do desire to do,
And by his Servants: to be held so too.
Though I must say, In me, there is much out-straying,
And in the unregenerate part, gainsaying.
My Message is for Peace, and unity,
For fear God's Church, should much in danger'd be.
These are the special, not the only end,
Why on this subject I some speeches spend:
For my intent is too, to keep this glass,
To view my mind hereafter, what it was.
That this against my face, may witness bear,
If I gainsay; what I have written here.
If any say, w^ile fools do undertake it,
A parable seem worse for him that spoke it.
I say, I have been trained in Christ his School,
So long I trust, I am no wilful fool:
But such a fool, I much desire to be,
As Gods true Wisdom may remain in me.
If he grant that, let men speak on, and spare not;
For I at all, for other wisdom care not.
But to conclude, le^^^ome may think it wrong;
I numbers use, not liberty of tongue:
And hold that measures limit one to sore,
I say, if free, I had said little more;
Only expect not here such frame and order;
As in G^y Gardens framed in bed and border,
Which through fair Allies, answering to the eye,
In well proportin'd uniformity.
But some wild Forest work, or ill fenct fields;
Where grow at tandom, such as Nature yields.
A Cowslop, Daffadil, perhaps a rush
Sometimes arose; but never a Bramble bush.
In sine, a speech, where things at next are sets
As memory, objects, and occasions met:
Irregular my Muse, has traced the bent
Of such occasions, as still give it vent.
A course by some, but now of late begun;
Where those that method want, may row and run.
Professedly, and find a shelter fit,
To cover wants, and suit a running Wit:
An ess-bee, or some such little thing,
Which honey bears, and yet without a sting.
The thing as yet, requires to shadow out,
My silly k^owledge could not bring about:
But what I thought was needful to be told,
As I am able, I do this unfold.
Of True CHRISTIAN Liberty.
I Was sometime (as the^ a stricter man)
By some good fellows, termed a Puritan.
How I deserved that name, though I Will not say;
Since best men now, must bear that brand away,
But lately (ay me) Grace has waxed cool;
Flesh playing truant out of Moses School.
Not through the Liberty that Faith does give;
But for because, much Adam yet does live:
Which ever and anon, or more or less;
Is turning Gods grace into wantonness.
And now men say, I Am deeply drowned in Schism,
Retired from Gods grace unto Grindletonism:
So that I now, a Liberty do hold,
Which neither Grace, nor Godly Wisdom would,
I grant, how far the Liberty I have,
Is not in God, were better be a Slave:
And further thus, what works of grace I do,
If any are, but weak and slender too:
What wicked ones may think or censure me,
Is (I confess) a thing does little move me:
But that Gods Children hardly should conceit me,
Whose precious balmes, I rather wish should bee^ me.
Thou God forbid, or that my latter age,
Should be secluded from thy heritage.
I mean the fellowship of Saints below,
Which if I want, I whither shall I go.
In some friends lately, I have Strangeness seen,
I once thought, could not possibly have been:
If O my God, this rent from thee arise,
Then smell the savor of a sacrifice:
But if some other Sone of man have done it,
Cursed be that sin, which at the first begun it
But, what are these, which in Gods Church I hear?
These strange contentions, stird up every where?
Manasses now with Ephraim contending,
And Ephraim back again, his counter forces bending:
Against little Judah, both of them partaking
Ruben's divisions, great heart sorrow making.
O let not thus Christ's seamless Coat be torn,
Or Sion travel, and no Child be born:
By that foul sin, which shares with bloody Sword,
This live Child's limbs, accursed before the Lord:
And that hard mother Step-dam judged to be,
That can not grieve her son thus mangled see.
But lest I too much from my self should wander,
J freely grant; this is at all ^o slander.
That once (when time was) I did thus much see,
Which now is almost, out of memory;
To wit, a wondrous beautiful condition,
On that which now, is termed new Religion:
By name deliverance, free Justification;
True Liberty, glad tidings of Salvation:
Which may be called new too, in some respects,
Of objects, times, and different effects.
As which the Spirit of our mind renews,
Which to Samaria, was so joyful news.
New wine, first Love, the Christians sweet beginnings:
Fine gold, rich pearls, the godly Merchant winnings,
Christ's yoke made easy, by the spirits oils,
The Joy of Harvest, or dividing spoils:
Not that I then did, or do look to find
Some strange Religion, of another kind,
Then that, wherein I ever have been trained,
Since first, I from my mothers breast was wayned.
For so to do, as I consider well,
Were t^ make sure work, soon to get to Hell:
But even the same (say I) that has been taught,
Since God his Gospel, into England brought;
Gods very Truth, which that it does not fit
All ears and seasons: man is faulty yet.
But to be short, then was the time (alas)
I can but only say, That then it was.
I was (I say) more sensible of sin,
And of the danger, it had brought me in:
But shall I now, begin God's love to story
To me his wretch, and is it for his glory;
Especially, If I shall there withal,
Show how his favors on a dunghill fall;
For though Sunbeams, do draw from flowrie brinks
Sweet smell, yet carrion send forth filthy stinks.
Lord, I confess much sown, small increase found
Of fruitful crop, within my barren ground.
O let my soul never draw this curse upon her,
Thou can not bless her, but with taint of honor.
It Is only thou, w^o can an answer yield,
Whether I Dunghill be, or fruitful field:
But if at all, thou ought in me have sown,
Bring to perfection, that which is thine own:
And leave me not (as sin gives cause to doubt)
Among these Virgins, who shall stand without,
Nor what I have, from me in Judgment take,
But me a harvest for thy mercies sake.
I will say on then, what my Conscience tells me,
And clear the truth, since thus the case compels me.
The Good I did (I say) seemed then more slender,
The ill more vile, my Conscience much more tender,
Then now it is: as having felt the smart
Of God's great judgments, with a troubled heart.
Gods Sp'rit (what say I) who now scarcely know,
If e're I ^elt it truly, yea, or no;
God's Sp'rit I say, for so as then I thought,
Had to my Soul, such happy tidings brought
Of Gods great mercy, in delivering me,
Who had so long tried the forbidden Tree:
And thereby plundge me in such deadly danger,
As to Gods Covenant almost made me stranger:
That then me thought, I felt his love more free,
Then I before, could it conceive to be.
His love more free, (I say) my self more vile
Then er'e before, unless I me beguile:
Then say I, what? Not liberty to sin,
Because of freedom God has set us in.
So that one may, whoredom and these commit,
And not withstanding, not offend in it.
Nor that the Spirit, so renewes the will,
As quite excludes all motions unto ill,
O Blasphemy! dute any brag of ground;
Wherein there may such cark o^ grace be found:
Nor of Gods presence, knew I ere such sense:
As drives from his, all sin and doubting thence:
So that one would not thereof be beriven,
No not to change it, for the joys of Heaven:
Nor that the Spirit, does without the Word,
Unto our Souls sufficient light afford.
Nor that one may, adventure on a sin,
Because God will be glorified therein.
But this I saw, that there is a rest of faith,
Which sets Believers free from hell and death:
That out of us, our health and life is wrought:
That out of us, the same is to be sought.
That Gods elect, even from their second birth,
Unto their death, are strangers on the earth.
That precious liberty, they thereby win:
How sweet a thing it is to master sin:
How this new Law does set Believers free,
How Christ his yoke is perfect liberty.
How this can be, that men can part from ill,
When dangerlesse, they may do what they will.
That God sometimes, his presence so reveals;
That for the time, both sin and sorrow vails:
How such shall think that while, be it short or long,
They never shall move, their hi^l is made so strong:
That more one does from this degenera^e,
The more he falls to pride or worse estate:
How God does draw, by his sweet cords of love
Souls here below: to live with him above:
Who whil^s they see, Gods will is so (o strange)
Their present bless, for greater would not change.
Not but, that they full freedom would require,
But thus to Gods will, linkt is their desire.
Wha^ power with God, this law of love does give,
How in his Members, Christ is said to live.
How grace does with a Metamorphose strange:
Deep threatenings into exhortations change.
That The World Flesh, Sin: yea, Satan and the rest,
Are for Gods Children sorc't to work the best.
So God for his, good out of ill does draw.
What Is life to God, what is death unto the Law.
How first the Law, does Man in bondage bring;
How Christ his death has taken away the sting.
But now of late (as I must needs confess
To Gods great glory, and my shame no less:
I have been through the Tempters subtlety,
Tossed with temptations of inconstancy:
Not in respect of our Religions ground,
I ever doubted to be safe and sound.
But in regard of some particulars,
About the which, have been so many jars:
As whether there be any living wight,
Who like to Gideon, walking in his might:
Does sin down right, like Midian's host destroy,
Whose heart God fills with such continual joy:
In his great love, such strength against their sin;
That faith in them, has long unshaken been.
In which his love, their souls are so set free,
As they therein can walk at liberty.
Such as that sin, can neither break their peace,
Nor upright walking, confidence increase.
This hight of Grace, do so exceed my skill,
I needs must say, that title it who will:
For mine own part, I utterly disclaim it;
I mean the having, not the will to gain it:
No, not the will to gain it, so I say;
Wherein I trust, I go not far astray:
For sure I am, if faith were fir^ly ^here;
It Lion like, the li^bs of sin would ^ear:
More faith, more love the surer is the knot:
Yea, such a one, as sin dissolveth not:
But rather shrinks to nearly to ap^roach
The Mint of faith, its copper c in to broach:
Or if it do, its but as though a rush,
Against shining shields, his pricks should proudly push.
But woe is me, how should I frame my tongue,
That some men here, should not conceive me wrong:
I do not I, broach news of such a state,
Where blocks of sin ly not in graces gate.
But that his heart's more safe, that is better guarded;
That fortress surer, which is strongly warded.
Faith is a fortress, Love lies strong within
To keep the hold, lest Foes should enter in:
When Gods bright cloud his Temple does fulfill,
Less room I trow, remains therein for ill:
The Bridegrooms presence, whiles the same does last,
Works joy and cheer, men need not then to fast:
Though slender shot, does cause the Fool to fall,
Canons scarce make sign on the Castle-wall:
The Assailants strength, the Objects weakness do
Ever contrare, to make a deadly blow.
This is the cause, why tender flesh by dint
Of sturdy steel, receives so deep a print:
And here especially, it must be so,
Where th'ones strength does, from the other weakness grow:
Like mushroms, which from harreness of soil,
Does suck his sap, and filthy liquor boil.
And if you think, whiles Faith stands firmly sound,
Yet sin that while, can strike as deep a wound,
As where ^ts weak, you speak things quite contrary,
And so affirm impossibility:
Indeed I grant most men coin such a Faith,
As may of sin abide the better breath,
And not be sick; but such a Faith say I
Will with his Master live, and with him dye.
So then such Faith my soul desires not
As is a Poison, but an Antidot:
Not such as flesh might freely sin as much
As it desires, and conscience feel no truth:
But a perfume which casts such smells behind it,
As foul, as made us cannot once abide it:
Such as prevents that sin, can bring no smart,
For that it first so purifies the heart:
And though this life afford it not in prime,
The less it is, the more the fault is mine.
And who imagins sin and this agreeing,
Feigns a new fiction never yet in being:
Yet is it true, that our Salvations ground,
Rests not herein, what good in us is found:
But in another, higher seat does sit,
Whick makes our works but underlings to it:
Hereof it comes that our Divines well say,
(Which words Lewd men may wrest another way)
That if from works, or more, or less, thou measure
Thy certainty, thou heapest copper treasure:
Since God in Christ before all times and place,
By His Decree, determined our case;
Not from the good that we should after do,
But of free choice ordaining us thereto
Then make not that a cause which is the effect,
Of Gods dear love in them, He does elect:
But whosoever draws from Faith by true descent,
The Pedigree of Works as consequent,
May thereby judge if no such fruits appear,
That sound assurance is in no ways there:
For good and ill trees by their fruits are known,
And fruitful seed will spring, where it is sown.
So when I say, I wish in God his love,
Such confidence, as sin might not remove.
My meaning is, I wish a ^aith so stable,
As t'enter therein, sin might not be able:
Or if it did, yet hope should not be lost,
But hid in him, whom it so dearly cost.
As i^ that case, when Sin and Law is over,
This were I trow the next way to recover:
Nor would this cause Gods goodness to despise:
But in new life still more and more to rise:
Unless Corruption do abuse the same:
Which if it do, yet grace is not to blame.
And it is most true, that Unbelief is Mother
Of every sin, adulteries; thefts and other:
By which is writ, the sins of graceless men,
With Diamond point, and with an Iron-pen:
For Conscience Paper is, Ink unbelief;
The Affections Pen men, whereof Will is chief.
So then lewd life, and true ^aith are no kin.
For Christ is not the Minister of sin.
Nor yet does freedom, preaching in such minds,
As that sweet Doctrine fitted for it finds:
By its own kind, abroad such bastards set,
More than does Nature monstrous shapes beget:
But if this new cloth wider make the rent,
It only falls out so by accident:
As when it meets with an hardened heart,
Which wholesome food to poison will convert;
As often it does too (I confess) yet so:
As that the Law of other sort makes more:
I mean of Hypocrites, who while they hear
The hideous thundrings, of the same through fear:
Work with a vengeance, till their backs do break;
Wishing mean while, their wrath on God to wreak:
Who still (think they) most like a cruel Master,
Lays on more load, and bids them work the faster,
Yea gathering ever, where he has not strawn:
And heaping profit, where he has not sown
These when they see, the Law no mean, nor measure,
Does hold in loading, then they take more leisure.
And having not the Son, to set them free,
Are tired at length, break out at liberty:
And so a freedom, of their own they have;
But such a liberty, as God never gave.
Whereout off too springs th'Atheist filthy swine,
The carnal Protestant or Libertine:
Or else such Hypocrites, as still make sure,
They take no peace, but what they may endure:
Gaining like peace, by that their formal walking.
As does the Fowler get, by Fowlers stalking:
Much like the Crab, their eye sight one way bending,
The whiles their footsteps are another ^e^ding:
Whereby it falls out, that these counterfeits,
Are of all other seldom set in Straits.
Whiles formal walking keeps them flesh and bone,
From being br ken on the Cornerstone:
A cause, why Harlots, place in heaven find,
Before that w^^ke proud Pharisaick kind.
As for the Law, this ground of Faith it gains,
That graceless men, it civilly restrains;
At le^st, until some exigent betide;
Such as it said; and ^ake them turn aside.
Then wha^ ways best, for thee who art a gleaner,
To make thy God herein the greatest gainer.
Since that most like, as in our Statute Law;
Ou^ of the yoke, lewd men their necks can draw:
By this or that exception; or pretense;
Or otherwise, by wresting of the sense:
And that in our Experience every day,
Those words prove true, that Christ himself did say.
We pipe to you, yet you no measure keep;
We mourn to you, and yet you do not weep.
It Is not (alace,) in offering oil, though fountains;
Nor though all thine, were sheep upon the Mountains:
Nor that thou do thy Neighbor sorrows grieve,
Nor yet the poor with all thy goods relieve.
It Is not in this, nor that corruption killing;
No, nor in Rivers of salt tears distilling.
It Is not thy foot, from outward evils turning,
Nor yet thy body given to the burning.
It neither is in this, or that man's teaching,
Nor is it in the Law, or Gospels preaching.
No, no, it is not in him, that wills or runs;
But in Gods mercy, which creats us sons:
Yea, Lord, it is thy Spirits mind that blows,
Which none can tell, from whence or whither goes.
But says one (for so I hear one say,)
I thought at length, these fellows would display
What minds they bear, reposing in such wise
Themselves in God, the means they do despise.
O God forbid (alace,) let not one brother
Such eager censures lay upon another.
The means I reverence, as the thing whereby,
God saves his Children ordinarily:
Nay, the only way, wherein all Gods elect,
H^s saving Grace, and blessing can expect.
Nay, who neglects much more who it contemns,
Gods Ordinance, for his souls health condemns.
Yea, it is in b^ief, Gods worthy Instrument:
Used in his hand, his Children to prevent.
Yet he offends not, who more p rases puts
Upon the workman: then the axe that cuts.
Nor is his tool the worse: Nay who contends
For workmanship, the tool therewith commends:
Like th'Orator, who whiles of kin does raise
Himself, the whiles, he Eloquence does praise.
For he who says, that God alone does all,
Makes not men dead stones in the living wall.
Yet this in reverence, we must all confess,
What good in us is found, beet more or less,
Is of the Sp'rit, which like sap even flows
From out the root, even to the utmost boughts;
It self transforming into diverse actions,
As numbers do, into their several fractions:
Nay, rather like, the sap within the tree
Which grows both branch, and bud, and fruit to be:
Yea, and leaves also: for it is nothing else,
But sap which runs through Natures secret cells,
Into the tender tops, it self conveying:
It Is sap, green liquor, more and more, conveying:
Till it to leaves, and fruits, from whence it lies,
In sundry sorts, and shapes diversities:
Where Nature taking time by the warm Sun,
Frames and concocts it, till the work be done:
When as, by wondrous workmanship we see,
It turned from sap to leaf, and bud and tree:
Being in hardness, fashion, collar, taste
Transformed, and in new mould and manner cast:
And so is called by another Name,
Then merely sap, whereof at first it came:
Yet is it of none other Nature made,
Then that whereof, it first beginning had.
Even so, the Spirit: is the root and ground
Of all the Good, that is in any found.
As for example, into thy froward Will.
Flows God, and does its hollow cisterns fill:
Whereby such sweetness to thy soul it sends,
As to its lure full bu^imely it bends.
Likewise he does, invest thy inward sight,
And fills thy understanding part with light;
With these much like, the moon making thee shine
With borrowed light, which yet he counts thine.
Lord, is it so, that we so base and vile,
Shall with thy beauty be adorned the while.
Shall thy life streams from out our bellies pour;
And yet for all that, be accounted our.
Will thou bestow both wine and milk, yet say,
That it is bought, though we have naught to pay:
Then Lord, so do, let me right beauteous be
Through thine own beauty, which thou sets on me.
My Soul into the wilderness allure:
Speak kindly there, and it to me assure
My Fathers house: O! cause me to forsake,
That thou may in me greater pleasure take:
Yea, be 't so Lord (as spoke the Mother Maid)
So be it Lord, to us as thou have said:
Then ours shall be the joy, and endless bless,
As thine the Kingdom, power and glory is.
But to return, me thinks, it should be best,
For winning Souls in Christ, his rule to rest:
Who meeting one, that needs would Heaven get
By his good works, a combrous task himset.
Now of this sort, all unregenerate be;
Who Christ his blood, their ransom does not see:
For having not that endless blessed Store;
Which, whosoever has, is rich for evermore.
They of their works, will needs a present bring,
Such as may gain the favor of the King:
Which whiles they strive at, with a bended back
Still, still they strive, and still they strength do lack;
And thus must needs, to exigent them drive,
Who that in vain, against the stream do strive
For struggling till, they see that what is amiss:
More than the other infinitely is:
Mean while, G^ds Trumpet, sounding in their ears
Blasts of amaz^ment, horror, bl^od, and fears:
Then Clouds of wrath begin to boil and brighten,
And thundering Canons, in the Conscience lighten:
Their high topt Mount does sm^ake, and quake, and quiven;
The Rocks do rent, and into splinters shiver:
And were it not that, sometimes a small still voice,
Does cause a stand, the Soul her sails would hoyse,
And into Straits, of deep despair straight run her;
Crying to Rocks, and Hills to fall upon her.
Yet must I grant, a lower sail does carry:
Go smoothly on, and times and tides do tarry:
Dancing full defly, in a merry gale.
With wind and weather, to the black Prince hall.
But of these paths, its difficult I say:
Which a man takes at turning of the way.
Whether toward the cape good hope aright.
On terrors tide, or senseless sound he light.
And where before I say the Law does drive
Those from self trust, who for performance strive:
It Is only objectively that I mean,
After the letter and the outward strain:
Even so far forth, I say, as means can go,
In such like working, and no more but so:
For it is God's proper work the soul to waken,
It Is he that has the Conscience tardy taken.
But what need is there thus t'apologize,
For who thinks I the work master despise.
When I say this or that, the means effects,
Though it be never named who directs;
For men will think my meaning to be this,
Gods Words the Tool, himself the Workman is:
Let none e contra then (whiles thus I praise,
God all as worker) thence conclusion raise.
I utterly the means thereby exclude,
Nay wish they should not past their place intrude,
Yet true it is, they ofttime so do.
Through our default, not by their nature too:
Men therein toward Papistry much bending,
Beginning their Devotion there, and ending:
And that's more danger as I understand,
Than doubt of leaning on the other hand:
Yet this I say, that who excludes either,
Disjoyneth those which God has linkt together.
Yet do I wish man would in any case,
Give both of these their due and proper place:
And let who fear (when as they hear some say,
That God in working bears the praise away.
Lest man thereby secure of means should grow:
Beware, lest they to far on lest hand go:
By giving so much to the outward deed,
As they thereby, mere Formalists may breed,
If men here in an equal hand would carry:
None need about this point so much to vary.
For Paul but plants, Apollos he does water:
But God alone yields both the work and matter.
And in this race men bend their bodies whole,
And stir their stumps, and lo^k at God the G^ale.
It Is read in Wars, some Nations set before them:
Their chiefest Virgins, to show valor for them.
The Crown of Life, puts much more life within,
And makes men strive, Immortal prize to win.
I mean this Crown, but as it m^n respects:
Not as it back to God again refl cteth,
And yet there is a motive more than this,
Which not by Nature, explicable is.
And yet no dream, no fancy, nor temptation,
Nor to be called in scorn New Revelation:
Which as I take it on me to express it:
So it is most true: I cannot I: confess it:
Nor do hereby boast my self to know it,
But sure I am, some of Gods Children do it:
If any know it not, yet scoff it so:
Let him before God answer thereunto:
But those that do, say what they list, and spare not:
For well I hope, that scoff at it they dare not.
But whither run I, all I have to say;
Is that Gods Word affords us the way.
For winning souls, who first for sturdy Rocks,
A hammer has for sin and Satan's locks:
A powerful key with many wondrous wards;
From which no time, nor place so secret guardes.
For every sickness, Medicines sweet affording;
To every person, and degree according.
Not only so, but teaches to apply;
And gives reasons, when, and where and why;
As bidding us not grieve, whom God would glad:
Nor strengthen them, whom he would have be sad.
As Reasons serve, rebuke, exhort, reprove:
And all these with long-suffering, and with love:
Yea, warn the wicked of his wicked way,
On mourning Souls, some balm of Gilead lay.
With many other such like rules: yet this
May be a thing too, which belonging is:
And that is Christian Wisdom, to discern
The proper state of those who are to learn.
Whether wild fallow, that needs plowing up,
Or gapeing dry, that showrs of grace would sup:
Like skilful cooks in season to prepare,
And each Stomach, wholesome fitting fare.
I would not be mistaken here, as though
M^ me^ning were, s^ deep in others bow
To draw: as that I here presume to lay
A Pl ^form to direct our Preachers way.
No, no, let none once such intention dream:
If any do, I speak it not to them.
My meaning only is to manifest,
Wh^ I d^ h^ld in this, as in the rest.
I h^ld it fit, that each one fitted be,
As to his need, and want do best agree:
Which being difficult of to discern,
(Those needing most, who least desire to learn)
Teachers must crave Gods spirit so to find it,
For in their own case, hearers often are blinded.
Thinking they knew enough, we wish more still,
Then can be kept subjected to their Will:
Or comforts to their hardened hearts applying,
Else loading Conscience, that is already lying:
The first (I needs must say) is oftener seen,
For in the latter, few to blame have been:
Most hearers being such, whose wounds do fester:
Needing sharp cor'sives, more than healing plaster:
And holy things must not be cast to Dogs,
Nor precious gold, before such angry Hoggs.
For though these Halcion days, which God has sent:
Men may the Churches orderly frequent,
And so be formal: th'unassailed Senses
Blinded, and guld, with Satan's sly pretenses:
The strong man armed, in peace posession keeping,
Trials not rousing yet the dog that is sleeping.
Yet sure full many, who the means thus use:
Do not forthwith, God for their portion choose.
But rather in the Closet of their Hearts:
With Sin and Satan, secretly take parts:
Yea all that live in unregenerate state:
Do God his truth, and Children deadly hate:
Whom i^ they could but at a dead lift see:
On God himself they would revenged be.
Who being so to that they love so dear:
They cannot choose, but needs his Force must fear:
Knowing, if he live; they are sure to smart,
For that from which, they are so loath to part:
Whose forced good works, though ^e regards not,
Those dear earned goods, that one a stone are got.
Yet are they turned through his over ruling hand,
For him and his, in righ^ good stead to stand.
To make his power known, and shall to th'free,
Hewers of wood, and water bearers be.
But to return, most hearers bring now:
Such as the truth in, words at least allow.
Yet wanting vigor, in the inward part:
Gods graces into wantonness convert:
Yea Gods dear Children, which regenerate be;
(So far as carnal) are not herein free.
For Wanton flesh soon taking heart at grass,
The soul bewitcheth with her whorish face;
And says, since Christ's robes on man, never fear it;
You Are safe enough, though slovenly thou wear it.
It Is meet, the hammer of the Word should wound:
The Laws loud Trumpet, much and often sound
To such hard hearts: for it is at all no wrong;
Since Law and Works of right to them belong:
At least so far forth, as they carnal be,
Or not ingraft in Christ, the living Tree:
And so works taught them, in another kind:
Than those that are of a more freer mind:
At least, until it bring their brazen face,
And iron sinnew into other case:
For there is difference, and a main one too:
'Twixt works that carnal, and regenerate do:
So do the Governments, that they are under,
Differ as far, as heaven and earth is sunder.
The One under grace, things good and well do act:
The Other bond slaves, rest with the ontward fact.
Yet is the first far nobler Government,
Harmonious, and full of sweet content:
As which does here, with noblest minds accord,
How much more fitting for the noblest Lord.
Especially, since where man cannot look,
He ope'ns and reads it in the heart-seal'd Book.
It Is this, no doubt, which shall forever be
The Saints Companion, through Eternity.
This golden Rule, which to be wished were,
Instead of all Laws, might be Ruler here.
And no discouragement to Princes tho,
Whose Rule were n^arest to G^ds ^rder so.
Then should long sufferance sweetly make supply,
To friend or foe, to any Injury
If Injury at all amongst so many,
Graces of Love, there could be offered any:
Which reaches foes, for a regenerate state:
To friends and foes, its goodness will impart.
It Is general unto Christians in their way:
And unto foes, to win them if they may.
Which may be so, yet wickedness and sin,
Through indulgence, men though not fostered in.
(For evermore, he loves his friend most dear,
Who least can with his faults and strayings bear.)
This is that love, which from good conscience springs
And a pure heart, like to the heavenly Kings:
Who is loves fount, pure, infinite divine,
Who sends his sun, on good and bad to shine.
Then would be pouring out abundantly,
To other men, as God had poured to thee.
Yea far beyond ability, a will:
As large as is the light, that all does fill.
Then would be no envying one another,
Nor lifting up our self above our brother.
Nor yet disdain with the elder son to see,
The younger in his Fathers grace to be.
No though the while, his brothers feast did last,
Sour herbs instead of dainties he should taste.
No contumelious, nor opprobrious words:
Which wound the heart, more deep than piercing swords.
No seeking for our private wants supply,
Letting our Countries, and out neighbors lie.
No Practices, no bitterness, no hate
Against private persons, or the public state:
No ill surmise allowed in friend or foes,
Without a t^yed and a grounded cause.
No prejudice, against a deadly teacher,
Nor fear of words, wrong wrested from the Preacher.
No busy hunting after higher places,
Nor no disdaining men of meaner graces.
No soul rejoicing, in committing sin,
^ut Gods sweet savor, and go^d conscience in.
No wrong invasions, n^r no hateful jarring:
No disobedience, nor no cause of warring:
Nor any thing, which might a hinderance be,
^o sweet concordance, and firm amity.
^ave that perhaps our conscience would not reach,
To guide us what is most fit to do in each.
But if the judgment were enlightened too
Accordingly, then were no more a-do.
But sweet content, a life of joy and mirth;
And in a word, a Heaven upon the earth.
A goodly golden Commonweal to see,
Through love each others Lord, and Man to be.
But since not had on earth, God has even here,
The better our Infirmities to bear,
Full well provided Commonwealths and States;
Masters and Servants, Subjects, Magistrates.
Such men as may, the sword of Justice draw,
Wrongs to redress, and keep lewd men in aw.
With other sundry means to end the strife,
And difficulties of this present life:
Which all are Rudiments, and helps to lead
Toward that life, where none of these shall need.
Without the which who could remain an hour,
But violence would life and goods devour
Which shows how much, we here estranged be,
From that perfection of Eternity.
I term it thus, since most here, if not all,
Is violent, so not perpetual.
At least so far, as God does not reduce,
And recreat it: for his nearer use.
Which I confess, the more that he shall d
The less corruption it is subject to.
As being brought to that sweet calm and peace,
The very Center of all happiness.
Yea sp'ritual made, which how much more they be,
With this his nature, nearer they agree.
For even these, our Massy bodies shall,
Again be raised bodies spiritual.
Yet so, as they must holy be and pure;
For otherwise, he can them worse endure.
Hereof he natures, goodly order set;
As shadow (though but of a portion yet)
In this that actions, natural we see;
Furthest from violent coaction be:
Wherein the Creature, does it self intend,
Toward that calm, and uncreated end.
In which fair Book, are plainly manifested,
Gods power and purpose, toward man regressed.
Who such a stamp, on silly man can frame;
Like to himself, I do not say the same:
For his pure Essence, Infinite in bless;
To Creatures in communicable is.
Two Infinits there cannot be for letting:
And bounds and limits, each to other setting:
So Creatures he, out of himself creates;
Whiles he his working, outwardly dilateth;
Outward, I say dilateth, for within;
The Trinity, has each to others been
Eternally: most letles of destraction,
In some serene, calm, pure, perpetual action.
Without all motion, change or alteration:
Which is far otherwise in this Creation.
Which made of nothing, daily does intend
Toward a Period, and a final end.
And would accomplish it, save that this power,
Upholds the former, and matters every hour:
For this our world is but the younger brother,
So called by some a shadow of the other;
That spiritual, and immaterial He,
The second ^erson in the Trinity:
And has a temper, said to be compound,
Of parts in nature quite contrary found:
A cause yet too why creatures it produces,
Of sundry shapes, and for so diverse uses:
For, God forbid, I should in any case,
Once seem Gods Works and Creatures to debase.
The least of whom that live the heavens under,
Than they have parts, contain more cause of wonder:
But thus considered, as we them compare,
With their Creator, so they nothing are.
Who all their parts creats, and frames and joins,
Whose least parts bigger than the other loins:
In whose wide womb all creatures lie unmolded,
Before all times, unsearchably unfolded:
Whose spiritual nature is without exception,
Most infinite in Goodness and Perfection:
The very Heaven of a blessed Soul,
(Though I a place grant too above the Pool)
These things to creatures, never can agree:
Which only spiritual in a measure be.
And circumscript, subject to time and place:
Motions, exposes, changes, and disgrace
By Nature; save as it is said before)
As to perfection, God shall them restore:
Which shall be once, when they are purified:
And sp'ritual made: their nature rectified:
Extract into a quintescence so pure:
As mere created Natures can endure.
Lessons hereof, some Artists seem to spell
By Nature: as in Mathematics skill.
Who (void of Rules, in th'abstract) through defect;
Place its perfection in the Intellect.
As that which is more spiritually intent:
And so by consequence, more excellent.
For spirits do all bodies far exceed;
As forms above their matter, have their meed.
I do not say, with some all spirits be
No substances, but mere quality.
But this I say, These are so near of kin,
That with one name, they sometimes named been.
And what in us, but qual ty men call,
In our Creator is essential:
From whose pure Fountain, Streams still overflow
To Creatures, as from head springs Riv'lets do.
Love, patience, meekness, peace, and righteousness,
Joy, wisdom, pity, truth and holiness.
No marvel then, though a regenerate soul,
Down these clear Streams, of Gods pure pleasure roll
And bathe it self wi^h sweetest delecta^^^n:
Re-sold therein by wond^^us transmutation:
Re-sold I say, l^ke the air which some c^nclude,
Those cold moist concaves of the Earth include:
Till in that Kingdom having long conversed:
It Is turned to water, and in springs dispersed:
Made fellow riv'let, with the rest to be:
To run along in one fraternity.
Or (if it fitter seem) like clouds of water,
From which the Sun, extracting subtle matter,
Changes them peice-male, till the whole dilated,
Be into the air, in time evaporated:
The aires kind kinsman, 'twixt it self and water:
Becoming so, a partial Moderator.
Thus does the Soul, most truly undergo,
Both generation, and corruption so:
Though not for substance, yet for quality;
Till in Gods Image it invested be.
The rather when, this body too is made:
To the pure soul then subordinate:
Like those in Luke, who bidden go, did run;
Do this, and it was incontinently done:
For bodies once, their Souls must fitly suite,
It Is pure designs, better to execute:
While both full blessed, eternally shall run,
Down those life Streams, till Gods good will be done.
And as his Will is evermore a doing.
So shall that stream be evermore a flowing:
They needless of constraint, herein for thriving,
As water is often down the Channel driving.
Or as the Tree, which does by Nature grow,
Bears fruit and blossoms, though none bid it so:
Which Kingdom here is actually begun,
So soon as one, by faith is made a Son.
And as the Soul, within the body lives,
And the^eunto, both life and motion gives.
So does Gods Spirit, the soul therein abiding,
With endless pleasures and delight it giving;
Wherein the lesser violence does need;
Nearer men are to happiness indeed.
As liker to the purest Nature, which
In all compleatness of perfections rich:
Who needs no labor, nor no motions make,
For any business he does undertake:
But is an Eye, a Hand, a Tongue and Ear,
On all occasions, when he list, and where:
Yea is that Ear, that at one Instant hears,
Within, without, and far beyond the Spears:
That Eye which does most infinitely see,
What Is past, what is present, what shall ever be.
A powerful hand (where e're he list to show it)
To hurt or help, and when he list can do it.
That Wisdom deep, that understanding might,
To whom all Secrets, and all hearts are light.
That will which is a work, and when it lists,
No Creature in the Heavens, nor earth resists:
That Providence, which with one act does guide,
What shall for all Eternity betide:
That Sinnowie love, which in embraceing Arms
Clasps all his Creatures, and them sweetly warmes.
And in a word, that good without defection,
Which is incapable of Imperfection.
How can that Soul then, but most blessed be,
Who bears a part in this sweet Harmony,
So far as Creatures can in any wise,
With this their great Creator sympathize?
This is that Ocean of Immortal Bless,
Wherein the blessed Soul sweetly swallowed is,
Born and contained, for it is more right to say,
That rather it contains, and bears than they.
That River pure, from Paradise that is flowing:
On whose green Banks, the Tree of life is growing.
With monthly fruit, with leaves that never fail;
All sicknesses, and maladies to heal;
That cheerful, fresh, and everlasting spring:
Which stintless, endless, boundless joys do bring:
Pure light where birds of Paradise are skirming:
Clear Streams, where fishes numberless are swiming
Fresh Floods, whose Channels, love is ever filling:
Their blessed body, through whose veins distilling.
O Sacred Mount, where love do build her nest!
O, World of Immortality and rest!
When shall my soul once and for ever be;
Wholy possessed, and swallowed up of thee;
Of thee the harbor of all happiness,
The Sea of comfort, Son of Righteousness:
Of thee who art the life, the light, the love,
Of those celestial Citizens above.
Of thee, whose face, makes Saints and Angels sing:
So as therewith, the heavenly voults do ring.
Here (by the way) consider if there were:
Some tastes (as why not) of such comforts here.
Whether it might not, cause the heart to see,
Some taken up, with that sweet melody.
As mourning now, were to the Soul a task:
As far more fitter to give thanks, than ask.
(As the one of these, quite void of the other be not:
How ever men, sometimes in that case see not)
How ever to, mourning (I must confess)
More suits this life, and man's great wretchedness.
I dare not then (where I can sometimes find,
Men less to craving, more to thanks inclined)
But think, they thus do, as then taken up,
With Gods bright face, and pleasures of his cup,
For though that flesh, may counterfeit a joy:
That proves not Gods Children for a toy.
For its apparent, that such cases are;
(As both experience, and Gods Word declare)
Whereof example, David's Psalms display,
In many a sonnet, and melodious lay.
When thanks and joy, as prompt and kindly be,
As are requests and moans in misery:
And tell me then, whose lot it is to see:
That which to most men, is a mystery.
I mean whose soul a load of sin does press:
Much like a Mountain, for it weighs no less.
The Lord discovering by a wondrous light,
To thy wrackt Conscience, such a ghastly sight.
As makes thy heart to quake, thy bones to quiver,
Thy flesh to fail, and scorcheth up thy liver.
So as thy self, art to thy own self seeming,
A lost damned devil in thy own esteeming.
Unworthy being, food, bread, life, that for,
Hate to thy sin; thy soul thou do abhor.
Tell me how then, In such a case can frame,
T'agree thy heart and tongue to praise Gods Name:
Whether thanksgiving to such a time as this;
Or prayers or groanings, more agreeing is.
If thou in this case, blames not groans and prayers;
Nor wilt if others, much, much thanks in theirs.
Since it is like, there was a time before,
When they were less in thanks, in groanings more.
I rather think, them nearer God to be;
Unless their carriage show the contrary:
Not judging they omit sins, to confess:
Because they see their own much holiness.
But if their joy now is, or e're was true:
There has or will come times, wherein to rue.
In fi^e suppose, thy hearts with child of praise:
To Gods Name here, thou now begins those lays:
Yea that celestial and melodious song;
Which to the Heavens more properly belong;
And feeling in thy self a reason why,
Thou art thus moved to this melody:
And no more plain a token can there be,
Of Gods true grace and thy felicity.
For who his friend with thankfulness can greet,
For that whereof, he never felt the sweet:
Which grace of God is hardest there to find,
In my conceit, of any other kind.
At least wise, for my self, I Will not deny;
This in my own self, I can least espy.
I mean, I can most hardly come to know,
If e're I truly gave God thanks or no:
Reasons whereof, are these (as I conceive)
We love our selves well, we would still receive.
Were our thirst kindly, we are thirsty land;
We never love, to look on empty hand.
Our flesh is lusty, and our souls are lank:
So that we have no hearts at all to thank.
But to return, to do God's pleasure, is,
Of Gods dear Saints, the happiness and bless.
No other thing, but instruments to be,
In our Gods hand, his Name to glorify.
In which his will, blessed souls for ever biding,
In that calm road, to watch his ebb and tyding:
And therewithal (or in or out the bay)
With sweet breathed sighs of love wasted away.
What course the Current of Gods pleasure runs,
Which is that very liberty of Sons
Imparted to them, not by verbal telling:
Nor labored out, as Words are done by spelling:
But secretly, th'anointing does convey
Into their hearts, to will, to do and say.
Yea that anointing, which without all measure,
Remains in him, who is the very treasure:
From head to members, still it self conveying,
As head springs do in thousand Channels straying;
Or as in Organs, one self breath fulfills,
Proportionally, the great and little quills:
Causing the less, as well as bigger speak;
And in each time, in order silence break:
So does Gods Spirit, which is his very love,
Whereby he loves himself, and his does move.
Toward himself (which too his working power
And does before, at Sea and Land devour,
Laying the mountains and the valleys plain,
That nothing might Gods Childrens wills restrain)
Cause man within the living stock to thrive,
Or move, as do great wheels the lesser drive:
So that this will is Gods primarilie,
Yea, even man's too in a next degree;
As fully as his eating, drinking, sleeping,
Standing, or walking, health or harbor keeping.
For who gives power these things to will or do?
The very same that gives the other too.
O happy grafts, who thus transformed be,
Into the Nature of this living Tree;
Whose leaves are ever flourishing and green,
And roots fast fixed, the liquid streams between.
You Demy-gods, who to this Mount can say,
Pluck up thy self and plant thee in the sea?
Whose wills from Gods, receiving still their bent,
May in a sort be called Omnipotent:
At least, so far as by his Spirit ye
Are set a Work, his instruments to be.
Though here in measure, after to fulfill,
In perfectness the pleasure of his will:
Who, from the hot breath of Gods spirit bear
Tidings of joy, alarums often of fear:
The great Kings Heralds now proclaiming pity,
Anon for sin, destruction of a City.
Whose souls down deep in Gods sweet secrets dive,
As fish in wholesome streams play, live, and thrive:
Whose sure presages, (oracles say I)
Gods light reveals, his power does ratify.
Dear messengers whom God does often employ,
To kill and quicken, plant and to destroy:
Whose fatal Judgment justly to come under,
Is to be Butt, for Gods bright bolt and thunder.
O let me Anchor underneath your Lee;
But never spread ensigns of an enemy.
Now Gods will thus revealed is termed commanding,
So called (as seems) for our weak understanding:
At leastwise as commandment does imply,
Unaptness, or inflexibility.
Which though by Angels done, and out of hand,
Yet as but can, with Angels Nature stand;
Whose absolutest Actions, never are such;
As to approach an uncreated pitch.
Yet is me thinks, life to a free concurring,
Of Stream with Stream, moved by the Fountains stirring:
Always remembering, that within the head,
Lies all the life, that is in the members spread.
Yea Christ himself, when once he has put down,
Authority and Power, shall yield the Crown.
To God the Father: that the Deity
May all in all his dear loved Members be.
Authority and Power, thus much importing,
By Law and Ordinance, a forced extorting.
And thus Christ's Prayer, for his is verifi'de
That he in them, and they in him abide.
Who does both will, speak, think, and live, and move
In every soul unite to him in Love:
Like as the Soul, still in the bodies senses:
Its executions outwardly dispences.
Thus God does use to execute his will,
In such (I say) as he vouchsaves to fill;
Though he such Organs, needs near a deal:
But all is done, for silly man's avail:
Needs not (I say) who to himself is store,
Of all rich Treasures, as is said before.
Yet by a new and living way found out,
B^tter to bring his blessedness about:
That he might man, his late lost treasure win;
His Jemm, House, Temple, to delight him in.
He bows his heart by love from him to draw,
What never could be wrung out by the Law.
Could not (I say) in reverence be it spoken
For by Gods Power his will is never broken:
So be obtained, till from himself first shedding
His love: He set a second love a breeding.
For such is Man, for frowardness and teen:
As some crab'd, dogged curr, that I have seen:
Which you may take: and all to beat and bang him,
To make him stoop, and you shall sooner hang him.
Who with the Marigould shuts against a storm:
But ope's at-large, when beams of grace shine warm.
This way God deals and takes delight in this,
That thus in him his spouse delighted is:
Like a most kind and tender hearted Lover,
Who his own dear hearts joy, and grief, does suffer:
Or Friend on whom, his friends content rebounding,
Is to his heart, a double joy resounding.
As of a well moved lute, the trembling strings,
Unto a well moved ears, sweet murmurings:
Or as two souls, by ligaments from either,
Within one body, were unite together.
Thus well the Father with his soon agrees;
And thus the Son partakes his qualities.
Yet here but in a measure I confess,
For we are here but in a wilderness;
Where penury of bread and water wring us,
Where foes assault, and fiery serpents sting us.
Where lusting thoughts, from Egypt store defile us,
Where Midianites entrapping snares beguile us.
Our health more resting (for our Faith is small)
That we are known, then that we know at all.
For were it full, our joy would be so strong,
This mortal life could not continue long.
But here the best, do but in little measure,
Enjoy that rich inestimable treasure;
As Vessels that contain, not past their bearing;
Or bodies that endure, not past their wearing,
Though I confess a difference of degree,
Is here as well, as shall hereafter be:
Some newly born, and in the Mothers lap;
Which skill no more, than sweetness of the pap.
Who (save in their desires) do quite disclaim
All hopes of Sonship, to belong to them:
Whose hate to sin, is yet so wondrous sore:
Then yield to it, they would rather dye before.
Some in the vigor of their you^hful prime
Suffer and do, by intercourse of time:
Now soy'ld (their Arms, not closely clasping on)
Yet Victors in the spiritual fight anon.
Some Fathers grow^ both circumspect and wise,
In spiritual combats through long exercise;
By constant walking in a godly way,
Able for God, both much to do and say*
For though our deeds do nothing add nor minish
To God nor to what Christ (not we) could finish;
Yet, that it may be better manifested,
That this life bread is thoroughly digested:
Its look^d for that it the eaters drive,
In courage, strength, and manly acts to thrive:
For sweet it is ones heritage to see,
But sweeter far to feel it so to be.
Now here through sanctity we entrance make:
Yea, sound possession of Gods kingdom take.
Our God being like some wondrous loving Father.
Who choosing an adopted Son, the rather
To let his Son his mind the better know,
That all is his, and that he means it so:
Not only by his writings does convey,
Or state him in his livings all he may:
That he far off in other Countries being,
Might feed his hopes, by seals and writings seeing,
But gives him leave, and freely bids him come:
And in his lifetime makes his house his home:
Allowing him his diet at his Table,
And for his horse, a standing in his stable.
Provision of his Chamber, and his Bed,
To come and go, and rest his weary head.
This man can then by demonstration show,
That he is heir; yea, feels the same is so.
Now for our present case t'apply this to it,
I will forbear, since every one may do it.
Only I say, who truly is an Heir
Of Christ his Kingdom, makes his entry here:
Yea, some enjoy it in a great degree,
Great in it self, though not respectivelie.
What measure though I deal not here to say,
Meddle not with that, who meddle with it may:
Wherein thou needs exceeding wary be,
Of judging others by what is in thee.
For shall I others gifts and graces stint,
Because my self can see no farther in it?
And who art thou that d^rest so confine
Gods bounty to that straightened breast of thine?
True grace still eminent, of grace will own,
Admire and reverence where the same is known:
Not once disdaining to be thought to be
Inferior to another in degree.
For this one thing that we do somewhat think us,
To nothing, in the pit of pride does sink us:
Not that but shows sometimes for substance goes,
And that men ofttimes are deceived so:
But ignis fatuus never yielded smoke,
Nor Owls long hidden lie within the poak.
Yet that no hinderance is, why some indeed
And verity may not in grace exceed.
Such mastery to obtain against their sin,
Such constant feeling of Gods favor win.
So comfortable and so sweet abode,
Such fellowship and walking with their God,
That nature, nay, themselves shall much admire,
That e're they should continue or acquire:
(As some of our late well approved Divines,
Have testified in their new extant lines)
Why should it so incredibly be thought,
That men should into such a case be brought:
As both we find the Scripture does avow,
And good men's past experience too allow?
And who art thou dare scoff at, or deny,
That for sincerity thou never did try?
Nay, can thou do it, tell me by the way?
(That its impossible, I do not say)
Since grace there is, and grace its face does show,
Why judge thou the heart thou do not know?
I grant thou may est upon the parties, where
Some answerable fruits do not appear.
Pronounce that they but rotten branches be,
And no sound members of the living tree:
But therewithal beware, that thou good seed
Do not pluck up together with the weed.
Give me a man that can himself set free,
From imputations of Hypocrisy:
For still more labor he bestows in it;
More cunningly, men thinks: he strives to spin it.
Since this is so, what means have thou to spy it:
More probably, then the other to deny it.
So then where thou good signs sees, how much less
Can thou these Parties charge with doubleness.
Not that but Maskers by contempt, awateing
Those apeish Juglers, and their counterfeiting:
Who having not the heat of Grace within;
A superficial self wrought web, begin:
Self wrought (I say) for where true grace is seen:
The Parties Patients, more than Actors been.
Still understand me, not in any case:
The means hereby, I lessen or debase.
Since commonly, God in and by the means;
Bestows on his, this rich and happy gains.
But to return, mistakings I confess,
In Christians one another sort no less:
That Hypocrites, I willingly let pass,
Who counterfeiting what he never was.
As one who does the praise of goodness favor;
The thing it self, yet never the rather savor:
Who by his seeking, how to be accounted,
Amongst such, as to some pitch of grace are mounted:
And outwardly the business undertaking,
Quite ^ars the matter, in the very making.
These I let pass, being such defigured mates:
As makes themselves unbid associats.
Of them I nothing say, but of dear brothers,
Of mis-conceits, 'twixt Christians, one and others.
But out, Alace! will no man undertake?
'Twixt Paul and Barnabas accord to make:
Must (I the man, so far unfit) be he
Somewhat to say? or nothing said must be:
Or is the one part, so obstinately bent;
It may be counted labor vainly spent.
Or have the other eyes, and do not see:
Nor can with meekness they restored be.
Or if not so, do brethren quite give over,
To labor so, their brethren to restore;
Or do their Conscience testify that ever
They thereto have employed their best endeavor?
Or is the one part willing, and the other
Backward unto the duty of a Brother:
Or would in meeting still more jarrs arise,
And cause the one part the other to despise.
Raising an heap of doubts and quarrels more,
Than ever came in question yet before.
Or is it in vain to strive? that inward light,
That some decernes, to paint to others sight:
Would some disdain to hear, or to be told,
Of mysteries that meaner men behold?
Or think they should be thereby much despised,
At least accounted not so well advised:
Or has the one part cause of jealousy,
That the other deals not in sincerity?
Is any side with prejudice so led,
Words may not rightly be interpreted?
Is any side (say I) must taking parts,
Remain, where should be Harmony of hearts?
Or, is their main truths left undescried:
Or, are men carnal, or is Christ divided?
But, O! what means and parties might be found,
To search out these things to the very ground?
For, as for me, I am a silly man,
Unable and unsit these things to scan:
To whom it may be said, look thine own eye,
Before thou fault in others do espy:
But it is no spying faults, where what is amiss,
Through misconceits, one labors to redress:
And lo, how Sion droups, love lies along,
Even like to dye, who then can hold his tongue?
Then somewhat will I say, and somewhat must,
Though sin say no, and I lie in the dust:
And if that any these my words despise,
Say, he has met with one more bold then wise:
And if he lists let him add this too,
Who can more boldly then blind byard do.
And if he think a Mediator still,
Should be a man discreet of place and skill,
Of good desert, who needs not be ashamed,
To find a fault, where faults are to be blamed,
To either part indifferent, or at least
One, who on all sides has some interest:
And he that judges me to be none such,
Well fare his heart, I will not blame him much.
For I am greatly conscious to my self.
Of indiscretion, ignorance and pelf;
Yea, sin and weakness, insomuch that I,
At all disdain not to be said so by:
Yet thus much say I for apology,
I take not on me this or that to be:
Nor seek I the pre-eminence and state,
To be some dooms-man things to arbitrate:
But leave to each man, as he thinks best,
To censure it, and me even as he list,
Praying that Gods, not man's regard, may be
In chiefest honor, and respect with me;
Not that I light esteem man's love or hate,
But would to Gods, keep man's subordinate.
And for my taking parts, my answers this,
I see not where a real difference is;
For this I count as none, where men accord
In substance, though some difference be in word;
But had there been, and I had therein rankt me,
I know not who would for my Work have thankt me:
Nor seek I for it, for that, nor for this stuff,
Which though perhaps it now endure a snuff:
Some honest heart may yet, when I am dead
Vouchsafe to Read, and think not evil said:
And howsoever the manner I may miss,
I Am sure I know what min intention is.
In fine let this serve for a period here,
If ill I say, let all men witness bear.
For difference then I say, I do not see,
In these Garboils a main one yet to be:
If men by rule of Charity be led,
That things may rightly be interpreted:
For as I grant some worthy to be checked,
Because dark speech they do too much affect,
So by misunderstanding, answer me,
May not some hearers too blame worthy be.
Far b^ it from me here in any wise,
For dark and doubtful speech t'apologize:
Much less for that accursed worthy hating
Damned Romish practice of Equivocating;
The which though by Nature all men liars be,
Who willingly maintains, accursed he:
Nor do I judge of Charity as blind.
But say its no sharp censurer by kind;
Whiles Christ and his Apostles plainly spoke,
Did their true sense each hearer undertake;
Nay, who will deny, God does to some unfold,
That others cannot see though they be told,
No, though thou spell them in the plainest ways,
Withal the best words thou can once devise.
For what sees flesh, or man regenerate too,
So far as blind corruption has to do?
Which may a reason be, why this man brands
That for obscure himself not understands.
Like him that cried, the candle gives no light,
When as (poor man) the want was in his sight:
That man whose speech is out of feeling spun,
Thinks it perspicuous as the midday Sun:
Not that I here do go about to blame
Some, (who at others landlie though) exclaim,
With such like words: O these are they that see
That which to us is but a Mystery:
Nor that I point out, or exemple sie
For eminence, this or that man, I,
Nor yet the other for deffect in grace,
Once aim at, or endeavor to debase:
But say, who scorn that other should discern
More then himself, this lesson well must learn.
Take heed of thinking he does somewhat know,
Least he know nothing as he ought to do:
I speak to them too, who disdains at such
As simpler he, and know not yet so much.
And whereas there be more or less degrees,
Of spiritual insight each one sees:
I lay this ground, more grace one has, still he
Thinks other better than himself to be:
For why in others man the effects but knows,
Within we see sin in the very cause:
And that is plain in this, that in their hearts,
Such are more vexed than all their other parts;
Nor say I now, that Nature cannot see,
In humane learning, difference of degree,
And as is said, Grace has for other eyes,
And Wisdom to discern too, none denies:
Yet one main property of clearly seeing,
Is not to much to eye ones own well being.
But with good Job, to listen too not scorn,
His Maids admonishment, though basely born:
I often have heard a godly man confess,
Himself beholding for his skill no less,
And spiritual insight how to bare the face,
And secret passages, 'twixt sin and grace:
To some one poor distressed Soul that lies,
With bleeding, and with sore and blubbered eyes,
Who never a letter know, can on the Book,
Nor dare for sin, scarce up to Heaven look:
Then all his Studies, or his humane guides,
Books, or what other humane help besides:
And good cause why such folk have so clear fight,
For God sets in the Soul his candle light:
Yea, makes it even a Holy School, wherein
His Spirit and Satan strong disputants been;
The Soul mean while, yea often the Body walking,
The hands at work, the tongue employed in talking.
The eyes at view, I almost said even sleeping:
Hear these two talk, their acts in earnest keeping,
Which needs must be a passing way to fill,
That simplest Soul with wondrous spiritual skill:
And this made David too a good practiser,
Then all his learned teachers so far wiser,
As to speak truth: how should it other be,
But such must practice of necessity
So deep impressions both of love and fear,
Stamped in their Souls of things that touched so near?
And this has made some speak, how much they found,
Themselves to Prayer and Temptation bound,
For finding out of that hid Scripture sense,
They never could gain by labor nor expense,
Learning and Arts, as handmaids unto Grace,
My meaning is, by no means to debase;
For where these two have both their proper site,
That man must needs prove rarely exquisite:
But that is where Grace the other closs does lay,
Down under hatches from the light of day,
For ken it self once nere, so little stronger,
It will be Mistress, but the Maid no longer:
A cause why those, who lay as chiefest ground,
Bare Eloquence, does yield so harsh a sound,
And burden so, a sanctified ear,
With such a weight, as grievous is to bear:
True Eloquence I blame not, but such froth,
As all in sounds out from the speaker goes:
The base-born Imp, whose pedigree's derived
From spurious Seed, of learning wrongly wived,
Blameworthy most, when as in holy writ
Affected Humane Flowers varnish it.
True Eloquence is in its splendour, where
Fulness of matter, words does overbear:
Setting the heart of such a large extent,
Like a full Vessel that must needs have vent:
Or well-charg'd Piece, whose bullet fircely drives,
So violent, that it with lightning strives:
The chief intention which one has in hand,
Being how to make his hearer understand,
As best content, when he the impression leaves,
And clearest sight of what himself conceives:
Unlike that Soldier, who more cares in fight,
Fair to discharge, then where his bullets light:
Still Gentlemen fair and far off de shoot,
Missing the Paper, and sometimes the Butt.
But the good Archer, who the Game would win,
Cares not how fairly, but how near the pin.
Accordingly things are to hearers brought,
As they before are in the speakers wrought:
For what man gives another of a store
Which himself has not in some sort before?
A cause why such whose heart and tongue agree,
So wondrous powerful in their preaching be,
And those who teach not by experience so,
So little profit by their preaching do.
What use has eloquence, but to impart,
To other men, the language of the heart:
Wherein the plainest words that wit can find,
Will come far short to model out the mind?
So almost infinite and never divine
Words, rather seem its language to confine;
Whereto, yet all that may most fitly sort,
The speakers thoughts most lively to import:
Whereby more light to hearers may accrue,
Yea, though it seem never so strange and new,
Are commendable, yea, necessary too.
(Though most men think its but too much ado)
And plain, another thing than words high born,
Where wind instead of Substance does adorn:
Which Sermons stuffed with eloquence and phrase,
Never pierce means hearts, but sets the wits at gaze:
The Preacher's, like the neat spruse City Dame,
Who, when an hungered from a feast she came,
And asked by her Maid (and therewith chidden)
Why she eat not with others that were bidden?
Said fool, the cause I feasts frequent I trow,
Is not for meat, but manners there to show.
Now for new words, some men as error-breeders,
Condemn, and term them fruits of fancie-feeders:
To this I say, and hope I say aright,
Some words termed new, often gives a greater light
Into the Spirits meaning of the Word,
Then otherwise a sentence will afford.
Always foreseen, they do not disagree,
With that sound touch stone of all verity:
Nay, of absurdity, nor error sound,
Which if they do, then cast them to the ground:
Because man's wit subject to falsitie,
And thereto prone, by Nature as we see,
Does catch an error sooner from a word,
Then credit to long tales of Truth afford.
In which respect our words we well must scan,
As is observed by a worthy man:
New words must too be molded in a mind,
Enlarged by grace, and helped by natures kind:
For Nature here a handmaid we exclude not,
So she into her mistress room intrude not:
Since Grace must somewhat have to work upon,
No Seeds takes rooting on a naked stone,
Grace yielding often accordingly improvements,
As Nature does fit, or unfit indowments:
For to the well-tuned Lute, the oaten quill,
Yields (for delight) though manned with never such skill
Herein a large imagination much
Avails to the yielding forth of such:
Which is for every form, a formless table,
And how much larger, so much better able,
To bear and represent to judgments eye,
More lively Pictures to shape speeches by.
Its a good help, I say, namely in this,
That many a figure therein framed is;
And yet the sentence never th'obscurer neither,
But more apparent made by much of either:
And if you say, that figures little need
Where truth is meant, to stand in any stead;
I say, read but our Saviors life throughout,
Tell me what Chapters you can find without,
I almost said, what verses? sure if any,
Full well I wot there be not very many:
For this frail Life so slender knowledge brings,
We see but here the outward side of things,
And must the same express, not as we please,
But as we may, by such weak means as these:
Weakness I do not to the Word impute,
But say words serve, our weak conceits to suit,
Wherein the Lord to silly manward bends,
And to our weak capacity descends.
Yet is it self unsearchable profound,
Where Elephant may swim, and find no ground;
And does in glory infinitely shine,
Being one with that Majesty Divine:
Which though I do not, nor yet rightly may,
Of Gods Word (as it is writ in Paper) say
In that respect a Creature, yea, also
Shall fade and perish, as such Creatures do.
But to leave this, we judge here by events,
Our senses guided by mere accidents,
And must have things in such a sort expressed,
As fitteth our Capacities the best;
For in their cause to know things as they be,
This is reserved for Eternity.
Save that sometimes some glimpses of that Light,
Shine here at seasons to our inward sight:
Of spiritual things while God (a spirit being)
Shapes some good Souls a shred of his own seeing,
Which might be cause why Prophets could foretell,
What diverse ages afterward befell.
But now for uncouth words, if those I say,
Hurt; it is where pride and arrogance bear sway,
Men speaking things never in themselves decern'd,
But only at the mouth of others learned:
Wherein I wish my self, and all men wary,
How we in these respects our selves do carry:
And that Paul's counsel well observed may be,
Be wise according to sobriety.
But herein many I believe have been,
Yea, and yet are too much defective in:
Nor do I strive hereof my self to free,
But wish clear sight, my sailings more to see:
For this it is in some declining case,
As (woe is me) what wanes are often in Grace:
When as the flesh begins to grow secure,
The spirits Curb unwilling to endure,
Temptations baiting of their eager charge,
Grace leaving for a time my heart at large,
High self-conceits in me not downright killed,
Rather the heart with foul presumption filled,
Most ready all Gods promises to take,
That to security may furtherance make:
The judgment full of these conclusions stufft,
(Which by the way does make the heart so pufft)
These, and such like, that my salvations free,
That works but only show my Faith to be:
That though God does not alwayet manifest
To me his love, nere'lesse in his own breast,
Its sure enough, as marks and mercies past,
Witness whereof perhaps some heartlesse taste,
Does then remain, recorded long before,
Within the Register of memories store,
Which morsells, when the flesh has got: it hyes,
And then unto a stomach croude applies:
From whence down to the spiritual members sent
They breed exceeding hurtful nutriment;
This peradventure may be reason why,
Some on marks past so loath are to rely,
Which used to lead though to a higher measure,
Are to the Soul a very worthy Treasure.
(For that the flesh these to its ^urther fall
Converts; the new man cannot do withal)
These help too, as a staff to lean upon,
Often in afflicted Souls when feeling's gone.
They hurt by accident, when from supply
Of some rare Preachers sweet delivery;
The flesh idea's to it self does frame,
Of freedom, which (alace) is but in vain,
Which falling on a Stomach sitting for it,
Makes new Creation droup, and sore abhor it:
And often with Paul to sigh and look about it,
And cry for help and means to go without it,
When yet perhapes it proves a faster guest,
Then to be packing at the first request.
For carnal reason its a steadfast friend
To all designs whereto the flesh would bend:
I call these Stomachs crowd in this respect,
For their spiritual calors great de^ect:
For sure there is times, when as Gods Children are
Like Bees in wi^ter season, branches bare,
Yet seasons too, when he their Vessels sines,
And warms their hearts, as with refreshing wires:
Yea, when Gods sp'rit, the sweet and pleasant showers
Of promises, into their bosoms poures:
The season warm, the ground well dig'd and dressed,
Whereby it moisture better may digest:
Where lack of Sun and moisture more t^en needs,
There oftimes many a beg and ma^^ish breeds.
As in our neig^bour Irish ground by name,
We have at large experience of the same;
For give some Soil more moisture then behooves,
And it forthwith into a quag-mire proves.
But Rivers in Gods Sanctuary flow,
And stand not in such filthy pudles so.
This may because, why Christ himself did say,
To his Disciples ready then away:
Yet many things I have to say to you,
But you are weak, and cannot bear them now.
Wise Fathers let their Sons have liberty
As they have wit to guide it: for we see,
Let th'heir in none-age feel himself young master,
It Is all to nothing but he will prove a waster:
Makes revell rout, lets silver handfulls shiver,
Thinking his portion will last out for ever,
And of his Patrimony gets such vent,
That ere full age, often stock and all is spent.
Alace, poor Child, through want of wit and skill
^n right discerning of the good and ill:
Himself he thinks how e're so ill he merit,
His loving Father never will dis-inherit.
Whereby such bl^ws he to his livel'hood gives,
As he shall hardly see through while he lives:
Or else at least it brings a smarting skin,
And many a heavy frown to hedge him in,
With threats, that if such courses be not left,
He suit shall of his birthright be bereft;
Whereof, the whiles he lives in deadly fears,
Himself he more on his good carriage bears:
Bringing home often many a weary back,
With Inning that, which he before did slack.
And with hard toil, and sweat out of his brows,
Offer such fruit, as in his garden grows:
For its not ill, that such lewd lads as he
Should know themselves within command to be:
Yea, and be taught by strict, strict observation,
What it is to be out of Gods frame and fashion:
And not to have his lands till he can use them,
Least he, by prodigality abuse them.
For most of young men have their youthful fits,
Often coming to their lands before their wits;
And commonly are called Bucks o'th first head,
Never weighing how their Father was bested:
Whiles with great toil, and sweat of brows, he bought
The Inheritance which now they set at naught,
Who play at fast and loose, light come, light gone,
Like snow in Summer, on a Sun-hot stone.
These must be first taught by the Road to know
What it is to use their Patrimonies so.
What if such life be still continued?
No hope for them, but dis-inherited.
And still, as they are of a duty quailing.
Their Master never of due reckoning failing.
This tutors them, and as a hired groom,
Still holds them under, till their freedom come.
But that once there, then all that is past they see
Mere Rudiments, and but School-fashions be:
Wherein un'wares, they have been trained long,
To get them skill, and pluck their plummes among;
Yea, hard hemmed in, by th'masters straiter hand,
Till they their state might better understand:
Much like the untamed Colt, the Horse, or Mule,
Who (if he show his strength) no man can rule.
But true skill comes not till the time appointed,
That they are with the Sp'rit of Sons anointed:
Whereof more measure one enjoyes indeed,
The lesser he of Rudiments has need:
For Childhood thoughts, and skill, but like it brings,
But riper age does banish Childish things:
And now the ground of learnings well begun,
He needs not each inch to his rules to run.
Not that I dream of such a rule erected,
As that Gods Word should so become neglected:
But that th'spirit, which from the word never swarves,
Guides all Gods Children as occasion serves:
And leading them to what is there spoke or meant
In express words, or by good consequent:
Whereof the very scope, the mould, and frame
Is in the heart deep written by the same,
And is to every one his heap of Treasure,
According to his several pitch and measure,
Serving for Life and Actions as a Law,
There-out sound rules and lineaments to draw:
Whereby Gods Children in good measure can
Make up the model of a Christian man:
As from that storehouse where things old and new,
The good householder for his household drew,
Wherein the Spirit, with the written Word,
In one self same does evermore accord.
Which word of God so spoken by the spirit,
May fitly well, the name of inward merit:
This term I use, its working to express,
And in no humor of new fanglenesse.
Here by the way, I would desire amain
This grant of thee that fear God, to gain,
That is, as I would none should be obscure,
In willful use of words which doubts procure:
So thou should still too hasty censures fly,
Since who is in fault it may a question be:
He, for dark speech uneasy to be found,
Or thou, because you are weak to understand.
I heard a good man once new Phrase control
This for example (inward in the Soul)
Which me thinks deep impression (I profess)
Does in the affections fitly well express,
For which that he good cause, yet did not know
I dare not judge, but think it might be so:
For reverence, which I to his learning bear,
His wisdom, godliness and silver Hair,
But that he wanted knowledge how to give
A tolerable sense thereof, who can believe:
It may be he dislike it as a guest,
Bred as he thought in a distempred breast.
But woe is me, why do we go to wars?
And make a breach about these verbal jarrs?
I wish that Charity may every where,
In these contentions equal balance bear,
And yet no further then things do accord
With verity, and wisdom of the Word:
Word-strivings (with a good Divine) I say,
I much mislike, and wish they were away:
As our dear mothers loss, much more then gain,
And therewithal She Is wearied out in vain:
Yet grant I too, some things but verbal seem,
Which we at no hand lightly may esteem;
Proving (in Christ his Ship) like little holes,
Or some small clew, which like the snow-ball roules,
Whereof enough examples might be yielded,
Of Heresies, of small beginnings builded:
As of Nestorius, Eutiches, and others:
Those base-born buds, and hateful brood of brothers,
Against the which, good warnings well to arm
In these worst times, I grant will do no harm.
Christians must still labor to bear a mind,
Not seeking faults, nor in plain misses blind:
Not seeking cause (I say) like him which to
His question, whether man helped God or no,
In any work: end answered with denial,
Is said t'exclaim, and make a strange replyal:
Alleging for his proof this pregnant ground:
Out of the Judges easy to be found:
Where those are termed accursed by the Word,
Who against the mighty helped not the Lord.
Nor may we be like Anaxagoras,
Who could not see that Snow white collored was.
But to return whence I but lately left,
Gods Sons must once be of self-works bereft.
When they as dung, shall suffer all disgrace,
And faith and love take standing in their place,
And that the Heavenly Sabbath dawning is,
When we from our works rest, as God from his:
I do not such a resting here maintain,
As may cessation from good duties gain:
But such a seasing as is from the Law,
A resting in our Saviors yoke to draw:
Not that the Law is for its substance changed,
But to Gods Saints in other order ranged.
Its nature now in Christ so qualified,
That its grim face we better may abide:
At least the while its glory passes by,
Closse in the clifts of Christ his wounds we lie.
Whether like him, who once appeal did make,
From Philip sleeping to the same awake:
Flying for refuge, we in safety be
Under that perfect Law of Liberty:
Which flying is by faith, a still relying
On Gods free favor, both alive, and dying:
Whereout our Sabbaths works, which now are sport,
Though heretofore performed in slavish sort:
For neither circumcised, nor otherwise,
But a new Creature God does chiefly prize.
Yea, this is it wherein he pleasure takes,
And which in works, a real difference makes:
According to which rule, who walks, he
Shall ever happy, and most blessed be.
Wherein, if any to the Angels train,
Of pitch, or paritie could here attain;
Who often on earth by Gods permission walk,
Yea, eat and drink, converse with men, and talk,
(Acting Gods will) yea in a sort do bear
Heaven still about them, as they sojourn here,
Ever remaining in that happy case,
As to behold the heavenly Fathers face:
Then should they have, I dar be bold to say,
As little need of Rudiments as they.
For to the pure even all things holy be,
But to th'impure they fall out contrary.
To every one as he in grace does grow,
Things are to him according thereunto:
But, for because man's nature is but frail,
And destitute of means full soon would quail,
God of his mercy does us here afford,
Prayer, Public, Private, Sacraments, the Word,
Temples, and Preachers, Times, and Seasons fit,
And set apart for due frequenting it:
Wherein I see not, but there needs a strife
In me, much like as for my limbs and life;
I mean to find Gods presence in the means,
For else the outward action little gains:
Which blessing yet I cannot look to find,
Unless my self closs to the means I bind:
Yea, when I feel my heart most backward bent,
Then most of all it needs sore constraint,
(As (...) hardened (...) and much unfittnesse,
In stocking duties bear me woeful witness)
F^r things in me are not yet brought about,
That the inner man can bear the other out,
But still need unto all good means to press.
(As freely to Gods glory I confess)
But if that any (as it may be some)
Conceives he is to such perfection come,
As that his life a holy Sabbath is,
Though he task, work, and time, set duty miss:
Yet midst of all his worldly vocation,
His heart is up in prayer and meditation,
And that good thoughts in ordinary greet him,
Upon occassions still as any meet him:
So that his actions, yea, his thoughts and words
Glory to God, and good to men affords,
(As in some measure novices in grace
On others God may banquet for a space,
I say in measure, for I do not hold
Perfection here, as I before have told.)
I envy not his case, happy man he,
Let him rejoice in God, and pity me:
And were it not, that men are bound to fear
And reverence to Gods ordinance bear,
And might a Christian dangerlesse dispense,
With other Christians welfare or offense,
(For ought I see) I should go nere it, I,
To think himself he might so edify,
And with set times and duties, to be bold,
And by his inward strength, firm footing hold.
But seeing (as aforesaid) flesh is frail,
And cannot look at Heaven, but through a vail,
Gods brightness being clearer than the light,
Which seen in strength, would quite put out the sight:
That Rudiments much like our bonnets brim,
Will help our eyesight, though themselves be dim.
I dare not for a world of gold advise,
Men to forbear the least, least, exercise,
That any help or furtherance may afford,
To God-word, and has warrant from his Word:
No, though they lived in the clearest light,
That ever yet enjoyed earthly wight.
For (were there no cause else) Gods ordinance, tho
Neglect thereof no man could answer to:
The simpleness whereof none may despise,
Since by those foolish things, God daunts the wise:
There may be in Gods child, I grant, sometimes,
(As in the top-branch of his first love-primes)
Feeling himself deep in Gods graces dyed:
His Soul in Gods pure streams well satisfied,
Through much conversing in that spiritual business
In Bodyly less care and more remissness.
I call this Bodily, the Churches order,
In things that Christian liberty afford her:
Set forms of duties; yea, the outward Letter,
Time, person, place, all Rudiments the better:
There Is difference twixt bare actions (as to live)
Or well, or ill, which form to actions give:
I only mean herein [I do professe]
That very form, which men call outwardnesse:
An accident which to the Subject clings,
And not the solid substance of the things:
Nor outwardness as it is Hypocrisy.
For so it is an evil quality:
And every act so qualified is sin,
Which I would no man should be fostered in:
But I mean that for which (in every nature)
Its Subject does receive its form and feature,
Which is the baser portion of the two,
That in Gods service here on earth, we do:
Herein, if any miss themselves shall find it:
When deadness after shall give breath to mind it.
Which here I Will not condemn, nor commend it,
Let them who stir the controversy, end it.
Only I say, as I have said before,
Were we spiritual wholly, then no more:
But instantly these Rudiments withal,
Would of themselves, even by their nature fall.
The Soul then from these outward things be freer
Whereby it might enjoy its God th'nigher.
For to the Soul, things earthly are a let,
Made Rudiments, to serve our weakness yet:
This may be cause, why in our spiritual home,
Our bodies too shall spiritual ones become.
Now of Gods presence what is obtained below,
I take not on me to express it, no.
And whether, or how far one may remit,
Or, what in each degree, is meet and fit.
Yet this I say, if I in some man see,
Show of more grace then e're was yet in me.
Whose life and carriage I cannot detect,
The same apparently to contradict:
(For I Will not plead for all, who do profess,
By goodly words, their own much holiness)
So be it he climb no more, but what the Word
Says, God to his both may, and do afford;
Do others as they please, I dar not, I;
That this their show may be in truth deny.
For though Hypocrisy often spins a thread,
Good corn can hardly be descern'd from weed:
Yet mark what way a man his carriage bends,
'Twill give good light, whether his journey tends:
Captains love Camps, Scholars attend the Schools,
Husbands the ground, bab^es please babes and fools.
This world was but King Alexanders walk,
Kingdoms, and Crowns the subject of his talk.
Niggards do love to talk of niggardize,
And liberal men, of liberal things devise.
Weak archers shoot but at a little length,
For as the man's, so likewise is his strength:
God has his David's from whose breast there springs,
Thoughts of great hearts like the sons of kings;
Of whom let this a special token be,
That their own worths they least of all do see.
I undertake not here to know or name,
Particular examples of the same:
Though whiles I see my self quite overrun;
With sundry novices but new begun:
And thinks (by them) what more it is like there be,
Well grounded ones, and of antiquity:
Whereof some samples (not to me unknown)
Have been, who now do reap what they have sown:
Whose testimony I dare well believe,
Which by occasion I have heard them give:
That they some late years of their h^r^ abode:
Sweet comfort, joy, and fellowship with God;
Did constantly (or for the most part) keep;
Wherewith I doubt not, but they fell asleep:
Of whose both life and death to testify:
Let all who knew them speak as well as I.
I say, whiles that some, such as these I knew:
I find good cause to hope there are ^n^^gh.
But who of this thing would yet further know, Genesis 5.22. Luke 4.6.

Let him to Gods word and experience go:
More yet I say, who makes the King a feast:
And seeds him with the dish he loves best:
Though (in the mean time) somewhat serviceable
Be (through that care) neglected in the stable.
It shall not be so blamed (if blamed at all)
As if it touched the presence or the hall,
And Ordinances, so in themselves accord,
That each to others time, and turn afford.
Now't may well be, the spiritual mouth does rest,
From chewing whilst the stomach does digest:
Nature in man corrupt and finite too,
Cannot with all things have at once to do.
As for example, hear and read and pray,
One me suffice to bear the mind away.
Since there is still, as says the wisest King,
A seasonable time for every thing,
The use whereof, I wish men wary in,
Lest ought neglected should become a sin.
See how God dealt with Moses when he brake
Through zeal the Tables, which himself did make.
And at the Rock again, how unbelief:
A sin scarce named, did bring so wondrous grief.
I^ fine, let Christians, labor to be wise,
And Paul the Apostle counsel not despise.
The best gifts still desiring, until they
Attain unto the more excellenter way.
The which when any shall attain unto:
Th'anointing will direct them what to do:
But still in sp'ritual things fly we extortion.
Bearing our selves but after saiths proportion.
For we are yet as little children here,
And do our selves but like to children bear.
How er'e ^^ts eye the main chance, look to that:
Lest that the leaner kin^ devour the fat.
Thus I let pass the bodies sl^cknesse too,
Such duties; as Gods Spirit wills it do.
Since where that is and cherisht, Satan's seed
I^ sown; temptations and illusions breed:
And say, men may (the soul in some good plight)
Drawing the body after wi^h delight:)
Have this last dish, not all in order get,
Or if it be not so observed yet:
Through a desire to void what Paul so fears,
Th'observing days and times, and mouths and years.
Since outward exercise small good does bring:
But Godliness is good for every thing:
Believing that this outward man's own dying.
Is inwards greater comfort, and reviving.
As where (e contra) the inward man decays:
The outward it self into its room conveyes.
Some may think thus, I say, and that withal;
The constant use of outward things let fall:
Through a persuasion, that such strict observance:
Is not a course becoming sons, but servants.
By outward things note, still I mean such duties,
As may be called the Churches outward beauties:
As thinking thus, the more the bodies bound
To these; the more the Soul's in darkness drowned.
For still Gods spirit is of aspiring nature,
Seeking the clearest view of Gods bright feature:
And gladly here would find it, but alace,
Things are not yet com'd to that happy pass:
For till it be refined, this house of clay,
Weighs overmuch to soar with quit away.
I speak not here with purpose or intent,
To give true zeal the least discouragement,
Which on the wings of faith does mount and hye,
And takes no resting underneath the sky.
But wish men jealous of such freedom found,
Which leave at large, the outward man unbound.
For though in such transcendent state as this
God so upholds, men go not often amiss.
Yet is it possible for one to stray
Wherein our nature weakness does bewray.
Whereof this an occasion, but no cause
May be, as are of briberie wholesome Laws.
But say some (for that time) with merry gale,
Float on their sail, clothes puffing up withal.
Yet may it prove (e're they shall touch the shore)
They Will be constrained perforce to ply the ore?
How confident are some in this estate,
That there then comfort never shall abate.
Still having in their month this cheerful song,
They never shall move, their hill is made so strong:
That no temptation ever shall prevail,
To cause their faith to faint, much less to quail?
But all like clouds before the summer Sun,
Shall fade and vanish till they quite be done.
That they unshaken, still may make abode,
Like a strong pillar in the house of God.
What may one say to this then? bid God speed them,
Or else with Joshua, challenge and forbid them.
I neither blame, nor this do justify,
But if men thus believe, so do not I.
I mean, It is no sound Axiom general:
But who holds so, under reproof do fall:
Only I say it may be some men's case,
Particularly God's mercies thus to trace:
And if it be an error, or a sin,
Then it is the same that David once was in;
And I say more, it is ordinary too,
Most of Gods Saints in this state thus to do:
Which from what Spirit, it does or may arise:
I leave to better judgments to advise:
And thus conclude, what is to me if short,
God cut their days; and mean while fit them for it?
By letting them within his bosom ly,
To rest them in his lapp, until they dye;
So many tho: As make this general,
(As I have said) under reproof do fall:
For that Gods Word always remains true,
God's Church shall wain, and strength again renew.
And like the Moon still have its time and turns:
Yet with the bush consumes not, though it burns.
But to return; this sense of graces slacking,
Satan then vantage of men's tempers taking:
Sets in the brain, what in the heart should ly:
To make them wise, above sobriety.
Inciting them through latcheate felt of grace,
The Stock of liberty to spend apace:
An still to hold on in their former course:
Then which to men, thus fitted, none is worse;
As though one of five hundred pounds revenue,
Should after a thousand, speed and keep retinue;
Or like the younger son of some Esquier,
Who brought up with such diet and attyr:
As fits his Fathers house: after keeps State:
On a poor farm, and lives at former rate.
Forgetting his Annuitie, but run;
Maintain a farmer, not a gentleman.
Some men are thus deceived for finding grace:
In the first prime thereof, put forth apace:
Much like those trees, which dug and dressed will do,
Bear more that year, than afterward in two.
Or the young child, which at the first does thrive:
More in one year, then afterward in five:
The humor radical, being at that time
In its full vigor in the very pryme:
Grace (with the corn of Hezekiahs growing;
The first and second year without their sowing:
They think that soil the third year also will,
By Gods sole blessing, bring a harvest still:
And so forbear to plow again and sow;
And ply their works as other neighbors do.
But times will tell them, thus they 'l little win,
And find their gain, but slowly coming in.
I do not speak against it though that we
Should in this prime estate industrious be:
But labor then, I count it is but small;
I scarce know, if I should it labor call.
Since Gods true service is to such a bless;
Yea to the holiest, most delightful is:
Provided that it much much spiritual be,
For such with that estate will best agree:
Yea all things to the spiritual men they do,
Are holy, grace does alter nature so:
I mean as far, as they regenerate been,
In which respect, its said, they cannot sin.
And so far too, as the act it self not ill,
Repugnant so to Gods revealed will.
I say Christ's yoke is then no such great toil,
(When the hearts fresh noynted with the spirits oil)
As afterward when the old man stronger grows,
Which as he wins ground, still the new does loose.
And thus I count the worse, the new man speeds:
More industry and labor still there needs.
The Prophet says, I Will wise and warrie be,
In perfect way, until thou come to me.
The ground when barren, must have greater toil
For lesser gain, then in a fruitful soil
Some (having tried these things) cry out that this,
No other but a mere delusion is.
I mean who try the danger to rely,
Without like inward power, or liberty.
And in loose hearts, it does in very deed
Dangerous errors and confusion breed.
By accident, while men will take in hand
To know above, what they do understand:
And these are in this manner said to know,
Whose brain without the heart in these things go.
This is that new cloth on the old garment spent,
Which is a cause, that all the whole is rent:
And that new wine into old bottels filled,
Which makes both wine and vessels to be spilled:
Which if Christ's words (as they needs must) be true,
God's not a workman which makes pieces new.
But all at once, new hearts, new hands, new will;
New love, new hate, new joy, new fear, new skill:
If any frame; and have not all of these,
Proportionable, such their labor leese.
As who of liberty, such teachers been,
As little lack of being slaves to sin.
Sometimes confess they being on the score,
Of upright Christians (so esteemed before)
Thinking themselves so too, hold this for lewd:
Till after they repentance had renewed.
But O so sweet then was that little crumb
More sweet then honey, or the honeycomb,
For want of this renewing often a heart,
That cooles in grace, to works would backward start:
Nature and reason for the soul refining,
To make her worthy thereunto inclining.
That so works might stifle and stop the breath,
And thrust themselves into the room of faith.
The part regenerate, that it might obtain
Its ancient fellowship with God again.
Not so as though the part regenerate smelt
The Hirelings task, but much much carnal felt,
The whole to be; and so must needs come under:
The burning mountain, and the voice of Thunder:
Or else become these two extremes between,
Of neither party, but a libertine:
Its not brain knowledge that does make men free,
But where Gods Sp'rit is, there is liberty.
In quantity as faith proportionable:
And other graces too are answerable:
Then who so is in this untoward state:
(With those who fear God worse, than death to ^ate)
As they can neither make themselves believe;
The Laws their Lord, nor yet by faith can live.
Their way is this, since they will needs be free:
Map of their Faith, to let obedience be.
And judge, if small, or none be this proceeder;
According thereunto is that its breeder.
Its wantonness, which makes this Word so ha^ed:
I mean, the Word, Liberty, and so be rated.
To wit, when such as Liberty profess,
Thus turn God's Graces into wantonness.
There is an holy Liberty I grant,
Which may the Devils, and all gainsayers dant:
And therein also difference of degrees;
As in the brightness of the Stars thou sees:
Which (with our late Divines) I think more clear:
In our posterity shall yet appear.
When once the Stone, that is cut withoutten hand,
Shall like a mountain cover Sea and Land.
When God by his sore plague, shall on a day:
Leviathan, that crooked serpent stay.
When he shall so his vineyard purge and fine,
That men shall sing of red and purest wine:
When under David, his anointed King,
He his out of Captivity shall bring:
When they who once did pierce his dearest son;
Shall weep and mourn, for that which they have done:
When a New Temple God shall fashion so:
As streams of life, shall from the threshold slow.
Where shall resort (devoid of Dogs) the clean:
For its no carnal Liberty I mean.
But of this pitch: this Iron-age comes short:
God has no doubt his time reserved sor't.
When as his Church, even here on earth shall close:
With this sweet doctrine, faster I suppose;
Yea, even now I dare not say, but some
May to good measure of perfection come.
As good presages, for hereafter be,
Of New Jerusalem's prosperity:
As Wickliffe and John Huss in ages past;
Were of that time, when Luther came at last.
I fancy no particulars herein;
Be who they may, who have or first begin.
If thou see some to aim at here and fall,
Thou thinks to stand, look to thy self withal:
But that it may appear, this Sate's not fained,
Look Master Rogers how it is attained:
Which if that some in weaker means have got:
Gods mighty power, and working limit not:
If such through want of constant strictness lose it;
Take thou good heed, who better knows to use it.
The well beloved, sometimes skippeth in;
When almost past, all confidence we been:
And whether his abode be short or long;
Whiles it remains, it makes a chearf^l song:
Until which time, let still Gods Child expect
God in the means, and watch but for the effect,
It Is inward work, which out the other bears;
It Is the first mover, that first moves the spears.
Let that within still guide the rains, or curb
And sort thy motion to its proper orb;
And if at any time, flesh get the rain:
Rest not until, it be redeemed again.
For otherwise, insensibly will grow,
A senseless slumber, and thou shall not know:
Or such occurrences, as whereof the least,
May bring more danger, than can be expressed:
As sloth, profaneness: and such like the seeds
Of many hateful, and accursed weeds.
The whiles men do, the stock of grace imbessil;
Striving to carry sail above their vessel.
The head unwealdy for the body grown,
Makes topsie, turvye, all quite overthrown.
This is ov'rwise, and overjust to be,
Whereby, so many desolate we see.
To censure strange opinions, which I know not:
I may not take upon me, No, I do not.
But this is blamed in Familists I hear,
Which others also may have cause to fear:
All I can say, is I would have men be
Wise (as is said) after sobriety.
(For he that faiths proportion will exceed,
Loses his labor, and withal his meed)
Yet to beware too, then in no wise plead
For backwardness and standing in a stead:
By these and like words, men no angels are,
Who love to climb, a fall let them beware:
To dream of constant fellowship with God;
For weeks and months, is but conceits and odd;
These and such phrases, while men often use,
Many do them to sloathfulness abuse.
I know they have their use and proper place:
But such is seldom, and a rarer case.
While men to press to good works are too slack,
Striving to keep a straight unstrained back.
For we must wisely words and speeches sort,
After as times, place, persons fitteth fort:
Had one to Paul's work, proud Galathians taught;
St. James his doctrine, he had over raught:
Or this to James, his Auditors applied,
That faith alone sets free, had gone aside:
Though both be true, each must applied be,
Still to men's several necessity:
Witness the State in general of the World,
Which into such security is hurld.
Security, nor Ignorance I trow:
For most have knowledge, more then will to do.
Though I must say, to know and not practice,
Is no sound knowledge counted by the wise.
And though it may be thought to little sense,
Preposterous, and of bad consequence.
The body to an action should be pressed,
Before the heart be thereto well addressed:
Yet true it is hand work in brick and clay,
Will cause long looking for a holy day.
Or at the least a groaning underneath,
Such burdens as do make men pant and breath.
And (as before I said) men must wisely do,
In perfect way, till God come thereunto.
And (this though grace be weak) will not be vain,
Th'embers blown up, it will revive again.
That being to the spirit liberty,
Which to the Flesh will yoke and bondage be.
O what an hunger was in many late,
To search and labor out this spiritual state.
Which ground in some, I trust laid long agone;
The next work now is, how to build thereon:
Always foreseen, that from the living spring:
Our works their liveliness and vigor bring:
Which though they want their measure that they should:
(Grace being in the wain as I have told)
Whereby, men them unsavory works may call,
Yet better half-loaf, then no bread at all.
But to end this, like brother with his brother,
The Law and Gospel, must be each with other:
With fire and hammer, that to break the rocks:
And this to quicken dead and withered Stocks:
Then afterward, the Law of Liberty,
Does follow both these necessarily:
Which I according to the Scripture hold,
To be the Law of love (as I have told.
When as the love of Christ does men constrain,
Duty and Love to yield to God again.
Wherein because, the flesh is wondrous slow:
And does unwilling to Gods service go:
Let rules be urged strictly in Gods blessing;
Yea to good duties, let there lack no pressing,
And all well-willers say, God speed the plough:
For there is on all hands backwardness enough.
Witness the tracts, that some good men have made,
Which lie but in our houses for a shade:
I mean to make our selves believe to know,
Is our desire that we might somewhat do.
When I my self have had one seven year,
And yet for practice, never a whit the near.
Though for that purpose, this good Book was meant.
Not Speculation or mere Complement. Rogers his practice of Christianity.

And if I should affirm my chiefest let:
Was that I could not find companions yet,
To join therein (for The Author who did make it:
Prescribes Societies, should undertake it.
My heart often tells me, Thus I grant that slacknesse
Of other men, is my most cause of slacknesse:
Then in conceit I run through thick and thin,
Some fellowship with God, this way to winn:
Whiles for the passing sweet, my soul sees in it;
I seem (I say) full ready to begin it:
Satan and Oppositions crouching low,
At such a time, for danger of a blow:
Or like an Angel, then at least appearing,
Whiles he is but tidings, so far off him hearing:
So seeking to persuade me, all is quiet:
I need not undertake so strict a Diet.
Self-love still telling me, as said before,
That one foot forward is at least a score.
Then blame I each ones backwardness to join;
Like one that had in hope a Mint of coin:
And still my heart, when Partners are most scant;
Seems most desirous, and at greater want.
Till giving th'onset, and things further trying:
I find good cause to charge my heart with lying.
For when in sooth, thereto I have disposed me;
I find things cross, which never before opposed me:
Many a Lion in the way to let me:
How e're my will seemed on the way to set me.
Whereas again, it keeps so great a toil
For company, I find a plot or soil;
By Satan laid, more lively to express,
In others sloth; mine own much forwardness:
Thereby into my secret thoughts to wring,
A hideously and most pernicious thing.
In blameing here, my self I Will not excuse
Others, who do these worthy means abuse.
For I protest, I cannot this deny;
I find the most as backward too as I.
Whereas 't were meet, that brother with his brother,
To the found practice, should invite each other.
But a main cause, why most of us in vain,
Endeavor this same practice to attain:
Is for because, we do not so begin:
As those who would so rich a treasure win;
That is with Prayer and fasting wear sin out:
Nor this great work, the whole man set about:
But this shall be, when as Gods precious love
Shall warm our hearts, and cold affections move;
Which if it be Lord, in that good season when;
Thou sees it best for every one, Amen.
But now for that, from which I have so strayed:
Of which I trow, the Devil the ground work laid:
Yet not without Gods just decree and will:
His own good ends, and purpose to fulfill.
I mean in plain terms the earnestness and strife,
Which in Gods heritage is now so rife.
Between the Grindletonians, so men call them:
And for distinction, let that Name befall them:
Distinction, without difference, let it be;
For real difference, yet I cannot see;
Between the Grindletonians, I say,
And those that do oppose them at this day:
Which needs must minister both grief and dread;
To all live members, of the living head.
Grief to behold, Gods people thus distracted:
Fear, lest through Satan's wiles, some harm be acted.
I mean, lest men, through wonted love abate,
And Satan, their affections alienate.
I speak not this for nothing, for I find
His subtlety already in this kind.
Even in mine own experience (I profess)
As to Gods glory, freely I confess.
For while, I in these Controversies bending:
My best endeavors, for their better ending:
Did find men's zeal (I say not stomachs) great:
Barring (in my conceit) my hopes to treat.
My Choler (from pursuing the disease)
Be urged upon the parties selves to cease:
Pressing me through some such unlookt for sound,
Of mis-construction, which in some I found:
To adverse thoughts sleely insinuated:
Which yet no sooner I espied, but hated.
Or else at least, mislike my self herefore,
Because I could mislike these thoughts no more.
But O let all Gods Children warrie be;
How they (but on plain grounds) vouch enmity:
Rather instruct, if any one be blinded,
With meekness such, as are contrary minded:
Unless he prove a stiff and hopeless foe,
Then let the Church a Gods name use him so:
For ought I know, the nearer I agree
With opposites (keeping the verity)
Liker I am (if any grace be in him;
I mean mine enemy) by love to win him:
A good old man, whom I my self well knew;
There Is diverse yet alive, can vouch this true:
Did by the blessed Virgins (but due) praise,
The Affections of some Popish people raise.
Yea such devotion and attention win,
And of good harvest, greater hopes begin:
In one plain sermon, to allege no more;
Then some more learned men did in a score.
Now handling of the Controversy tho,
I must commend as necessary too.
Yet only to be used for shunning harms:
When fair means boot not, then men take up arms.
There Is yet a course my self and others do,
But overmuch in controversies go.
And that is, where we think men are astray;
We range as far the quite contrary way.
Thinking we shall by setting these to these,
Our adverse part at least wise counterpoise:
When often like him, that feared his house would fall)
We prop so hard, it overturneth all.
There was upon a time a question stirred,
What was the testimony of the spirit:
One answered, he held it to be this:
When by Gods spirit, one assured is.
By reason out of Scripture of his case,
Another said, That same an error was.
For that the Spirit withnesseth (quoth he)
To speak in proper terms (immediately)
Yet he in fine concluded so to do,
Was one kind of his testimony too:
The answerer by this conceav'd, he smelt
Th'opposers moving, and his pulses felt;
That either he mistook himself opposed:
When (he conceits) th'answer for peace was choos'd.
When as [immediat] is so harsh to many,
As it is not almost yielded to by any:
Or else, perhaps some over by conceit,
Espied in answerer, he down would beat;
This was in it self good, and perhaps did need:
And well may such endeavors ever speed.
Thus for because the godliness of such,
And gravity thereto induce me much.
Since learning and experience ought no less,
Then draw respect and reverence I confess:
Thus I expound him: but n're less I think,
He did not sleep; though he then did wink.
But let me never put the Sail-cloath to
That I may better by the Ruther do:
For how this wrought, I say not, this I wot,
It brought forth an effect some wished not.
But leave we this, where men do chiefly set
Themselves against error, and prophanness yet:
Their hearts run right, give every man his due,
The Affections godly, so the ground be true;
Which doubt I do not meddle to decide:
But leaves to better judgments to be tried.
For I disclaim my self a judge to make,
To controvert, or parts herein to take.
But hereto chiefly my endeavors bent
To gain accord, and prejudice prevent.
How'ere I have been deemed heretofore,
A partial censure [if yet no more]
If any say the Bonito, and I
Do now live in the Sea, now in the Sky;
Whom both the Sea disclaimeth for a fish,
And Butchers Shambles for a Yeaster Dish:
Whom fowls pursue, when he the sky does scour,
And falling fishes eagerly devour.
I answer, I still wish, I may, as best
In God, and Conscience, testimony rest:
If I well do, no matter who has eyed it;
If I ill do, no forge, from whom I hide it.
Whiles Conscience knows, my sins recorded be
Before a Judge; from whom I cannot fly.
If I the worlds applause, and favor gain;
If he accuse, their praises are but vain.
Fame sometimes may a false allarum send,
The conscience never, but of this an end.
Then thus I say, Who for Gods honor sight:
Let them go on, yet in the spirits might:
But from Gods Church, foul rancour keep thee hence,
And every spot of hellish virulence.
Let zeal and knowledge evermore agree,
And never let strife, but on just causes be:
Which is the end, whereat Gods people aim:
And to their knowledge will pursue the same:
More striving how to cause, men truth to know:
Then how to give their skill the overthrow:
Wherein, I no man's practice do accuse:
So nor himself, nor others he abuse.
How ever happily, some of pregnant wit,
With some such weening may their fancies fit:
Or else on my dejected state they meant;
To give their ready wit and will the vent.
Let me propound, for resolutions sake;
So will I do: for no disputes I Will make:
Only I say, If any list be stirring:
He Is Master of his Speech (I of my hearing)
If it be true (as sound Divines consent)
Faith most opposed, is then most eminent:
And by The Apostle termed the Evidence:
Of things not now discerned by the sense.
So called when weak, as when in strongest plight;
(For its expressed by term indefinite)
To wit to each one, who in truth believe;
An Evidence, sound and demonstrative
Yea, that which does Gods Childrens hearts uphold
In Crosses, and Temptations manifold:
Yea, in their doubtings and afflictions so,
As they despair not, as the wicked do:
Whereon it follows of necessity,
It must be active, and inherent be.
And if it be injustice to detract
From what one Brother does well say or act:
Nay, if too sharp a censure be but laid,
On what is apparently ill done or said;
And thus to judge, he carelessly does miss,
When yet through ignorance perhaps it is;
Or this sin was deliberatly done,
When rashness might his reason overcome:
^his on presumption, when as yet he may,
upon infirmity be drawn away:
that of ill conscience or of hate to me,
^hen want of heed, or other cause might be.
^ea, if we must still make the best we can,
^f th'words and actions of another man:
So he be upright hearted, and his Word,
^r Act, a good construction may afford)
^f these be so, from hence then does the doubt,
which I would be resolved on issue out.
^ut e're I speak, let me of one great crime,
Wherein I have been charged in any a time
^o wit, with too much bolstering indulgence
^f words, that savor error and offense:
^cquit my self, if words so do it can,
and that clear me, which may another man:
^f not, my case shall so much lesser grieve me,
because I know yet one that will relieve me.
(...) say, I have been wary as I could,
^s for my self, that I no error hold)
(...) ever since this variance did arise,
^he same in others not to Patronize;
^or any man, wherein I found him savor,
^f new fond Phrases, did I therein savor.
(...) ^ould then do no less, though I had smarted,
Where I conceive man to be upright hearted]
^^d while such speeches from their mouth I hear,
(...) fitly may a good construction bear]
^t them interpret in the better sense:
which I might do [I trust] without offense:
^^d help them what I could too to express,
their true intent, [for I could do no lesse]
^t labor others might their meaning see:
whom I perceive misunderstood to be.
^is might be done, yet none such overflow
Charity, as some have termed it tho:
^hiefly, since conscience tells me, I did never,
^t what I judged the speaker meant deliver.
Racking no strayned sense from any word,
But what the same might pregnantly afford:
Which practice I should rather deem a mean
Not error to confirm, but to reclaim,
Whiles erring judgments (be so) men reduce,
And words ill placed from error and abuse:
Unto the Touchstone that it may agree
With God and good men in the verity;
Which to my simple skill, I still shall pray,
I may endeavor to my dying day:
Yet God forbid, thou Lord of Heaven should,
That I the least encouragement should yield
To any one, to hold what is not sound,
And in Gods word has not a settled ground:
How far that is from my will, O Lord, thou knows,
Though I therefore all earthly hopes should loss.
Let never such venime in my secrets lodge,
Wherein let Christians charitably judge.
Nor would I willing ought a triflie call,
Which may to Truth be prejudicial.
In least, least measure, for I this can find,
That Moses might not leave a hoove behind,
And if I herein any hinderance be,
It Is, (Lord, thou know) that I do not see:
For well I wot, Gods truth is all so dear,
That one small titles loss he cannot bear:
In all this speech, I do not undertake,
All that are taxt with error, clear to make.
Nor free the best, that they do never miss,
(For who in earth so sound of judgment is)
But things amiss, and presently retracted,
And not with wilful obstinacy backed.
There I must judge men teachable to be,
And dar not brand them with inconstancy:
Nor yet all such erroneous judgments call,
Lest my reproof too large a compass fall.
Nor that the man (time past) misled of late,
Reforming judgment does equivocat.
Unless I know him commonly to use,
Thus his own tongue, and others cares to abuse:
But I deny not, I have found some wrong,
Wherein if I accorded to their song;
Or to my skill have such a different lay,
I leave it unto other men to say.
Or did I ought unblamed pretermit,
It Was that whereof I either doubted yet:
Or fit occasions served not thereto,
Which in reproofs must be observed you know.
Yea, many lessons theretoo needful are:
Easy to miss, unless one be aware,
Which might be cause (sometimes perhaps) wherefore
I kept me silent, and reproof forbore.
Yet never so (to my knowledge) as for stay,
I gave to error any willing way.
For therein, first, Gods word must be the ground,
Next we thereto, by calling should be bound:
Then see if others might not better do it,
Also, whose ears thou make witness to it.
Lest to the man's less credit with his friends,
Or more discredit with his foes it tends:
Though in some cases, we, (I grant it true)
Paul's rule against Saint Peter must pursue.
Now furnished as is said, set in Gods place,
Then must one next put on th'offenders case;
That as his sin he may not spare to blame,
For love to him, and zeal to Gods great Name.
Yet must he with such self passion press,
As not to seem too much compassionlesse.
The heart then settled right for zeal and love,
Calling from God assistance from above:
Before one speak, in speaking for his grace,
And for a blessing, for the after-space.
Go on a Gods Name in Gods ordinance,
And hope he will thereto give his furtherance.
Now I Will not say, that thus my self still do,
But where I miss, I am blame-worthie too;
Nor hold I me excused to stand aloose,
Though all these be not, and forbear reproof:
To every party as occasion serves,
And the condition of his case deserves.
For he who does not, [yet would variance end]
Against every let in either parties bend:
Wrongs both himself, and others, and sure he,
Who sorts with all, shall not my dayes-man be.
True charity will never presuppose,
Men use sharp language only to their foes:
Shall I in sight, where one my blow diverts,
Conclude, he needs must with my foes take parts.
As though, where brethren jar, brother with brother
Curbing the one, I needs must spare the other:
Who sees in me, or deems [say so] some faults,
And deals not plainly with my Soul, but halts.
The which reproof may be in Charity,
According as our Saviors speeches be;
Its no friends part to cease, or speak or do
To either part, as one finds reason too.
Unless perhaps, some party think him free,
From all reproofs, such one shall go for me:
If in the matter he deserve no blame,
Nor in his ends, nor carriage of the same.
I Will no^ excuse my self, for my part neither,
But I may join in missing too, with either.
For should [as God forbid] ones spiritual eye,
Not keep its proper site, but stand awray:
Then though the same be never so clear and bright,
That man [the whiles] shall never see aright:
Whom with the Eunuch, one might thus demand
What thou condemnest, do thou understand?
Saint Peter says, some men there be, who do
Rashly condemn the thing they do not know:
The cause is where a beam does blind the eye,
Through a false glass, those other do espy.
The Crab perswads sin fish, they wrongly swime,
Because they go not backward way with him:
Lord still pres^erve me, that I never may,
Of good things which I know, not evil say.
I trust, I shall under thy guidance go,
My eyes and heart may be, not tainted so:
I grant that passion does sometimes prevail,
To cause me greatly in my carriage fail;
Yet does my conscience testimony give me,
My zeal did never [unlesse my heart deceive me]
In those Garboyes on the other object but,
But on the door of reconcilement shut:
For as I saw strife to a period tend,
Accordingly my passion drew to end.
Now let me go on forward with my task,
And resolution to my question ask:
Whether the whiles Gods Children does despair,
Their faith than lying on the lowest stair,
Resisting unbelief? though in their will,
So as it can the Soul not wholly spill;
Or keeping sin at least un-interessed,
That so the whole is no thereof possessed?
And so as it was at first, stark dead in sin,
Before God did his work of grace begin.
So some small head, and real difference yiedling,
Between those hearts that have, and want that shielding
Whereby men do not in that weary Day,
Back slide for ever, and fall quite away.
Whether this Faith in case, as now you hear,
May yea, or no, name of assurance bear:
And whether this may not in right good sense,
Comparative be spoke, without offense.
If thou the same from some Divine should hear;
Who well reputed for his soundness were?
[How these are thought on? who so termed it?
The question wholly I will pretermit]
Nor ask I this, cause some gainsay the same,
For that I them thus covertly would blame.
Nor to give way for weaklings more to languish,
Who are already in distress and anguish:
The whiles they want sense of assurance then,
T'exclude themselves from all believing men.
But say their weakness must be well regarded:
And such terms used, as Satan's blows be warded:
As Paul the Corinthes warns against his devices,
Not ignorant of his fly interprises,
Wherein a faithful Teacher ever treads,
That tried way, which Christian wisdom leads.
But woe is me, what might I frame to say,
Is there no means to lavish strife away?
I ask but this sad question, that do I,
Men's hearts (ay me) somewhat to qualify?
As I could do to diverse others more:
Of such like sort, if it were needful so:
Not to cross any, for it is now no season,
Nor I fit man, to pro and contra reason.
Since in my Soul, I love and reverence bear,
To all the parties meant or mentioned here;
Or if it were any failing be herein:
For by respects, I hate it as my sin.
As judging all, even in my very heart,
(Set prejudice aside) to take one part;
And verily believing to be true,
The Devil himself, and all his damned crew,
Shall never, (if kindness re united were)
The limbs thereof again in sunder tear.
But, Lord, it may be, thou who knows the event,
Will work by some more gracious instrument:
So be it then, to t'honour of thy Name,
By whomsoe're, I Will glory in the same.
For this shall vex, or little trouble me,
(So some effect it) whether I, or he;
But that in strife, 'twixt Father and the Mother,
Cherish the one, and I offend the other:
Whereof there is no cause, for ought I know,
Save that some good men understand it so.
Mean while, for Sion sake (as said before)
I Will make request; till I can speak no more:
And would rejoice, could I but rubish bear,
The walls thereof a little to up-rear;
Although to me, so clogged with sin and pelf,
It may be said, Physician heal thy self:
Yet I Will wish well, be it so as it may,
By Gods good grace unto my dying-day:
And who can less do that was never styled,
And hopes he is the Churches lawful child:
Which name, suppose I still deserve among,
Such other Children, as to her belong.
Yet, Lord, (I trust) not banished by thee.
Her rods not Serpents, but chastisements be:
Which (while they) threat, let me at any hands,
Not spare, but search well how the matter stands,
Within my self, for many sins I have,
Which I confess: for heavy blows might crave:
Yet God forbid (where conscience sets me free)
Her deadly blows I should apply to me.
What has been said, I know both where and when,
I take not t'out as meant to other men.
Knowing no cause in me, nor him that spoke it,
I should mere bastard be, or be so take it:
But say he meant me, as I said before.
Let me not spurn, but search my self the more.
Which howsoever meant delivered so.
Few else save enemies do undergo;
Yea, enemies of such transcendent pitch,
As never after other are so rich:
Which to point out in our new Churches state,
I dar not meddle with at any rate.
For ought I in my self can see, or may,
Full easily stink back and fall away:
But what good works thou once in me have wrought,
Lord, I have hope shall never come to naught:
Not through my strength, but for because that he,
Is still the same, that has redeemed me.
But to conclude, I wish the Churches peace,
That all heart-rysings (not of God) may cease.
That no grudge may be smothered in suspense:
But set at one, by friendly conference:
That those who Christian liberty does teach,
Be not accused: they carnal freedom preach:
That men be wary freedom to apply,
Where is more need to teach the contrary:
That those who seek men to good works to draw,
Be not condemned as Preachers of the Law:
No, though they teach it as the Law indeed,
Because most hearers do such teaching need:
That though some term them so, none storm nor wonder,
More then if men should call them Sons of Thunder:
The Law and Gospel, rules works be pressed,
As shall appear to Christian wisdom best:
That each one therein labor to be plain,
That speeches still in the best sense be taken.
That all the members of one body may,
Hold truth in love, cast prejudice away:
That each amongst others may their gifts dispense,
That each with other lovingly converse;
That none from Gods Church excluded be,
But such as is indeed an enemy.
That odd conceits of every idle head,
Be not upon the guiltless parties laid:
That all good means be used to satisfy
Gods Church, where but the least suspicion lie:
Hearers, while Preachers have the word in hand,
Apply themselves rightly to understand:
That Teachers still in every thing they say,
Make it as plain to hearers as they may:
That Brethren may not so each other hate,
But warn, and war'nd be of their wretched state.
In brief that each to other say, and do,
As he desires to be done unto:
And he that is the very God of peace,
Shall make love grow, and all contentions cease:
If any think too far at once I leap,
Himself is free to do as much as cheap.
By ROGER BRIERLY, sometimes Minister at Grindletion Chapel in Craven.

THE LORDS REPLY.
IS this thy state, and do thou now confess?
That lost thou art, and dead in sinfulness;
Has Death now ceased upon thy buildings great,
Thy righteousness, and all thy high conceat?
Is sin and death thy portion now? and can
Thou not lay th'blame on any other man?
And is that witness now within thy mind,
That die thou must, unless thou mercy find?
And art thou now that sinful man alone,
To free and save thee, is there now not one?
And art thou now like to the Prodigal,
That goodness in thee, there is none at all?
And art thou now that Publican so poor,
That thou have nothing laid up in that store,
To boast and brag as did that Pharisee;
But lies along in doleful misery?
And is thy heart within the inward ground,
Truly in want, and in deep sorrow found?
And does thy cries therefrom to me arise?
Am I that only one, whereto thine eyes,
Are firmly set, so that from me alone,
Thou looks for life, or else thou looks for none?
And will thou here thy self fit all alone,
To wash my feet with tears, with sigh and groan?
Has all things else denied thy woeful cry,
And is there none that does thy tears espy?
Is all things in thee now come to an end?
That thou to me this woeful cry does send:
THE SOULS ANSWER.
YEa, Lord thy Word, by which thou named art,
Has sound me out, and made my soul to smart:
So mighty is thy Word, and prevalent;
Who can withstand, it makes my heart to rent.
For under it I judged stand: therefore
To thee I Will cry, for I am low and poor.
And I have none, but thee alone: and I
To thee will cry, to heal my malady.
Here will I stay: thy word has slain my heart,
And here I Will lie, until thou heal my smart:
Thy only hand, O Lord, that has me slain:
Can raise me up, and heal my wound again.
My breach is great, my load I cannot bear;
My sins are great: my sorrow is my cheer.
In sad laments, My cry is still to thee,
That thou would mercy show, and pity me:
Thy mercy Lord, which in thy bosom lies:
To that I cry, to heal my maladies.
THE LORDS REPLY.
IS this thy voice, and are thy cries so strong,
And will thou lie before me all along?
As though with violence in sunder thou,
Would break the heavens, that mercy to thee now
May speak to thee: and from thine eyes dispell
That mistie cloud, which is thy present hell.
Is this the thing, that thou woulds have tell me,
And hide it not, for I assure it thee?
If sin be sin, and thou a sinner be:
And so remains, condemned for to dye.
And is there none of all thy friends at all,
That can relieve, or ransom thee from thrall?
I tell thee true, as sure as I do live,
Thou shall not dye, for for thee I will give
My only son, and he shall pay the prize
Of all thy debt: I swear it to thee thrice:
For rather then, that thou in this thy state
Should dye, and from my love st^nd separate:
I will perform that which before all time.
Was wi^h me then, and in my love did shine.
My word is past, to thee it shall appear,
Which shall thy nature once again up rear
By assuming it to my self wherein:
I will a living life to thee begin:
For I to death, in that same nature, thine
Will subject lie, that then the Godhead mine
May there appear to be that mighty one,
The which shall trush, like to a mighty stone,
Thine Enemies, and captive lead them all:
And thee redeem out of thy sinful fall.
For I will that decayed natu^^ thine
Assume unto my word: the Godhead mine:
Wherein, I must perform my Fathers will:
And andergoe his mighty wrath until
It satisfied be for every one;
And thus thy debt, I will discharge alone;
And when thy sin, and death and hell and grave
Has got on me, whatever they could crave:
Then I Will triumph, and captive lead them all;
And free thy Nature from thy former fall.
And in the same, I will triumphant ride
Unto my Father, there I will abide
At his right hand: there I will reign so long,
Till sin and death, and all that darkness strong
Stand subdued, among my people all;
And then the Kingdom to my Fathers shall
Be resigned: that so for evermore,
He may be all in all, as heretofore.
THE SOULS ANSWER.
NOw Lord, what lets, that this thy love to me,
Does not yet shine unto my heart so free?
To make me know, and fully understand
My happiness, which yet is in thy hand:
Will thou not now, at this same present time
Declare thy Kingdom to this sense of mine:
I fain would know, how thou thy love to me
Would so confirm, that I may cleave to thee?
THE LORDS REPLY.
O Stay a while, that way I Will from thee go;
And thou after thy flesh and sense also
Shall not me know: for I will far ascend
Above those thoughts: yet I an ear will lend
Unto thy cry, yet is it fit for thee;
Thou still attend, in thy humility:
The time and season that the Father has
Kept to himself, (for so the Scripture says)
I tell thee true, this way thou looks for me;
I will not come, but that way will leave thee.
Which when I go, it shall thy sense so try;
That down shall fall, that which thou lifted by.
And this is fit, it should be done to thee,
Or else the Comforter thou shall not see.
Let not thy heart, at this be so aghast;
As though it should for ever with thee last:
I Will come again, according to that life
Of holy Ghost, so that no evil strife
Shall shut thee out, from my dear love wherein,
I will a living life to thee begin.
Then let not sorrow fill thy heart so fore,
As though that thou should meet with me no more.
Wait but a while in that Jerusalem,
And thou shall see again that blessed Stem:
(Jerusalem) thy heart, that now lies desolate,
Which of my presence makes so high a rate;
As by the flesh, a Tabernacle there
Might builded be, to keep thee out of fear.
It matters not, though from thy sense I go:
I will not leave thee now, and always so.
For when thou thinks, that I am gone for ay,
Wait thou that while; for then 's the time I say:
That I Will appear: my sp'rit it shall descend
Into thy heart: and thee it shall defend
From all thy foes, which do encamp thy soul:
And bring thee where, thou shall without controul^
Received be, into that lasting peace,
Which shall abide, and in thee never cease.
For then I will give thee my sp'rit which shall
Seal thee to me in that true love withal:
My tokens true (which shall not thee beguile)
Shall be within thy heart and mind, and I Will,
So charactere my love therein, that none
Of all thy foes shall hurt thee, for that stone:
That I have cut out of my mountain great,
Shall fill thy heart, and unto dust shall beat
Thine enemies all: and in thy heart I Will write
Again my Law; that first I did indite:
And therein shall my spirit freely move;
Which shall be witness of my dearest love.
And in thy heart there shall my temple be,
There will I dwell, so I assure it thee:
And thou in me shall be thy resting place
From all thy sins, in this my day of grace;
And live in me, by my own life alone:
And thou in me, and I in thee be one.
This is my word, from me to thee its gone:
And shall prevail, as that chief corner stone:
That shall be laid within thy heart so low,
That death and hell shall never overthrow.
THE SOULS ANSWER.
NOw Lord, what have I more to thee to say?
This breaks my heart, I can it not deny.
That golden chain, that is tied about my neck;
That word of thine, that gave my foes the check.
Has wounded me, and win my heart that so,
From thee, and from thy Word I cannot go:
Here will I dwell, my heritage does stand,
On thee alone, and builded by thy hand.
And I will feed by that same waterside
That flows from thee, and I will abide
Within thy house, thy praises forth to tell:
(Thy house my heart) there will I with thee dwell:
For there I shall behold thy wonders all,
Thy lovely works, freeing my soul from thral:
That pierceing word, that made my heart to bow,
And all my Forces for to overthrow:
That pure truth that made me naked lie,
And bair'd my heart, before thy seeing eye:
As in that day, in Edens garden I
Did eat and drink of the forbidden Tree:
That living Word, wherein thy footsteps shine
In love to me, in purest streams divine
Of thy true light: that now my heart so free
Of thee shall boast, of that same liberty:
Where I shall stand in that same truest vine,
And root of life: whereout in me may shine
Thine own life streams, for ever to declare
Thy loving wonders, in me great and rare.
And that I may, Lord, grant me still mine aid:
Thy Spirits life, as unto me thou said:
Whereby thou may within my heart indite
Thy living Word; That Lord, I pray thee write
In Table of this meek'ned heart of mine:
That there thy Image once again may shine
In living power, and lively streams again.
From thence may run in such a heavenly strain,
As I may live, and in such union dwell
With love divine, as may again (I Will tell)
Reduce my soul from all duallitie,
And set me fast in perfect unity:
From whence, as from a perfect fountain fair
May spring in me these lively graces rare.
Whereby, I may in those same lively streams
Preserved be, and by those heavenly beams,
I so may flourish in that living way
Of life: So that with Paul, I then may say,
It is not I, but that sweet loving store
Of thy own grace: praised be thy Name therefore.
THE LORDS REPLY.
Has now my word prevaild with thee so far,
That from my self one jot thou will not dar
To turn aside, nay art thou in such love
With me, that like the bravest turtle dove
Thou will love still; though absent from thee I
May seem to go, and thou in darknessly?
And does thy cries from hence to me arise?
From this same love, is there none other prize
That can prevail, but here thou will abide,
And fit alone, by this same water side?
And have thou now none other fountain sweet,
And can thou now none other lovers greet?
If love be love, and thou a lover be,
And so thou lives, and from me will not flee:
I tell thee true, my love I Will to thee give,
And will thee aid, for with me thou shall live:
But one thing I will let thee understand,
How I my love, my truth, my mercy, and
My graces all shall in thee be declared,
The way wherein, I have my self prepared:
For that some way I will thy senses cross,
Thy fleshly understandings I will toss:
For that same way which in thy wisdom by,
Has learned out my mercy for to spy:
Nay though it be in highest gifts of grace:
If by thy flesh thou there my paths would trace
Thou'l be deceived, my graces in thy mind,
And all my gifts in their own proper kind.
Shall then shine forth, when thou in weakness stands,
And bears thy death, under my great commands,
Behold the way that I before thee went,
It was the cross, that way I ever meant
Thee for to trace my steps, and there sojourn
In lowest death, where flesh may always mourn,
And down may come that high conceited thought,
That to thy soul, thy ruin ever brought:
And there remain in that same grave with me,
Where flesh may lie, but thou that time shall be
Raised up again, so shall my life appear
Victor to be, which then will shine so clear
Within thy heart, which strongly shall confirm
My love to thee, which is without all term:
In this thy death mine aid thou still shall find,
To bring thee through (according to my mind)
Thy troubles all, which unto thee appears,
In thy own sense, which works thee all thy fears:
Come therefore sweetly, lie thee down with me,
Under my cross, that fearful mighty tree;
Fear not my cup, for I have drunk before
A health to thee, to cure thy wound and sore.
This is that way by which I will destroy
The strongest lust, which does thy soul annoy;
For life divine is to thy flesh the crossed
To kill thy lust, and on the same to toss:
And if thou drink and taste not heartily
Of this my cup, thou have no part with me!
For more thou comes to taste of this cross,
And deeper that thou drinks of all thy loss;
So much the more my life shall thee defend,
And thou with me shall to that pitch ascend
Of freedom, so that all thine enemies now.
Shall be subdued, I do to thee avow:
And then my love most noble and divine,
In midst of darkness, in thy heart shall shine,
Which will cause thee to sing, and leap, and dance,
And me alone, in all thy thoughts advance:
Who in this mount my glory so does shine,
To free thy heart from misty clouds of thine,
In that clear light of spirits life which shall
Dispell those clouds, in sunder rent them all;
And out of death bring forth that life I say,
Which will lead captive that wherein thou lay.
Therefore lie down, and drink hereof a maine;
This is that way the which will bring thee gain,
For in thy death thy life thereout shall spring,
And that is the way whereout I will thee bring,
Into that land of peace and rest, wherein
Thou shall be fed with all contents, and in
That Paradise, I will so with thee dwell:
That unto thee I will my wonders tell.
My Word, my Name; and that ingraved form
Of my own life, so that to thee no storm.
Shall once arise, my love to overthrow,
Or for to draw thy mind from me to bow;
For why thy help I have in Me so laid,
And in my Son, as heretofore I said:
Which shall remain as that chief cornerstone,
That shall abide, when flesh is dead and gone.
At this the powers of Death and Darkness all,
Thy guilty heart, that thou got in thy fall:
That wisdom thine, that lifted thee on high,
In this my day they shall all vanquished lie;
And I will live triumphantly in thee;
As I am one, so shall thou be in me.
I was once dead, but now alive I am,
To quicken thee, in me the new Adam.
From whence shall rise a living child in thee,
Which shall attain the full Felicity:
Nay, I my self in all my graces rare,
Will there appear, and in this union bare
My bosom so, in that anointing free,
The which shall raise thy heart in such degree
Of raptures hy, that now thou shall despise
Thy fleshly self, with all base vanities.
Nay, hence shall spring that living life again,
And in shall come that truth, that substance main.
Wherein there is life, and thou as one freeborn,
Shall be the heir, though bondmen mock and scorn.
For though thy fleshly dead, and in thee there
No hope remains: for none can there appear:
Though glorious shows in strength of nature did
Show forth their force; yet now they lying hid,
Under that curse, where desolate they stand,
And barren ly in wildernesses land:
Yet ^^nce shall rise that righteous seed, which shall
Bring forth in thee, (in my free graces all)
My Law, my Truth, and I will it indite
Within thy heart, in love so will I write
It all, in lively living life Divine,
And freedom true, which shall in thee so shine:
As that it shall instal thee once again,
In Sonship true, so that from thence amain,
May flow again, as from a fountain clear,
Such freeborn fruit, as may in thee appear
To be the fruit of that same living tree,
That Is my free grace, that all the world may see,
That grace is grace, and that by it alone
My people live, and by that Cornerstone:
Th're filled with my righteousness so clear,
That sin in them it shall no more appear:
For they in me before my Fathers face
Shall clothed be, all decked with my grace:
Where shall no spot at all on them be found,
That Is clothed here, and settled on this ground:
And there abids, as he abids in them,
Who is the root, they branches, he the stem.
This is that freedom, whereunto I Will bring
My Sons again, where they shall mount and sing
With Simeon, that sweet and pleasant song,
And shout it forth with all my Saints among.
THE SONG OF THE SOULS FREEDOM.
NOw let thy servant, Lord, depart in peace,
For I have seen from thee such great increase
Of grace and truth in that same little seed,
Which thou have sown for me, when I stood need.
When Sin, and Death, when Hell, and Darkness great,
When loss, when cross, about my heart did beat:
When angry thou as judge to me did shine,
And I stood judged within my conscience, mine,
Such witness had, that I could plead no more,
My sin did mount to such a mighty score.
When all my friends from me a loof did stand,
When lovers all ran far away, yea, and,
When I lay dead, and hopes I then had none
Of life: but laying comfortless alone.
Then thou declared to me that time I say,
Thy saving health, wherein, O Lord, for ay,
In peace I Will rest, as unto me thou said,
From all my fears, for thou have so displaid
Thy freest love, that makes my heart rejoice
And mount, and sing with Simeon that voice:
Now let me, Lord, depart in peace anon,
For I have seen thy great salvation:
Thy words enough, I thereon will depend,
In it there is life, and it will me defend,
And bring me forth into that light wherein,
I shall remain, and with high Cherubin,
Shall show forth, what with thee I have seen,
In my return, as it has with me been.
I have none other Song but this to sing,
What thou have done for me, that I will bring
Before thy Saints; that they also with me,
May sing it forth, in sweetest melody:
As none else can but them whom thou alone,
Has so redeemed by that same cornerstone,
That lies lowest in the building so,
That simmoned they are for so to do:
Which freedom brings in such great mighty store,
That sing that song they will for evermore.
Then thou my Soul sit here in silent rest,
Under his wings in whom thou thus art blessed,
And wander not, nor let thy gadding mind,
Be turned about (thy Spirit for to blind)
Into the flesh, as though that heavenly thing,
Thou there would keep, and to thy sense would bring
Thy freedom now, and think thereby to hold,
That in thy self, which no man ever could:
And soar not up into thy thoughts so high:
But ly thee down in true humility:
And eat thy portion there with that content,
That faith does bring, and be thou patient.
A word's enough, he will supply thy want.
There Is all in him, how can there then be scant:
Nor turn thou back unto thy pleasures vain,
Nor unto Mammons filthly sordid gain;
Such lovers all too base are for thy mind,
Who now stands free in such a heavenly kind
Of noble birth, nay, what shall I say more?
An heir with Christ (as was said heretofore:
Of that same Crown, which links thee into one,
Where freedoms stands, beside which there is none.
And that I may, Lord, take into thy hand
My life: for alls at thine own great command:
If thou will speak, thy word it will suffice,
Then speak it, Lord, let not my foes arise
Me to prevent, of this thy pearl great.
O then speak, Lord, and so they shall retreat,
And then full safely I shall walk along
With thee: though with my wicked foes among.
I sojourn still until that precious time,
Of Jubill come, that full deliverance mine;
That Jubill time, O! when shall it appear
To free me from my burdens that are here:
Me thinks I long, my heart it would be gone,
Out of this clay, unto that only One.
But I must stay, and in this house abide,
Till gold from dross, be true and fully tried.
And sin, and death has done their worst, and then
Shall life come in, and that same last, Amen.
Shall then make up both breach, and ruins all,
That has befallen, the Saints since Adams fall.
The which shall then full gloriously appear,
When God in man his Kingdom shall up rear.
When God is all, and man brought home in one,
That Is the Kingdom: or else I say there is none.
For Kingdoms else before him they shall fall,
And come to end, though they be never so tall:
Then hasten, Lord, this Kingdom that is thine,
That I in thee, may in thy oneness shine:
That thou in me, and I in thee still may
Remain in one eternally, I say.
Where I may cast before thy face my crown,
Where thou abides in that same highest throne
Of glory great, where all things end in one,
And thither brought by the chief corner stone:
Where Saints and Angels in true unity,
One song shall sing in God eternally.
Amen Lord, hasten this thy pointed day,
It Is in thy hand, yet still for that I Will pray,
That when thou have brought all things into one,
We all thy Saints may live in thee alone:
And thou in us may be our heaven always,
Which shall remain that mighty longest day,
That mighty longest day, that Alpha one,
That last Omega, who is God alone.
Amen, Amen, O Lord, I do thee pray,
To bring my soul to this thy holy day:
For thou art First, and thou will be the last,
Of all that is to come or has been past,
That glory, honor, power, and due praise,
May be of all returned to thee always.
The corner stone out from the Father came,
Was laid in blood for to declare his name,
His grace, and love, unto fallen men (alace)
And by an oath, so interposed was,
To reconcile to God his creature man,
So as no Angel, nor no creature can:
So that his glory did surmount the bound,
Of all darkness in this wide world round:
Yea it did shine through sin, through death, through hell
And grave, as does the Scripture fairly tell,
And if his splendour shine through such darkness,
Then does it shine within all men no less:
To be the life of them who do receive it,
And judgment unto them who do reject it:
Thus is he set, the fall, and rise again
Of some, and all, as will appear full plain;
When he as judge such witness will produce,
That who rejects shall be without excuse:
Let all men then, what talent God does give,
Improve it so, as he therein may live.
And give account what gain comes in thereby
Unto his Lord, lest not so doing dye.
Then see thy Talent be not laid within
Thy carnal earth, which no good gain can win;
But exchange that which of thee is carnal,
Into a state that is spiritual:
So shall thou build upon the corner stone
A good increase, while carnal earth brings none,
In Jordans water Christ baptized were
By John, so plunged over head and ear,
The Holy Ghost descending on him so,
That he our sorrows bare, and rude our woe;
And was the man, who did repentance bear
For all men's sins, that he might wash them clear,
And after that, that he was so baptized,
His after life was all then sacrificed
Up unto death, and in death baptized,
And by the spirit, he again was raised,
Into the heavenly being there to reign
In power great, until he come again:
In watery tears and siry blood was he,
So plunged in our Savior for to be;
Thus water, fire, and blood was mingled
For him to drink, In all the tears he shed,
Thus water washed, and burning blood did cleanse,
In one baptism, so for to dispense,
Water, and blood, distinguish we may so
In two, though one, and so there be no more
Baptisms, but one, which cleanses sin away,
By Jesus, in his water and blood for ay:
For God in three distinguished may be,
And yet but one there is in verity.
Thus we may drink with Christ his water so
In watery tears, and unto blood may go
And drink thereof, to take with him a sup,
Though two, yet is but one devincing cup.
SELF CIVIL WAR.
I Sing not Priam, nor the Siege of Troy,
Nor Agamemnon's War, with Thestis Joy,
I sing my self my Civil Wars within
The Victories I hourly loose and win;
The daily battle, the continual strife:
The Wars that end not till, I end my life;
And yet not mine alone, not only mine:
But every on's that is under the honored Sign
Of Christ's his Standard, shall his Name inroul
With holy vows of body and of soul.
Vouchsafe, O Father, succor from above:
Courage of Soul, comfort of heavenly love:
Triumphant Captain, glorious General,
Furnish me Arms from thine own Arsenal:
O sacred Spirit, my Spirits assistant be,
And in this Conflict, make me conquer me.
Virtue I love, I lean to vice, I blame
This wicked World: yet I embrace the same,
I climb to Heaven, I cleave to the earth both:
I love my self, and yet my self I loath.
Peaceless, I peace pursue in Civil War
With, and against my self, I join, I jar.
I burn, I freeze, I fall down, I stand fast,
Well, ill, I sare, I glory though disgraced,
I dye, I live, I triumph put to flight,
I feed on cares, in tears I take delight,
My slave base brave I serve, I run at large
In liberty; yet ly in Jaylours charge.
I strike, I stroke my self; I kindly ken
Work mine own woe, rub gall, and rouse my spleen:
Often in my sleep, to see rare dreams, I dream:
Wakeing mine eye, does scarce discern a beam,
My mind strange Megrim whirling to and fro,
Now trusts me hither, thither does me throw:
Into diverse fractions, I my self divide:
And all I try, I fly on every side:
What I but now desired, I now disdain;
What late I weighed not, now I wish again:
To day, to morrow: this, that now annon:
All nothing crave, I ever, never one:
But Combitant, unreadie for the field:
To tardie take, I (after wounds) my shield:
Still hurled headlong to unlawful things,
Down-dragging vice, me easily downward dings:
But sacred virtue climbs so hard and high,
That hardly can I her steep steps descrie.
Both right and wrong to me indifferent are,
My Lust is law, what I desire I dar:
Be there so foul a fault, so fond a fact,
Which folly asking, fury dare not act:
But artless, heartless in religious cause,
To do her lessons, to defend her Laws.
The all proof Armmour of my God I loose:
Fly from my charge, and yield it to my foes:
Guilty of sin, sins punishment I shun,
But not the guilt, before the offense be done.
For how could shunning of a Sin ^nsue,
To be the occasion of another new.
Often and again, at the same stone I trip:
As if by falling, I learned not to slip.
Alive I perish, and my self undo,
Mine eyes self-willing, wise and witting too.
Sick to my self, I run for my relief:
More sicker of my Physic, than my grief:
For whilst I seek my swelting thirst to swage,
Another thirst more ragingly does rage.
Whiles burnt to death, to cool me I desire,
With flames, my flames: with sulphur quench I fire:
Whilst that I strive, my swelling waves to stop;
More stormilie about they toss my top.
Thus am I cured, this is my common ease;
My medicine still worse than my worst disease.
My sores with sores, my wounds with wound I heal,
Whilst to my self, my self I still conceal.
And, O! what leagues, what truces make I still,
With Sin, with Satan, and my wanton will?
What slight occasions do I take to Sin?
What silly crimes am I entraped in?
What idle cloaks for crimes? what nets to hide,
Notorious sins already long descri'd?
I writ in ice, winds witness, signed with showers,
I will redeem my Soul, lif's former hours:
But soon the swing of custom, whirl-wind-like,
Rapting my passions ever fashion sike:
Transports me to the contrary alone,
Faint guard of goodness, armless Champion*
My green-sick taste does nothing sweeter find,
Then what is bitter to a gracious mind.
Egypts fat fleshpots, I am longing for,
The eternal Manna, I do here abhor.
Worlds Monarch, Mammon, Dropsy mystical:
Crowned round faced Gods, I join Beliall:
Mydar's desire, the misers only trust,
The sacred hunger of Pactolian dust,
Gold, gold bewitches me, and frets accursed,
My greedy throat, with more then Dipsian thirst.
My mind's a gulf, whose gaping naught can stuff,
My heart a hell, that never has enough.
The more I have, I crave the less content,
In store more poor, in plenty indigent.
For of those Cates, how much soever I cr^m,
It does not stop my mouth, but stretch the same:
Sweet useries inf^stuous interest:
For Dollors, dolours hoordeth in my Chest.
The world's slave confits, and the minds sweet pleasure
Insatiat both both boundless bot^ past measure.
This Cleopatra, that Sardonaple;
For huge annoy's brings joy's both short and small.
O! miracle begot by Heaven in Earth,
My mind divine, my body brute by birth,
O! what a monster am I to depaint,
Half friend, half fiend, half savage, half a saint.
Higher than my fire, does my gross earth aspire,
My raging flesh, my restless force does tire.
And drunk with wordly lusts, deep sunk in sleep,
My sp'rit the spy, that wary watch does keep,
Betrays at last, woe, that I trust it so,
My Souls dear kingdom to her deadly so,
Through ^a^es Caribdis, and through gulfs of grief,
Star-la-board run, I sailing all my life
In merry, sorry seas, with wind at will.
My Ship, my flesh, my sense my Pilots still:
As in a most seditious common-well:
Within my breast I feel my lust rebel,
Against their Prince my furious people use,
Their awlesse Prince dare his own Law despise.
Mine Er's an outlaw, and my struggling Twins,
Jacob and Esau never can be friends.
Such deadly feed, such discord, such despite,
Ever 'twixt brethren such continual sight.
What done in me, another does, not I,
Yet both, alace, my guest and enemy.
My mind unkind, sub-ordin'd by my so,
Indeed within me, but not with me tho:
Near, yet far off, in fleshly count be fyl'd,
And with the worlds contagious filth defiled.
I am too narraw for my own desires:
My self desires me, what my flesh requires.
Fearful I hope, careful secure, I languish.
Hungry too full, dry drunken, sugared anguish.
Weary of life, merry of death, I suck
Wine from my Punice, honey from the rock
Disordered order, mournful merriment,
Dark-day, Doomsday, dull, double, diligent.
Infamous fame, known error, skilless skill,
Mad mind, rood reason, an unwilling will.
A healthie plague, a wealthy want, poor treasure;
A pleasant torment, a tormenting pleasure.
An odious love, an uglie dentie base:
Reproachful honor, a disgraceful grace.
On tho^ns my Graps, on garlic grows my Rose,
On crumbs my sums, from flint my fountain flows.
In showers of tears mine hours of fears I mourn,
My looks to btooks, my beams to streams I turn;
Yet in this torrent of my torments rise,
I suck annoyes and drink the joys of life;
A fruitless tree, a dry deflowered flower,
A feeble force, a conquered conqueror:
A fickly health, dead life, a restless rest,
These are the comforts of my soul distressed,
O how I like, dislike, desire, disdain,
Repel, repeal, loathe, and delight again!
O what, whom, wither, neither flesh nor fish,
How weary of my life! again I wish,
I will, I nill, I nill, I will my mind,
Persuading this, my mood to that is inclined:
My loose affections, Proteus like appears
In every form at once, it frowns and flears:
Mine ill good will is vain and variable,
My Hydras flesh buds heads innumerable:
My mind's a grief, a Labyrinth my reason;
Mine eye false spy, the door to fancies treason:
My rebel sense, self soothing still affects
What it would fly, what it would ply neglects:
My flothing hope with passions storms is tossed,
Even now to heaven, even then to hell almost,
Concording discord does my life sustain,
Discording concord kills me soon again:
My self at once I both displease and please,
Without my self, my self I feign would ease;
For my too much of me, me much annoyed,
And my self plenty my poor self destroys,
Who seeks me in me, in me shall not find
Me as my self, Hermaphrodite in mind.
I am at once Male, Female, Neuter yet,
What ere I am, I cannot mind I weet.
I am not with my self as I conceive,
Wretch that I am, my self, my self, deceive:
Unto my self I do my self betray,
I from my self banish my self away:
My self agrees not with my self a jot,
Knows not my self I have my self forgot.
Against my self I have moved wars unjust:
I trust my self, and I my self distrust.
My self I follow, and my self I fly;
Besides my self, and in my self am I.
My self am not my self, another same
Unlike my self, and like my self I am
Self sons, self furious, and thus way-ward else
I cannot live with, nor without my self.
FINIS.

