IMPRIMATUR.

Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Febr. 12. 1694/5.
SIX SERMONS (Preached before the Late Incomparable PRINCESS QUEEN MARY, AT
WHITE HALL.

WITH Several Additions, and large Annotations, to the Discourse of
Justification by Faith.

By GEORGE BRIGHT, D. D. Dean of St. Asaph, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCV.

TO THE KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR,
THIS small Volume was designed, humbly to crave the Acceptance of your late
Royal Consort, that most truly Excellent Princess; who not only heard, but
relished Discourses proper for her Edification. These present ones dare pretend
only to an Attempt, and endeavor for such a Purpose. But she is for ever gone
from hence, where her virtuous and pious Soul had neither Books nor Company
good enough for its Entertainment! May her just Character be preserved, fresh
and fair, to the last of Time! may her goodly Presence strike the Imagination
of every one who enters into your Royal Palaces, that her exemplary Virtue,
Piety, Prudence and Sweetness may never be forgotten there.

Forgive me, Great Sir, if I for once lightly touch the Wound, not only of your
own Royal Heart, but also of the Hearts of all your Subjects, except here and
there a Self-interested, weak and peevish thing, or two, in this matter,
whatever they may be elsewhere.

But as this severe Providence has brought with it a mighty Loss, and not
reparable to Your Majesty one way; so has it given you a mighty Advantage
another; for all the Affections and Hopes which your People had divided between
two, are now publicly vested in, and settled upon Your Majesty's Person alone.
And we hope, and pray, that as God will continue your own Portion of his
Blessings to you, so he will not withhold hers from you. So that now your force
being doubled and united too, cannot probably be much longer resisted, by your
haughty and malicious, though puissant Enemy.

That God would continue and multiply his Blessings upon Your Royal Head, fill
your Heart with Piety, Wisdom and Integrity in all your Counsels, prosper your
Arms for the Chastisement of Tyranny, Violence and Injustice; for the Peace,
Safety, and Universal Happiness of your People, and all Europe, is the constant
Prayer of

Your Majesty's Most obedient Subject, and Chaplain, George Bright.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT has been my Aim in these ensuing Sermons, as it has been always my
Endeavor in all Discourses of the like Nature, to represent the Duties and
Doctrines of our Religion plain and reasonable, that the real and great
Advantage which it has above all others may be manifest, and the Cavils and
Contempts of irreligious Men may be put to silence and shame. Nor can I think,
whatever some Difficulty may do, that Vnintelligibility or Absurdity in any
Religion ought to commend it to any; I am sure it never will to inquisitive,
considerate, and honest Men, who are the best, though infinitely the least part
of the World. Such, I mean, who ask Questions, and examine things in Religion,
not to show their Subtilty, or pose Men, not to disgrace another Profession,
or to get room and ease for Licentiousness, or to make themselves and others
greater Scepticks, and doubt, and droll more: but like the Noble Beraeans, to
see whether things are so or no, that they may know more, and be satisfied in
matters of so great Concernment, that they may not be abused, led into Error,
and kept there by Force, Confidence, or bare Authority. Such as these, I think,
are to be taken care of, that they be not justly scandalized, or offended at
Religion. Nay, they are in the first place to be regarded, who are not only
intended surely by God to be saved as well as the Vulgar; but may also be great
Instruments of the Instruction and Confirmation of others, and the
Establishment of the due Esteem, and Reputation of Religion. Strange it is,
that the weak, the ignorant, and the peevish, should be treated with so much
Tenderness: but these should be rudely put off with the wise Application of Not
many wise according to the Flesh, etc. And, Where is the wise, where is the
Disputer of this World? or perhaps with the Reproach, and Backbites of
Indifferents, and Underminers of Religion.

This way of teaching and preaching the Christian Religion, as it is at all
times just, and of solid Advantage to it, so is it now become necessary. There
are very many in this Age, more than formerly, inquisitive, knowing, used to a
more accurate Exercise of their Understanding every where in Divine matters, as
well as Natural, Moral, and Political. These will not be put off with general,
confused, figurative and obscure Notions, nor with false, uncertain, remote
Reasonings; they will know what, and why they believe.

And hitherto is very well, the present Age being happy in it, whatever others
may please to think: And had it been thus for some Centuries before us, a
Thousand Falsehoods and Fopperies had never crept into Christian Religion;
which have already, and yet will cost the World so vast an Expense of Labor,
and fill it with infinite Troubles, and Vnquietnesses, to drive them out again,
and restore our Excellent Religion to its native and primitive Beauty.

But as that Occasion of the Necessity of Clearness, and true Reasoning in
Religion is good, so hardly any thing can be worse than the Licentiousness of
our Time, when the generality of Men, (especially of those who pretend to any
Wit or Breeding) have not only rescued themselves from the Slavery of
Superstition, and usurped Authority, but shaken off even the natural Reverence
of Mankind to true Religion, the sublimest Perfection and Glory of Humane
Nature: Nay, they have run further yet, and pertly taken up a mean Opinion and
Contempt of it, and all that belongs to it, as being nothing but Craft or
Pedantry. Now these Men must be knocked down by weighty Reason, (for they
slight the Holy Scriptures) and exposed to contempt themselves, for gentler
Dealing will not do.

It must be shown, that if they will make good their Title to the Man, they
must be Religious and Christians too: And that there is nothing more Reasonable
than a Christian's Belief, and nothing in his genuine Religion not adulterated,
unbecoming of God, and disagreeable to Reason, if rightly sensed and
understood; that it is the weakness or ignorance of its Doctors and
Commentators, and perhaps ever will be in some Degree, if any thing in it
appear, or be represented otherwise; and that they have been infinitely to
blame, who have been the Causes of Grudges, and Dissatisfactions in the minds
of men, between Religion and Reason, and even made irreconcilable Quarrels
between them, which should cohabit with constant and mutual Endearments and
Assistances. I hope, and am apt believe, that such will be the next turn of
Divine Providence, which invisibly governs the World, that the Holy Writings
will every Day receive more light, and Divine Truths, more clearness from
another Method, than what most Men make use of.

To conclude this short Preface, I am of opinion that now Miracles are ceased,
this way of teaching the Christian Religion, accompanied with a judicious
Affection, and followed with a sober and well governed Life, seems the
principal means left in our Power, to restore it to its Beauty, Force, and just
Authority, and the Church of Christ to its Purity and Honor; which now (as it
is said) is crammed with conceited Drolls, Indifferents, and downright
Infidels; and in no part of Christendom more, than where it appears with its
greatest External Splendour and Domination. This very bad Estate of the Church,
I beseech God to amend in his own time, and to introduce sincere and judicious
Religion, neither Theatrical, nor Fanatical.

G. B.

THE TEXTS OF THE Several Sermons.
SERMON I. 1 COR. 15. 33. Evil Communications corrupt good manners. SERMON II.
1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the
same Excess of Riot, speaking evil of you. SERMON III. Psalm 35. 5. I will
confess my Transgressions unto the Lord. SERMON IV. Psalm 14. 1. The fool has
said in his heart There is no God. They are corrupt, they have done abominable
works. SERMON V. Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. SERMON VI. 2 Cor. 5. 19. To wit, that God
was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Trespasses
unto them.
SERMON I.
1 COR. XV. 33. Evil Communications corrupt good Manners.
I design from these words to begin (for little more can be done in so short an
Exercise) a Discourse concerning Evil Examples; which I take to be one of the
most general, and too effectual obstructions of Reformation of Life and
Manners. So powerful for the most part, as to defeat and defy all the force,
not only of some dull and noisy Sermons; but also of the most wise, rational
and eloquent Discourses, either spoken or written.

It is true, every ones particular experience gives in but too much evidence,
that our Natures have been by some ways miserably corrupted from the womb; that
we never saw the light clear and innocent; that our vicious inclinations came
into the world with us: but it is as certain they had never been so numerous
and multiplied, never so strong and violent, never so continued and lasting,
were it not for the multitude and magnitude too of bad examples, perpetually
passing before us, enticing and sometimes hurrying us with great violence, even
against reclaiming Reason and Struggling Conscience. We set fire one to another,
and like smothering Coals put together, we increase the heat of our lusts to
such a degree, that at last they burst forth into a flame; and that sometimes
so fierce, that nobody dares to approach so near as to allay or slacken them.
Vivitur exemplis. The rules of Men's lives for the most part, is what they see
other Men do, not what they are taught, and what in sober temper they dare not
deny they ought to do. Precepts are of small force against this, and are as
little able to withstand it, as a grave Senator with his wise and eloquent
Orations, the rude charge of a Troop of boisterous Soldiers.

I know there are sometimes examples of good and happy Influence, and we are
not so far to discourage those that are, or those who are fairly inclined to be
good Men, as to tell them, that they are all alone, and so always like to be;
that they will never make one Proselyte, and it is well if they can secure
themselves. For the Conversation of a wise and virtuous Man, especially joined
with a goodness of Nature, may move, and sometimes effectually convert the
Minds and Manners of those who are constant witnesses of it: but alas, it is a
thousand to one perhaps otherwise; and all to be expected, is, that if you live
virtuously and piously, some few will commend you, but rarely any imitate you.

The number of good examples is very small; and when we have in our view those
of both kinds, we are all more apt to run to the worst side, by reason of the
most unhappy inclination and pente of our nature. Quoniam dociles imitandis --
turpibus and pravis omnes sumus.

To which we may add the observation, that virtuous and religious men are
generally of a more modest, prudent and reserved temper and behavior: but
contrariwise, vicious men generally are more confident, active and bold; which
seems to inconsiderate spectators (infinitely the greatest number) witty,
generous and pleasant, yea and reasonable too; because reason should precede
confidence; and consequently their examples make greater impressions. But I
somewhat prevent my self.

The words are a proverbial verse in Menander the Poet. Whether S. Paul had
read it himself, or heard it often quoted as a very useful proverbial Speech
is not material. Something may be said of the true rendering of the words,
before we lay out the matter of the Discourse, but very briefly.

There is some difference in the translation of (...) [communications] and
(...) [good manners.] The first is translated by some Colloquies, Narrations,
Discourses; by our own here Communications; by others Conversation, using of
Company, or the like. I should think this last best. (1.) Because it is more
general and includes the former. (2.) Because Lexicographers expound it of
both. Phavor. (...). The word (...) is taken for discoursing, or conversing
with another. And in Suidas (...) is (...), to converse together. As for (...),
good manners, a learned Expositor of our own would rather have it turned good
nature, or good dispositions; i. e. such who are very pliable and easy to agree
with others in their discourse and actions; which is usually out of weakness of
understanding, and softness of nature together; and sometimes from an imprudent
civility, (in which may be excess) and loathness to give offense, and
willingness to please every body. But I should rather retain our own
translation of good manners. Because although (...) may sometimes have such a
peculiar signification as good dispositions, yet the other signification is far
more frequent and more agreeable to the scope and context of the words. So that
I should read the Text thus; Evil conversations [i. e. of some] corrupt good
manners, [i. e. of others].

From hence we shall take occasion to discourse a while concerning the general
influence of bad Examples, and how mighty an hindrance it is of the conversion
and reformation of Sinners, and that under these heads:

I. Give the Reasons of the efficacy of Examples against Precepts. II. Mention
some of the Causes of the prevalency of evil Examples against good ones. III.
Show how these evil Examples do operate. IV. Give a caution or two to be
observed in noncompliance with evil Examples. V. Make an Inference or two.
I. What are the Reasons why Examples are more powerful than Precepts, and
consequently bad ones prevail easily against Precepts and Rules of Duty. They
seem to be these.

1. Because Examples are more frequent than Instruction. For Instruction, the
rules and reasons of our opinions and practice, are met withal only in a few
good Books, (the Bible in the first place) or in Discourses and Lectures out of
Pulpits and Desks, or in the Conversation of wise and virtuous Men. The first
of these are seldom looked upon, except on the outsides, and it is a very few
hours of their lives that the greatest part of Men, and even of those of
Education and Leisure, whose time lies upon their hands, spend in such an
Employment.

What they do read is only something of Wit and Fancy; or fine Words, and
perhaps Filthiness.

It Is not easily to be imagined how much the World would mend, if Books
containing true and rational Religion, Morality and Wisdom, were put into Men's
hands, and frequently perused by them; if it were but once the fashion and
humor of the Age, to furnish their Libraries and Memories and Discourses with
the choicest Thoughts of the wisest and best Men.

The first place no doubt is justly here given to the Oracles of God, or the
Writings of inspired Men well proved and well understood; and it is as certain
that the Books of the New Testament, or Christian Religion contain in them the
best Collection of Dogms, both for Speculation and Morality that ever the World
knew. But because there are a sort of Men who will suspect Credulity or Cunning
in the best Religion, or pretend to do so; it is to be wished they would then
at least vouchsafe to look into the Writings of those, who have had no other
Masters but Natural Light and Reason, and who have been in great Reputation for
Wisdom and Knowledge, for now many Centuries of Years.

The Names and Sects of such as Plato, and Tully, and Seneca, and Epictetus
with his Commentators, and that excellent Emperor Antoninus, who may seem
better to deserve a Saintship than many foolish things in the Church of Rome,
are still every where known and great. Their Morality though in some few
instances defective, yet is generally excellent.

And it has been known often, where Men have been by reading their Discourses
shamed and reasoned into good Manners, and restrained in bad ones, and thereby
mightily prepared for a great Esteem, and relish of the Christian Religion.

Wherefore it is reasonable to believe, that the Modern humor of calling,
reading even of the choicest Books of the wisest Men, by the contemptuous Name
of Pedantry, and justling out the Study of Books by the pretended Study of Men
(not to help to mend but to corrupt Humane Nature; not to avoid but to imitate
Vices, which otherwise they had never known; not so much to secure themselves
and their Friends the honest and innocent, as to circumvent and supplant
others) I say, that this modern Humor has had a considerable influence upon
the Degeneracy and Immorality of this Age; and is truly great Pedantry it self,
if want of reason and judgment be as it ought, signified by that Name: And it
may well seem to be set abroad, and with an Air of Manliness received, by some
who could hardly write or read well, or at least in no other Tongue than what
their Nurse taught them: like as some Fashions have been invented to cover some
natural or viciously contracted Infirmities.

The Truth of the Case is, as I think, and which will do no harm to most Men to
remember, that the generality of Men are the worst Books that can be read, and
the Study of good Books approved by the wisest, which contain Men's Thoughts,
Passions, Actions, Laws, Rules and Precepts, what Men have thought, done, and
should do, is the best Study of Men.

Though the other too managed discreetly for honest and virtuous Ends is a
great improvement for any, and even necessary for many Employments and Stations
of Life. And then for Pulpit-Discourses or others of the like Nature, they are
but rare likewise in comparison of Examples, which occur every Hour; and many
of them too, as they sometimes should, contain Matters of Faith more than of
Practice; and when they are practical (to mention it by the bye) they are but
too little regarded, though they want not Eloquence, Reason and Judgment; or at
least such both Matter and Dress as may be most proper for the Auditory.

Finally the Conversation of wise and good Men is seldom to be had, few Men's
Company being instructive; or else more in Matters of Speculation than
Practice, more in other sort of Knowledge, than in wise and useful Observation
in practical Religion, and good Manners.

But on the other hand, Examples are in our view every moment almost, except we
be of that small Number who converse much with the dead and the absent, (I mean
Books) and with themselves. Which were it more frequent and intermixed
seasonably and discreetly with Experience and Conversation, would much secure
us from the Corruption of the Examples of Vice and Folly; of which otherwise we
are in very great danger by reason of their frequency, notwithstanding the
Precepts and Rules and Exhortations which are to oppose and hinder them.

2. A second Cause of the greater Efficacy of Example above that of Precepts
is, that Examples are Objects of Sense and Imagination; but the Precepts or
Rules of life only of Reason and Understanding. The Impressions of Example upon
Sense, Imagination and Corporeal Memory, are deeper and stronger than those of
Precepts upon our Understanding. And consequently upon our Passions, and then
upon our Choice and Inclinations, that is, our Manners; and we may truly add
finally, upon our opinions. For there is not a persuasion in an Hundred, which
is not the effect more of affection and inclination than of reason and judgment.

The sense and meaning of Precepts are by few Men well conceived and
apprehended, or but faintly and obscurely, because they are intellectual
Objects.

For which reason History, but more especially Biography, or the History of the
Lives of the most excellent Men in all kinds, where mental Endowments or the
Qualities of Men's minds are represented as it were embodied with sensible
Circumstances, written by judicious and virtuous Men, seems the most proper and
effectual Way, for the good Instruction of the Generality of Men.

3. A third Cause of the prevailing Influence of Examples, if we consider the
whole Life of Man together, is the early precedence of it to that of Precepts
and Instructions. We are capable of observing and receiving great Impressions
from, and imitating of Examples too, especially of those whom we love and
esteem, before we know what we do, or come to the use of any Reason; much more
of so much as to understand a good Instruction or Precept.

The first is from our very Childhood, the second rarely comes before we arrive
at an Age thought fit to manage an Estate, and it is well if we then see it. So
that we have been under the power of Examples, and are formed usually by them,
before we are capable of the Discipline of an Instructor or Tutor.

Whence it is that men seldom much change the Inclinations they have contracted
to that time; and generally if by good example and government we are well
seasoned and tempered to that Age, or some few years beyond, we seldom prove at
least very bad. Although by long and frequent ill company and example, too
great a part may be undone again, and sometimes all spoiled, which is very
rare, because it is very difficult to obliterate those early characters and
impressions so often repeated.

Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness, but rather reprove
them, says the Apostle in that excellent Epistle, Ephesians. 5. 11. (...), etc. From
the good you will learn good, among the bad you will surely grow worse: like to
that of the Wise man, Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with wise men shall be
wise; but the companion of fools shall be destroyed. Aspice quid faciunt
commercia, venerat obses. The Youth once was very innocent, behold what he is
now; how strangely changed by lewd company? (...) Associate not thy self to a
wicked man. These and such like are the Sayings of the Scripture, and the wiser
sort of men, which do but remind us of the efficacy of examples upon our
manners, and that far beyond the power and force of all Precepts, Instructions
and Directions.

Nor do I yet know how this prevalency of example may be prevented or remedied,
but either (1.) by a more than ordinary felicity of temper from the birth,
whereby we are inclined to use our Reason more than our Senses, and are capable
of giving Precepts and Examples too: or, (2.) by the providence and grace of
God, which may happily order the condition of our lives, or even immediately
work upon our minds, and particularly by afflictions: or finally (which is most
in our own power) by some considerable retirement from too frequent and
tumultuous conversation, and accustoming our selves to Reading and Thinking.
That be spoken to the First General; viz. the Reasons of the Efficacy of
Examples against Precept.

II. The Second is, the Reasons of the prevailing influence of bad Examples
against good ones. Why ill Examples do so much more harm, than good ones do
good, we may observe these among others.

1. Evil examples are infinitely more numerous. We can hardly light upon a good
one, we can hardly miss a bad one. Good ones we can hardly see any, bad ones we
cannot but see many. The High and the Low, the Rich and the Poor, and the
Middle too. It has been thought indeed that this last sort of men are
generally the most Sober and Religious; because great and rich men think
themselves above God and Religion, poor men below it. The one behave themselves
as if God Almighty dared not to take notice of them, the other as if he would
not; both equally mistaken.

But suppose it so: yet Bad examples far out-number the Good among all ranks
and conditions of men, though of different vices according to their respective
temptations: of different particular Vices, but the same general want of the
sense of Virtue, of Conscience, and the fear of God in all.

And now if the number of Good Examples be so small in proportion to Bad ones,
how much greater will the influence of these certainly be? For if we observe,
it is frequency and repetition of thoughts and affections and actions, which
form our Manners. Those Objects which we most frequently and generally converse
withal, which possess our thoughts, have the command of our affections, and
consequently our inclinations and actions. We seldom think or talk of, love,
hate, desire, delight in any but them.

And this is the reason why in a Family small or great, and in Palaces
themselves, the single example even of one or two of the greatest in it, though
deservedly honored and beloved too, does so little good upon all the rest;
though it would otherwise be far worse. It is because they are very many
against one. And how much less is it to be expected that in a place consisting
of many scores or hundreds of Families, the example of one or two whose
business it should be to back their instructions with good ones, should have
any visible good effect, unless their number be increased, (which would become
the Ecclesiastical and Civil care too) or some more be pleased to give their
assistance, and make up a number.

2. But Secondly, the Greatness of bad Examples is another cause of their
greater influence. I do not know but that in proportion to their number, there
may be as many Religious and Virtuous persons in the Superior as in the
Inferior Ranks of men, and that with more judgment and generosity: But still
the greatest part of the Great, the Potent, the Honorable, the Rich (the more
is the pity) are of the bad side. Though in the whole lump of all sorts of men
put together infinitely the Major part (in their practices at least) should
vote for the licentious and vicious side; yet it would not have near the
influence it now has, were not the Major part of the Great on that side too,
and of the same Party to head and lead them. So that it appears, it is not only
the number of Voters, but also the power and greatness of them, that makes ill
example go so far and prevail so much. Were it the property of the vulgar and
inferior sort only to be Irreligious, Immoral and Dissolute, we should soon
see that Party decrease and generally desert both in inward Principles and
outward Practices. One excellent example of a great Man would be (...),
outweigh a great number of small ones. The generality of men far from wise,
first esteem the Men and then the Manners. At least the dignity and height of a
vicious man makes that Vice seem little and tolerable if not honorable, which
were it only seen in those of lower place, would be thought contemptible and
punishable.

Alea turpis.
Turpe and adulterium mediocribus, haec tamen illi
Omnia cum faciant, hilares nitidique vocantur.
We admire men for their power, pomp and wealth, and then all that belongs to
them, leaving not out their very vices too. Like as the Pagans of old, not only
deify'd their Heroes, but built Temples and erected Altars to some of their
flagitious actions and abominable crimes; as Tully somewhere complains.

On the contrary the poor and mean man's actions, according to the Wise-man's
little History (Eccl. 9. 14.) though never so wise and beneficial too, for that
very reason are not heeded or soon forgotten.

Indeed it is Truth and Reason, and not vulgar opinion only, that Power and
Greatness, Ability to effect and bring to pass, is to be honored; but then
Wisdom and Goodness, which are to direct and determine that Power, deserve it
much more. It is true, Wisdom and Goodness without Power are moveless and
ineffectual things; but then Power without them may be most mischievous.
Goodness without Power if it can do no good, yet it can do no harm: But power
without goodness may be used to make miserable, if it be managed by Cunning,
Pride, Malice and Illnature.

But above all is that Person honorable and amiable, where Greatness, Wisdom
and Goodness are in Conjunction, as it is in God with Infinity. The Examples of
such work mavelous Effects in their Sphere, and carry all before them. They
have great force to change the very inward Springs and Principles of Men's
Actions, their Opinions and Inclinations; at least they outwardly bind them to
their good Behavior. And oh! that Heaven as it has begun among us, would go
on to bless the World with such an Happiness, and refresh the Souls of
Righteous men, grieved and tired with wicked Generations, by so beautiful and
lovely a Sight. And here we cannot miss to make the Observation, how much
greater obligations the Great are under, to look at their Conduct and Example,
than others, and how much larger their Account will be for the Evil they have,
and the Good they might have done, and what can be said by those for
themselves, who because they are great already, will be greater than God
himself who made them so, and take that liberty which he never used?

3. A third Cause of the greater influence of bad Examples is their Confidence,
Promptness and Fierceness. Good men more generally (unless they be very happy
in the Gifts of Eloquence, quick Apprehension and Courage all together)
converse with Caution, and consequently are more sparing in their Speech and
Actions, more modest in their Affirmations, more tender of the Reputation of
their Conduct, more careful of their own peace and satisfaction, more
sollicitous concerning the influence of their Examples.

Now the confidence and boldness of bad Examples, is usually accompanied with
some Wit and Freedom of Speech and Carriage, and some Passion, always with more
vigor and life. Which things are more discernible and acceptable to most
Company, than good Sense and Reason; and often make so great an impression, as
almost to force themselves upon those who assuredly know much better.

There is also in such Confidence a certain heedlesness and negligence, which
carries the Air and Appearance, and is some ingredient of Generosity and
Courage, which first much commends the Persons, and then their Discourse and
Actions, especially to those who are their Equals or Inferiors, and are no
wiser than themselves; though in other Circumstances where it may seem
excessive or unseasonable, to understanding Men it is usually as offensive.
Finally the confidence of bad Examples to the greatest part of Spectators, is a
sign of assurance of Truth and Reason in what they say and do; at least of no
great harm or folly; but where the former inclinations to imitation are backed
by appearing Reason, its force is irresistible.

On the contrary, Calmness and Reservedness seem lifeless, dubious, cowardly;
and even when they are thought to be the Effect of Wisdom and Judgment; yet
they are grateful but to very few of the same temper, and the Examples of such
reach the Generality with no force, or with very little impression.

Whence good Men may be advised, that there is place and reason sometimes for
Freedom and a handsome Confidence in conversation (though many very wise may
want that faculty) managed with a regard to the Measure, Seasonableness and
other Circumstances, and with a Design to convey as opportunity may serve, some
good sentiment and instruction.

It is a laudable and useful Dexterity in conversation, to communicate wise
and virtuous things with advantage, and to convey it acceptably, and
particularly with a seeming heedlesness of what one is doing, when indeed it is
the main Design to do it well: like as the discreet Physician may seem to his
ungovernable Patient to be doing nothing of consequence, when he designs the
administration of some effectual Remedy for his Disease.

4. The last Cause we shall name is the most general Corruption of Humane
Nature, consisting principally in prevailing Inclinations to other Objects,
above those to Religion, Virtue and Wisdom.

The depravation and vitiosity of our active Powers is this, that those
Appetites and Inclinations, which should be moderate, governable and
subservient, are the most violent, ungovernable and commanding.

Though this Cause be very general, yet it is not remote, but near and
immediate. This is the reason why, supposing good and bad Examples equal in
number set before us, and recommended alike advantageously, we should, except
here and there one secured by a rare Felicity of Temper, or the Grace of God,
without much deliberation enter our selves into the worst Company.

This is the reason, why, if Orations could be made with equal seeming Reason
and Eloquence for Virtue and Vice, and we were the Moderators perfectly left to
our own liberty without the restraint of shame, we should soon heartily
determine against Virtue. This is the Reason at the Bottom, why one single
Example of one great Man has more influence than twenty of the prudent and
virtuous, the wise and the good. It Is because our very opinions, as well as our
practices, are perverted and corrupted. We esteem, admire, and love Power more
than Goodness, to be great rather than good, to do what we list rather than
what we ought. And then our general Veneration and great Opinion of the Great,
inclines us to a particular promiscuous Approbation and Imitation of what he is
and does. It Is from this miserable inborn Propension of our Natures to Vice,
heavy and forcible, that if sometimes by the most excellent and celebrated
Examples, we are a little heaved upwards, that is all, and we presently flop
down again all at once.

And sometimes they do not in the least move us; and all their beauty and
luster no more affect us, than if we were deaf or blind. It Is from hence till
it be changed, that like the filt by Swine, we will never learn to be cleanly,
though in the Midst ^f a verdant Meadow covered with innocent Sheep, if there
be but one Puddle where we may wallow in the Mire; or like some naturally
clownish and slovenly People, who will never be taught any decent Carriage and
Manners, though always in the Company of those who are gentile and well-bred.
Oh the deplorable Pravity and Degeneracy of Mankind! desperate and utterly
incurable without a merciful Touch by the Finger of God, and the special
powerful Influence of his Grace, preventing, following, assisting our earnest
Prayers, and serious Endeavors, without which the Company of Heaven it self
would never mend them.

They would still retain the Propensions and Inclinations, nay the Actions too
if they could, of Devils and Brutes in the midst of Saints and Angels. These
are some of the most considerable Causes of the prevalency of evil Examples
against good ones, in Answer to the second Question.

III. How do these evil Examples operate? This is convenient to be known, that
so we may the better prevent or obviate their mischievous Influence. The
several ways may be observed to be such as these.

1. By their Number, Variety and Constancy. They take up all our attention and
observation; they wholly possess our thoughts. Evil examples are oft-times like
the ill-designing Companions and Counselors of some great Man not over-wise,
who will not permit any other Company but themselves to approach him, nor
suffer him to hear or know much more, than he has from them. Sometimes we may
be so unhappy in our almost constant Conversation, as to have little occasion
to observe any thing that is good, or not so much, or so often as to make any
impression. There are some Persons so brought up, surrounded always with such
Company, that folly and vice are their perpetual entertainment, scarce ever
hearing a wise Word, or seeing a wise Action. Swearing and cursing, and
brawling, and railing, and drinking, and gluttony, and trifling, and dressing,
and gaming, and wantonness, and at the best worldly drudgery or diversion, are
set before their eyes, and upon their ears perpetually. They rarely hear but
the very Names of Conscience, Wisdom, and Virtue, of Sobriety and Piety, of
Prayers and other Exercises of Devotion. They scarce know whether there be any
such men or things in the world.

And it seems very likely, that were it not for the constant Public Exercises
of Religion and Divine Worship; Piety, and Devotion, and Conscientiousness, and
all other Virtues, but what are more immediately necessary for civil Society,
for men's Dealing and Traffic one with another, would be so far neglected and
thrust into corners, so little any-where appear, that thousands more would in a
short time be ignorant of there being any such things at all. As it is now, how
many are there who hardly ever see (so as to take any notice of) a pious well
governed Family or Person, and when they do, they seem to them like Foreigners
from some strange Country, with an unknown Language, an uncouth Garb, and odd
Manners; nay perhaps some would seldom hear of a God or Jesus Christ, but in
Oaths and Imprecations.

The Corruption and Degeneracy of the Gentile World in some parts of it, was so
great before the Preaching of the Gospel and the Doctrine of Christianity came
among them, that they wondered at the Christians for abstaining from the most
abominable ways in which they securely walked, of lasciviousness, lusts, excess
of Wine, revellings, banquettings, abominable Idolatries. Nay they did not only
think their Manners very strange, but they reviled them for them. Their sober
and virtuous Lives were not only matter of their wonder, but of their Reproach
(1 Pet. 4. 4.) they had never seen nor been used to such things before. And it
is beyond doubt, that there is but too much of this amongst those, who have
indeed been admitted Members of the Church, and bear the name of Christians.
From the time they were first entered by the Sacred Rite, they have heard
little, seen less, and practiced least of their Religion. The Families, and
Relations, and Acquaintance among whom they have been brought up, living more
like Heathens than Christians, and that none of the best sort of Heathens
neither. And what can be ordinarily expected from those of any thing that is
good, who have scarce seen any thing but what is evil?

(2.) But among others who have had so far the happiness of better Instruction
and Conversation, that they are not altogether ignorant, or ill inclined, or
insensible of what is good and virtuous, evil examples soon bring most of them
over to Imitation, by taking away the restraint of some shame and fear, which
they were before under. Few persons at the beginning of evil courses, are so
hardy and imp^isent, as not to stand in some awe both of themselves and others;
of their own Consciences, and other men's opinions concerning them, and the
consequences of them. As bad as our Natures are, there are very few who do not
at first boggle at many vices; they blush and hang back at them. Such as are
Drunkenness, Swearing, Fornication, Lasciviousness, Profaneness, Disrespect
and Contempt of the wise, sober and grave, or in general of their Superiors.
But let but two or three of the bolder and worst of them begin, and how soon
shall you see the rest to follow; and when their number is increased to a
multitude, how fierce and insolent do they soon grow? They are backward and
cowardly oft-times, till they are entered into villainy by some experienced
Practitioners, or by some one of note who leads them the way; but perhaps being
once entered they go beyond their Patterns, and outdo those who taught them. Now
when once natural modesty, shame and fear of the reproof of their own
Consciences, whether well or ill informed, and of the judgments of others are
taken out of the way, then those, as natural inclinations to the vices of evil
examples have more their liberty, take their swing, an^ ^^^ their very motion
gather strength and celerity. We see in a Rabble got together in a riotous and
unlawful manner commanded by Authority to depart, every one afraid at first to
disobey or affront it, till one more impudent and fierce than the rest makes an
attempt. And the violence of Robbers at first trembles more than they whom they
set upon and rifle. And amongst the most desperate and bloody Ruffians hired to
murder some person of Innocence, Eminency and Merit, every one is afraid to
strike the first stroke; but that being once given, the rest soon fall on.

(3.) Evil Examples work their effect not only by removing and taking away the
shame of Vice, but by making men ashamed of Virtue; and this especially when
they are numerous and great. They make men ashamed and afraid to be virtuous
and good, both positively and negatively; both to do that which is good, and
not to do that which they know to be evil. Men well disposed and inclined are
often fearful to give offense, to appear singular, to break company, even when
their conscience and discretion tells them, they omit to do what they ought;
and what they do is not only foolish, but plainly unlawful. Although the Man
who thus practices be not so bad as he that gives a bad Example, or is as
ready to follow as the other is to begin; yet he is far from being so good as
he should be; nor indeed if it be his habitual Temper and more frequent
Carriage is he to be deemed a good Man. For it is a sign he fears the
displeasure of Men, more than that of God, and loves the Praise of Men, more
than the Praise of God (John 12. 43.) like the chief Rulers who believed on
Jesus, but dared not to confess and own him. We are generally like the ordinary
sort of Soldiers in the Field, who either very willingly change sides at any
time with their Commanders and Comrades, (which is a further step still) or
else at least they are afraid of the reproach of their Company. Whereas we
should heartily engage in and espouse the Cause of Virtue and Religion, and
then stand to it: that if it be possible we may keep others from deserting
them, or recall them again. The truth of it is, we want courage generally in so
just and honorable a Cause, when we do not want some Approbation and fair
Inclination to it. Which if it should be said to some Men in other matters,
would hardly be let pass without a challenge. We want some resolution to follow
Virtue and Piety boldly. We are much more foolish and timorous in our Manners
than our Fashions, for we will not follow these if we find them improper or
inconvenient for us; but those we generally do, though in our discretion and
conscience we condemn them as foolish and hurtful, both to them who lead and
follow too. It would make an honest Man of ordinary Spirit ashamed, to see
those who will take no other Affront but upon the point of a Sword, to sneak
and be cowardly in the Cause of Virtue and Goodness, which they themselves
justly esteem. We not only dare not draw our Swords (that is not desired) but
not so much perhaps as speak in their behalf, when they are unjustly reproached
and despised. We draw in our heads (indeed silence may be in some Cases both
most proper and fit) or rather take part with their Enemies, and second perhaps
their jeer with some conceited humorous Wit of our own, and this as has been
said to please others against our own Consciences. Thus evil Examples seem
principally to keep us bad, and make us often appear indeed worse than we
inwardly are: but there is great danger if we still keep such company, and use
such practices, we shall really soon be as bad as we seem. But,

(4.) The operation of evil Examples is yet more immediate to fix, or to alter,
and change the very Temper and Inclinations of our minds, and in great part our
opinions and judgments.

The great proneness of our Nature to imitation every one knows, and it is one
of the first signs of reason which appear in Children. And if there be no
particular impediment in our Nature (much more if there be any disposition to
it) we take that first which first comes, and most frequently presents it self
to us. Thus we act, we speak, we choose, we delight in, we hate, we admire, we
despise as we see others do, (especially those whom we love and esteem) without
any design of imitation, and we do not observe or know it our selves, unless
others take notice of it and tell us so. We hear Children and young People, and
those of inferior condition at every turn, saying, they love such a thing as
their Eye, and they hate to do this, or that, (the one perhaps a trifle, and
the other good or of no great harm) for no other reason, but because they have
often heard others their Superiors say so.

Now if we often so speak, act, choose, relish, love, hate, etc. it soon begets
in us habitual Inclinations to, or aversations from certain Objects, and in
time so strong and obstinate, that we cannot for the present be, or do
otherwise, nor ordinarily weaken or destroy them, but in a long time, by a
great change of the circumstances of our conditions, and by the inward grace
and assistance of God himself. And these habitual Inclinations are called our
manners, our temper and constitution of mind; by which we are, and are called
good or bad Men. According to these we are estimated, and shall be treated by
God, who better knows them than we do our selves. Now our manners being in this
fashion corrupted by evil Examples and Conversation, our opinions and judgments
will at least in great part be soon suitable to them.

It is in the power of Man to believe what he lists, unless it be some
immediate Axiom; such as the whole is bigger than its part. And even there too
a Man may confound, darken, perplex, and indispose his mind in such manner, as
not to discern so clear a Truth; and then he can much easier turn himself away
from regarding it, and consequently he can suspend his judgment, or not
actually belleve it if he please.

It is naturally consequent to all other Inclinations, to be inclined to
believe and judge that to be true, which may most gratify and please them. When
therefore by evil Examples we are swayed and bent to that which is Evil, and
brought to delight in it, we will persuade our selves contrary to what we
thought before, that it is even laudable, or at least of no great harm, and
therefore tolerable, and a matter of jest more than Reproof.

Our Lusts and unlawful Affections by the Influence they have upon our Wills,
bribe our very Consciences, and bring them over to plead and argue on their
side, or at least to excuse and extenuate them; to call Evil good, and Good
evil, put Darkness for light, and Light for darkness. These are defiled
Consciences, as the Scripture speaks: and how deplorable is the condition of
such Men, whose light is worse than darkness, and whose very guide betrays
them, and leads them to sure destruction, not suspecting or fearing any such
matter. Besides our opinions are changed by evil Examples another way. Most men
have no other reason for their practice, to believe it lawful or unlawful,
wise or foolish, but only the Intimations of their own Consciences, and the
Testimony of others. Now evil Examples invalidate both these, and first the
Testimony of others against any Vice. When we see so many confidently and
securely indulge themselves in it, we are apt to believe, that they think it a
passable or commendable thing. And as they seem to think no worse of themselves
for it, so will they not of us; and a great many more may be of their mind. And
then consequently it weakens the credit of our own Consciences with us too. We
begin to suspect, and at last we conclude, that they have been hitherto but ill
informed; that we are superstitious and more timorous than we need to be,
through natural Temper, Education, want of use and experience.

Thus by this time we may more distinctly see the ways, how evil Examples make
their attacque upon us, and the method of their proceedings, and being
beforehand advised and admonished thereof, we may, if we in good earnest be
willing, and wise, prevent their most dangerous and ruinous Influence upon us.

IV. In the Fourth place, I am to give a Caution or two to be observed in
Noncompliance with evil Examples, to secure our Prudence and Innocence: They
are but two. (1.) In respect of the matter of our Actions. (2.) In respect of
their End.

(1.) As to the matter, the most general Advice is, that we be well assured,
that the Examples be really evil. One of the most certain signs of which is, a
thing's being universally forbidden in the Scripture, and if we can be equally
assured of it by true Reason too. That which is prohibited by God universally,
has certainly in every particular Action more mischievous than good effects;
though we may not see it at present our selves, or be able to make it appear to
others; and therefore it is not at any time to be done. As contrariwise, that
which is universally commanded has more good than bad, and therefore is never
to be omitted. In things therefore that are thus forbidden or commanded,
compliance with others, to do, or not do as they would have us is never
justifiable. If Company, Conversation and Custom desire us, and God forbid us;
if they forbid us, and God command us, it is no question, whom we are to follow.

But because we are oft-times liable to great mistakes, we are hear to
endeavor sincerely to be well informed, as was before advised. We may judge
that universally forbidden or commanded by God, which truly is not so. We are
to avoid singularity through ignorance, or misinformation in our Duty, and
consequently giving a needless offense, and exposing our selves to the contempt
of the ill-natured and ungenerous, or to the pity and disesteem of the best
sort of men for our weakness or suspected Contumacy and Self-will; sometimes to
the loss of our secular advantages, whereby we may not only live comfortably,
but perhaps very usefully. And then we are with the same sincerity to judge as
truly on the other hand too, and not to believe that lawful which is really
forbidden, or that not to be commanded which is really so: and consequently to
take an undue liberty, and in a more proper and important Sense give offense.
And because of our general proneness to indulge our selves, and live easily, we
have more reason to be vigilant and careful over our selves in this last
Extreme.

2. The second Caution is in respect of the End. We are to take care (and there
is need of it) that we refuse not to conform to, and follow received Practice
and common Example, or to comply with company at any time, no not in things
materially evil, out of pride or affectation of singularity; not out of an
humor to contradict the World, and control others; to be leaders, not
followers; not out of a design to be pointed at and showed, that such an one
will not do so; not out of a sly intention to be known, talked of, esteemed as
a Man of Courage, Resolution, Self-government; not out of surliness and
unwillingness to gratify others. These are all naughty and ill principles and
ends, which defile and pollute, otherwise materially and eventually very good,
profitable Actions; and are very apt as in other places. So here to creep into
our minds; and either to thrust out, or at least mix themselves with those that
are worthy, just and reasonable. There are some, and very many specious,
external Carriages and Behaviors, to which men pay a great deal of Reverence,
which have no better Spring, at least in great part. Whence then must our
diversity of manners from the evil Examples of the rest of the World proceed?
From Charity to the World, because thou see such Courses and Carriages to be
foolish, unworthy of Men or Christians, noxious and mischievous; from prudence,
because thou know them to be unworthy, or unbecoming thy self, nor useful,
nor safe; but indecent, troublesome, hurtful, and of dangerous, bad
consequence here, and hereafter: In few words, from Piety, Charity, Prudent
Self-love, and Care of our selves. Our Carriage and Conduct here will be very
beneficial and effectual, if the same Spirit and Temper appear in the rest of
our Conversation, showing our selves generous, and civil, and easy, and
willing to comply, and gratify in things which are not unlawful or very
inconvenient, or have no good reason against it. And even where we refuse
sinful and incommodious Compliances, we are to appear unwilling to give
offense, or not to gratify; but that our Charity to our selves and others, and
even to our Companions themselves: Our prudence and our Duty to God, oblige us
necessarily so to do.

To conclude this Caution we must take care to avoid two Extremes. The one
Pride; which word and vice I take so generally as to comprehend all particulars
of affectation of singularity, contradiction, etc. just before warned against,
as so many kinds, and many more which may be named. The other is too much
softness, too great loathness to offend or displease for the present, either
out of love or fear; when we know in our Consciences, that it will be better
for the future, both for them and us, not to gratify or comply with them: and
to this infirmity that which we call good Nature (otherwise a valuable thing)
is obnoxious, an will often betray us, if we do not (as we ought, all other
natural dispositions and inclinations) regulate it by a judicious and resolved
Virtue.

V. The fifth and last thing to be done is, to make an inference or two from
what has been said.

1. We are with great care to avoid giving bad Example. Certainly good Manners
is a good thing, if there be any in the World; and to corrupt a thing so good,
so absolutely necessary to any tolerable subsistence in this or any other
State, is the worst of Employments. Now the giving bad Examples tends to it,
the following of them effects it. If any be so wicked as designedly to give an
ill Example in any Vice (suppose Irreligion) and to make it their study or
diversion to corrupt the World.

This seems to proceed from pure Malice against God and Men. But if we be only
careless and heedless of what we do, though it be never so ill, and what others
may do after us, it is at least want of good Government of our selves, and want
of that kindness and charity which we owe to our Brother, and draws upon us the
guilt of those sins, which our Examples have been the Causes of. Like as we
should reckon that Man devilish and inhumane, and worthy of the severest
Punishment, who knowing himself infected with the Plague, should mingle himself
with all Company, and industriously or carelessly breath out his Pestiferous
steams upon all he met.

But more especially are they concerned in this Admonition, whose Examples are
of the most forcible and diffusive Influence. Such who are most eminent and
conspicuous, with whom compliance and invitation brings great conversation,
honor, and secular Advantages. The rich, the potent, the ingenious and
learned, are like Stars of the first Magnitude, which draw all men's Eyes
toward them; and we know how far it reaches, and thanks be to God we know too
how far it is prevented, when the Commands and Examples of Piety and Virtue
come together from the Throne it self; whose force we hope will in some time
make its way through, and alter the Constitution of the whole Body, and drive
out the Venom and Leprosy of Vice, which has so long defiled and deformed it.

After Hypocrisy, Enthusiasm, Immorality, Impiety, and Contempt of all
Religion, Superstition and Idolatry successively, we are in hopes to see a
serious, enlightened and judicious Piety and Virtue; which shall not so much
frighten as shame and reason Men out of Vice. And if, together with this,
Virtue and Sobriety were always, among others, the Distinguishing Condition, as
they ought to be, of Honor and all other Secular Advantages, a great work
would soon be in great measure done: For I think Vice never yet had so much
esteem as to have one small Martyr for it. But,

2. We are not to follow bad Examples when given. They can but tempt us, not
force us; when the Text tells us, That evil Comunications corrupt good Manners;
the meaning is, That they have always a natural tendency to it; but not that
they always effect it. We may prevent and defeat their Influence by Precepts of
Wisdom, by Vigilance and Resolution. We may learn, receive and possess our
Minds with right and just Opinions, with good and wholesome Instructions and
Documents, with generous Passions and Purposes. We may soon attain to the
Capacity of looking upon Examples to be only Representations, not Reasons of
our Manners, to help our Imaginations, but not Arguments, to determine our
Judgments. We need not be either surprised or overborn by them. We may, we
ought to discover, examine, confront and compare them with others, receive or
reject them if we please. If we find them foolish, mean, impious or bad, we are
not to be drawn away by their Greatness, Number, Impunity, nay, Encouragement
too. For we need not be advised of a thing so common, that the Companions and
Ministers of Vice may be cherished, honored and rewarded; when Religion and
Virtue are neglected and slighted as troublesome, uneasy and ill Company.

Thus we may behave our selves, and not only secure our selves, but many
others, from the Infection and Contagion of foolish and wicked Examples. But it
may be otherwise too, and we are always in very great danger of them. And
truly, generally, as the state of the World now goes, they reach us, and have
their mischievous and pernicious effects more or less upon us; which ought not
to dismay us; but still to increase our Caution, Courage and Resolution.

Indeed we have had too long an Experience of it, and have felt its Influence
so deep, and almost universal, that it is not like in a long time yet to be
worked and worn out by the most operative and powerful Remedies that can be
applied. We seem to have great need of a Confederacy here too, and all too weak
and insufficient, without the Conjunction of the Supreme Power to head and
conduct it, which we may promise our selves. Never can Authority and Power be
employed in a better Cause; in which they shall certainly have God on their
side, his Assistance, Favor, Blessing and Reward; the Hands and Hearts of the
best Men, and the Consciences of all, even of the very worst.

As for our particular, Let us list our selves under this Confederacy, and
augment the number of Heaven's Forces against the Armies of Hell and Vice, and
even by Multitude oppress them if we can: But if not that, at least, let us by
Courage and Conduct make good our Ground, and keep our selves entire; not only
receiving the boldest Attacks of Vice and Folly unmoved, but sometimes charging
through the most resolute of their Troops. And may the God of all Power and
Victory, who is not an unconcerned Spectator of the Endeavors and Prayers of
his Faithful Servants, multiply their Number, increase their Zeal, Courage and
Constancy, and in some measure grant them here present Success: However, we are
abundantly assured, that he will hereafter signally own their Service, and
crown it with a glorious Reward.

SERMON II.
1 PET. IV. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the
same Excess of Riot, speaking evil of you.
WHEN first Christian Religion was introduced, and Societies which made Public
profession of it were formed, there never appeared a greater contrariety of
Manners in the World, than there was between the Christians and all the rest of
Mankind. The former were eminently pure, spirituallyminded, humble, just, and
in all instances charitable; the latter most impure, proud, malicious, envious,
cruel.

The Gentiles, except here and there a Philosopher, or a good Natur'd-man, were
as much corrupted in their manners and lives, as inhabiting together upon this
Earth could well bear. Their very Religion was the worst part of their
condition, teaching them Beastliness and Cruelty to such excess, that it was
necessary to be corrected by the light of Nature, and the supreme, civil Power;
as the Bacchanalia among the Romans. Some of the Fathers justly reproach them,
that their Religion taught them nothing of Morality, as the Christian Religion
did: but only childish, superstitious, or beastly Rites and Ceremonies. And the
Holy Scripture in several places, gives us abundantly to understand, the most
lamentable condition of the Gentile World, when the Gospel or Christian
Institution came first among them; particularly the Epistles Romans 1. Ephesians. 2.
4.
to the Romans and the Ephesians.

As for the Jews, though their Religion was good and wisely instituted, in that
place which it had of the whole Divine Economy and Providence over all Mankind
from beginning to end; and although they had excellent Books of Morality, of
which I reckon Piety and Devotion the principal part in their hands: yet both
their inward manners and outward practice generally, were little better than
that of the Heathens, except in one point of Idolatry.

They living every where promiscuously with the Gentiles, and under their
Dominion, soon grew like them, retaining only what they could of the Rites of
their Religion, and some true opinions concerning the Deity to distinguish
them. St. Paul charge them with an universal Defection and Corruption in his
Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 2. 3. and their own Writers are witnesses how
wicked they were. And the Talmudists particularly had a Tradition, that just
before the coming of the Messiah, Impudence in wickedness should abound, as
some think it will before his second Coming.

This was a deplorable State of humane Race; but considering the Ignorance and
Darkness which had so long covered the face of the Earth; where they rarely
heard or but suspected any thing better, it was not so much to be wondered at.
But strange it was when they heard the Doctrine of the Gospel, or did but see
the contrary manners and practisers of its Professors, that they were not all
of them startled; and yet stranger that they should wonder at the Christians,
that they would not live as they did. And yet so it was then with the Heathens
toward the Christians; and so it is still with bad Christians, little more
such than in Name, and infinitely the most Numerous toward the Good, who are
in Heart and Life obedient to the Laws of Christ. And that is the Observation
as briefly as may be to be treated of.

Vicious and dissolute Men wonder that all others are not like themselves.

It is not to be doubted of, but that they have their Reasons for it, whatever
they be. And they are the same by which they use to justify and excuse
themselves and all others, who are drawn to compliance with naughty Manners,
and corrupted by evil Examples.

It shall be my business at this time to see what some of them are, and to give
the strongest of them its full Answer.

We may conceive some of them to be these.

They say then, that as the World ever did, and now goes, to be Conscientious,
Pious and Virtuous is, (1.) To be Singular, and to call all men's Eyes, and
Talk, and Censures toward us. (2.) It is to be Solitary, Melancholy and
Cheerless, when others are diverted, courted and crowded with good Company.
(3.) It Is to be contemptible and ridiculous. (4.) To be reviled and persecuted.
(5.) It Is to undertake an impossible, or at least an extremely difficult, and
consequently painful thing. We have not time to speak any thing considerable
to all these Excuses: For the present we'll take only the three last, and of
them put the two first together more briefly: but the last of all, which seems
the best they have, and is by experience found most to deter Men from the
Resolutions of undertaking a virtuous Life, and bidding a final farewell to
vicious Manners and Company, is that which we shall hear and answer more
particularly.

(1.) In the first place then to abstain from the evil Manners and Lives of the
bad, to join our selves to and practice with the good; the first being the
generality of Men of all ranks and conditions, will expose us to much contempt,
hatred and ill Treatment. We shall meet with neither favor nor justice. Such
was the usage of the Christians by the Heathens. Here in the Text they are said
to be (...) speaking evil, viz. of the Christians. No doubt their Tongues, and
their Hearts, and their Actions went together; they reviled, despised, hated,
and ill used the Christians, because they would not comply with their
abominable Customs and Practices. And it is the same thing still in general
(though there may be some difference in degrees, and some Circumstances)
between the bad and the good, even of the same external Profession of Religion.
Of which some of the Causes in few words seem to be, The foolish and false
Opinions of Libertines (especially if great, who take licentiousness to be the
privilege and property of their rank) that religious and conscientious Men are
timorous, and mean spirited, because they dare not venture upon some Actions
and Courses, which they fear not; when it truly proceeds from their Judgment,
Choice, and a great Mind; or on the contrary they will have them to be proud
and self-conceited, thinking themselves wiser than every body else, and on
purpose contradicting common practice; whereas it is true Wisdom and good
Understanding, to fear God and depart from evil. It Is Piety to God, Charity and
Compassion to the World, prudent Care of their own greatest Interests. Finally,
they think, that the opposite Manners of good and virtuous Men reproach them
first; these by their courses of life which they take, in effect call them
Fools, or perverse, weak, or wilful. Which indeed is true: but it is the
necessary signification of their Principles which they cannot help: nor are
they willing if they could, because they hope it may at last prevail upon some
of them to be wiser, and to do better. At least they think themselves obliged
to appear in, and for the Cause of Religion and Virtue, and not any way to
contribute to the danger of the few good, or the confirmation of the many bad.

But let the Causes of this unjust usage of the Religious and Conscientious be
what they will, it is confessed that the Matter of Fact is true; but it is
denied to be a sufficient reason, either for the compliance of the good, or for
the wonder of the bad, that they do not.

As if there were no better reason for Virtue, and living well, than the
pleasing of Men; not one in 1000 of which have any reason at all for what they
are, ^^d do; but only humor, passion, appetite, and example of the most and
worst. It Is true, he that discreetly and conscientiously will not go with a
multitude to do evil, may be evil spoken of, and ill used by the blind,
inconsiderate, or cowardly; but can never deserve it.

It Is they, who are the foolish, and ofttimes perverse and wilful in their
pernicious Folly; and therefore their Qualities to be despised, and their
Persons pitied.

Let men give me better reason than I have for what they do, and I Will follow
and thank them too. But this contempt of those, who have no other reason, but
their confidence, number, and humor, or blind passions, and inclinations is to
be contemned; and will never move a Man of ordinary spirit or understanding,
who knows what, and for what reasons he ought to do any thing. And the truth is
the Argument for imitation of the many (great or small) in evil Manners to
avoid being neglected, contemned, despised, frowned upon, or hated, reaches
only the more mean and vulgar minds, whatever they appear; from which
notwithstanding, they ought to be secured by particularly showing and minding
them, of the folly and injustice of it, in respect of God, our Neighbor, and
our selves; and that there is no comparison to be made which is worst, to be
really an ill man, and to be ill-spoken of, or ill-used by ill men, through
pride and ill nature, or even by the better through mistake. For we'll take but
that one consideration of our own true Interest, and a prudent care of our
selves. Who would not take it for a Reproach, to be counted like a silly Sheep
to drown for company, or prefer being wicked and miserable, with a Multitude
before being innocent and happy alone, least they should scoff or be angry with
them for Cowardice, or breaking Company. Suppose nineteen of twenty should in a
Frolic draw their Blood, or drink Poison to the Ruin of Health, or endangering
Life, does any man think himself under the least Temptation to imitate such
folly and madness, least he should be taken for a Dastard, or an ill Companion?

These Similitudes are not impertinent, or improper, let men believe as they
please. For wicked Courses of Life continued in, are and will be, as surely the
death and destruction of our Souls, and often of our Bodies and Estates
altogether, as some Wounds and Potions are mortiferous to our Bodies only.

Add to this the considerations of Piety to God, and Charity to Men. The good
Man who reckons himself born for the Service of God, and to do good to others,
as well as enjoy it himself, reasons well when he thinks himself the more
obliged to honor God, and to preserve himself and others from the Infection of
bad Example, when their Number, Confidence, and Security is so great, as to
wonder, and despise, and treat hardly all those who are not like themselves:
the more the misery and folly, and impiety of the World increases, he thinks
himself the more bound to endeavor to lessen it, by saving himself, at least
if he can do no more. It Is the most seasonable and necessary then to be the
best, when the World is the worst, and men are generally running to their
ruin. Such is the Apostolical Admonition to Christians, to be harmless and
blameless the Sons Ephesians. 2. 15.
of God in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, and to shine as lights
in the World. Never more need of light, than in a gross and general Darkness,
nor of the Mounds and Banks of resolute, virtuous Examples, than when the
Floods of vicious ones threaten to drown all. After all this, we must not allow
or grant too much to this Plea and Excuse, for Conformity to evil Examples, and
bad Manners.

There are a great many wise and good Men (though too few) whose Commendation,
Favor and Assistance, we shall not fail of by our retreat and separation from
wicked Practices, though never so numerous and great, and then oft-times at
least, if our Nonconformity be as discreet and prudent, as it is sincere and
conscientious, those very Persons who from the Teeth outward, reproach and
slight us, will silently in their own thoughts esteem, and commend us; or if at
sometimes, when upon the rant, and in the heat of passion, they may inwardly
contemn and hate us too, yet at others in their sober Moods, when they are most
themselves, they may be of another opinion.

And I think it is not to be doubted, that the Text speaks here only very
generally; and that some even of the Gentiles, were struck and awakened by the
light, and beauty of the innocent, virtuous, spiritual and heavenly
Conversations of the Christians, and inwardly moved to esteem and admire them.
Nay after some time, some even of those, who at first wondered at the
Singularity and Novelty of their Manners were so affected, though they did not
yet leave their own. For that we may observe by the way, that men may in some
considerable Degree, approve, esteem, and love that in others which they do not
practice themselves; the one costing nothing, the other much pains and
solicitude: and that therefore sincere Piety and Virtue, have not so many and
fierce Enemies as from appearance may be thought. Besides, this excuse has no
place, when the greatness of our Condition, and our advantageous Circumstances
may be such, as to command Honor and Imitation of us; not to fear contempt or
ill-usage, for not imitating of others; when it is thought our part to give
Examples, not to follow. -- But as I have said, It is the last excuse of men
for going along with the Crowd of the vicious; namely, the difficulty and
painfulness of doing otherwise, that shall most enlarge this Discourse.

To follow a Multitude is always jolly and pleasant: but when our Nature sets
us going too, it is little less than necessary, and the contrary impossible.
Let us hear it at large.

2. They will then allege for themselves, that Virtue and Sanctity to our
Natures, such as they are born, and such as they are by long use and custom now
made, are in the highest degree difficult and laborious, and consequently
grievous and painful, and next to impossible; but Vice is easy, and thence
delightful and pleasant. And it is certain, that one of the most general, and
sure Causes of the beginning, and continuance of the Inclinations and Actions
of humane Nature, is first Facility, and then Pleasure. What is painful will
either be never attempted, or soon left off.

To speak more distinctly and properly: We acknowledge (say they) some
remainder of an appetite to Virtue, and moral good; but we find an hundred
others incomparably more forcible and strong.

Now to exalt Virtue to an universal Supremacy, and to preserve it there
constantly; to bring all other appetites and passions down to its subjection
and obedience, so as to receive all their motions, their very being, end, and
measures from its directions and commands, tell us whether, and how it may be
done? For the man void of all Honor and Love to God, nay an Hater of that most
perfect and holy Nature, to be his devout Adorer and Imitator; for the little
selfish Soul contracted to a point to become great, and widen it self to his
Country, Mankind, or even the Universe; for the malicious and sour Ill Nature
to be sweetened into Charity; for the proud and covetous to desire and value no
more of Honor, Power and Wealth, than what he may be able to manage to the
Honor of God, his Sovereign, and the good of others his fellow Subjects, and
for that very end; for the voluptuous and luxurious to scorn any bodily
Pleasures, or sensual Delights, any further than they are the Means and
Instruments of Piety, Charity, and our own spiritual and eternal Good; any
further than they are necessary or useful in this frail Life of Flesh, to
remove the Hindrances, or to procure the helps of Virtue and Beneficence, of
being and doing good. Thus to turn all the Motions, Inclinations; and Aversions
of our Souls upside down; To put off the old man, Ephesians. 4. 22, 24. Col. 3. 9, 10.
which is corrupt according to deceitful Lusts (as the Scripture phraseth it)
and to put on the new man, which is created after God in Righteousness and true
Holiness: This, this is an undertaking most difficult, irksome, tedious, if not
impossible to be ever performed; of which the small number of those, who but
seem to do it, and the vast multitude of those, that never think of it, is an
evident Argument.

And may we not well wonder at the first, who will adventure to turn head, and
with sore labor perpetually tugg against the Stream of Nature, and almost
universal Example? may we not well excuse those, who swim down easily with so
violent a Tide, or permit themselves to be carried by it?

This is the Sum of their last Plea (and I think the best they have) made use
of, by vicious and dissolute Men, for their wonder at those who will undertake
to be better, and defense of those who are as bad as themselves. And to this we
shall return, I hope, no insufficient Answer, and that in these particulars.

1. That Reformation and Conversion from Vice to Virtue, from Sin to Sanctity,
however it is effected, is not impossible, needs no other Evidence than the
eminent Examples of some, and the good ones of many. We confess that they are
but few, comparatively: yet in various instances and degrees more than bad Men
are willing to allow; who industriously diminish them, and will sometimes
pretend to believe, that there is hardly any in sincerity and reality, but only
for by-ends, and in outward appearance. But this is certainly false, and there
are those in the World, who after impartial Enquiry and mature Deliberation of
what is really true and good, (nor do they affect to be mistaken, as wilfully
vicious Men do) are convinced, that Virtue and Holiness are the Perfections of
their Nature, and the only Source of Felicity of Life; which leaves not there,
but entirely possesses them with the most inward inclinations of their heart
to it, and with the most ardent Aspires to the utmost perfection of it their
Nature can receive; and are so uneasy under the Delays, Hindrances and
Oppositions they meet withal in this State, that they have oft-times much ado
to secure their patience and dutiful Behavior to God Almighty. That against
the pretended impossibility.

2. For the great difficulty, pain; and pain we say, that it is not so great
and frightfull as is usually imagined. For,

(1.) We are not alone and helpless, far from it. There is, in this design and
resolution of rescuing our selves from the Dominion and Slavery of that evil
One, of blind Concupiscence, contemptible Appetites, and pernicious Lusts, and
of returning to our just Obedience to God, and Reason; there is, I say, one
greater for us than all that are against us. The Grace of God is always ready
to assist us. Nay, it is that which prevents us all in some degree or other
with good Counsels and Desires, and causes us to begin to look the right-way,
to bethink our selves, to be serious, and not to play the children all our
lives. This, if we cherish them, is more at hand still; and if conscious or
suspicious of our own weakness, we by earnest Prayers implore it, and by our
Endeavors concur with it, we shall not fail of such a supply, which together
with the Divine Providence disposing the circumstances of our lives, will
render the Work much easier than was at first thought, and in some time
delightful. The Heathens themselves were not ignorant of Divine Operations and
Influence upon the Souls of Men; but it makes a considerable, and in my Opinion
a very august part of the Doctrine of Revealed Religion. But,

(2) It is truly said, that this difficulty of change from bad to good; of
withdrawing from old but evil company and practice is principally at the
beginning: (...), etc. Things are indeed by the Divine Disposition come to that
pass, that Virtue is to be sweat for at the beginning; the way to it at first
is steep and rough, but when the Ascent is mounted, there opens a spacious and
smooth plain, which makes abundant recompense by its ease and delight. The
suite, the progress of a virtuous and holy state of Soul, perpetually
exercising itself in Acts of Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety, is full of
pleasures, the most sincere, penetrating, constant and durable without any
mixture, remorse, uncomfortable reflections, suspicions, or forebodings; nay
multiplied by remembrances and hopes, which Vice never dared to pretend to.

When the first brunt is over, and the Inclinations of the mind set right, and
restored to their primitive, just, and natural order and constitution (for
Virtue was first, Vice super-induced) the great pain and difficulty then will
be to commit a sin, to do a foolish or ill thing, and continue in it; the ease,
the pleasure will be to acknowledge, condemn, and forsake it. Then the scales
will be turned; not gratifying, obeying, submitting to a malapert Appetite, an
insolent Lust, a blind Passion; but the denial, command, suppression, steady
Government of all these by Religion and Reason, will be our glory, peace, and
intimate satisfaction. They have been the Heathens too, who have said such
things as these, of which sure many of these very Wanderers could not be
ignorant. Semita certe tranquillae per virtutem patet unica vitae. Much like
that of the Divine Poet, Great peace have all they that keep thy Law. Now if it
be thus (as most certainly it is) bad Men are mistaken in their plea, and much
out in their reckoning, when they fright themselves and others from a good and
virtuous life, by the painfulness of it. For the tediousness and pleasure of an
whole journey (such as our life is) would be very childishly estimated by the
first mile or two. And yet further, (3) I think it most certain (that we may
not shrink at the first onset) that the very first steps of change and
conversion from bad manners to good, some of the first Acts of Repentance:
(Such as are self-condemnation, indignation, sorrow, and contrition of heart
for our most beloved sins, firm resolution utterly to forsake them, followed
with watchfulness and endeavor, earnest prayers to God for forgiveness;) I
say, even these have that secret pleasure and satisfaction attending them,
which out-weighs their trouble and difficulty.

It Is true, to be disordered, ashamed, confounded and vexed at our wickedness
and folly, to despise and reproach our selves, to pull from our hearts with a
violent hand, that which has had so long and kind an abode there, and still
makes great resistance (for all cannot be done at once) this certainly by it
self is no desirable condition. But then it is blended with, or immediately
followed by a strange secret joy and satisfaction, diffused through the
intimate recesses of the Spirit, from a sense of the beginning, recovery, and
reconvalescency of our Souls; of their restitution to their natural
constitution at the first birth of Souls, of the assured reconciliation and
favor of Almighty God our Heavenly Father, and finally of an hopeful, nay,
safe condition to Eternity. So that take all together, a Man may with great
assurance affirm, that there is, or may be more of joy than sadness, more of
ease and comfort than pain and sorrow in Repentance, the sowrest diet a good
Man tastes of; and this proportion is still the greater, by how much the grief
for sin is more penetrating and pressing, as being an evidence of its
sincerity. A Penitent upon his knees sipping in his briny Tears as they
trickle, may take down a more delicious draught, than he, who quaffs off his
full Bowls filled with the choicest Liquors. Sincere Repentance is like relief
under a heavy burden, or the setting a disjoynted limb, or the recovering of
good appetite, clear health, and vigorous sense by a bitter Potion or two. So
is it, I say, even now found by experience as unhappy as our nature now is; and
those who are at present very hard to believe it, will never I am sure employ
their time better, than to make trial of it themselves.

All this, I doubt not, was most remarkably verified in holy David, one of the
greatest Souls that ever dwelt in an earthly Body, of which he himself be
witness in several Psalms; and it may be often observed in other good Men after
such a performance, who without any design never appear more easy and pleased
in themselves, and more innocently cheerful with others. Such then be the
second Answer to the plea of the extreme difficulty, pains and pain in
conversion and reformation, in correcting this propension of depraved Nature;
and quitting the most numerous evil examples: Namely, that we have the Grace of
God to assist us, and render it more easy; that the difficulty is principally
at the beginning and first onset; and yet that, even there the pleasure and
ease far outweigh the pain and labor; and finally, that in the suite of a
virtuous state of Soul exercises and actions, there are pleasures sincere,
deep, constant, and durable, and but the sample and commencement of infinitely
greater still. The difficulty and pain will lie on the side of Vice; and that
it is most true, that a sincere and generous good Man may find it more hard and
vexatious to him to be brought to do an evil thing, than the most bold and
accustomed sinner to do a good one. Go we on further, and,

3. Suppose if we please that which is false, the utmost difficulty, labor,
and suffering throughout the whole course of a virtuous and conscientious life;
nay, suppose we may lose life itself for their sake, and in their cause; have
we never heard of any thing hereafter? or have we satisfied our selves with a
demonstration that we are not concerned in that? Will there be no reward for
the righteous, no vengeance for the wicked? had not these very Gentiles
themselves, their Elysian Fields for the just, their Tartara, Styx and Acheron,
and various sorts of never ending punishments for their wicked too? Had not the
Jews, many of whom were infected with the Heathen Manners, their Paradise for
the Holy, and their Gehinnom for sinners; if they did not believe the Fable,
they assuredly did believe the moral of it, viz. the happy state of the good,
and the miserable one of the bad, and that everlasting too, as might be shown.

As for Christians, do they not know, that in the day when God shall judge the
World by Jesus Christ, he will render to every Man according to his deeds; to
those who patiently continue in well-doing eternal life, and to those who obey
unrighteousness, indignation, wrath, tribulation, and anguish? Has not Truth
itself told them that there is a time when the righteous shall go into
everlasting life, but the wicked into everlasting punishment? we need not stand
to reason upon such concessions. The case is plain what we ought to do, if we
have but common sense and understanding. Is it not a most contemptible and
pitiable condition we are in, if we suffer our selves to perish everlastingly,
because we will not take the pains of a few days to be saved? to fall into a
state of meanness and misery, whence no redemption, through mere laziness or
cowardice; having not the heart to encounter some difficulty, or courage to
bear some present pains and pain, though it were the pulling out of an Eye or
cutting off an Hand? Oh! where is the wisdom of such, who easily swim down in a
pleasant stream, which runs into a dead Sea, or a lake of Fire and Brimstone?
Where is their reason, who forewarned, dance on merrily with a jolly crowd in a
smooth way, till at last they tumble altogether into the mouth of a Volcano,
when they were an hundred times advised, and entreated to take a certain path;
at its entrance, indeed more solitary, rugged, and a little toilsome (if you
please:) But which in a short time would bring them into a place beyond all
imagination delicious, furnished with the most agreeable and excellent company,
eternally secure from any disturbance from within or without? Whose part is it
now to wonder? are the riotous, dissolute, and vicious to wonder at the folly
and weakness (as they think) of the pious, virtuous, and well-governed; or
these at the wilful madness or sottishness of the former? These no doubt, if
all be true that has been said.

But some who have the greatest reason to fear, will not believe so great
severity (so they term it) of Almighty God to sinners, though they are willing
to believe his kindness and bounty to the good. Men can believe almost what
they please, and that against the most universal Tradition, Reason, and
Conscience of Mankind. But they have some reason: what is that? Sinners cannot
hurt God, and do but enjoy themselves. Is this said in earnest? or is it only
because they will not openly own Infidelity? But,

(1) They would hurt God Almighty if they could, and every one else; were their
power answerable to their will, God himself would not be safe or happy. Every
knowing and wilful Sinner, who opposes or complies not with God's most wise
and beneficial Government of the World by his Laws and Decrees, by his Commands
and Appointments, has the Insolence, and does what he can, to make God and all
the World besides, the Ministers of his Personal pleasures and lusts, and is
the Enemy of God, and all that he has made. And I think such an one deserves
the severest punishment, and so does all humane Government judge and act too.
The very will and purpose alone is a tendency to such mischief; it is a partial
and inchoative cause, and is accordingly to be used; of which further reasons
may be still given. But,

(2.) According to this reasoning God must not reward his faithful Servants who
love him; for they can as little profit God as the rebellious and malicious
hurt him. If God accept the will for the deed, and reward it too, why may he
not punish the will for the deed likewise? And,

(3.) I do not see, but that the Act of will is the only proper Act of a Man,
and that all external effect is from God, when and in what measure he pleases.
So that in proper speaking, a sinner hurts no body; but wills to do it. He is
indeed inwardly malicious, proud, careless of every one but himself, or
gratifying his own lusts; that these have any external effect more or less,
comes from another hand.

Lastly, he can hardly seem in earnest, who asks why vicious Men should be
punished so severely only for enjoying themselves: Nevertheless, because we do
not know how childish, trifling, and foolish Vice, may indeed render some Men,
even in things of the vastest importance, we say that (to take the three
capital and general ones, malice, pride, and sensuality, impiety, injustice,
covetousness, and an hundred others, being only their kinds or instruments) the
malicious Man delights in mischief and would do nothing else too, if God would
permit or rather lend him his power for such a purpose. The proud Man and the
envious (which seems composed of pride and ill nature) would have every one
under his feet, and may affect superiority in every thing to such a degree, as
to permit none to enjoy any good thing but himself, if his will and desires
were attended by an equal power to execute them. The sensualist (who seems most
intended in this excuse) if he will enlarge and indulge his carnal appetites
and lusts, would command and force all that belongs to all Men to satisfy
them, if he dared and could. Nor can he generally gratify intemperance,
luxury, and wantonness without Instruments and Companions, whom he makes and
keeps as bad as himself; and never without the mischief of a bad example; and
of all this were some Roman Emperors examples, as notorious, as odious, and
miserable in the end.

Besides a Sensualist is unjust to God, to others, to himself; all have a right
to the use of any power, which God has endued any one withal, so far as it
will go. All power is to do good to its utmost extent, like as every member of
the body ('it is St. Paul's excellent comparison) were it endued with
understanding, would be obliged to do its utmost for the greatest good of the
whole; not to be in any degree useless or mischievous. The Possessour has only
the privilege to judge of Persons, Seasons, and Measures, and accordingly to
distribute, God is the Master and Owner of all our faculties, abilities,
enjoyments, we are but his Stewards. The Sensualist impaireth, oppresses, or
abuses those powers and faculties, which God has given him for his honor and
service, for his own and others, especially spiritual and eternal good. He
deprives himself of perfection, tranquillity, happiness, a thousand of times
more than he enjoys; and if chastisement and punishment be just for those who
wilfully murder or maim their Bodies, (so it may be by some mark of Infamy)
or, who will idle away their time and strength, because their labor and use is
lost to the public and themselves too, why not for those who do the same to
their Souls?

The immediate reason of all reward and punishment seems to be the maintenance,
encouragement, propagation, of any principle, power, or action, which is good
and beneficial, and the restraint, discouragement, oppression of that which is
evil and mischievous, either privatively or positively; and such surely at
least is the wilful, neglect, or omission, and consequently impairing of the
use of that power any Man has to serve God and do good withal; much more the
abuse and conversion of it to dishonor and displease God, to oppose and hinder
his Service, and to do mischief with it.

The slothful Servant was thrown into the same kind, though perhaps not the
same degree of Matthew. 24. 51. and 25. 30.
punishment, with the evil Servant. And the evil Servant too was he, who eat
and drank with the drunken, as well as he who smote his Fellow Servant, He that
did but enjoy himself, (as the phrase is) as well as he who abused others.

The reason of the Punishment of impenitent Sinners, after this Life, is not
their Amendment that we read in Scripture; but the manifestation of the Wisdom,
Sanctity, Justice and Goodness of God, in the Government of the World, and for
Confirmation and Prevention in others. For Angels and Saints shall be
Spectators and Adorers of the Righteous Judgment of God, by Jesus Christ, in
that great and terrible Day of the Lord.

The best reason of the everlasting Continuance of the miserable State of the
Condemned, seems to be the continuance of the sinful State of their Souls:
Their inward Dispositions, and Inclinations, and Wills, being in no sort
changed for the better by their Sufferings. Which we need not wonder at, since
we see here such multitude of Examples, in whom afflictions and sufferings in
extremity alter nothing of their inward Manners: not the loss of parts and
endowments, not Ignominy, Poverty, Prisons and Gaols, not corporeal Diseases,
and grievous Tortures and Pains; nay, finally, not Death it self, for heinous
Crimes.

You may hear them bitterly complain of their misfortunes, pains, unhappiness;
but not a word of their sins. You shall see them wriggle and turn a Thousand
ways for their Diversion, Ease, and Deliverance, but not to the humble
Confession of their Sins, though they know as well as the Damned are like to do,
that they are the Cause of their Sufferings; not to sincere Resolution of
Amendment, earnest Prayers to an offended God, not only for Pardon, but for
Purification of their Hearts, according to that admirable Pattern of that Pious
Prince holy David, Ps. 51.

If it otherwise happen in this Life, as it does sometimes, it is to be
attributed to the special Operations of the Grace of God upon such Occasions.
Without which, even in this present State, to him who considers things, the
habitual Change of our Natures, may well seem impossible against the Pelagians;
how much more then in the State of the Damned hereafter.

What sufficient reason Origin had so peremptorily to determine, that the
hideous Sufferings of the Damned, would naturally force them, as it were, to
Repentance, (by which, I mean, an inward Charge of the very Inclinations of the
Soul, to love God, that all perfect Nature, and Goodness, or the Sanctity and
Purity of his Nature, above all other things) I know not.

And Plato himself, from whom it Phaed.
is like, he had the first notice of this Doctrine, does teach, that as some
wicked Men might be (...), capable of being restored to a virtuous State of
Soul, by their Sufferings in the miserable State hereafter: So others there
were (...) incurable, and consequently, to continue there Eternally, and never
to come out from that Infernal Prison.

But why Plato should make such a difference between the miserable there, I
know not, excluding any supernatural Operation. If Sufferings naturally in some
men altered their Opinions, and Inclinations of Soul, by bringing them to
reflection and consideration first, why should they not have that effect in all,
sooner or later, in some time or other?

And for my part, I do not see how any man can hope for an End of Punishment
there, till he can prove, that God will sometime afford his effectual Grace,
for his Conversion, and the Change of his vicious and corrupt Nature. And when
he can prove the one, I think, he may be assured of the other. For as God will
not there any longer suffer the wicked, his Enemies, to be as well, or better
treated, than the Righteous his affectionate Servants, as they seem to be here
in outward Respects: So will he never keep a good Man in such a bad place and
company.

Perhaps some part of this Discourse may seem too long a Diversion; but a
little spice of Skepticism or Infidelity from a sculking Objection, is so apt
to abate or defeat the force of all Arguments, and Persuasions to be good, that
I was not unwilling to mention it, (for I am not the maker of it) and at the
same time sufficiently to satisfy it, as I hope I have done. Though more amply
and particularly to prove many of these things, will require more time and
words, than is meet to be spent in this Presence. And let this be then the
third Answer, to the best Plea of the wonderer at the good, and the justifier
of bad Men and Manners.

The Answer in few words is this, That supposing the whole Course of a
conscientious and virtuous Life, to be very painful and grievous, which is
false; yet it is a folly and madness which deserves the greatest wonder and
pity, for the avoiding of that, to lose an everlasting Happiness, and to plunge
our selves into an eternal Misery, which is not Talk only, but Truth and
Justice, if there be any God or Providence in the World.

To a man of a comprehensive Reason, Justice and Generosity, may be added
further, and beyond all the rest. A

4. Answer, which I must not now insist upon; but only in very few words, say.
To please, serve, and honor God by love and obedience, to contribute what we
can to the common Good and Happiness, by all virtuous Life and Actions (Vice is
useless or mischievous, a common Nuysance) is certainly a Duty and an
Obligation, which no Difficulty, Pains or Suffering in this Life, can discharge
us from.

I do not understand how all our Duty is derived from our own Interest,
although, I know they are inseparable. To serve and please God, and to do good
to others, merely for our own sakes, and to refuse to undergo any thing for
theirs, when necessary, seems neither ingenuous nor reasonable. And I am sure
it seemed so to that great Heathen, Tully. As if such things, or rather
nothings as we, were more to be considered than the Infinite God, and all the
World besides; when we may as well weigh a single Atome against the Universe.
Nor seems there any difference between a good and bad Man, in respect of their
Will, but only of their Understanding, if both of them make themselves their
entire ultimate End. The one takes the right course to be happy, the other the
Wrong: But this last is mistaken only, and would have done as the first, if he
had known better. And even the Man of Courage and Generosity, would take it for
a great Reproach to be told, that he fights only for a little Wages or Honor
either, and would not venture upon a Wound or Death it self, to save his
Prince, and Country, and to repress an insolent and malicious Enemy, who
pleases himself in the Destruction of all Mankind, to gratify his boundless
Lusts. Which with many other Instances is an Argument, that the Soul of Man at
present, is not incapable of so great and noble a Quality. I am sure our divine
Religion has taught us as much, both by Precept and Example, when it commands
us to love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves. Nor do I see
reason to find a Figure in the known Expressions of Moses, and St. Paul. To
such a Greatness of Soul we ought to aspire.

Notwithstanding we are to know, which may be proved even to a Demonstration
from the Nature of God, and of the Soul, that our Duty and Interest, our
perfection of Nature and Happiness of Life are inseparable, except for a Moment
or two in this Life, for Exercise and Improvement of Virtue or other Ends,
which vanishes into nothing compared with Eternal Duration.

It is impossible that the wicked should be happy or not miserable, and that
the virtuous and good should be miserable or not happy. As impossible as that
there should be no God at all: or that God should not be infinitely powerful,
wise and good, and consequently distributively just.

And now, I have said all I have at present, in Answer to the wonderers, and
their best reason for vicious Manners, Practices, Customs and Examples; and
perhaps the general Heads of all that can be said, and what I think cannot be
answered again, by those who will act like Men, and be governed by Truth and
Reason.

But as for those who disclaim or burlesque their own most excellent Nature,
and will abandon themselves to blind and haughty Self-will, Humors, Lusts, and
Passions; who will be like the Horse or Mule, that wants understanding; I
leave them to other Arts and Methods of Persuasion, and to the Mercy of God
Almighty, which we will not confine. All that can be done for them on our
parts, is to pity and pray for them, as we do daily, when we say, Thy Kingdom
come, thy Will be done, That God may at last rule over, and in the Hearts of
all the Sons of Men. He can when he pleases work most effectually upon the
Souls of the most senseless and obdurate Sinners; even upon those who scorn all
Instruction as a mean, and hate understanding as a troublesome thing; even upon
those who most foolishly take it for a Point of Wisdom, and Greatness of Heart,
to make a Mock at Sin; even upon those finally, who with the Heathen Idolaters
in the Text, think it strange that all Men run not with them to the same Excess
of Riot, speaking Evil of them because they will not.

SERMON III.
PSALM. XXXII. 5. I said, I will confess my Transgression unto the Lord.
I Am a while to treat of a Duty of Religion, both revealed, and, as I think,
natural, which perhaps passes among the wise and brave of this World, for a
weak and mean thing, and an effect of superstition rather than Religion: But to
me it seems just contrary, so qualified and directed, as shall presently be
mentioned. Confession of Sin to Almighty God, has very evident Arguments of
many excellent Qualities.

For, is it not a sign of a just Honor for God, and all his Laws made known,
by Reason or Revelation? Is it not a Mark of a generous Love of the Truth, and
that a Man will own his Faults and Follies, though to his present Disadvantage,
and that he is more ashamed to commit a Sin than confess it? Is it not a proof
of great probity and strength of mind, for a man not only to permit, but
command his Conscience (and others too if there be occasion) to report to him
all the Truth, and nothing but the Truth concerning himself; to set all his
Faults and Infirmities before him, and not to conceal, excuse, or justify any,
because he is not willing to mend any, or has no concern for the Health and
Ornament of his Nature? Are not these, and such like Qualities, highly
laudable? On the contrary, are not a vulgar Carelessness and Insensibility of
our Manners and Actions, vain, self-conceit, arrogance, affectation of
appearing to ones self, and others, something worthy, rather than being so
indeed; and above all, the contempt of the Word, and Commandments of Omnipotent
Goodness, Wisdom and Sanctity, by a weak, ignorant and sinful Creature; I say,
are not these sordid and truly contemptible?

Nor does this confession of sin to the Supreme Deity seem to me less a part of
natural Religion, than Prayers and Praises to him; though we have little
mention of it among the Heathen Moralists.

And as this is Truth in it self, so we find that the greatest Souls who have
had the Knowledge of the true God, have always behaved themselves with Truth
and Decency toward him; acknowledged their Sins, thrown themselves at his
Feet, and humbly implored his Pardon and Grace. Nor was there ever recorded a
more eminent Example of this than David, as great a Prince as Saint.

He wanted not surely that Courage which is so magnified and adored by the
World, who when scarce got out of his Childhood, killed the Lion and the Bear;
and, when a Stripling armed only with a Sling, ventured upon the prodigious
Bulk of a Giant, a Man of War from his Youth, and laid him dead at his Feet,
and returned to the Camp, lugging his Head, the Trophee of his Victory; who
from a simple Swain was advanced to the Alliance, and then Possession of a
Throne for his Prowess and Wisdom. And yet, lo this is the Man who cries out
(Psalm 51.) Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness;
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot put all my
transgressions. Wash me thoroughly from my sin, for I acknowledge my
transgression, and my sin is ever before me. Against thee only have I sinned,
etc. This is the man who, in this Psalm, proclaims the Blessedness of the
Innocent, or the Pardoned, and tells us, That while he kept silence his bones
waxed old through his roaring all the day long; This is he, finally, who in the
Verse of the Text, acknowledged his sins unto God; who said and did
accordingly, That he would confess his transgressions unto the Lord.

And because it is, and ought to be a daily Religious Duty enjoined, and
recommended in our public and private Devotion and Worship, it ought also,
more especially, to be well understood, prudently directed, and shown to be
most agreeable to natural Reason and Justice, as well as expressly commanded and
constantly practiced by good Men in the Holy Scripture.

Accordingly, we shall choose out three things for the Heads of our Discourse
concerning it. First, the Nature and Parts of it: Secondly, the Rules for it:
Thirdly, the Reasons of it.

1. And very briefly, in a more solemn and deliberate Confession of Sin,
especially (and it is best to take into its signification more than one single
Act) three Three Parts.
parts may be observed, and that in this Order.

1. Self-accusation: The Penitent having first enquired into his past Temper
and Behavior, consulted his Conscience concerning his Duty, and observed his
Aberrations from the Rules of it: He proceeds as a Person different from
himself, to accuse and bring an Endictment against himself, and here he acts
like a Plaintiff.

2. But Secondly, Follows an ingenuous and free Acknowledgment of the Truth, of
what with the greatest Impartiality he judges to have been bad in him, or ill
done by him. Neither by Superstition or Timidity vainly frighting, nor by
Boldness or Partiality favoring himself. Here he acts the part of a guilty
Defendant, and an upright Witness against himself.

3. Thirdly, He pronounces himself guilty and deserving of the Punishment,
which God has threatened for the Transgression of his just Laws. And so he
leaves himself to God, whether he will execute the Sentence, and punish him as
he deserves, or else be pleased upon his humble Confession, and other parts of
a complete Repentance, to show him mercy, reprieve and forgive him.

Thus the true Penitent in this part of Repentance termed Confession, acts as a
Prosecutor, guilty Defendant and Witness, and an inferior Judge.

In such manner may be, in short, distinctly conceived the Nature and Parts of
Confession.

2ly, The Rules follow. Some of which may be these;

1. Let our Confession be made with exact Truth. We are at no time and with no
Person to say, that which is not true: Least of all, when we address our selves
to God. This fault can only be on one side, viz. by confessing those things to
be sinful in us, which are not so, or to deserve a greater Punishment than
they truly do. For if we falsely think any thing really sinful in us, not to be
so, we do not confess that at all. The number and evil Deserts of our Sins, are
truly great enough in themselves; we need not to multiply or magnify them in
our Confession by imagination and passion. As those (for example) have always
seemed to me to do, who in their Prayers acknowledge all their Actions, before
their Conversion to be sins, i. e. before Grace was generally the ruling
Principle in their Hearts, or their lives were governed by their Consciences.
For a bad man generally speaking, may now and then drop a good Action.

Nay there are those who have been so humble (which is excellent when it speaks
truth, and not despisable even when it is mistaken, if sincere) in their
Confession, as to say, That all the very best Actions of the best Men, after
their Conversion are sins too, but pardoned in Christ, which I do not well
understand.

Defective indeed they may be (and so is the most perfect love to God in the
highest Angel; for no Creature can honor and love him in that degree which he
deserves) defective I say they must needs be, but not sins. He who loves God
with all his might, strength, and understanding, as I doubt not has been done
often by pious Souls, surely sins not, nor need ask any pardon for it, though
he may justly acknowledge, that the greatest affection our hearts are capable
of to him, are infinitely below the infinite Excellency of his Nature. The
Confession of the neglect of a more than Jewish Observation of the Sabbath, in
some men's Phrase is upon this account blameable: but such an Observation of
the Lord's Day, and other Festivals, as is prescribed by the Church of England,
in one of their pious and grave Canons, is most agreeable to Christian Piety
and Prudence, and the general wilful neglect of it, more than savours of
Profaneness. There are other strange things too, which in the depth of a
seeming or mistaken humility have been uttered, especially in some men's ex
tempore Confession, without countenance from Scripture rightly interpreted, and
shocking the common Reason of Mankind. Numerous also are the Instances of this
Error among the Romanists, who out of ignorance or design, unreasonably,
oft-times rack and vex men's Consciences. But these things, need not to be too
subtly searched into. It is too much, that the best of us have too many, and
too great faults to confess to Almighty God.

The most usual Causes of this Fault in confession is, such a degree of
Self-revenge, Indignation, and Contempt against our selves, as to cause us to
forget Truth and Justice to our selves, as they would ordinarily be the Causes
of false Judgment on the worst side against others, whom we are apt in such
Fits to accuse of much more than they are guilty of. But of this Cause (though
surely it be a fault) I am almost tempted to wish we could see more.

But there is a second Cause very dangerous, and that is a Design to flatter
Almighty God.

It is not impossible but, that some without reflection may conceit, that the
Honor they do to God, by confessing all, and more than all the sins they are
guilty of, may procure a Connivance for some sins, though they never forsake
them. It is enough, or very well to load themselves with the heaviest
Accusation, though they do not, or perhaps think they cannot grow better. Much
like a great Debtor, who will readily own greater Sums than he really owes, if
for that his Creditor will permit him to run further into his Debt, and not be
angry.

But the most frequent Cause of this Miscarriage is Superstition, i. e. a
groundless Timidity, by reason of mistake in the Nature and Degrees of Sin*
which is a thing of bad consequence; when our Judgments are deceived, and our
Affections abused; we may swallow that which is truly wicked, and greatly
mischievous, and be frighted at that which is really so far from being evil,
that it may be good and commendable. Let our confession therefore of sin be
truly informed and well advised: Which is the first Direction.

2dly, The second is to confess our sins most impartially. As we must not on
the one side make or magnify our Sins through Self-revenge, Flattery of
Almighty God, Superstition or Timidity: So we must on the other hand take great
care, that we do not excuse, connive at, or extenuate any. Such are our most
profitable and delightful Sins; Those which by corrupt Nature, or evil Custom
and Practice are deepest in our Hearts, and therefore most difficult and
painful to forsake: We must be in all sincerity most willing to see,
acknowledge and amend what is truly faulty in our selves, and what is most so.

The Design of a true hearted Christian is to be better, and his hearty desire
is to reform universally, and in order to that, he must know what is really
amiss, and out of order. Like the wounded or sick Man, who longs for his Cure
and Health. He is not willing to conceal or forget any of his Ailments from
himself, or his Physician. So far from that, that he beseeches his Physician's
care, as well as uses his own observation to discover all, least through
ignorance or neglect, something may prove fatal to him.

And what a foolish thing is it to say nothing of, or slubber over some sweet,
some darling Sins we are loath to leave, when we are upon our knees before God?
He needs not our confession for his information. He sees the most secret and
dark Corners of our Hearts, and knows full well whether we hide any thing there
or no. He observes whether we deal truly or hypocritically with him, and if he
find the last, will reject us and our confession too. Follow we that great
Example David. Cleanse me from my secret sins (Psalm 19. 33.) prays that holy
Man; and see if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting. He that thus prayed for the discovery of all his sins without
reserve, no doubt in his Confession spared none.

3dly, A third Rule of our Confession is, that it be performed seriously and
affectionately. The confession here meant, is not uttering a few words with our
Mouths, though never so good: but it is in the mind and spirit, though we
should not speak a syllable. Nor is it to be slight and careless, as if it were
a thing of no great moment, whether it were true or no, and we indifferent
whether it were done at all. No! It is at the same time to be expressly assented
to by our Judgment, owned by our Consciences, and thence pass further into our
affections. We are to be really troubled, ashamed, disordered and tremble at
the mention and remembrance of our sins, according to the various Degrees and
Aggravations. We are to be affected with them in our Devotion, when our own
Conscience only can accuse us, as if men of Gravity and Authority should openly
and publicly charge us. Nay (setting aside the difference which the hopes of
pardon here may make) as if God himself instead of our Consciences, was judging
of us. And do we think at that terrible Day, when Jesus Christ shall appear
with all the Ensigns of Justice and Majesty, with Rewards and Punishments in
his hands, we shall be looking another way? Shall we then stand unconcerned,
and confess our sins in such a manner, as if neither God nor our selves need
take any notice of it. No, then with sinking Hearts, and trembling Knees, we
shall see, believe and confess, that we are miserable Sinners indeed. And yet
all in vain, because it proceeds only from the Terror of the Sentence and
Punishment just ready to be executed, not from the hatred of sin, from the
dread of the Judge; not from the love of him, or hatred of our Crimes. But now
in this Day of Grace, our passionate Confession and Cries from a truly penitent
(that is changed) Heart to the Judge of all the World, that indeed we have
presumptuously, and ungratefully offended against his holy Laws, and that he
would have mercy upon us miserable offenders, shall through Heavens Goodness
find a gracious Audience and Acceptance. Of such temper, and in such manner
should be our confession in the third place.

4ly, Our confession ought to be suitable and proportionable. I mean our
confessions is to be proportionable to our sins. Thus we ought between God and
our own selves, most frequently and passionately to confess those sins which
are in themselves really the greatest, and which we most frequently and
deliberately commit. To be always with great vehemence, filling our Prayers
with smaller Faults (though none are to be slighted and indulged, for small
sins known, weaken conscience and make way for greater) but more rarely or
faintly to mention those sins, which are truly more provoking, is to offend
against this Rule.

Thus to confess impertinent and wandering Thoughts in Religious Duties, vain
use of God's Name (though these things are by no means to be allowed or
neglected) but never to say any thing of Pride, Covetousness, Injustice, Fraud,
Hypocrisy, Malice, or the like, or so coldly as if we scarce thought them any
sins; I say, this is to perform this Duty with great indiscretion if not
Hypocrisy. For it is a shrewd sign we can be very favorable to sin, when it
is agreeable or profitable, and therefore painful to subdue and mortify it.
When we are clamorous against the sins we get little by, or which cost us
little of expense, or pains to forsake: but otherwise silent or soft; it is
very suspicious that there is not in us that hearty Zeal against sin, which we
would seem to be possessed withal.

5ly, And lastly, Our confession will be the more commendable if it be
voluntary, and from pious Motions in our heart allowed by our judgments, when
we freely open and disclose our Souls to God, and earnestly desire witness, and
judge God and our Consciences to inform and remember us of our Faults. As may
be more especially done at those times which are set apart for a longer and
more deliberate performance of this Religious Duty.

This is better surely than when our confession is thrust upon us by a
persecuting guilty Conscience, which we fly from as much as we can; or when it
is extorted from us by the urging Interrogatories, or undeniable Proofs of our
Friends or Enemies, and then uttered with coldness and indifferency.

Such are some of the Directions or Rules for our Confession, which was the
second general Head.

3ly, The third is some good for the frequent performance of this Duty of
Religion. They are many.

1. First, By a serious affectionate and impartial Confession of our sins, we
give God and his Laws their just Honor. At the same time we acknowledge and
bewail our evil doings, in sinning against God and transgressing his Laws, we
proclaim the Righteousness of both; nay the Justice of our Punishment which God
has, or may inflict upon us. When we accuse, confess, condemn our selves, we
justify God in his Nature, Commands and Dealings toward us, when we seriously
cry guilty, confess what we have done and deserve, we at the same time declare
that God's Nature is holy, his Precepts right, and all his Dealings with his
Creatures just and unblameable. Like that great Example of Penitents, Psalm 51.
Against thee only have I sinned and done this evil in thy sight, that thou
may be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge.

2ly, This confession of sin is very edifying to others, both good and bad,
when it is performed publicly or with others, and owned our Duty in secret
too. We hereby do somewhat considerable toward the Confirmation of the good,
and Reformation of the bad. The mischief we have been the Authors of by our
naughty Example, we undo again in part by a free and serious Confession; we
thereby tell the World it was not our discretion, or commendation to have
lived, and done as we have done formerly. No! 'twas our folly and shame. We
call now to them not to follow us, or if they have adventured after us, to
retreat presently. If they have imitated us in sinning, they would do it now in
confessing, and condemning themselves.

4ly, This confession of sin is very acceptable to good Men; nay, I may say,
generally to bad Men too, who have some kindness and good liking for Virtue and
Piety: but are so entangled and captivated in vicious Courses, that they cannot
find in their heart to take the pains to leave them. The conversion of a
sinner, of which free and humble Confession is a fair step and a great mark, is
certainly the joy of Angels and Saints. Nothing more melting, than the hearty
and unaflected Confession of a Penitent sinner. It is a sign of so many amiable
Qualities, (as sincere Piety, Humility, etc.) that a good Man cannot observe it
without joy, and even a bad Man without some motion and tenderness. It is a
more than ordinary pleasure, to hear a pious Soul sighing out his confession of
his sins, and desires of grace, and pardon before God, when he thinks no body
hears, or is regardless whether they do or no.

5ly, This confession of sin is a very comfortable Duty to us. What calmness,
ease, and secret comfort is diffused through the Soul of a devout Man, after he
has opened and disburthened himself by a sincere and humble Confession to
Almighty God? His conscience softly tells him, that he has not in vain
disclosed his heart; that he has not confessed his faults to the deaf Ear of
too rigid a Master, or severe Father; that God as great, and as high as he is,
regards the Soul in such a posture with great kindness and compassion; and that
now the offender may safely put himself into his hands. If in our Confession we
are conscious to our selves, of no Hypocrisy or Formality, it creates an
humble confidence in God, with a free resignation and submission of our selves
to him, notwithstanding our former sins, and contracted guilt. Nor is this
confidence vain. For so far as our confession is a sign and exercise of real
Goodness and Piety in us, it does render us more capable of his Favor, and
truly acceptable to him.

6ly, Confession of our sins, such as I have directed, is a Duty of Devotion of
great benefit to us, and that many ways. As,

1. It is a certain and notable means for preserving us in that Degree of
Holiness and Goodness we may have attained to, and of making further progress
therein continually.

For as it brings to remembrance our former known sins (nor are we only to
confess new sins, but old ones, and the same very often, especially if more
heinous, nor even to forget them to our lives end) so it discovers to us many
before unknown. Before especially a more deliberate Confession, we are to
reflect upon, and examine our selves carefully, and that will hardly be done
without some further knowledge and discovery of our faults, and (which is of
great use) of their temptations and occasions. And even in the times themselves
of our devout Confession, usually the temper of our minds is such, that some
sins then may first appear, which before we had never observed or suspected.
Now all this is necessary for our amendment, and the prevention of the like
again. For how shall we avoid that, which we never knew or have forgot. Add to
this that every serious and hearty (not customary) Confession, impresseth upon
us some more dislike and aversion from the sins confessed. Insomuch, that by
the frequent practice of it, we may at last become utterly ashamed to confess
our sins so often, but not to forsake them; to sin on in a round, perpetually
committing and confessing the same sins by turns. Our consciences will be apt
so to reproach, that we shall leave off either to commit or confess. Thus as an
hearty and unconstrained Confession is a sign and effect of an ingenuous and
generous Dislike and Hatred of sin, so does it confirm, heighten and increase
it.

2. Another benefit and advantage of this Religious Duty, is a right
Understanding, a true and just Opinion of our selves; to know what is bad and
defective in our selves, as well as what is good and useful. This is one
principal Branch of that most excellent Grace humility, which contains many
other. The great Error of the World is on that hand, to be arrogant and
presumptuous. Foolish Self-love renders us wilfully blind, so as to see no
faults, spy no defects, observe no sins in our selves. We deny all, or excuse
all, or justify all.

We all know the Behaviors of the Pharisee, and the Publican in their Devotion
(Luke 18. 9.) They both went up into the Temple to pray. The Pharisees Prayer
was so far from any confession, that it was all boasting God, I thank thee that
I am not as other men, etc. The Publicans contrary, was all Confession, Shame,
Sorrow, begging for Mercy. He stands a far off with a dejected Countenance: He
with a revengefull hand beats his Breast, and sighs out, O Lord, be merciful
to me a sinner. Our Savior tells us what was the effect. I tell you this man
went down rather justified than the other. As the Pharisees Self-conceit and
Arrogance, made him pray in such a manner as he did, so his Prayer made him
more arrogant still: It could not but increase his presumptuous Opinion of
himself, to reckon up, and that before God himself, all his Religious Qualities
and Actions without taking notice of but one small fault, and to have compared
himself with one so despicable in his Eyes, as the poor Publican. It is
reasonable to believe, he went away bigger and statelier from his Prayers, than
he came to them. On the contrary, as the Publican's Behavior, Posture and
Prayer proceeded, no doubt, from a due Sense of his sin and guilt, and
consequent humility: So did it likewise dismiss and send him away with a
greater Degree of it. He saw that before in himself, which made him cry out
with shame and indignation against himself, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner.

And doubtless he saw it yet more, and with deeper impression upon his heart,
for having made his short but most passionate Confession.

4. This confession of sin makes us less censorious and contemptuous of others,
more backward to publish their Faults or to insult over them. We shall not be
so ready to censure, talk of, despise others, when we are accustomed to look
upon, and justly and humbly to acknowledge what is as bad or worse, at least
bad enough in our selves. We are not so forward to reproach others, when we
permit our own Consciences to reproach our selves. We are loath to condemn, at
least to treat others with Wrath and Contempt; when if we are impartial, we see
too much cause to do the like by our selves. No men so ready to proclaim and
aggravate other men's Faults, as those who take the least notice of their own.
He who knows his own defects and miscarriages as he pities himself, so is he
apt to do to others. Most men esteem and despise others comparatively, or as
thy judge them superior or inferior to themselves in worthy, and deserving
Qualities and Performances. We take the Measures of others from our selves. Now
he that observes most Infirmities and Faults in himself, will think himself
less above or more under Men, than he who though ignorance or self-conceit,
sees no blemish nor blame in himself.

The former often despises himself comparatively with others; the latter
foolishly despises every one besides himself. In the Example just now alleged
how haughtily does the Pharisee hold up his Head, and with what Contempt does
he throw his Eye upon the Publican? This Publican, says he: But we hear no
such Language from the Publican, who in truth had more reason to have derided
the Ignorant and Hypocritical Pharisee.

5ly, And lastly, This confession makes us more sensible of the Divine
goodness, and disposes us to greater Gratitude and Love to God. The Divine
goodness may well be our wonder. That the infinite Majesty so provoked, has
not yet made us remarkable Examples of his Justice and Displeasure; Nay, that
he has continued to us Life, Health, Strength, Plenty, Power, and the like
Favors, which we ungrateful Wretches have dishonored him with. His lenity
and long suffering cannot but be admired by us, when we consider that we have
grown wanton and proud against him by his own benefits; and his bounteous
Goodness which should have highly obliged us, has made us careless and
presumptuous, as if we now wanted him no more, and could stand upon our own
Legs. But that which may justly increase our wonder is, that after all this
upon our humble confession and actual Change of our Behavior toward him, he
is ready to forgive our greatest Crimes, and to blot out all our
Transgressions. So great is his goodness, that he is more ready to give us his
pardon upon such a Repentance, than we are to ask it, or by Repentance to
render our selves capable of it; as if he courted our Friendship, and stood in
need of our Reconciliation. Finally, there is something yet more which exceeds
wonder, and that is, that God should be pleased so kindly to accept our late
Repentance and Obedience, as to take occasion from thence to bestow upon us, no
less than Eternal life. Now the serious and deliberate Confession of our sins,
giving us a necessary occasion to observe, and consider all this; so certainly
the Truth; cannot but deeply affect us with Gratitude and Love, to the Author
of such unparalleled Goodness and Love, expressing it self by all ways
possible, our Words, Services, whole Lives. Of so great and much greater
spiritual benefit and profit, is a true, sincere, serious, affectionate and
free Confession of our sins to Almighty God. Which was the fifth Reason for the
performance, and frequent Exercise of it.

And now, if we put all these Arguments together; the just Honor we owe to God
and his Laws, the Edification and Pleasure of others, our own spiritual Comfort
and great Benefit, one would think they should be sufficient to reasonable Men,
guided in their opinion and actions by good understanding, though we had no
Commands from revealed Religion, not only to secure this Duty of Religion and
Piety from contempt or neglect: but especially to recommend it to their
frequent and serious Practice from the highest to the lowest.

For no mortal so high, whom it does not exceedingly become, and perhaps better
than the meanest. For excellent and great Qualities sit best upon the greatest,
are most amiable in them, and most justly expected from them. And true
Religion, the right Knowledge, reasonable Worship, and Resemblance, and
Imitation of the Supreme Being, and the Universal Parent, is the utmost
Perfection and Attainment of humane Nature. Nor is there any in this Life so
holy and innocent (take all our Lives together) who have not great cause for,
and abundant need of this confession of sin.

Thrones and Shrines, Crowns and Glories, Sovereigns and Saints are with all
just Humility to lie at the Footstool of the Almighty, and most merciful
Father of his Creatures; we may altogether send up with one Heart and Voice,
our common Cries of Confession of Guilt, and Petition for Pardon, without fear
of offending against the Dignity of our Condition, or Sanctity of our
Profession. None too great, none too good, to say with this great and good
Prince;

I acknowledge my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said I
will confess my transgression to the Lord, that he might forgive the iniquity
of my sin.

For a conclusion of this Discourse, it may not be amiss to pick out of it, and
put together a brief Representation of a true penitent Confessor, in some such
manner as follows.

The sincere and deliberate Penitent then is no negligent Person of himself, to
let all things go at random, but is desirous to bring things to a Trial, and to
keep them in order in the Affairs of his Soul; nor is he slothful or afraid to
take notice of, and bring an Indictment against the Offender, though it be
himself, when he thinks he has been guilty, he will bring his Accusation, and
let him answer for himself as well as he can. Nor does he after this endeavor
to withdraw himself, not to appear to his Action or Indictment, but to sculk,
lie hid, or have the business passed over: nor does he when his carriage comes
to be canvassed, allege Pretenses, make frivolous Apologies, shift and turn
himself any way to excuse and defend himself, or to abate and extenuate what he
cannot deny. No: but he willingly makes his appearance, desires nothing more
than that the Truth may be known, and all that can be said against him may be
produced; that either he may where he justly can vindicate, or where he cannot
condemn himself, were he is convinced of his Faults or Crimes, though never so
heinous, he owns it, he cries guilty to God; saying, O Lord! I have indeed
transgressed thy Commandments, I have done foolishly, I have been wicked,
ungrateful, wilfully ignorant, or careless, or presumptuous; I confess it; I
am perfectly ashamed of my self, I despise and abhor my self; what shall I say
unto thee, O thou great Maker, and Preserver, and Benefactor of Men? I am
obnoxious to thy greatest Severity and Justice, I deserve to be punished as thy
unerring Wisdom thinks most fit, I submit my self to thy Sentence, and
receive and own it, whatsoever it shall be as the most just. But I hope that
Justice may be mixed and allayed with Mercy, and that that Goodness which has
some way thus far led me to true Repentance, will go on so far to complete it
in me, as to render me capable of thy pardon and forgiveness. Nor is this
Confession forced from this confessing Penitent, nor wrung out of him, nor
thrust upon him by his persecuting conscience, which he flies as much as he
can, nor extorted by the urging Interrogatories of his Friends or Enemies, with
a great coldness and unwillingness. No, it is the most free and voluntary; he
himself discloseth and opens all his Heart, and whatever he knows by himself,
and earnestly desires both witness and judge too, to produce all his faults,
and to tell him what he may be ignorant of, or has forgotten. He is not
willing to connive at any in himself, though never so criminal and shameful,
nor does he desire any to conceal them from him; he has no darling which he
would not look upon, because he would not leave; or wink hard, because he would
not see it, or believe it to be no sin, or so small, that it deserves not the
trouble of any notice or acknowledgment. He drags out his most beloved, and his
most justly suspected sins, and is not ashamed to betray them, which he has so
perniciously hugged, and which have and would betray him by their Flatteries,
Insinuations and Charms to his utter Ruin and Destruction. He prudently has
his Eye there where there is the greatest danger, and his greatest, most
delightful and most frequent Sins he will bring to the light, and so often
till he makes almost the sins themselves to blush, and perfectly wonders at his
own blindness and stupidity. It Is not a few words only that this man mumbles
over, or a Repetition of any Form, as it were of Recantation with his Lips,
when he is insensible, or perhaps laughs at it in his heart; no, it is within
in his Soul: judgment and conscience, and affections; all within him is
employed and moved. He is no Hypocrite or Actor of a part, but oft-times
appears rather on the other hand to have no such thing, or to be of no such
temper when he is. None can tell perhaps whether he has been in his Closet, or
what he has been doing there. Nevertheless he does not refuse if there be just
occasion (as in public Devotion) to let all the World know, both by his words
and carriage, what he thinks of himself, generously to justify God and his
most righteous Laws and Dispensations; but to accuse, reproach and condemn
himself. To advise and admonish all men, that they beware of what he sees his
Folly in, and not to imitate his past bad Example. He is willing that good men
should understand, they have one come over to their party, and that bad men
should follow him. He is very glad to please good men with such a sight, and
even to add to the Joy of Angels. He soon spies the great benefits of this
devout Exercise, and is very sensible of the pleasure and comfort of it. He now
discovers more pravity, disorder, and sin, and more aggravations of them than
he did, and consequently according to his earnest desire, can better prevent or
amend them: he understands himself infinitely better than he did, and sees
great reason for humility, charity, pity and compassion to offenders; but not
for an indifferency and neglect of the properest way he can use to reform them.
As he is grave and serious, and has a very indifferent and mean, and sometimes
contemptuous opinion of himself; so is he for that very reason again cheerful
and gay, for that nothing is more so, than innocence or repentance. He makes
his address to God Almighty as with great humility and modesty, so with great
good hopes for success in his requests, or for that which is better. He makes
use of God upon all occasions, and in all concerns, as his refuge, his shelter,
his support, his supply, his patron, protector, benefactour; nay, his Father;
casting all his cares upon him with moderate industry and endeavor, but
without solicitude and vexation.

In fine, Though he have grievously and unworthily for the time past offended
and displeased God, yet he is not afraid of him, but assured of his pardon,
love and favor for Christ's Sake, because he is well assured of his
Repentance; and because that God cannot lie, who has said, That he that
confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy.

SERMON IV.
PSALM XIV. 1. The Fool has said in his heart there is no God: They are
corrupt, etc.
AN Argument of late especially, often treated of, and perhaps in this great
Audience, and truly for great reason. It may be hoped there is less need of it
now; I am sure there are great hopes that there will be; when simplicity,
probity, and piety have more seasoned the first sources of manners and
opinions. However, I doubt there may be some need of it still: The God whom the
wicked Fool denies, only knows when it will be otherwise. Good men would
rejoice to see the time (and it may come) when it shall be as ridiculous to
doubt of the Being, Attributes and Providence of the true God, as it is of the
Sun's Being in Heaven, and its influences upon this Earth; as indeed it now is
too in it self, and to an honest man's thinking in a right method.

But let us briefly run over the words, read, and see what instruction they
will afford us to discourse upon. By the term Fool it is well known, that in
the Scripture generally is not meant only an ignorant or erroneous Person, but
also one who is wicked and of ill-manners, because he knows not, or mistakes
his own interest, as well as departs from his Duty. The Hebrew word is here,
(...) which signifies him that does foul, as well as foolish Actions. So Nabal
is said to have done according to his Name, when he was so ungrateful and
churlish to David, as well as so foolish and imprudent; that had it not been
for Abigail, by sparing a little he had lost all, 1 Samuel 25. 25. And the
Syriack Version here renders the Hebrew word, (...) by (...) i. e. an unjust,
wicked and perverse Man.

2. It follows, has said in his heart, i. e. he has thought so, though
perhaps he never dared to say so; for that was Blasphemy, and therefore death
by the Jewish Law.

3. There is no God, i. e. there is no such thing really existent; it is but a
name or an imagination. Or if he be any where yet he is not present upon this
Earth; he meddles not with humane Affairs. Some foolish, wicked Men, in their
thoughts, deny either the Being, or the Providence of God, extending it self to
this lower World. Like the Ancient Sect of the Epicureans, among the Greeks,
long after these Fools of the Psalmist; and consequently the true and necessary
Perfections and Attributes of his Nature, his Omnipresence, Omniscience,
Omnipotence, his Universal Goodness (whereby he governs and directs the whole
Universe at once) to the best Ends, his Sanctity, Justice, and the like. And
further consequent to this, they deny all distinction between Moral good and
evil, right and wrong, virtue and vice, other than the present gratification,
and fulfilling their own lusts of haughtiness, pride, violence, covetousness,
voluptuousness, etc. which sort of Men the Psalmist here more particularly
means by the Fool. Nay, finally; hence it must necessarily follow that they
were, (...) as the Jews speak, i. e. they denied their Religion, despised even
the Authority and Laws of Moses, and were Judaical Infidels, as ours now-adays
are Christian ones; which is the more usual signification of the word, and
restrained to revealed Truths. This last sense wants not Equal probability with
the former. For it is likely, that from the beginning of Mankind, there have
been many more, who have questioned the Providence and true Attributes, than
the Existence of a God, for want of the true notion of his Nature, and
therefore the Chaldee Paraphrase seems not to have done amiss, when it
paraphraseth (...) the fool has said in his heart that God has no Dominion or
Government in the Earth.

4. The words, they are corrupt, they have done abominable works, etc. may be
looked upon with the coherence, either of a cause or an effect of the preceding
Proposition. The fool has said in his heart, etc. As if they should be thus
uttered. Because they are corrupt, etc. therefore they have proceeded to that
extremity of folly and impudence, as to think there is no God at all, and that
he does not see and know what they do; or if he does, yet he cannot or will not
concern himself to punish them. Or we may read then to this sense: Foolish and
lewd Men have first persuaded themselves that there is no God, or no Providence
which reaches humane Affairs, and then have let loose the Reigns to their
lusts, which have carried them to the most wicked Works, and abominable
Practices.

From whence we may learn these Two things.

1. That they who deny the Being or Providence of God over Mankind, and the
consequent Truths mentioned, are both ignorant and wicked; or infidelity is the
quality of vicious Fools. The fool, etc.

2. That the denying of those great Truths, and such like, is the cause of
corrupt manners; or infidelity is followed with still greater corruption of
manners, and wickedness of practice.

To take the first of these.

Among many heads of Discourse, which have and may be handled, in this great
and most important Argument, I shall choose but these Two.

1st. To observe some of the most frequent causes of this Disease. And, 2ly. To
propose some remedies to prevent or suppress their Efficacy.
And because those of both parts are many to be named, I shall be as brief as I
can in each of them; and do little more than enumerate them.

1st. The first cause then of this infidelity is ignorance. A charge which
perhaps they may wonder or smile at, who have so often been by themselves, and
others taken for more than ordinary Wits; and so indeed they are, but it is in
levity, shallowness, temerity, self-conceit and boldness, and some other as
worthy qualities to be mentioned. And we affirm still, that one of the leading
and first Causes of infidelity is great ignorance of the Nature of all Beings,
short of infinite Perfection, and particularly of the material or corporeal
World, to believe it possible for any thing to exist without a God, or a Being,
whose Essence is to be infinitely perfect, and consequently necessarily to
exist himself, and to be the productive and conservative Cause of all other
things whatsoever existent: And then when there is such a Being, it is to have
lost the faculty of reasoning, seriously to deny those Attributes of his Nature
before mentioned, and his Universal Providence. For it would be to ungod him
again. It must be from a gross ignorance more particularly, for any man to
doubt his Universal Goodness, whereby he disposes and orders all things for
the best State of the Universe of Beings, in all its duration taken together,
and consequently his Justice; so that it shall be better with the Good and
Righteous, than with the Evil and Wicked, all Conditions or their whole
Duration considered and comprehended.

It is from no better Cause, that any man questions the Immortality of humane
Souls in their own Nature, and the unsuitableness of the Divine Attributes to
annihilate them. And it is far more incredible, and further from all belief,
that God should make our Souls only for this point of time we live upon this
Earth, than that he should make all humane Race to come into this World only to
cry and die.

It Is (I say it again) from a contemptible ignorance of the Nature of Body and
Spirit, the Nature of God, the true Ends of all Being, Life and Action, that
these grand and fundamental Verities are seriously, and ex animo, disputed or
denied by any. It would be at present too tedious and impertinent to deduce at
large, the particular proofs of these most important Truths. It has been
especially, in this last Age, excellently well performed; to which in some
things a further Addition may be made. Let Infidels or Scepticks sufficiently
answer that first: I think we may without vanity, challenge all the power and
force of their Wit and Learning to do its utmost. Let us see if they be in
earnest, whether they be not extremely ignorant, and (if we may have the leave
or pardon of this Royal Audience, to provoke them with a great, but just
reproach) whether they be not both bold and blockish: Of which the second Cause
of infidelity will give some Account.

2ly, And that is the difficulty of apprehending and conceiving those
intellectual Objects, which are absolute. Such as are the Properties and
Actions of God, Angels, humane Souls, whence some have concluded them to be
mere Words and Talk, or mistaken for some corporeal Nature. Such are those, who
first beginning at the substantiality and immortality of the Soul, proceed to
deny the Providence, the Attributes, and at last the very Being of God;
impudently affirming, nothing can be conceived by us but Body, and that which
belongs to it. This miserable Infirmity of humane Nature, confines the noble
Soul of Man, to the most ignoble and dead part of the Universe, deprives it of
its greatest pleasure and perfection, and debaseth it both in its knowledge and
manners, in its perceptive and active Powers. The men who are most liable to
it, are those of much secular Business and Employment, perpetually taken up
with observation and reasoning, and plodding about sensible objects and affairs
of this bodily Life.

And some there are running so far to the extreme of this side, as to give
little, either encouragement or opportunity to any other knowledge or
employment of the mind of man, besides Mechanics Trade and civil Justice, as
if all other things were mere Chymera's, and unprofitable, fruitless, empty
Notions, and nothing deserved our regard, but only how to handle a Tool well,
or to buy and sell, or at the highest to prevent or decide a Controversy about
an House, Field, or Fence, and other little Properties. Which indeed are at
present necessary, and of great use for Temporal plenty and peace; but are not
in the least to be compared to the goods of the Spirit, and to the hopes,
acquisition and enjoyments of immortality in the Heavens.

Alas, how little do such men understand or consider, that if all the furniture
of this momentany bodily Life be not designed by God, and used by us for
spiritual and eternal good things, it is scarce worth our coming into Being at
all, much less undergoing the manifold uneasinesses, incommodities, cares and
calamities of it. The effects of this humor and genius in a Nation, to which
lapsed and degenerate Mankind are prone enough, for some small time prevailing,
seems to be profound ignorance and oblivion of intellectual and heavenly
things, the increase of Atheism, irreligion and profaneness, Immorality in
heart and life, any further than it is inconsistent with secular interest, and
restrained by the Laws of civil Society.

For which one reason, it seems highly expedient, or rather absolutely
necessary, to set apart one order of men, in considerable number with places,
and other proper and convenient Circumstances, to preserve and improve the
knowledge and esteem of spiritual and heavenly things amongst Men, otherwise
truly in great danger to be lost: And without which we should live like the
Fish and Mole, as ignorant of the nature and privileges and felicity of the
superior World, infinitely the vastest and noblest part of the Universe, as
they are of ours.

It is more than likely some men may be content with it. But surely they will
be so humane and charitable, as not to hinder, but to help those which are not.

It is certain that the two great differences between that part of the World
which is called barbarous, and that which is civil, are intellectuality and
charity; and so far as we lose either, we return again to Barbarism.

3ly, Another most frequent and lamentable Cause indeed of infidelity, is
licentiousness. Men would live as they list, and gratify and indulge their
lusts to the full, without any fear, restraint or allay. And because their
consciences are at first more or less troublesome, they endeavor to bribe,
corrupt, and bring them over to their party; to tell them that they may safely
and honestly too, follow such courses. For that which is ordinarily believed
(say they) and talked of virtue and vice, and difference of Actions, except
only from agreeableness and present pleasure; of God, his Sanctity and Justice,
of Heaven and Hell, of Reckonings and Recompenses hereafter, are but
imagination and talk, or false, or at least dubious things.

These men do the Work thoroughly of debauching, and eternally ruining
themselves; they do not only hire their Consciences to be silent or stand
Neuters, but to give their lusts all possible assistance and encouragement;
like some who have fought desperately in a bad cause, not without conscience,
but with one as bad as their cause. And here these Persons who will suffer
themselves to be thus abused by their lusts, ought timely to be aware in what
great danger they are, not only to deny the Lord that bought them, but also the
Lord that made them with all Religion, that ever Reason and Nature has taught;
and consequently to be denied by them.

4. In men of an haughty spirit; that very temper of theirs is a frequent cause
of infidelity, they will needs be uncontrollable by any, and not endure any
bounds to their desires and enjoyments, but what they please to set themselves.
It is for ordinary and low spirits, and not for such great minds as they are
(so say their flatterers, and they believe them) to suffer themselves to be
restrained by any Laws of Nature, Reason or Religion, or to depend upon any
Being whatsoever so much, as to hope or fear from him; and therefore they will
not believe there are any such things. Men who speak as big as Pharaoh, Who is
the Lord that I should obey him? Exodus 5. 2.

Poor creatures! who though they are not a jot wiser or better, and truly
comparatively very little greater, than other meaner Mortals; yet they will
aspire to the Prerogative of God their Creator, to whom by reason of his
essential Sanctity, immutable Justice, all comprehending Wisdom and Almighty
Power, it only belongs to know no other Laws, but those of his own Nature and
Will, and to court no Power superior to his own.

5ly. We may add to these a certain gayness of spirit in some men. These hate
all care, attention, reflection and foresight, which contract the spirit, and
causes it to gather it self together; and consequently they like not to hear
of or believe, nay they are resolved to disbelieve every thing which may
disturb the security, or confine the liberty, or darken the gayety of their
minds. It is plain, if we entertain and settle in our minds the great practical
Truths of revealed and natural Religion, they will oblige us to make use of
some prudence and attention; to direct our Actions by certain Rules to a
certain End; and not to leave our selves to a tumultuous boonness of spirit,
and to the fortuitous tides or rushes of our appetites and passions. So it has
been said of the Ancient Epicureans, that their Exclusion of their Deities from
humane Affairs, was recommended by them as a comfortable dogm, freeing Men from
all fear and solicitude, to please or displease them.

6ly, Sometimes in some men infidelity has proceeded from a sowerness of mind,
great displeasure conceived and fermented into an impatience against God and
his Providence: Perhaps their impetuous desires have been crossed, their
darling designs broken, and their jolly hopes frustrated, or their sweet
enjoyments suddenly swept away from them; whence first they have entertained
very hard thoughts of God and his Providence, and broken out into rude and
unmannerly expressions against them. Then in revenge proceeded to wish them out
of the World, and at last have thought it more easy and safe to deny them.

7ly, In others again an affectation of singularity and despising what is
common, an humor of contradicting of what is ordinarily believed disposes to
infidelity. Because the generality of men do believe those great truths so
often mentioned, therefore they will not. They would seem more searching, or
fortunate or bold in their discoveries and opinions, than all the World
besides. They would appear to know, or at least dare to say, that which the
generality of Men have been ignorant of, or that which, if some few of the more
curious and inquisitive and penetrating have thought as well as themselves, yet
they had not the courage to publish it. Now these men are under a far more
dangerous prejudice from affectation of singularity and novelty, than the
generality of men whom they usually despise are, from Antiquity, Custom and
Example.

If we consider both these abstractedly, it is far safer to follow common
received opinions of many Countries and Ages, especially if believed of great
importance, than the new inventions of one or some few.

Though both may be false, yet if no other reasons be considered, the old is
much more likely to be true than the new. And I believe it is the experience of
those who impartially examine things, that generally the common and well near
universally received opinion of all places, and ages (especially if thought of
great consequence whether true or false) are at last found in the main part of
them to be true. And it is one of the best Employments of men of great Wit, and
more than ordinary sagacity and capacity, to conceive and deliver them more
clearly and distinctly, and to pare off and separate some absurdities and
falsehoods, which may in some tract of time, by passing through many unskilful
hands, have been fastened to them. But of this more will be said, when we come
to the remedies of infidelity.

8. (To add no more at present) Envy against the Professors, but of Ingenuity,
Philosophy and Sobriety, much more of Religion and Piety; especially, if
attended with any thing of Dignity, Reputation and Revenue has been the Cause,
I doubt, in many ill-tempered and ill-living Men of this Infidelity.

Some of these at first out of this ill-humour and quality feign to themselves,
and then industriously bring themselves to believe it, that the things are
frivolous or false, for which Men of Learning and Religion, have been thought
worthy of their Rewards of Esteem, Honor and Revenue. And what is the Cause or
Reason? No other but that their Eye is evil, and they would not have them to
enjoy them. They do not well abide it, to see them in possession of that, which
either they would have themselves, whether deservedly or not, or at least no
body else. Others again, speak meanly or disgracefully of their Doctrine,
Opinion, and Profession; because they spoil the Reputation of their manner of
life, and are inconsistent with that licentiousness and liberty which they
profess, practice and delight in. Hence it is, they give them the bad and
contemptible names of Pedantries, uncertainties or falsehoods. Here we may take
in another sort of men, which are but servants and attendants to the former,
those, viz. who get their livelihood, and sometimes more, by the excesses,
contentions, quarrels, perjuries, and other wickednesses of the Age.

These two, as far as their Wit and Interest will go, help on and promote the
disbelief of all sober, virtuous and religious Principles.

These and others, which may be still added, are the inward Causes, and
inherent in our selves, of unbelief and disbelief, and which are most in our
own Power, to prevent or remove.

There are also some others external and occasional, such as the Example of
witty and acceptable Company; Hypocrisy in Religion both revealed and natural
(so taken, and seeming at least) especially in the Teachers of them; when men
profess they believe their grand Truths, but do not live in any sort, as if
they did. Which accusation is partly false; for the generality of men, though
they do not indeed live near up to their Faith, yet they would be much worse
without it. Partly it is to be put to another Cause, viz. heedlesness and want
of application of their belief to their practice. But perhaps few things have
been more an occasion of the Infidelity of some men, than the over-zealous and
blind Credulity of others. Some men's believing too much, and otherwise than
they ought, and yet fiercely imposing it, has been the Cause of others
believing too little, and sometimes they who have most complained of Skepticism
and Infidelity, Unbelief and Disbelief (which are different things) have
contributed much to it themselves.

The introducing of many Opinions of neither light or use, or very little
either way, uncertain or trivial; nay, sometimes not only justly suspicious,
but manifestly false, and then the imposing them under what Penalties men have
in their own Power, the least of which is commonly the Censures and Reproaches
of Enemies or Indifferents in Religion, Heretics, Atheists, Infidels: I say,
these have begotten and extremely nourished Skepticism and Infidelity,
especially in this knowing and inquisitive Age, bold when they dare, lurking
and doing more mischief oft-times when they dare not show themselves, because
they cannot be examined and receive their Answers.

This is the infirmity of those well-meaning Men, who will have every thing
believed and imposed too, which seems to them to make for the honor and
reputation of their Religion, not minding what should be in the first place
known, whether it be true or false.

But it is the wickedness of those who do it for their own secular interest,
and care not how much Mankind be abused; so that their Domination be advanced
and secured, at least they connive at it, and let it pass.

This Cause has its effect principally among the ingenious and witty, the
great and haughty, but not wise and just, who want either leisure or patience,
or capacity or probity, to examine and distinguish things. They easily throw
away the Wheat with the Chaff; what is true and solid, with what is false and
light.

It Is also probity of mind they want, who being licentiously given, and no
great friends to any Religion or Truth either, which may lay any restraint upon
them in their opinions or practices, gladly take any advantages against them.

That men look upon all professing Religion and Conscience to be Ignorant,
Superstitious, or Cunning; so that their Example or Reason are of no Authority
with them. Neither does this humor stop among this sort of men, but it is soon
conveyed into the vulgar too, who soon learn to contemn Religion, and the
Priest especially in times of liberty.

Wherefore it is to be advised, (and sincerely Religious men, wise and honest,
who heartily desire the Advancement of true Religion will so do) that we be
first assured of the truth of our belief and opinions in Religion, and be now
careful and just to appear for nothing but what is so, and for that reason.
And when we cannot fairly maintain any thing to be such, though it appear never
so much for the honor and interest of Religion (as many very false and forged
things have) let it rest, and go as it is till time may further discover. And
as for the vulgar, it is surely their safest way to rely upon the Conduct of
such wise and honest Men, though they may be even exhorted to see with their
own Eyes too if they can. For it is much more easy for them to know who are
such, than to judge themselves of the truth and falsehood, Universal
conveniences and inconvenienc^es of things, to know who are the best Guides,
than to guide themselves.

This plain dealing without fraud or force, will surely much advance the just
Esteem of Religion, and its Ministers, and consequently its influence and
efficacy.

We have but too much proof of this Cause of Infidelity from experience. We
have seen some Men, and that of the first rank, who have taught us such a God,
and that out of his own Books, which others judge to be an absolute
impossibility: And yet after all, they will be the only Orthodox, and reprobate
all those who will not be of their opinion. Many also are those, who have made
the Holy Scriptures, the most excellent Collection of Writings which were ever
extant, to speak such things, which has caused others not brooking their
Interpretations, nor being sufficient to find out better themselves, to have
mean and injurious thoughts of them. And yet if any pious Man with the
sincerest intentions, and endeavors to preserve, and vindicate their due
honor by salving difficulties, which seem to check Reason, do advance any
thing inconsistent with their settled Opinions and Systems, he is presently
irreligious and a severe Atheist, too severe Censures, whatever their mistakes
may be. But they are much more numerous still, who have made up such an
Hotch-potch in Religion, by their Additions to the Holy Scriptures, from
pretended or enthusiastical Revelations, forged or false Miracles, Traditions,
Ecclesiastical Authority and Infallibility, as first, to turn men's Stomachs
against it, and at last, to cause a great many quite to discharge themselves of
it altogether. But of these, and such like, I shall say no more at present: But
go on to the next general Head.

2ly, To propose some remedies proper to prevent, or repress the influences of
these Causes of Infidelity; whereof some are more general, some more
particularly relating to some Causes and Circumstances.

The first of these is,

1st, To advise and assist Men to improve, and advance their Knowledge to the
highest Degree they are capable of. For it seems just to deal so uprightly, and
plainly with the World, as not to make use of mere Authority, instead of
understanding and reason, where men are truly capable and honest; though, where
they are ignorant, but yet conceited, self-willed or dishonest, in things of
importance and consequence, Authority must be allowed to interpose for their
own, and the public good, which otherwise would greatly suffer. Let therefore
Men know, as much as they can, and examine these great verities with the
greatest severity. Assuredly the more they know, the more reason they will see
to believe them seriously, and resolutely to live according to them. Search the
Scriptures, says our Savior to the unbelieving Jews (John 5. 39.) to convince
them that he was the promised Messiah, and the Person to whom all his
Characters there did agree. So say we, Search the Scriptures, Nature it self,
and Reason too, for they bear witness of all these great Truths. But then
search them thoroughly, examine them to the bottom, see clearly, reason
carefully and justly; weigh all things with indifferency and impartiality;
which will be presently a direction by it self. Otherwise, as the Jews did
erroneously interpret the Holy Scriptures, and conclude from them: So may Men
here through want of patience, and attention, and apprehension, err and mistake
in their Conclusion, concerning the great Truths of Morality and all Religions.

We heartily desire, that men's Faith and Belief may be the effect of a plain,
serious and deliberate Conviction, more than of Custom, where it may be. And
truly then, as well as when it is wrought in the heart by the grace of God,
(which is another Cause mentioned in the Scripture) great is its Power, and
forcible its Operation, and life it self is at its devotion and service. Such
was the effect of it in all the Apostles, and particularly such is the Faith in
Jesus Christ, mentioned of Saint Thomas, and Saint Peter, when one cries out,
my Lord, and my God, and the other, Lord whither should we go, thou have the
word of Eternal Life. Let that then be the first remedy against Infidelity,
viz. the utmost improvement and best exercise of our knowledge and reason.

2ly, Possess we our minds with a sincere and zealous Honesty and Probity. By
which, I mean, a strong habitual propension and inclination to that which is
right and just. This will have three Effects very proper to beget, or confirm a
right belief of the Truth, and to preserve us in it.

The First, A fervent love of the Truth.

The Second, A free and ingenuous acknowledgment of it, wherever we discover
it, be it for us, or be it against us.

Thirdly, A desire to act suitable and live according to it.

I say, a sincere and resolute Probity has these effects. For surely, never
any honest man doubted whether it was material, more fit and just (of better
effect) for a good man who will make good use of his knowledge, to be knowing
rather than ignorant, or to believe the truth rather than a lie, in order to
direct him in all his inward Motions and outward Actions. Without the first, we
shall not trouble our selves to search, or find the truth. Without the second,
when we know it, we shall either not believe, or deny it if possible; or if by
the clearness and evidence we cannot do that, yet we shall turn our minds away
from it. Finally, without the third, we shall little esteem or use it. And
indeed, the first, is always attended with the other two. For he that has a
great affection for truth, will readily embrace it where ever he discovers it,
endeavor to recommend, and make the best use of it he can, showing what
influences it has upon his heart and life. This excellent quality of our
Spirits, is more than once commended and commanded in the Holy Scriptures. It Is
this which our Savior means in his Parable by the honest and good heart, which
having received the word, keeps it, and brings forth fruit with patience, Luke
8. 15. It was the want of this, which was one of the Causes of the seduction
from the Verity of the Gospel, in those who perished, viz. Because they
received not the love of the truth, i. e. Not only the Gospel, particularly
called the truth, but of truth in general, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. And it was this our
Savior, above all things, required in men to become his Disciples. And it is
for this reason, together with the incomparable evidence of the truth of
Christian Religion, that it is to be believed, that never an honest man of
capacity, who has been rightly instructed in the principal Doctrines of it,
has long held out against it, and finally disbelieved it. We may add to this
natural effect of probity, the extraordinary and supernatural one, even in
those who may be for some time doubtful, or erroneous in those greatest
Verities (so perhaps may God permit.) It procures God's especial care, to
enlighten and incline such to the reception of truth.

3ly, Another cure of this Infidelity is a branch of modesty; that is but a
just and true esteem and value for our selves, and therefore particularly to be
careful, we entertain not too great a Conceit of our own ability and
sufficiency above other men's, to find out the falsity or weakness, or
uncertainty in common received opinions of consequence. If we seem to our
selves to observe it, let us still be diffident of our own Judgment, and
believe we may be mistaken, and that there may be something in them, or for
them, which we do not yet see; and therefore reserve the alteration of our
belief to further consideration: Those who are strongly conceited of their
knowledge and sufficiency in judgment above other men, and are hugely pleased
with it, are very forward and ambitious to show it to themselves first, and
then to other men; more especially in contradicting and correcting what is
generally taught and believed, and that by the most esteemed, and of the best
Reputation and Authority.

The Holy Scripture has given us this general advice also. Romans 12. 3. Not to
think too highly of our selves, but soberly according as God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith. But because some men in their Infidelity, may
rely more upon the Wit and Learning of one whom they much esteem, than upon
their own, it is to be advised.

4ly, To have a great deference and respect to the most public Testimony, or
to the most general received Opinion; so much the more still, by how much it is
larger in respect of places and ages.

The least effect, this consideration ought to have upon us, is to make us
cautious and suspicious, when we are inclined to believe and advance any
Opinion contrary, because it appears true to our selves, or some few other
really knowing men. We ought diligently and impartially to examine what it is,
in the common Opinion, we cannot persuade our selves to be true, and how such a
general mistake should come to pass. He that contradicts an Universal belief,
had need be the wisest of men, and he that rejects a very general one, should
be very wise. The first is not to be done without a Demonstration, and even
that which so appears to us is reasonably to be suspected; though, till we see
otherwise, it cannot be denied by us; because, in a thing a thousand times
considered and debated, it may seem much, that none before has light upon this
Demonstration, though I do not say it is impossible. And, as for those
persuasions which are very general in things judged of great concern, and
consequently, most frequently brought into conversation, writing and practice,
it had need be a very great evidence; and having lain long under variety of
examination, is at last also generally approved, that should entirely remove or
displace them. Yet I deny not, but a man may have sometime a reason sufficient
at first to suspect, to doubt, to say, that the new Opinion looks with a good
countenance, and seems not to want a fair probability. And then it seems no
more than Justice, and a thing becoming the public Care, that it should have a
fair hearing.

But here too, that we be not imposed upon, we are to take a true account of
the Universality, or Generality of received persuasions; not call those of one
Nation or Country, or perhaps one quarter of the World, introduced, and
maintained by mere interest, cunning and force, or of one, or some few Ages; I
say, we must not call these universal, or more general than indeed they are.
This is the fault and folly of the Roman Church, which will needs have
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Image and Saint Worship, and an hundred others,
to be the Catholic Opinions, and Practices in the Church of Christ; when we
can produce whole Countries and Nations greater than theirs now, and many more
Ages, and the best even of their own Church, which neither believed nor
practiced such things.

This remedy is proper against blameable singularity, whether out of ignorance
or affectation. I will add but one more, and so have done with this general
head also. And that is,

5ly, That as it has been already a general Advice to possess our minds
thoroughly with probity and plain honesty, and consequently a prevalent love of
the truth: So it will much help and assure the effect thereof, to purge them of
all prejudices which may oppose it; and to leave truth and honesty as few, and
as weak Enemies in our Breasts as it is possible for us. We must therefore turn
out, and send away all unreasonable Inclinations, Humors, Appetites and
Passions, which may have any influence upon our understanding, and judgment, in
our enquiring or assent to any truth: We are to keep our minds sincere and
upright.

This will prevent or repress the Influences of many Causes of Infidelity at
once. For in pursuance and application of this general Direction, we shall free
our minds from the love of any lusts, from the extravagant and most
unreasonable desire of liberty, uncontroulableness and independency, from
pride, vain self-conceit, and affectation of singularity, from the humor of
setting our selves in good earnest to oppose and contradict, from wrath and
impatience against God Almighty and his Providence: from spite and envy against
knowledge and goodness, and good men, against their reputation and interest in
the World; and finally, from Skepticism it self (or as I now take the word)
from timidity, inconstancy, instability of judgment and assent, in which there
seems some passion and inclinations without reason, as well as in all the rest.
Then shall we be clear and free to believe the truth, merely, because it is the
truth, as far as we can apprehend, and for no other reason whatsoever. Till we
have thus cleansed our souls, deposed and laid aside all these prejudices, the
more ingenious and witty we are, the greater is our danger of error and
unbelief; and the common sort of men who have not so much Wit, Haughtiness,
Self-conceit, and Pride, do with much more safety and security, follow the
easy and natural Sense of their own minds, and the common belief of the World,
who are wiser than themselves.

And now, what use shall we make of this whole Discourse? I shall make but one
inference from it; and that is, If what we have all this time been delivering
be truth and reason, as I hope it is, then it is our Duty to contradict the
Fool here in the Text, and that two ways, both in his Infidelity, and in his
consequent Practice. Has the vicious Fool said in his heart there is no God,
or no Providence: Let us deliberately, peremptorily and decretorily conclude in
our hearts, and confess it with our mouths, that there is a God, and verily,
that this God judges in the Earth. But then let us be sure, boldly to oppose
and contradict him in the consequence of our Faith, else our Faith and
Profession will serve us to no purpose, but to condemn us out of our own
mouths, or it will be suspected, that our inward Faith and outward Profession
do not agree; that we say one thing as loud as any, and think another. At
least, that our Faith is very slight, cold and rare, and therefore little
valued by us. For a serious, express, firm and frequent Faith, or actual
Assent, especially after deliberation or doubting, is a great matter and very
operative. We see the settled Opinions of men in other Affairs of Life, how
sturdy and forcible they are. They govern even their Passions, and Persons, and
are difficultly mastered, or hindered by any opposition. So would it be also in
Divine Faith, if it were as well rooted in our hearts, and as frequently made
actual use of. Is then this wicked Fool corrupt, and vicious? Has he done
abominable Works? Let it be our firmest resolution, and utmost care and
endeavor, to be of an incorrupt, sound and strong Virtue, and a laudable and
amiable Practice, and do good Works. But more particularly, and immediately,
the Virtue which our belief in God, his Nature, Attributes and Actions should
produce and preserve is that of Piety and Religion, or Divine Worship, in which
I comprehend all our Duty to this God. Let us then spare him as many thoughts
as we can, and contemplate his Beauty and Glory, as much as our frail Nature
and Condition will bear; let us conceive the most worthily of him; let us
honor him with all the force of our Souls, love him with all our might above
all things together, both in Heaven and Earth; rejoice and be happy in his
Favor, and fear his displeasure; put our ultimate trust in him alone, and
above all, entirely resign up our Wills to his, in whatever is to be done or
undergone by us, and all his Creatures; that his Will may be done both in
Heaven and Earth. This which is the internal Worship of God, we are at all fit
Seasons and Circumstances, to signify by our Lauds, Praises, Prayers,
Thanksgivings, solemn Profession of a sincere, universal, constant, perpetual
Obedience to all his Commands and Appointments, and above all by the Tenor of
our Life and Actions, which is External Worship.

Behold a heart and life suitable to our Faith, and to the God in whom we
believe. An employment worthy indeed of all reasonable Creatures, from the
highest to the lowest. The perfection of all their noble Powers and Exercise of
them. This Religion and Conversation with the Deity, is the highest
Accomplishment and Felicity of any spiritual Nature. All other objects do not
fill their Capacities. This State we are all here as much as we can (which is
but little) to endeavor to attain to. The rest we are to desire, hope, and
prepare our selves for.

Now to this God, whom the wicked Fool denies; who made and upholds all things
by the Omnipotent Word of his Power, and governs all things by his All-wise
Providence; to this one most excellent infinite Nature in three Persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all this inward and outward Worship,
constantly rendered by Men and Angels, from henceforth, and for ever-more. Amen.

SERMON V.
ROMANS V. 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ.
THere are hardly any words of the Holy Scripture, more common in the Mouths of
Christians, especially reformed, or uttered with more affection, or more
frequently made use of, than these of Justification by Faith. Nor is there any
Doctrine of Christianity, which has of late been disputed, with more Volumes
or greater Heat, than that which is said to be contained under them.

To which we may add, that in truth, it is a Doctrine both in matter and
phrase, in great measure, new and proper to the Christian Religion, and yet of
a great importance; honorable to God, and comfortable to Men. For the most
devout, and even inspired by God among the Jews, as far as appears, knew little
of the principal Part of it, and the most learned among the Heathens nothing.
Nay, it seems, by what we read, that it has been defectively, and but
ill-understood even by Christians themselves, till of late.

And although in a good part of this last Century, it has been much cleared
and recovered by many learned Men, who began better to understand the Style,
Phrase, Occasion, and other Circumstances of the New Testament; and by none
more, perhaps, than our own judicious, pious Paraphrast: yet, methinks,
somewhat more may be done in the matter.

I shall at present, only, briefly and plainly endeavor, the explication and
application of the words.

The two things which deserve a particular explication are, (1) Justification,
(2) Faith.

Justification. I take the original and general Notion of it to be, the doing
by any Person (for to that I now restrain it, though it be spoken of Actions
also) as uses to be done to one who is just and righteous: i e some way to
show favor, or to do good to him, whether by approbation, commendation or
beneficence. Of this general sense of the word, it is easy to see that the
juridical Sense of acquitting absolving, etc. is but one instance or kind.

This usage may be in respect of some particular Act, or Quality only, or of a
man's general Temper of Mind and Course of Life. We have several Examples of
the first. It is said by our Savior of the Publican, who went up with the
Pharisee to the Temple to pray, that he went away rather justified than the
other (or justified, and not the other, according to a known Hebraism.)
justified! i. e. accepted, approved by God, in that particular Act of his
Prayer to God, as uses, or ought to be done to him who is just, and does well.
The same is the Sense of the word, Romans 8. 33. It Is God that justifies, who is
he that condemns? We know the World does condemn, reproach, hate us
Christians for our Religion, for our believing upon Jesus: but that we despise,
because we know too, that we have the favor and approbation of God for so
doing.

Thus also it is recorded of Phinehas, Psalm 106. 30, 31. that he executed
judgment (slew Zimri and Cozbi in the Act of Uncleanness) and it was counted to
him for righteousness, or for justification, or the effect of it was
justification (for (...) and (...), have often the same signification, as Gal.
2. 21.) i. e. he was, and ought to be, and ever shall be unto all Generations
greatly approved, and highly praised for that Action in so eminent a degree,
righteous and just, done with so much Zeal and Courage for the Honor of his
God, and the good of his People. And we read too, how he was rewarded by God
for it with the high Priesthood in his Family. Nay, the justification of
Abraham himself, is said sometimes to be in the same sense, for some one
particular eminent Act of Obedience to God, Romans 3. 18. Heb. 11. 8, 17. Jam. 2.
21. though at other times for his general Faith, and Piety, or obediential
Temper to God. And of this justification he is set forth as an eminent and
extraordinary Example, Romans 4. So it is in like manner with all good men, who
walk in the steps of the Faith of Abraham, as the Apostle phraseth it, viz. who
are religious, obsequious to the Will of God, in what manner, and whenever he
shall sufficiently make it known to them; and consequently men of sincere
Probity of Spirit, devoted to all that is good and just. Of which hereafter.

This usage of a just man, or justification may be distinguished into (1)
negative, or doing him no harm: (2) positive, doing good to him, bestowing
certain benefits, and positive favors upon him. But there are three more
remarkable instances of both these, and frequently mentioned in the Scripture.
The first is remission of sins upon repentance, or an omission of punishment
for them: like as one that has been just, and never committed any sin, uses
to be treated. He suffers no evil from God for sin, and this is negative. The
second is the Holy Spirit's influences, operations in the Souls of Men. And the
third is Eternal Salvation upon perseverance in a good and holy life. All these
are more particularly regarded by St. Paul in the Text: As if he had said.
Therefore being by Faith (of which presently) restored to the Favor of God,
particularly expressed in the forgiveness of sins, the gift of the Holy Spirit,
the promises and assurances of Eternal life, we have peace with God. We are in
a state of Amity and Friendship with him, and we have Peace and Tranquillity in
our own Consciences, which do not now threaten us with God's Anger or
Punishment, and that through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now if this be the true notion of justification, when it is joined with Faith,
as I think it is: Then first, it is not the same with sanctification, or making
a man inherent, holy and just. Justifying the ungodly through Faith in the
Scripture-style, is not making an ungodly man godly, as the Papists, Socinians
and Grotius would have it. A mistake in that learned Man, which has led him
into many other Misinterpretations of Scripture. Nor (2) is it in a strict
Sense an accounting or reckoning a Man perfectly just, or more than he really
and truly is: for that were to say, that God may be deceived, and judge things
otherwise than they are. It is true, the Church of England in one of her
Articles has used the words, accounting righteous for the merits of Jesus
Christ by faith, and not for our works. But there needs no force to make them
signify, the treating or using as righteous, for the Merit of Christ upon the
condition of Faith, without any Merit on our part, which is the true Christian
Doctrine of Justification, as we shall presently see. Nor (3) is Justification
to pronounce or declare a Man inherently just, as it were in a solemn Sentence,
who is not so; for this were to make God give a false sentence. Nor (4) is it
to cover or cloth a Man (even a penitent sinner) with the pure Robes of
Christ's perfect Righteousness, and then to appear to God, pure and spotless,
as Jesus Christ himself: For this were to suppose God to look no further than
the outside, and represent him like old Isaac, deceived by Rebekah and Jacob.

These are the notions of men, who seem never to attend to the proper Nature of
things: but are content to talk only in Figures. And in truth they might do
much more harm, if they were not antidoted by other plain Scripture Doctrines;
such as that of the necessity of Holiness of heart and life for the forgiveness
of sins and everlasting Salvation. Nor (5) is Justification God's imputing the
Righteousness of Christ to Man, who lives in any sinful Breach or Neglect of
God's Law.

There is indeed a comfortable and true notion under those phrases; and that
is, That sinners fare the better for the complete Righteousness, or perfect
Obedience of Christ. Great and many indeed were the benefits God was pleased to
afford sinful mankind, for the sake of Jesus Christ. No less than such as
these; his long suffering and forbearance, all sorts of temporal Blessings, all
the inward and outward means of Virtue and Goodness; All this even to sinners
while sinners; which some learned men have called degrees of remission of sins:
I should rather say instances of justification, or dealing by men as uses to
be done to the innocent and just, who had never offended. Then further, upon
true repentance, entire pardon for all past sins: All in the other life, and
all in this, except, what God in his fatherly Wisdom may think fit for our
discipline and means of further improvement in Virtue and Holiness; constant
forgiveness upon constant repentance, for the interfering faults of good Men,
and finally, Everlasting life. All this Men owe to the complete Righteousness
of Jesus Christ, from the beginning to the End of his life. It was for his
sake, God was pleased to have any regard to, or compassion upon the degenerate
Race of Mankind; that God might by so eminently rewarding him, show the World
how acceptable to him Holiness and Virtue were, and encourage to the Attainment
of the highest Degree of them possible. All this is true, and a reasonable
Administration of God in the Government of the World. But yet it is not
Justification it self. God's imputing Christ's Righteousness to us in such
manner, is one Cause of our Justification: but Justification it self, or the
using of us in such favorable and kind manner is the effect of that
imputation. Nor (6) and lastly, is Justification a bare remission of sins. They
who say so, speak too little: for the using a man as a Righteous and just man
is not negative only, or doing him no harm; but positive, also doing him good;
and therefore it contains not only security and exemption from the evil of
suffering; but the bestowing the good things of enjoyment, the principal of
which are, spiritual and eternal; the Assistances for Virtue here, and Heaven
hereafter, or Grace and Glory as is usually said. I will only here observe,
that although such as I have said, be the general notion of Justification of
sinners: yet it must here in the Text be restrained to those instances of
favor, which follow Faith taken for a quality in us: such as remission of
sins, etc. because it is said justified by says. Faith is the Cause of
Justification, viz. a condition qualifying, or capacitating Cause.
Justification, or being used kindly by God, is the effect of this our Faith.
And so much for the Explication of the Term Justification.

In sum, this it is to use or treat a Person, as uses to be done to a just
and good man, which is to do him no harm, but to bear him good Will, some way
or other to do him good, show him favor and kindness.

For the second Term faith, I mean, justifying or saving Faith, by which we are
said to be justified, it is as much contested, and perhaps with more difficulty
and less certainty resolved, than the former of justification.

I for my part have observed these three significations of it. The last of
which I intend principally to enlarge my present Discourse upon.

First, The first Sense of it may be Piety, or Religion in general, or rather
religiousness, i. e. Such an habitual Temper of mind, whereby a man is disposed
to obey the Will of God: and consequently to do that which is right and just,
however made known to him from God. It is this temper of Soul by which God
estimates a good Man, and by which he is qualified for God's Approbation,
Acceptance and Beneficence. Particularly in those great Instances of Pardon,
Grace and Glory. Which if vigorous and prevalent, and constant enough to
denominate us good men, will certainly exert it self in all actual Obedience of
inward Will, and outward Action, when it is not necessarily hindered, as it may
be, by pure and invincible Ignorance, by Diseases and Disorders of the Body, or
any external Impediments. I say again, because I think it wants and deserves
Observation, that it is according to the Degree and Constancy of this habitual
Inclination of Soul that God estimates us, and we shall be dealt withal by
him. Outward Actions, especially, and inward too are contingent, may cease, and
are liable to an hundred Hindrances and Obstructions, when the habitual
Inclination of the Will is a constant thing, and remains fixed in the Soul;
which God certainly knows, though others, and even our own selves sometimes may
be ignorant of it, so that the Jews from whom probably the Mahometans had it,
might save themselves and God the labor of casting up, and weighing their good
and bad Actions, to know which Number weighs most, and how the Case will stand
with them in the Day of Judgment, any further than they are signs of the Degree
and Constancy of habitual Temper, sometimes fallible enough. But let this stand
for a little Digression. To return,

I cannot yet tell what better notion to fix upon faith, when it is said, The
just shall live by faith, quoted by Saint Paul, Romans 1. 17. and Gal. 3. 11.
from Hab. 2. 4. to prove Justification not to be by the Law, but by Faith; and
that too Synecdochically put, viz. The Doctrine of the Condition of
Justification for all the rest of the Gospel-doctrine concerning it, as we
shall presently more largely discourse. The just shall live by faith, i. e. A
good and just Man by his Piety and Religiousness shall be in the Favor of God,
so as to be safe and happy, when the proud and wicked Man forsaking God, shall
be forsaken by him. An habitually Religious man, which will certainly produce
actual Obedience to God, whenever he sufficiently declares his Will and Laws,
ever was, and ever will be approved, accepted and favored by God. Which as he
did once by Moses, so has he in these last days more evidently and perfectly
by his Son the Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore it is not necessary, that the just
Man should live, or be justified only by the actual Observance of the Mosaical
Law, which is what the Apostle proves by these words. Let us examine a little
the importance of the whole Verse, in Heb. 10. 38. and Hab. 2. 4. The just
shall live by faith: but if he draws back (so it is to be rendered, there being
no (...) there, but supposed to be put in by our own Interpreters, in favor of
the Doctrines of absolute Election and Perseverance; My Soul shall have no
pleasure in him. We shall not meddle with the difference of the Heb. in Habb.
and this quotation by the Author to the Hebrews, but only observe, That to
live, is to fare well from God, to be approved by him, and be in his favor, so
as to receive from him the Promise of Salvation, and Deliverance from their
suffering Condition here, or after this Life the reward of a happy Condition,
or both; or as it is expressed in the next Verse, the saving of the Soul. This,
I say, is the sense of living (as it is commonly of the Hebrew word (...))
because, God's having no pleasure in him, i. e. God's disfavour, is opposed to
it. Besides, in the Gal. To live (not only vivere, but valere) is plainly of
the same importance with Justification, in the latter part of the Verse.

And then for Faith, (...), it is manifestly the believing of God's promises so
effectually, as to produce an entire, submissive, and obsequious Temper of
Heart to God, and consequently an actual Obedience, and doing the Will of God
in the profession and practice of the Christian Religion; because it is opposed
to a Man's withdrawing (viz) from that his Duty to God, through fear or
diffidence, or any other evil Affection. And it is of the same importance with
that in the following Verse, believing to the salvation of the Soul, by which a
good Man lives. Faith, by which a good Man lives, cannot be either according to
common reason, or the Tenor of Revelation, a bare Assent to God's Veracity,
Goodness and Power, or the fulfilling of his Promises; but the effect thereof,
a dutiful and obediential Heart to God. It was in the same manner, that
Abraham was justified (viz.) by his Piety, and generous, obediential
Disposition of Soul toward the true God; ready and prepared cheerfully to
receive and execute all his Commands though never so difficult, at all times.
And as he was then justified by that pious Temper of Heart, manifesting it self
in actual Obedience to the Commands of God then laid upon him: So shall we
Christians (says St. Paul) if we be of the same pious Temper of Soul with
Abraham, exerting it self in an actual Obedience to the Laws of God now
declared, and enjoined by Jesus Christ. Nay, we may add, That the Jews
themselves (though they little understood it) were all along justified upon the
same Condition too. Not so much by the Observance of the particular Laws of
Moses, as sent from God by Moses, as they stiffly contend (most of which were
but temporary, and fitted for the particular Circumstances of that People) as
by that devout Temper of Love, Reverence and Obedience to God, declaring his
Will for that time by Moses. And wherever that Temper was among the Jews, it
had the same effect of actual Obedience to God by Jesus Christ, when he was
sufficiently preached, and made known to them. True, sincere Piety, the Love of
Truth and Goodness prevailing against all worldly Interest and Prejudices,
brought the Jews themselves most certainly over to Christianity. If we would
know more of this Temper by Example, we may see the 119 Psalm, the History of
Cornelius, those of the New Covenant, into whose Hearts and Minds God will put
and write his Laws, Heb. 10. 16. those whom our Savior calls his Sheep, who
know, hear his Voice, and follow him. And what is said of the Son of God
himself, Heb. 10. 7. Lo, I come, (in the volume of thy book it is written of
me) to do thy Will, O God. These are the Persons, this the Qualification,
Condition, and Capacity for God's Favor, Approbation, Commendation and Reward;
or in one word, for his Justification; A submissive, obediential Temper of
Heart to God.

I say a Qualification or Condition of God's Favor in general, and
particularly expressed in remission of sins: which by no means excludes the
Consideration of Christ's Obedience and Sacrifice, which ever was another Cause
of Justification from the beginning, and ever will be. This sense of Faith,
(viz. Piety) will not be thought strange by those who have observed the Hebrew
way of speaking. Thus we read, Exodus 14. ult. that the Israelites believed in
the Lord and his Servant Moses, [(...)] i. e. they submitted themselves to
God's Laws and Government by Moses. Their belief or faith in God and Moses, was
a disposition of mind in them, to observe the Commands of God by Moses. For it
is of the same general Importance with the Phrase immediately before, The
people feared the Lord. The Israelites were (as they professed) ready to hear
and do the Will of the Lord by Moses. So they express themselves, Exodus 19. 8.
All that the Lord has spoken, we will do to obey the Voice of the Lord, and to
keep his Covenant. Nor is it to be doubted, but that the Israelites, if they
were really in their hearts what they professed with their mouths, were then
also justifi^d, and in the Favor of God, before they had heard any one
particular Command of the Law from God by Moses, either Ceremonial, as
Circumcision, Festivals, Sacrifice, etc. or Moral: and if any of them then died
(as no doubt some did) they were also saved.

Nor is the reason of this signification of faith, when it is joined with
Justification and Salvation, less easy. It Is because Faith in its strict and
primary Sense of assent to some Truths, necessarily preceeds this Religiousness
of Heart, this habitual Piety. A Man must firmly believe, that there is right
and wrong, moral good and evil, that the Will and Laws of God are the most
infallible Rules of it, that he will reward and punish the Observers or
Transgressors of them, before he is effectually resolved, or habitually
disposed, universally to be obedient to God, and to please him, as the Author
to the Hebrews has it Chap. 11. In like manner, the love and fear of God are
every where used in the Scriptures Synecdochically, for all Religion and
Virtue, because those Affections, in their strict and proper Sense, produce in
us a disposition of Soul to universal Obedience to him, and consequently all
Instances of Righteousness.

Such may be the first Notion of justifying, or saving Faith.

Secondly, A second is more particular and limited, and that is an obedient
Temper of Heart to God, making known his Will and Laws to us by Jesus of
Nazareth, the true Christ, or by being a Christian. It was one of the principal
Errors of the Jews, against whom St. Paul in various places disputes, about
the Point of Justification, that they would admit no other Condition of it,
than the Observance of the Mosaical Law, which he calls the Law, and the Works
of the Law. St. Paul maintains against them, that it was not: but a virtuous
and holy Temper of Soul, which loved Righteousness and hated Iniquity, and
consequently most desirous to know and do the Will of God, when, and in
whatsoever Instances he should please to declare and reveal it. But more
especially, and particularly, now by Jesus of Nazareth, the true Messiah
described, foretold, and promised to their own Nation.

He was now appointed by God to be his Vicegerent, and Legislator under himself
to all Mankind to the End of the World, as Moses was for a certain time only to
the Jews. Now God expects and requires Submission and Obedience to his Laws by
this Jesus, from all Men every where. All, I say, to whom this Declaration of
his Will shall come, and particularly from the Jews, to whom he was preached by
himself and other Disciples. Which if they did, and persever'd, they should be
justified by God, and in his Favor, particularly receive from him remission of
sins, the Holy Ghost, and Eternal Salvation.

Thirdly and lastly, Some have named a third Sense of faith, and that is Faith
objectively taken, or the Doctrine of Christianity, or if you please, the
Christian Religion. For Religion objectively taken, I would call a Doctrine
revealed from God: or a System of revealed Doctrines, and that which is by
Jesus Christ, the Christian Doctrine or Religion, so that Justification by
Faith, is the same with Justification; according to the Doctrine of the Gospel,
or according to the Christian Religion; and Justification by the Law, or Works
of the Law, is Justification according to the Doctrine of the Mosaical Law. Not
that which Moses himself really taught, or delivered, but that which the Jewish
Doctors, the Interpreters of that Law, and the generality of the Jews, taught
and believed in St. Paul's Time. Such may be the sense of Romans 3. 22. The
Righteousness of God by faith, i. e. taught by the Gospel; and then fitly
follows the particulars of that Doctrine, in the four next Verses, and v. 28.
We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law; and
v. 30. It is one God which shall justify the Circumcision by faith, and
Uncircumcision through faith. See also Gal 3. 17. and Romans 10. 6. And truly
such a kind of Language and Speaking, seems agreeable enough to that of the
most Ancient and Modern Jews; Nay, I think, to one who never so little
considers, it is plain. For the Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness
which is of Faith, or by the Faith of Jesus Christ, (Romans 10. 3, 6. and Romans 3.
21, 22.) are the same thing. But the Righteousness of God is manifestly that
way or method of Justification (all the Causes of Justification together) which
God had appointed after the Coming of Christ under the Gospel, and which Saint
Paul, and the rest of the Apostles taught. For (...) there, as frequently
elsewhere, (Gal. 5. 5. Romans 3. 21, 22. 30. compared with, Romans 9. 31.) is put
for (...), as appears from the opposition of (...), the Righteousness of God,
(Romans 10. 2.) to that of the Jews own Righteousness.

To interpret that of inherent or imputed Righteousness is not probable, though
it may be a possible sense, which sense of the word is yet more plain from v.
10. with the heart man believes to righteousness, i. e. to justification. From
hence it follows, that the Righteousness of Faith, is the way of Justification
by God's Appointment, and Command preached by the Apostles the Ministers of the
Gospel, or Christian Doctrine. Again, the Righteousness of God and of Faith is
opposed to the Righteousness of the Law, of the Works of the Law, of their own
Righteousness, and St. Paul's own Righteousness of the Law, Phil. 3. 9. and
therefore must have the same kind of sense. But these Righteousnesses are all
manifestly no other thing than Justification, according to the Doctrine and
Belief of the Jewish Doctors of the Law, the Generality of the Jews, and St.
Paul himself before his Conversion to Christianity.

And what if we should reduce the other two Senses of justifying Faith to this
last, and say, That Faith where it signifies primarily, the Condition or
qualifying Cause in us of Justification, as has been explained, may be taken
Synecdochically; a part for the whole, one part of the Christian Doctrine
concerning Justification, and that which was more earnestly contested by the
Jews, for the whole of that Doctrine. A thing ordinary enough in the Style of
the Holy Scripture. Nor do I see it besides the mind of the Apostle. Beside, if
this sense be but equally probable, it will be the best taken, because it
comprehends the other two.

Now to know what were the principal Differences between the Doctors of the
Jews, and Christians concerning Justification, we are to consult both the
Scriptures, and the Jewish Authors themselves.

And, as I think, we may therein observe these Five.

First, The Jews were of opinion, that there were some men who needed no
Justification at all, no favor of God in that particular of remission of sins.
Some of these they thought had never sinned in all their lives; the other again
by their own study and exercise, became without all faults, and their exact
Righteousness made recompense for their past Transgression. These they called
perfectly Righteous, (...), as they had two sorts more to appear in the Day of
Judgment, (viz.) perfectly wicked, and a middle between both; when as Mahomet's
Disciples fancy God will make use of Poc. ad por. Mos. not. cap. 6. Tal.
Rosch. hasch. c. 1.
Scales, to weigh good and bad Works one against the other; and if the Scales
happen to be even, mercy will weigh it down on the favorable side. Of this
sort among the Jews might be the Pharisee, who went to the Temple with the
Publican to pray, for he recites only his religious Actions, but says not a
word of any thing ever ill done. And it is said, Luke 18. that our Savior
spoke that Parable against certain which trusted in themselves that they were
Righteous. And the occasion of the Parable, Luke 11. and Matthew. 8. 13. is some
Argument, that it was an opinion among the Jews, that there were some men who
needed no repentance. Perhaps St. Paul might once reckon himself among these
perfectly Righteous, when he knew no better; for he says of himself, That
touching the Righteousness which was in the Law, i. e. in Vogue and Reputation
among the Lawyers or Doctors of the Law, he was blameless Phil. 3. And I
remember some-where in the Talmud, to have read of some Masters of such perfect
Sanctity, as never to have committed one sin, and to have been such from, and
in their Mother's Wombs, as Jeremiah is said to be; which there signifies no
more, than his being so early by God designed and separated to his Prophetical
Office and Employment. Now this opinion of theirs St. Paul denies, affirming
that all Men (except the Blessed Jesus, the true Messiah) have been, and still
continue in some Degree, or other, Sinners; and that all Men therefore stood in
need of continual Repentance and Remission; That Jews and Gentiles have all
fallen short of the Glory of God, and were guilty before him; That even the
best of the Jews themselves, were not exact Observers of their own Law,
especially in the inward and moral part of it. This St. Paul proves out of
their own sacred Authors, which he quotes, Romans 3.

Secondly, (b) The Jews held generally, that there was no need of the Merits or
consideration of any other, no not of the Messiah himself, for whose sake
Justification or Remission of Sins, particularly, should be granted by God: But
that Repentance, good Works, Fastings, Prayers, Sacrifices, Oblations, temporal
Punishments, or finally, corporeal Death were sufficient for the expiation of
all sin whatsoever. Or if any thought that there were any sins to be forgiven
for the Messias's sake, as some few of the Ancients thought (c), yet these were
but few, and restrained the Privilege to those of their own Nation, and
Religion: and lastly, however they would not hear of such a thing, as that it
was for the sake of Jesus of Nazareth, whom they denied to be their Messiah,
and rejected with an obstinate scorn. To this St. Paul opposes three things,
and maintains, First, That God ever did, and ever would justify, and forgive
sinners, upon Consideration of, and with regard to the perfect Obedience and
Sacrifice of the Messiah, and not without it. Secondly, That this great Favor
and Indulgence of Heaven was extended to all mankind. And, Thirdly, That Jesus
of Nazareth was this true Messiah. And that all this, as it was in it self most
reasonable, so was it agreeable to Moses and the Prophets, and now with such
undeniable Proof, and clear Evidence, declared to be the Will of God, that it
was not indeed any longer to be disputed.

Thirdly, The Jews advanced yet further and affirmed, that their Repentance,
Prayers, Sacrifices, and all other their good Works and Qualities, were not
barely a capacitating Condition of Justification, forgiveness of Sins, and the
happy Life to come, but meritorious; and that God was obliged in Justice to
give these for them. And as for the perfectly Righteous who needed no
Repentance, no question but that God was strictly bound to reward them with a
future, happy State of Life, especially at the Resurrection of the Dead, and
the Day of the great Judgment.

Nay, when they wanted Merits of their own, they had recourse to those of their
Ancestors, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and others; like the Works of
Supererogation among the Papists.

Nay, some were so besotted with vain Conceit and Arrogance, that they thought
God chose their Ancestors for their Merit, and was in love with their Posterity
for it too. And still there remains among them an Enthusiastical and Arrogant
strain, beyond all this, probably older than St. Paul; That God created the
World for their sakes, foreseeing, I suppose, what a lovely and excellent
People they would prove. We need but look into both Ancient and Modern Jewish
Authors to learn all this. Though, if we knew nothing of this their Arrogant
Opinion and Temper from themselves, yet the Holy Scripture would sufficiently
inform us (d).

Now, St. Paul, so zealous for the Honor of God and Jesus Christ, most
deservedly in his disputes with them about Justification, represseth and
refutes such insolent and false Opinion and Language. And therefore asserts the
Righteousness or Justification of God, or of God's Appointment by Faith of
Jesus Christ, described and taught in the Gospel to all them that believe. This
way of Justification of God's Appointment was first to believers, i. e. real
Christians in their hearts and lives, And then through the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus the propitiation; and lastly, freely by the grace of God. This,
God's way of Justification being thus, upon the Condition of our Christian
Obedience, and Consideration of perfect Obedience, and Death of Jesus, and of
the free grace of God, every way excludes the boasting of the Jews; which they
thought in their way they had so much reason for. This Righteousness of God was
neither without the interposition of the perfect Obedience and Sacrifice of
Jesus the true Messiah, nor by any Merit of theirs by which they may claim
Justification, as a Debt from God. Nor was it so much, as upon Condition of the
Observation of the Law of Moses, (of which presently) much less upon the
Account of its Merit, Romans 3. 22.

And because the Jews had so great an Opinion of the Merit of their Father
Abraham. He affirms, that Abraham himself was justified in the same manner too.
He was justified by Faith too; taking Faith first for a godly, religious Temper
of Heart as the Condition; and then this one part of the Gospel-doctrine of
Justification for the whole of it, by a Figure ordinary enough with St. Paul,
and other Holy Writers, as has been before observed. But he denies
peremptorily, that Abraham was justified by his Works of any sort, i. e. that
he was justified either according to their Doctrine in general, or more
particularly by the Merit of his Works.

He does not deny Justification by good Works, as a Qualification or Condition,
which is the Sense of St. James writing against an Error of some Christians,
who taught a bare Belief in Jesus, and Profession of it enough. And it is
likely they had it from the Jews too; the Vulgar of whom thought their mere
being Jews sufficient for Salvation.

Nor has either the Jewish or Christian Church ever wanted such sort of
People, and very numerous too; especially in times and places of great
ignorance, when their idle, ignorant and corrupt guides themselves have taught
them as much. St. Aug. tells us, that there were some in his time, who believed
all to be saved Civ. Dei lib. 21. cap. 22.
who gave Alms, who said daily in the Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses,
etc. and did forgive when asked, sometimes; who remained in the Church, however
they lived otherwise. And he believes there were many in St. Paul's time too,
who not rightly Lib. 80. quaest.
understanding St. Paul's Justification by Faith without Works did really
think, that having once believed in Christ, they should be saved by that Faith,
though they lived wicked and flagitious Lives. Those Christians in St. James
seem such a sort of People: And if the Epistle to the Romans was written before
that of St. James, they also might be led into such a Conceit by St. Paul
himself misunderstood (not minding what he had otherwise by word or writing
every where taught) and particularly in Romans 10. 9, 10. That if thou shall
confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with the heart man
believes unto Righteousness, (i. e. Justification) and with the mouth
Confession is made unto Salvation.

Here it is observable, how one Circumstance of the Persons who are written to,
and their Opinion, may determine the sense of words. St. Paul wrote to the
Jews, who affirmed, that their good Works merited Justification; St. James to
Christians who believed, and taught that they were not so much as a
qualification or condition, and no way necessary to it.

They both wrote true: Justification was, and was not by good Works. It was by
them as a qualification and condition, it was not by them as meritorious in the
most received and common sense of that word. But to return to St. Paul, he
flatly denies that Abraham himself was justified by the Merits of his Works, so
as that God was in manner of a Debtour obliged to it; much less was his
Posterity. Abraham indeed was a Person extraordinary, and so might justly
pretend to some privilege amongst Men: but had no reason to claim or challenge
any thing; particularly, so great things as remission of sins, and salvation
from God, merely for his own sake, or in such manner as a Creditour or Servant,
may do from his Debtour or Master, Romans 4.

This Doctrine of his so directly opposite to theirs, he proves from Moses and
David; for one says, that Abraham's Faith (his Piety and Obedience) was
imputed to him for Righteousness or Justification; and the other, blessed is
the Man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Now this word (...) impute,
imports in God nothing of payment of a Debt, nor of Merit from him: but an Act
of Discretion, Liberty, Choice, Goodness; though most wise and reasonable too,
in pursuance of the one great End of all his Counsels and Actions: This was the
Doctrine of St. Paul, and the other Apostles elsewhere, as if it were a matter
they much desire Christians should be well instructed in.

And in truth it is most agreeable to natural Reason: For to talk of Merit in
its proper sense, and so as it usually signifies amongst us, between God and
the best of Men, or the most excellent Angel, is to give a very false Idea of
the Case. For to merit from any one, is first to profit or advantage him some
way; and then it is to impart somewhat of his own; and lastly, he that
receives the Benefit, is bound to requite it by some Law without, and superior
to himself. Now there is nothing of all this, between God and his Creature.
For, can a Man profit his Maker? A Master indeed may be benefited by the labor
and service of his Servant. Next the strength, industry, and fidelity of the
Servant, is his own in respect of his Master; he never had any of this from
him. But what have we, which we have not received from God? Our very Being,
Faculties, Liberty, all kind of Ability and Capacity, are they not the free
gifts of our great and good Creator? Finally, what Law is there superior to
God's own Nature and Will, to oblige him to any Action? who can, or ought to
say to him, What do thou! not so much in respect of his irresistible Power
(for there is no Tyranny in Heaven) as his all comprehending Wisdom, his
immutable Righteousness and essential Goodness: It is true, there is such a
thing as just and right, eternal and unchangeable: But it is therefore so,
because God is so. It was eternally a property of the Divine Will (if I may so
speak) as truth was of the Divine Understanding. It is his own immutable Nature
to do that which is right and fit. That which we call right, fit, just, is a
due Relation, or Habitude of all Will, Action, Power to its Object; which
Object is bonum, good, and that the greatest too in respect of intention,
extension and duration, (and there can be no more respects.) This is the
ultimate, due End and Object, I say, of all Will, Action, and Power whatsoever.
But this Relation or (...), is therefore eternal and immutable, only because
God is so. It could never have existed without a Subject, and that Subject the
Divine Will exists necessarily. The very Being or Existence therefore of any
such thing, depends upon the Existence of the Divine Will. Besides, this
Relation which we call Right and Just is something, wherefore it as all other
somethings, must have the Will of God or active Power, or his Nature for its
Cause. But though Right and Just depend upon the Divine Will for its eternal
Existence; yet we cannot conceive it ever separated from them, or without them:
We cannot but conceive it a pure perfection, and therefore cannot but attribute
it to God, an All-perfect Being.

For an instance or application; we say, that the Object of God's will, is
always the Universal good, the good of all Beings, the greatest good, either
fit or possible; and in order to this he wills, been bonis, male malis, he
justifies the Righteous, and condemns the Wicked: He orders and distributes
respective recompenses of rewards and punishments to the good and bad; the
quantity, quality, time and other Circumstances are to be left to the Divine
Wisdom. But this proceeds from no Cause without the Divine Will it self. We
cannot but conceive the Divine Will thus to act. There is no Power or Will to
determine or constrain it. God's Nature is such, that we cannot but conceive
him to will, and do that which is just and right, (for the greatest good of all
reasonable Beings) and yet most freely, because it is his own immutable Nature:
for what can be more free than what is natural? Liberty in God is not an
indifferency (for that would be an imperfection) but that infinite force and
delight with which he acts. I have no better words to express my meaning by.
Liberty and Necessity therefore in God are not only consistent, but
inseparable. It is right and just for God to reward the good, who keep his
Commandments and observe his Laws, which are the infallible Rules and Instances
of what is right and just; but we must not say God is bound to it, or that
those who are good merit it from him, in a strict and most received Sense, and
common Usage, because that imports, as if he must do it whether he would or no,
and there were some Law or Person without, or superior to himself. We may and
ought to say, that God most certainly will do so, because it is his own
immutable Nature to do it. The Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, and his
Countenance beholds the upright.

It Is true (to put an end to this not useless, or very impertinent Digression)
that worthy Qualities and Actions, i. e. such as do effect or but tend to the
common good, that are useful or beneficial to the World, do justly entitle any
Person to a Reward, such as Honor, Power, Wealth or pleasurable Life, because
those same Qualities and Actions are thereby maintained, increased and
propagated, and consequently the best and happiest State of the World,
furthered and advanced. Every one in his place, and according to his Ability,
is bound to this, but especially all sorts of Governors. And such qualities
have, and may with good reason obtain the Name of Merits amongst Men, and in
respect of them in its most common and received sense. For they are the
property of those who possess them, they never received them from other Men,
they are beneficial and useful to Men, and there is a superior Law and Power
to oblige, and compel Men to reward them, none of which can be said in respect
to God. Though it being a congruous and reasonable thing, as is above
mentioned, God always does, and always will, necessarily from his own Nature,
will and act in such manner. And if there be no more meant by meriting than
that, we may safely in such a sense be said to merit from God too.

And in this sense it is, that St. Paul says, that God is not unrighteous to
forget your work and labor of love, Heb. 6. 9. And benceforth there is laid up
for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give
me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. i. e. It is a congruous and fitting thing of best
effect certainly in God's Government of the World, that good Men should be so
used by him.

I have been somewhat the longer in this Digression, because I believe the
whole Controversy about Merit, between the Jews and St. Paul with his
Christians, and between the Pontificians and the Protestants, may, by the
little that has been here said, be easily cleared and decided. At last we
conclude then with St. Paul, and the Gospel-doctrine against the Jewish
Doctors, and the legal Doctrine which they taught, viz. That we sinners are
justified by God, and more particularly upon our repentance and perseverance in
Holiness of heart and life, pardoned and saved, not by Works of Righteousness
which we have done, not by any Merit in us from him, in its proper sense as
has been explained; but according to his Mercy, and by the free grace, and
undeserved goodness of God, Romans 2. 24. Ephesians. 2. 8. Tit. 3. 5.

Fourthly, Another Doctrine of the Law, or of the Jewish Doctors concerning
Justification was, that admitting all Men to be sinners, and God to justify
them with consideration of the perfect Righteousness and Sacrifice of the
Messiah, and that this Messiah was Jesus of Nazareth, and that none of their
own qualities and performances, were truly meritorious of so great a favor
from God: yet the necessary qualification or condition of Justification to all
Men, those at least to whom the Mosaical Law was made known, was the observance
of all the particular Commands of that Law. For that Law was certainly from
God, and (as they deemed) never to be changed. Insomuch that the Messiah
himself, was not to abolish the least Tittle of it: but to cause it by his
Authority and Power to be more punctually, and strictly observed. And here St.
Paul had to do not only with the unconverted, but converted Jews also. For a
multitude of them, who believed Jesus of Nazareth to be the true Messiah, and
remission of sins through his Name, yet were zealous of the Law of Moses, Acts
21. 20. And such were the whole Sect of Christians, called Nazarenes, as some
of the Fathers report. They believed the Messiah was not to change the Law, but
to explain, confirm and command it.

This opinion of the Jews, St. Paul with much Zeal and Courage opposes: And
one of his Arguments, Romans 2. four last Verses, is to this effect: If God
justified sinners, Abraham and the Patriarchs, nay even you your selves,
Moses's Disciples, upon the qualification of an obediential Temper and
Disposition of Heart to the Commands of God in any instances, and howsoever he
shall be pleased to declare them, and particularly those by Moses to you Jews,
till the coming of the true Messiah, to declare God's Will, and give Laws in
his Name to all Men, granting you, that the Doers of the Law shall be
justified, till that great Prophet the Messiah shall come, Romans 2. I say if
this be so, as I have proved in the Case of Abraham, and the Patriarchs; then,
why may not God now also, since the Messiah is come, even Jesus of Nazareth,
invincibly proved to be the Person by Prophecies, Miracles, Resurrection,
Ascension, Mission of the Holy Ghost, justify all Sinners, Jews and Gentiles
upon the same condition of a Religious disposition of heart, exerting it self
in Obedience to his Will and Laws declared by this Jesus of Nazareth the true
Messiah? Why may not God make an alteration in the particular Condition of his
Favor, i. e. his particular Laws, the general one, an obediential and pious
Temper and Disposition of Soul to God, and consequently to what is right and
just remaining always the same? why may he not do it now by the Messiah after
Moses, as he did by Moses, after all the Holy Men before Abraham, and the
Patriarchs your Ancestors? why may not God make the Messiah the Messenger of
his Will and Pleasure, with Alteration, Addition, Abolition, etc. as well as
Moses? And such I believe to be the purport of that obscure and unusual way of
speaking to our Ears, but perfectly of Jewish Style, Romans 10. v. 5. Say not,
etc. Moses (says St. Paul) did say indeed, and that from God, that the man
which obeyed God's Law by him should live, i. e. have his Favor and Blessing.
But now the same God says by Jesus the Christ, and by us his Apostles, that he
has sent the Messiah, even this Jesus, the great Prophet foretold and promised
even to you, and that if we believe and profess him to be the Christ, and
consequently be obedient to, and hear him in the Name of God, we shall be
saved. Or in short Terms: God indeed did formerly command you if you would be
happy to obey Moses in his Name; now he commands you to obey Jesus the Christ
himself, sent now by him to you and all mankind. Before the Coming and
Appearance of Jesus the true Messiah, the Condition of Justification to you
Jews was, Believe in Moses, to be the Disciples of Moses, and the Observance of
the Laws of Moses; but now both to Jew and Gentile, and all to whom Jesus is
preached, the Condition is, believing in Jesus, becoming his Disciples,
observing his Laws, and keeping his Words. It will not be amiss a little to
paraphrase these few Verses, to make the sense of the Apostle ease and clear,
beginning at the second Verse.

I believe (says St. Paul) and openly declare it, that many of my Brethren,
the Jews, are truly zealous for God's Honor, and their Duty. But they are
unhappily at this time, ignorant and mistaken in both. They do not think of, or
rightly conceive God's way of Justification; part of which is, doing it upon
consideration of the perfect Righteousness, and voluntary Oblation of Jesus of
Nazareth, the true Messiah; and this ever was, and ever will be, from the
beginning to the end of mankind. So is also another part of it, viz. the
general Condition and Qualification in us for it; namely, a pious and religious
Temper of Heart to God: But the Application of this general Condition is new,
namely, Obedience to the particular Laws of God by Jesus Christ, without any
regard to the Laws of Moses, any further than they are, according to his
primitive and universal Laws of Reason and Nature, or repeated, allowed, and
confirmed by this Jesus.

And being thus ignorant of God's Method of Justification, they go about to
continue and establish their own way without Jesus Christ, and will have the
particular Observance of the Laws given by Moses to be necessary, and which
they still imagine and believe now and ever to the End of the World ought to be
retained. But they ought to know, that now Jesus Christ is come, he has put an
end to the Law of Moses. All who believe him to be the Messiah (and all should
to whom he is preached) are to have no more regard to Moses, as their
Legislator and Master now, but to Jesus, irrefragably proved and demonstrated
to be the true Messiah. Moses did say, and truly in his time (and for so long
time as it pleased God, i. e. to the Revelation of the Messiah) that if the
Jews his People hoped for God's Blessing, Favor and Reward, they must be of an
obsequious and obedient Heart to God, and with reverence observe those Laws in
particular, which God had most evidently commanded Moses to describe and enjoin
them, as a Condition thereof: But now Jesus the Messiah has been sent from God
to you, and all Mankind, with infinitely greater proof of his Mission from God,
than ever Moses was; both he, and we commanded by him, teach and preach that
all Men who shall hear our Doctrine, and have opportunity of sufficient
instruction in it, are not in the least to doubt, (it being an exceeding
manifest and plain thing) but that this Jesus is this Messiah; but are to
believe it firmly, and profess it boldly, and consequently to become his
Disciples, particularly showing their Piety to God, and their most religious
Disposition of Heart, Submission and Obedience to him, by the Observance of his
Will and Laws by this Jesus the Christ, if they intend to be saved. Obedience
to God by Moses was, now Obedience to Jesus Christ is, and ever hence-forward
will be (as the Jews falsely imagine concerning their Law) the Condition of, and
Qualification for the Divine Favor, Justification, Remission of Sins, and
finally Salvation.

Such may be the Sense of St. Paul, so we may suppose him to have spoken to us
in those obscure words.

The only thing of moment which the Jews had to object, and which converted and
unconverted to Christianity were very fond of, was the perpetuity of the Law of
Moses, clearly as they thought affirmed in their Law and Prophets. But this St.
Paul every where absolutely denies with the rest of the Apostles, and with
great reason. For besides that that Law is impossible to be observed by all
mankind; neither Moses himself, nor any of the Prophets ever affirmed it. Nay,
they have intimated the contrary, Jer. 31. 31. with Heb. 8. Moses himself
promises the Jews, That the Lord their God would raise up a Prophet like him,
whom they should hear, Deuteronomy. 18. with Acts 7. This, as it may promise a
Succession of Prophets, so it had a principal Respect to the Messiah, who was a
Person sent immediately from God with larger Authority than Moses, and to be
heard by them: Not as they too meanly thought of him, as if he were to be only
the Servant and second of Moses. No, he was to be a Lawgiver from God like
Moses, and to take and leave what he thought fit in his Law. And so the
Prophecy is only completely fulfilled in the Messiah. None of the Prophets were
so like Moses as he.

The Messiah, only, was a Legislator from God like Moses. It Is true, none of
the Talmudists, Paraphrasts or Rabbis, that I remember, have applied this
place to the Messiah; but neither have they done that by many other places
where they fairly might, and with much more reason than where oft-times they
have.

But it is enough, if Moses and the Prophets, never really and in truth
affirmed the perpetual Duration of the Law. For now God has given abundantly
more ample Proof of his Mission of Jesus, than ever he did of Moses; by his
Doctrine, Life, Miracles, Resurrection, Ascension, Mission of the Holy Ghost
upon them who believed in Jesus, and not upon the Jews: and from this Jesus, I
have learned (says St. Paul) that a great part of the Mosaical Law should be
abolished; principally in order to the uniting all Mankind into one Body by
Religion; That Circumcision and Uncircumcision now avails nothing (to
Justification) but Faith working by Love: A religious and obedient Heart to God
by Jesus Christ, producing all the substantial Actions of Piety and Charity to
God and our Neighbor, the sum and end even of the Mcsaical Law it self; that
no man who now believes in Jesus ought to oblige himself, by Circumcision, to
the observance of all the little temporary, and now useless things of the
Mosaical Law. Nay, if he does, Christ shall profit him nothing, as being
disobedient to one express Command of Christ, liberty and freedom from that
comparatively mean institution. Such then is the fourth false Doctrine of the
Jews concerning Justification.

Fifthly and lastly, In few words: The Jewish Doctors taught, that they might
perform and fulfill all the Commandments of their Law, by their own natural
Strength and Power (e), but St. Paul, and the Divine Writers, teach a contrary
Doctrine; viz. That the grace of God is absolutely necessary for our
performance of good Works, or rather for being good men; the Condition of our
Acceptance and Justification (f).

These are all of the most considerable Opinions and Doctrines of the Jewish
Doctors, or Expounders of the Mosaical Law concerning Justification, that I at
present remember. Now all these Doctrines of the Jewish Doctors put together,
are the Justification by the Law, or the Works of the Law, as I conceive.
Which, in not many words, are to this effect. Some men needed no Justification,
but those who did, were justified without any Merits but their own; viz. for
the due Observance of the Law of Moses, by their own Strength, Care and
Industry.

Justification then by Faith, or according to the Christian Doctrine, as
opposed to the Law, must be on the contrary. That all men being sinners are
justified, and particularly receive remission of sins, the Holy Spirit and
Everlasting Salvation, from the free and undeserved goodness of God, upon the
consideration of the perfect Righteousness, and the meritorious Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ, and upon the Condition or Qualification of a pious Temper of
Heart for the future, to obey the Will of God, (and consequently to do the
thing that is right and just) howsoever he shall be pleased to declare it; but
particularly by the Lord Jesus Christ; which very Condition too we had never
been able to perform, without the assistance of the grace of God. This, as I
think, may be the comprehensive Sense of Justification by Faith; but if it
should prove otherwise, it is but a mistake in the signification of a Phrase, I
confess obscurely enough delivered to us now at this distance of time, and of
so different a way of speaking from the Apostolical Age. However that be,
certain it is, that the Doctrine it self is taken out of, and according to the
Holy Scriptures; in which I see nothing but what is plain, easy and
reasonable. After this, we may in very short observe, that if any of the three
Senses of justifying faith mentioned, viz. A general Piety, or a Christian
Obedience, or according to the Christian Doctrine, be that of the Holy
Scripture, then justifying Faith is not a mere assent to the whole Doctrine of
the Gospel; nor, Secondly, is it a bare reliance upon God and Christ, and trust
in their promises; or as others express it, a rolling and throwing our selves
upon Christ, for pardon and salvation; nor, Thirdly, is it a confident
persuasion, that our sins are pardoned in Jesus Christ; nor, Fourthly, is it
whatsoever men have confusedly meant by those Metaphors of going to Christ, or
embracing Christ, or eying him by Faith as an instrument; as if such a thin
(...) or Exile Relation of Faith were a thing for which Faith should be so much
predicated, and to which no less than Justification, and Eternal Salvation
should be attributed. Besides, if Faith should thus justify, because it
apprehends, takes hold of, and embraces Christ, how much more should love be
said to do it; which more properly may be said to take hold of, and embrace
Christ.

Finally, There is no mention in the Scripture of Faith's justifying or saving,
as such a kind of instrument, nor of any thing which infers it, or would so
much as give any hint or suspicion of it; but as a necessary Condition or
Qualification every where, in the same manner as Repentance, Obedience,
Confession of Sins, and believing him to be raised from the Dead, Romans 10. 9,
10. Both these last are Synecdochically taken, for being true Christians, or
Obedience to God by Jesus Christ.

These notions, I conceive, have been invented and received principally in
opposition to the Pontifician sense; and then, for want of the knowledge of the
Oriental way of speaking, or from former prejudices. Such notions and language
would have seemed very strange and unintelligible to the Greek, the Roman, and
especially the Jew, the Adversary of St. Paul, whom he endeavors to convince
and confute, and when understood very mean and improbable. And yet there may be
truth under all these expressions, if they be taken figuratively with some sort
of explication; and we may be so charitable as to believe, that pious and good
Men have so understood them; and that others sometimes can better tell, and
explain their thoughts, than they themselves. As for example, if we take Faith
first strictly for an Assent, but then add, so firm, repeated, attentive and
deliberate an one, like that of Thomas, as to produce in us profound veneration
and submission of Soul to God and Christ, and an actual Obedience to their Will
and Commands, and consequently a true Virtue and real Sanctity of Heart and
Life; I say, if this be the Sense of justifying Faith, it is true and good; and
so if believing and relying upon Christ, and trust in him for pardon of sin and
acceptance, be not a presumptuous one, but well grounded upon a true
Repentance, the real Change and Conversion of the Heart, and supposing and
comprehending that, it may pass for a justifying Faith. So may receiving and
embracing whole Christ, as they phrase it, as King, Priest and Prophet; because
it includes Obedience to Christ's Laws as a King. And on the other hand, to
receive Christ as a Priest and Prophet may be included in Obedience, because we
are commanded to believe Christ's Doctrine, and to trust in God for the
remission of sins procured by him upon repentance; finally, when they call
their justifying Faith a lively Faith, or Faith working by love, and bringing
forth the Fruits of Holiness and good Works, it may do very well; though it is an
odd kind of expression of what some contend for, That Faith alone justifies
without Works or Obedience; which is like as if a Man should say, That the Root
and the Fruit of a Tree nourishes, to signify that the Root only does it.

We have now gone through the explication of the words promised. For the
application of them, let the Apostles own inference suffice at present, to
recommend unto us a justified State. We that are justified by Faith (says the
Apostle) have peace with God; that is, we are in a State of Amity and
Friendship with God; so that, we not only have no reason to fear any harm from
that Terrible and Almighty Power, which the Confederation of all Heaven and
Earth cannot secure us from: but we have all reason to hope for, and be assured
of all Instances of Favor and Bounty, which his infinite Wisdom shall think
fit, more and greater than we can conceive. What can intercept or restrain his
Magnificent goodness to his Friends whom he delights in, and delights to
honor? And then our Consciences will not terrify us, or make us uneasy with
Menaces or Suspicions of our Guilt, and his Justice one Day, and drive us from
all thoughts of God. But on the contrary, they will invite, encourage, command
us to make use of him, to make him our Refuge, our Trust, our Solace in all
Conditions at all times. Then, when all the World, as kindly as it may now look
upon us, shall neglect us, or forsake us, or hate us, or (which is certain to
come to pass sooner or later) shall not be able in the least to help us though
it would; then when Death shall envisage and summon us to an appearance before
that Sovereign Tribunal, and when we shall stand there to receive our final
Doom, and irreversible Sentence.

Oh, most desirable and happy of all Conditions! without the assurance of which
if we would draw our Curtains about us, and be serious but one hour, we could
not be quiet or easy in our selves. We proclaim the Person most happy and
fortunate, who has the Eye, the Ear, the Heart of a Prince; but what can the
greatest Potentates do for us more, than heap upon us Riches and Honors for a
few Days; which many to one we had better have wanted. Even the continuance of
bodily Life and Health, the greatest bodily Blessings are out of their Power;
but how much more the goods of the mind, and the Treasures of Heaven. Whereas
the Eternal Sovereign Lord of the Universe, has all things perfectly at his
own disposal, to bestow upon whom he pleases; and that here with the Wisdom
and Care of a Father, but hereafter certainly Fullness of Joy and Pleasures for
ever more. Besides, where God fixes his Affection, and vouchsafes his
Friendship, we are sure there is true Worth, and something of real and good
Value, though of his own gift; when Earthly greatness through ignorance,
misinformation, humor or necessity may misplace them.

And the belief of, and reflection upon God's Approbation, who is the best
Judge, is at all times extremely grateful and satisfactory to us naturally.
This is certain, that a wise and just Man takes more pleasure in not being
unworthy of Favor which he does not enjoy; than in enjoying what he does not
deserve. We conclude all in turning St. Paul s Doctrine and Inference into an
exhortation and motive. Let us use our utmost Care and Endeavor on our part,
and God will not fail to perform what is to be done on his, to get into the
Number of those who are Evangelically justified; our Sins pardoned, our Souls
inhabited and sanctified by the Holy Spirit, and our Eternal Salvation assured;
that so we may enjoy the great Honor, and the unspeakable Comfort of being the
Friends of God, and at peace with him through our Lord Jesus Christ.

To whom with the Father, and Holy Spirit, be all Honor, and Praise, both now
and for evermore. Amen.

Annotations and Additions On the Discourse of Justification.
(a) FOR the ample Proof of the Notion and Sense of (...) and (...) sometimes,
which I have given, I think what follows will be abundantly sufficient.

(1) Let it be premised, that though (...) in its most precise Notion,
signifies to pronounce just, to discharge, acquit and absolve from Fault and
Punishment; yet in its more general Use, it signifies more generally, Viz. to
treat, or use as just, in our Opinions, Words or Actions; and this, because
they are always, or ought to be conjoined; and because that the pronouncing
just is for that very End, that a Person may be so dealt with, and used in all
the abovenamed Respects. This is most ordinary in all Languages, and
particularly, 1 Kings 8. 32. (...), and (...), are of the same importance.

(2) It is certain, that the word (...) in the Septuagint, Apocryphal Books,
and the New Testament, in above twenty Places, signifies our Sense. For
Example, we may consult these, Genesis 44. 16. Exodus 23. 7. Deuteronomy. 25. 1. 1 King.
8. 32. Jes. 5. 23. and 50. 8. Prove. 17. 15. etc. In two or three Places, (2 Samuel 15. 4. Mic. 7. 9. Psalm. 81. 3.) it signifies to judge or give sentence,
either on the good or bad side, but rather on the good, and then it answers to
be Hebrew words, (...) and (...). Twice it signifies to be just neutrally, not
to make just actively, Genesis 38. 26. Psalm. 19. 10. In one or two places it may
be equally taken in our sense, or the Pontifician, of making just. Finally, in
two places only, the Pontifician and Socinian sense cannot be denied, viz. Psalm
73. and Apoc. 22. but that may very well happen, because it answering to the
Hebrew, (...), the grammatical Force of that Conjugation may take place so
rarely. But the sense of a word, surely, is to be taken from its most common
use; from twenty places, rather than one or two.

(3) The Hebrew word, (...), to which (...) answers in the Septuagint,
manifestly signifies our sense of Justification in above twenty places: Nor can
Bellarmine, or any other, find any more than two places, where it is used in
their sense of making righteous. The one is Jes. 53. 11. By his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many. But the Forensick sense seems there more
proper, because it follows, for he shall bear their iniquities. My righteous
Servant shall bring many into a Condition of Grace and Favor with God, by his
bearing their Iniquities; the Chal. Parap. here uses the word, (...), which
generally signifies forensically, and R. Selom. gives the same sense. The other
place which Bellarmine quotes is, Dan. 12. 3. they that turn many unto
righteousness, (...). But the Septuagint otherwise read the Hebrew Copy, viz.
for (...) they read (...), rendering it (...). But suppose this reading does not
give so good a sense, and finally, granting this single Instance of (...)
signifying Justification, or making righteous, is there any proportion between
one place and twenty, to determine the otherwise dubious signification of a
Word?

(4) The Chaldee, Syriack and Rabbinical words which interpret the Hebrew,
(...) and the Hellenistical (...), are certainly much oftener used in the
forensick Sense, such as are (...), as any one will find who reads the Targums.
The Syriack Version and the Talmudists and Rabbis, particularly the Treatise
Sanhedrim.

(5) The opposite Hebrew word to (...), viz. (...), most commonly signifies to
condemn, or to afflict, vex, use ill, as wicked men are wont, and ought to be
used. This signification we may find above twenty times in the Old Testament;
and the last particularly, 1 Samuel 14. 47. but it never signifies to make a Man
wicked in a double active Sense.

(6) This sense we have given is plainly to be collected out of the Apostle St.
Paul's own words, compared. Thus, Romans 5. 9. justified by his Blood, (...), is
the same sense with that in Verse 10. We have been reconciled by the Death of
his Son, (...). Justification and Reconciliation were the same, viz. to be
restored to Grace and Favor with God; to be delivered from punishment for sin,
and to be used generally by God, as those use to be, to whom he is favorable
and kind, as he always certainly is to a just Man.

Again, Romans 4. from the 2 d. to the 9th. Verse, it is manifest that (...), to
be justified, and (...) to justify, are of the same meaning, with having
Faith, (...), imputed for righteousness, and (...), to impute for
righteousness: But the phrase of imputing for righteousness, etc. is of the
same importance with (...) and (...), the remission and covering of sins.
Therefore (...) is of the same importance too. And what is remission of sins,
or to be freed from punishment for them, but only one instance of the more
general divine Favor, and of being used and regarded by God, as a good and
just Man uses to be? Finally, Romans 4. 16. 18. (...) and (...) and (...),
Condemnation and justification are opposed, therefore what is the sense of
(...) which no doubt, is the judging, pronouncing, and treating a Man as
wicked: such, on the contrary, must be the sense of (...).

I think therefore enough is here said to establish, and fix the notion of
(...), or to justify, when conjoined with the word Faith.

(7) There is abundant proof of this out of their own Writings most ancient;
nor is it to be doubted, but that the general Opinions of their Doctors in our
Savior's time, were the same with those we now find among them, especially who
were nearest to it. In the Treatise, Sanh. cap 6. Misna 2. Expiation of sin,
and a portion in the World to come, as they speak, is attributed to Confession,
from the Example of Achan. It is without doubt, they supposed Repentance too,
as they expressly mention in the next quotation.

By which we may see, how Judaical that Synecdochical way of speaking is used
also by St. Paul, Romans 10. 9, 10. If thou shall confess with thy mouth, etc. In
the Gemara of Cod. Joma. cap. 8. we have two leaves filled with the Elogies of
Repentance. Among other things, they say, that there are three divisions or
kinds of Expiation, with each of which Repentance is to be joined. If any one
should sin against an affirmative Precept, Repentance alone would be sufficient
for Expiation: But if against a negative one, then Repentance suspended the
Punishment, till the Day of Expiation expiated it. If any one committed a sin
which deserved Excision, or Death by the hands of the Magistrate, then
Repentance and the Day of Expiation did only suspend Punishment, till
Affliction and Chastisements expiated and wiped away Guilt and Punishment, (I
suppose.) Finally, if any had been guilty of Blasphemy against the Name of God,
nothing could expiate but corporal Death.

In the same place, they tell us, that Repentance was so great and excellent a
thing, that by its Virtue, even sins of presumption [(...)] i. e. of the most
heinous and atrocious Nature, became merits. In the Gemara of Rosch haschanah.
cap. 1. fol. 17. 2. and 18. 1. Repentance is said to undo and rescind the very
Decree of Judgment; And the iniquity of the House of Eli, not to be expiated by
Sacrifices or oblations, but (...) and (...) by the Law and the Retributions of
pious Men, or of the Saints, i. e. by Alms and Works of choice and Charity. The
sense of the phrase (...), or, by the Law, seems to be either by the reading or
studying of the Law, as they elsewhere commonly speak; or by the diligent
general Practice of the Law, and Observation of it, or of its Commands. And
that of Retribution of the Saints, or of the Religious, signifies more than
Observation of Command, viz. Works of Charity, Goodness, Bounty, Liberality,
beyond what is by any Divine Law required or due. Now it was by both these for
the future, not by the first only, that they say the Iniquities of Eli's House,
were to be expiated. See also Windet de vita functorum statu, page 193.

We may here fitly observe, that the phrase of (...) to be expiated, or purged
by the Law, expresses part of St. Paul s (...) and (...) and (...), which he
peremptorily denies to expiate sin, as he does also the other of their Works of
Liberality and Charity. He denies it, I say, not as a Condition, but as
meritorious of God's Favor and Forgiveness: For we ought here further to
observe, that in these quotations, two of the Jewish Opinions concerning
Justification are contained. The one the needlesness or exclusion of the
consideration, or regard to the Merits of any other, even of the Messiah
himself, least of all to the Sacrifice of him; which, they deeming him to be a
great Prince to subjugate all Nations, abhorred. The other, that their own good
Works both of Duty and Choice, of Precept and Charity, were abundantly
meritorious, and by their Worth and Merit did expiate all their sins, and
oblige God in Justice to forgive them, and receive them into his Favor again;
of which more in the next particular. We Will here add somewhat more. In the
Author of Eccles. Cap. 18. 22. there is a footstep of expiation of sin by
corporal Death, Defer not (says that Author) till Death to be justified. And
then for Alms or Works of Charity, how much the Jews attribute to them, we may
abundantly learn from the Talmudists, and Apocryphal Authors. See Bav. Bath.
Cap. 1. fol. 8, 9, 10, 11. in Gemara; we read also Ecclus. 3. 30. (...) Alms
make an atonement for sin. And Tob. 12. 9. (...), for Alms does deliver from
Death, and shall purge away all sin. The Holy Authors of the New Testament,
never express themselves in such manner; but always attribute expiation of sin
to Jesus Christ, no doubt, as a Sacrifice and a meritorious one, by his
voluntary oblation of himself. So St. Paul, Romans 3. 25. calls Jesus Christ
(...), a propitiation, and Titus 3. 5. (...), etc. not by Works of or by
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And John 1. 7. (...).
The Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin; in the forensick Sense it is to
be confessed, that some places in the Canonical Scriptures, might give occasion
to this opinion of the Jews: Such as Prove. 16. 6. By mercy and truth iniquity
is purged, in the Hebrew (...), by them iniquity shall be expiated, as it is
always said of Sacrifices: And in the Septuagint (...). And so Prove. 10. 2. and
11. 4. Righteousness delivers from Death, where (...), Righteousness, is most
probably to be taken in the Hellenistical Sense, for Alms. Because it is in
both places opposed to Treasures and Riches, which profit nothing in the Day of
Wrath. But most probable it is, that what the Canonical Writers, and Apocryphal
too, perhaps looked upon as a condition and qualification only, for Forgiveness
and Divine Favor, the Jews of the following Ages so mistook them, as to
stretch it to an Obligation of Justice upon God, as much as upon a Master to
pay his Servant his Wages, or a Debtor his Creditor. They improved their
Repentance and good Works, their observance of their Law, and their Works of
free Choice, as Alms, etc. to a proper and strict Merit; as some sort of
Christians do their Repentance, and sometimes that only which they call
Penance. Nor are we to think, that they extended the effect of their Merit no
farther than this corporal Life. For they tell us, it reached the future Life
too. In their Talmudical Tract, Bav. Bath. before quoted (fol. 10. 1.) The
question is asked why it is twice said (Prove. 10. 2. and 11. 4.) That
Righteousness delivers from Death. The Answer is, because it delivers from
two kinds of Death; from a violent Death [here], and from the Judgment of Hell.

(c) Those who seem to have thought so were but few, and of some extraordinary
Sagacity, or perhaps there might have been a touch of Revelation or
Inspiration. Nor do we know what, or how many thoughts may by such means first
come into the minds of men. The generality of their Doctors thought of no such
thing, nor make any mention of the Merits of the Messiah. Nor did those few
speak of it as necessary or certain, and then they restrained the Privilege to
their own Nation, and People. Finally, they say nothing who this Messiah was,
and it is certain the Apostles Adversaries, the Bulk of the Jewish Doctors
denied Jesus of Nazareth to be him. Who these Ancient Jewish Authors were, some
of them see in the Preface to the first Volume of Lightfoot, page 14, 15. and
L'empereur's Annotations on Jach. on Dan. 9. which is enough to let a Jew see,
how far a Jew may go in believing this Christian Doctrine.

(d) The ancient wise Men (says Maiem. Comm. on Pir. Anoth. Cap. 4. par. 5.)
who taught the Law Gratis, without any reward, were believers of God, and the
Law [(...)] by which a Man merits the Life of the World to come; and again,
parag. 16. Let a man get those Virtues here, by which he may merit the World to
come. See also pir. Anoth. cap. 6.

And to prevent the Objection that the word, (...), which I render to merit or
deserve, signifies no more than to obtain, as some have said of the word
mereri, used by the Latin Fathers; we may observe, that that is signified more
fitly by the word (...) in the former part of the Sentence. And if the Author
had meant no more, he had used the same word. But it is sufficiently known to
those, that are acquainted with the Talmudical and Rabbinical Language, that
properly and strictly to merit by being Righteous and Just, is the first
signification of the word (...).

In the Targums of Jon. and Hieros. Genesis 22. Abraham is brought in praying to
God. That when the Sons of Isaac were in straits and distress, and made their
Address to God, they might have deliverance and remission of their sins, for
the meritorious Piety of Isaac their Father, in submitting himself voluntarily
to be bound, and offered by his Father Abraham. And Psalm 60. 7. the Chal,
parap. introduces David praying for the sake of the Truth of Abraham, the
Righteousness of Isaac, and the Piety, (...), of Jacob.

And in Targ. Cantic. 1. 9. The passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea,
is attributed to the Merits of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

It Is true, the Holy Scripture it self tells us, that God did oft-times do
good to Men, yea, and forgive some punishments of some sins, for the sake, and
at the request of some other eminently, holy and righreous Man; (so Pharaoh's
Steward was blessed for Joseph's sake; the Israelites at Moses's humble Request
were spared; the Sodomites for ten Righteous Persons at the request of Abraham,
had escaped that dreadful Destruction) and we believe he does so still. But
the Jewish opinion extends this privilege of good men beyond its bounds, even
to the utmost. They expected all punishment for all sins here and hereafter, to
be remitted for their sakes. What we Christians are taught, to be the just and
due honor only of the Messiah, even Jesus of Nazareth. Besides, we believe,
that this very great favor afforded to the best of Men, is bestowed upon them
for the sake of Jesus the Christ, which the Jews never thought of.

In their own Books it is common, that all Israel shall have a portion in the
World to come, that not one of them shall perish, or go to Hell, except
Apostates, and such who deny some fundamental Articles of their Religion,
otherwise wicked enough.

So we find it in the Treatise Sanhedrin. cap. 11. misn. 1. and 4. I know they
do not all say just the same things in this matter, as well as in others: But
from their own Books, and the Scripture it seems most probable, that the
Generality of the Doctors and People did believe that their very relation to
Abraham, and being the Disciples of Moses, did deserve very good usage from
God. Much more surely, their external Penances, and strict Observance of their
Law. The Holy Scripture confirms all this. For in Jes. cap. 58. we read, there
were those who challenged God's Favor for their mere external performances;
and in the Evangelists how much did they vaunt themselves, for being the
Children of Abraham, and the Disciples of Moses?

Moses himself seems to intimate, what an insolent and arrogant People they
were, and would prove, Deuteronomy. 9. 4. when he tells them, that they were rather
worse than other Nations, and that God's Choice of them, was only from his own
free Goodness.

(e) We do not, as I remember, meet with any acknowledgment of Divine Grace,
any supervenient additional Influence or Assistance, either in the Scripture,
or in their own Writings, as necessary to Repentance, Reformation, or becoming
a good Man, by any Pharisaical Jew, such as St. Paul disputes against?

And it seems to me the most genuine Sense of that known and ancient saying
amongst them (...) i. e. all things are in the Power and disposal of Heaven,
except the fear of God. The sense I take to be that that depends not at all
upon God s Will, not solely on Conc ad Exodus 7. 3.
God's Will, as Men. Ben. Israel expounds it. A Man may do it, or not do it
merely of himself, by his own natural Power; if God hinder it not, that is
enough.

It is true, there may be met with in some of their Prayers extant among them,
a Petition for God's help to keep his Commandments, to serve him and keep them
from sin, but not as necessary, without which they could not perform it. So we
find in their Office for the Day of Expiation, (...), that God would (...) fol.
(...)
purify their Hearts to serve him, that it would please God they might not
sin. But it is more than I know, if they any where use it as an Argument for
this their Prayer, that they cannot possibly obtain those their Desires,
without God's special help and aid. We meet with no such expressions among
them, as, We who cannot do any thing that is good without thee. And again, for
as much as without thee we are not able to please thee, and many such like in
our own Liturgy.

This opinion of their natural strength sufficient (like Pelagianism so called
amongst us) to repent and be converted, might induce them to their opinion
about Merit; though indeed it was no sufficient proof, supposing it true. For
what if they had so much Power of Nature left, whence had they it? was it their
own originally? did they give it themselves? or was it not the gift of God who
made them? did not God continue this natural Power, and the Liberty of using
it? But such thoughts and reasonings, never came into the head of a Scribe,
Lawyer, or Pharisee.

(f) Every where in the Scripture, but more especially in the Epistles,
Sanctification, Regeneration, Renovation, Salvation, etc. are ascribed to God
and the Holy Spirit, the beginning and improvements of goodness in us, and of
the spiritual life, are attributed to the grace or influence of God,
preventing, concurring, exciting, strengthening our Resolutions and Endeavors.
So as to give us to understand, that a Man cannot reform or convert himself
without God, and that God will not without himself, ordinarily speaking, for
God no doubt can, and has irresistibly and physically (as they speak)
converted some, (such as St. Paul) for eminent Examples of the Power of Divine
Grace, when God pleases, and particularly when he designeth a Person for some
present, great and special Service. Man's nature, as it is now corrupted, cannot
recover the Rule and Dominion of Reason, Conscience, Virtue and Goodness in his
Soul, without the powerful Aid of Divine Grace; though, when it is offered, it
may refuse it too. Such places are, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. By grace are ye saved,
etc. not of works least any man should boast, for we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus to good works: And Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of
Righteousness which we have done, etc. but by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Romans 8. 13. If ye through the spirit mortify the
deeds of the flesh. Most plainly, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation; for
it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Nay,
the same Doctrine may seem fairly intimated, in several places of the Old
Testament, as Deuteronomy. 30. 16. God promises to circumcise the hearts of the
Israelites, and their Posterity, etc. where we may observe a spiritual promise
in the body of the Law. And Jerem. 13. 23. Can an Ethiopian change his skin,
etc. and David prays in his penitential Psalm, that God would not take his holy
Spirit from him, as (supposed) necessary to his perseverance, much more than to
Repentance. Although it is to be acknowledged, that this Doctrine of the
Necessity of Divine Grace, Influence and Operation, and especial Providence to
make, and keep Men inwardly holy and good, was only reached by some of the
Prophets, or most eminent Saints, or of a sublimer genius among the Jews; the
generality never thinking of any such thing, and when by Christianity taught,
denied by them. Nor was it scarce ever dreamt of among the Gentiles, except
here and there a Philosopher or Poet may have dropped something that looks that
way. But hardly any Doctrine more common and known in the Christian Church,
where every Child learns it before its Letters. And certainly the Belief, and
frequent Attention to so near, especially, and constant Presence of the Deity
to the Souls of Men, as it is true, so is it many ways a great Cherisher of
Piety and Religion.

It were to be wished that the Fathers, supposed by some to know best the mind
of the Apostles, as being nearest to them, had enlightened us here in this
obscurely to us delivered Doctrine. But these next of all to the Apostles, were
content to speak simply, and little varying from the Apostolical words, Clem.
Epist. to the Cor. p. 41. (...). And we therefore being called by the Will of
God in Jesus Christ, are not justified by our own Wisdom, or Understanding, or
Piety, or Works, which we have done in Sanctity of Heart; but by Faith, by
which the Almighty has ever justified all Men from the beginning, which
differs little in words, nothing in sense, from the Apostle, Romans 4. in the
case of Abraham. And the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 11. explained in the
Discourse above.

But if we go further downward among the Fathers, I do not know whether we
shall learn much concerning this point. Those who please may try themselves.
Just. Martyr the Philosopher seems to me to have taken the Notion of it best,
and St. Augustine and St. Jerome (in some places at least) though worst, with a
prejudice and narrowness, common to Persons of Wit, Eloquence, and Zeal in
their own Religion, especially when flourishing in Power and Reputation. Such a
zeal in so truly excellent Religion as the Christian, even when mistaken, is
pardonable: But more acceptable to the wiser sort of Men, when attended with
Judgment, and a just regard to Truth. St. Jerome seems to have been a greater
Master in the Language of the Jews, so far as Biblical Hebrew and Chaldee went,
than in their Opinions, and their Books in which they are contained.

And though he may sometimes mention somewhat he had learned in conversation
with his Masters, as in his Epistle to Algasia, the Collection called Misna (as
I think against Morinus) and a Custom or two of the Jews, and their opinion
concerning Melchisedeck, in his Epistle to the Evangelists: Yet I do not know,
(perhaps others may know better) whether he has quoted any one Sentence out of
any Jewish Book in its own Language. But without doubt there were enough of
them in his time to have quoted, and which contained the same Opinions
concerning Justification, which we have cited in these Annotations, and the
Jews teach to this day. Or if St. Jerome had read such Books, it seems it was
not in his thoughts to compare St. Paul's Doctrine in this matter with that of
the Jews. Let any one read St. Jerome on Gal. 3. St. Aug. quaest. 80. quaest.
73. and de spir. and litera ad Marcell. and his Expos. of the Epistle to the
Gal. and his Book de fide and operibus, and others. There may be some things
very good now and then dropped: But generally what they say, is of such confused
and uncertain Sense (and sometimes not true) that a man is little the better,
but only to know that such men have said so.

I would not be here thought by this, to desire the Abatement of the just
Esteem of so great a Name, as the Fathers. For I believe them to have been
generally of exceeding Piety, and the greatest men of their Ages for knowledge;
some in one thing, some in another, some in all; but it cannot be allowed that
they were equal either in Philosophy, the true knowledge, and distance of the
Natures of things, or in the skill of expounding and interpreting the Holy
Scriptures, which this present Age by the good Providence of Almighty God does
enjoy. We shall, I think be very unjust to it, if we do not acknowledge so
much. May the effect of this our advantage in knowledge be also our
improvement, in a substantially religious and virtuous Temper and Practice;
without which it is but diversion, not business; that which may please the
Speculators, but profit no body, and nothing mend the State of the World.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BY reason of the Affinity of the Subjects of. Justification and Satisfaction;
I had thoughts of adding a Discourse of this last, and that under these general
Heads.

I. What was the Doctrine of the Scriptures concerning that which is so called,
viz. Satisfaction by the death and merits of Jesus Christ?

II. What was the distinct Nature, Ends and Uses of a Sacrifice, and
particularly of an Hylastick or Expiatory one?

III. How they operated, or what they contributed toward the procuring,
securing, or recovering the Favor of God in general, and particularly that
instance of his Favor, Remission of Sins upon Repentance, and how?

IV. Whether Jesus Christ dying, was not a proper Expiatory Sacrifice?

V. Whether he was not in many respects a more excellent Expiatory Sacrifice,
than the Patriarchal or Mosaical?

VI. What is the true and distinct Notion of a Merit, and how the Merits of
Jesus Christ might obtain in general, the Favor of God to sinful Mankind, and
particularly Remission of Sins to Penitents, and the reasonableness thereof?

VII. Whether the Act of God's forgiving Sins to penitent Sinners, in
Consideration of the Sacrifice and Merits of Christ Jesus, instead of the Act
of punishing them, might not be called properly, and according to the Original,
and received use of the word Satisfaction, i. e. of as much value, of equal or
more good Effects to the Community, or rather in the World which God governs.

In all which I think much would be said, which has not been said before, or
not so clearly and distinctly.

But this and something else, if God give life and health, may find another
opportunity.

SERMON VI.
2 COR. V. 19. To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them.
IN these few words, we read the most important part of the Design of Christian
Religion. The (...) indeed, the glad Tidings which the Gospel has brought to
the World. Now do we hear the joyful News, and the best that ever sounded in
the Ears of Mankind. The Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, who is only able
to save or destroy us Eternally, looks toward us with a Countenance full of
Compassion and good Will.

Here we have the Completion of that Prophetical Hymn, sung at the Birth of the
Great Jesus by a Choire of Angels. Glory be to God on high, on Earth peace,
good Will toward men, and very fitly repeated by all hearty Christians, whose
Minds are enlightened, and Hearts sensibly touched after the Communion in that
Service, i. e. the sending of such a Person as the Ever-blessed Jesus, and with
such a Design, would one Day redound to the Glory of the Divine Wisdom and
Goodness, both Heaven and Earth sounding aloud his Praises. It would also be
peace on Earth, just Cause of unspeakable Comfort and Joy in all Men, who
should hear the News, that the Eternal God, an infinite offended Majesty, did
lay aside his frowns and regard them with a serene and merciful Countenance,
or Peace on Earth, i. e. between all Mankind, Jew and Gentile, Greek, Barbarian
and Scythian; there was now to be no Hatred, Contention, or Strangeness in
respect of Religion. All were to be united in the Service of the same God and
Lord. Christ, was to be the Peace, or Peacemaker, breaking down the
Partition Wall. Ephesians. 2.

Finally good Will toward Men, in Consequence to God's gracious regard, what
Acts of Grace and Favor might not Men then expect. Great were the Blessings
and Benefits now, more especially, which God was preparing for the Sons of
mortal and sinful Men. Who ought to echo back the Celestial Hymn in such
words, as that of the Psalmist. O sing unto the Lord a new Song, sing unto the
Lord all the Earth; sing unto the Lord, bless his Name, show forth his
Salvation from day to day. Ps. 96. 1.

Most of the words in the Text, may afford us matter of excellent Observation.
These five,

I. The Act, Reconciling. II. The Author, God. III. The Parties, God and the
World. IV. The Instrument, Christ. V. The principal Instance or Effect of this
Reconciliation, (not the only one) Not imputing their Trespasses unto them.
I. The Act, the Design, the Business to be done, Reconciliation.

This supposes some Aversion and Enmity in the Parties to be reconciled, God
and the World. The Parties were Enemies. This we ought a little to explain, and
show in Propriety of Speech,

(1) How man was God's Enemy, and (2) how God may be Man's. It needs not much
explication or proof, that Mankind has been, and in greatest part, still is,
the Enemy of God. Enmity imports 2 things:

(1) A Contrariety of Nature and Will, (2) and more strictly, mischievous
Designs, Intentions and Actions, according to ones Power. In both these
respects Man was, and is generally, still the Enemy of God. In the 7th. Chapter
to the Romans, is an excellent Comment Romans 7. 12.
upon this Enmity, between the Divine Nature and Laws, and the unregenerate
Man; for in such Sense St. Paul speaks of himself. And the same Apostle tells
us, That the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, Gal. 5. 17.

The degenerate and regenerate Nature, are contrary one to the other, Ephesians. 4.
22. The old Man is corrupt, the new Man is created after God in Righteousness
and true Holiness. Most expressly and plainly, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is
Enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be. And the Gentiles (which were almost all the World, nor were the generality
of the Jews inwardly much better) amongst other their abominable Qualities, are
termed Haters of God. Thus we see how man is the Enemy of God. But how is God
man's Enemy, i. e. sinful and degenerate Man? (1) It must be acknowledged that
God's Nature, Will, and Laws, are as contrary to Man's, as his is to God's. (2)
That God hates a sinful Nature as such (to speak after the manner of men)
infinitely more than the wicked Man does the holy and pure Nature of God. A
wicked man is not so perfectly, and in so high a Degree wicked and sinful, as
God is righteous and holy, and so it is every where expressed in the Scripture,
God's Soul hates the wicked, Prove. 15. 9. It must be acknowledged, (3) that God
often treats wicked Men, in some respects, as a Man uses to treat his Enemy.
He punishes and destroys them too, when irreclaimable. But then, more
generally, he uses them like one, who bears their Persons good Will: for he
pities their blindness and perverseness, he bears them with the utmost
Patience; In the midst of their highest Injuries and Provocations, he continues
his Blessings corporal and spiritual; the good things of this Life oft-times in
plenty, and the means of Repentance and Salvation, his word and spirit; He in
kindness chastises them to the same purpose. All these are the Effects of his
Benevolence, and love of good Will to them, even while Enemies.

Indeed, after all this, if they grow senseless, obdurate, and contemptuous. He
ofttimes makes them Examples in this World, however in the next. He utterly
destroys them Body and Soul; not their Being, but all for which it is
desirable. But this Treatment proceeds not from any Malice in God against their
Persons; but from Love and Care of the rest of his Creatures. It is only when
it becomes necessary to the Government of the World; when wicked Men ought not
to be any longer born; when their mischievous Impiety and Example becomes
intolerable.

Thus we see the difference between wicked Men's Enmity to God, and God's to
Men. On God's part what there is, is most just and necessary; but on Man's,
horribly unjust. However an Enmity there is, but not irreconcilable. For God
was in Christ reconciling the World to himself. And that is the

II. Thing: The Author, God. He began the Design immediately after the Apostasy
and degeneracy of Man, and has been ever since prosecuting of it, and that in
or by Christ too, as we shall presently mention: and here we are to observe,
that it is but one of the parties at Enmity, that designed and endeavour*d a
Reconciliation, and that is God.

Stupendous Goodness! God, an infinite Majesty, Sovereign of Heaven and Earth,
desires a Reconciliation with man, the meanest of his own reasonable Creatures;
God, infinitely holy, wise and good; Man unholy, foolish and wicked: God
neglected and forgotten, and most part wilfully, injuriously offended, and even
insolently despised: Man, his unnatural and ungrateful Creature, and
Offspring.

Finally, God Omnipotent, who could have done himself right every Moment,
crushed this pitiful Worm to dirt, turned him out of Being, or into Eternal
Misery; Man who could at his worst but have wrigled, turned up his blasphemous
Mouth, and contemptible Head against Heaven (not without its permission
neither) and finally perished in his inveterate Enmity against it.

It Is this God, I say, who began, and still carries on the Design of
Reconciliation, with this contemptible and perverse Enemy, Man: Even so far, as
to beseech him to be friends, as it follows in the Verse after the Text. Now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ (and Christ is for God) for it is added, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be reconciled
to God. How can thou hear such words, O man, and not presently fall down upon
thy Knees, endeavoring to prevent, in appearance, such an indecent
Condescension? And do thou, O Heavenly Father, beseech me? is it not below
thy infinite Majesty, to be a Suitor to a mean and sinful Creature? shall a
prodigal and rebellious Child suffer his wise, and good Father, to beg
reconciliation at his hands? nay, surely, that part is mine, and only becomes
me. St. Peter was so surprised with the Humility of Jesus, when he would wash
his Disciples Feet, and so offended at it, that he was bold to say, He should
never wash his, till our Savior threatened him into a Submission, John 13. 8.

In like manner, a good Man, duly sensible of the infinite Distance between
God and himself, and how the Case stands, may, at first sight, be tempted to
think so great a Condescension of God, as Entreaties for Peace and
Reconciliation with men, somewhat undecent and unbecoming, if he himself had
not expressly told us otherwise, and laid his Commands upon us, not to dispute
his Wisdom.

But upon a little Enquiry, he would soon find it reasonable and necessary. For
alas, as for a great part of Mankind, they were fallen into profound Ignorance
of the true God, the Person to whom they were to be reconciled, and to whom
they were Enemies in their minds by wicked Works, by their degenerate and
corrupted Nature. And though they should have known him, and how the case stood
between them, (as we through his great mercy do:) yet through Perverseness,
Pride, Haughtiness and Licentiousness, natural and affected Delight in evil
Temper and Practice, they would have refused his kind Offers, and not have
given him the hearing; like the Barbarous of Mankind, who will not be brought
to a civil Life, but choose to continue in Nastiness, Rudeness and Brutality,
mortally hating all those, who would persuade them to change their manners.
Insomuch, that it is one of the first steps of the most merciful Author of
Reconciliation, to bring Men to be willing to hear his Proposals, and to enter
into a Treaty with him. That Is the 2 d. thing observable in the words, the
Author of this Reconciliation, God. God was in Christ, etc.

III. The third is the Parties to be reconciled, God and the World: And here we
cannot omit particularly to observe two things: (1) the Goodness of God. Again,
(2) his Condescension; or, as I think I may be bold truly to call it, his
Humility.

1. The Goodness of God, that he would be pleased to be reconciled at all, that
he would vouchsafe to take any course to remove the Enmity between himself and
sinners; that he would contrive and prosecute (to speak after the manner of
men) such a design, that man first might have no unjust Enmity in his Nature
against him, and then that there might be none in him against Man; and that he
might not be obliged by his Sanctity, Justice, and even Universal Goodness it
self, to use him as an Enemy, that there might be settled and preserved, an
hearty Amity and Correspondence between God and Man. But,

2. That which is here most proper, is God's gracious Condescension, or even
Humility. Condescension to the lowest Acts of Goodness and Charity, where it
does not hinder greater, (as it does not in God, who is always sufficient for
all kinds and instances of it together) is one Branch of Humility; and
therefore God may be said, in a most proper Sense to be humble. The highest
does not think any Office of Goodness below him, because it is low, as
oft-times proud Man does. He feeds the very young Ravens when they cry, and
cloatheth the Lilies of the Field.

But there is another more general Notion of Humility, which may most truly be
attributed to God himself, and that is, not to esteem or use any Power
ultimately for it self, as to be feared or honored for it.

This is the true general Notion of Humility; and then there is nothing more
truly said, than that God is the most humble of all Beings. He does nothing
merely and ultimately, for the Ostentation and Exercise of his Power and
Greatness: He values his Power only as directed by his Wisdom for the Ends of
Goodness, as their Instrument of doing good. His Power over all his Creatures
is necessary for their Government, and for the most happy State of them all: If
God could not control Angels and Men, reward and punish the good and bad as he
pleases, the World would be all Misery and Confusion. But contrary-wise,
Pride, the opposite to Humility, which is to love and desire Power for it self;
an Affectation to do what one lists, Good or Evil; to have all others Wills and
Actions at our command; to strut and swell with it; to make all know it, which
may be in doing mischief, as well as good; all this, I say, has no place in
Heaven. It dwells only in Earth and Hell. The good Angels imitate their Maker,
and these mighty and powerful Spirits are so humble, as to be the Servants of
good Men here below. Whence we Mortals may be advised, that the Virtue of
Humility in general, as mean a thing as it may sound or seem, and that Branch
particularly of Condescension to the lowest Acts of Charity and Goodness, where
it hinders not greater, is an Imitation not only of Angels, but of God Almighty
himself. But to return to our Observation. This gracious Condescension of God
may be (if we please) justly raised by the distinct Consideration of three
things. (1) That he vouchsafes to be reconciled to his own Creatures. There is
infinitely greater distance between God, and the Noblest of his Creatures, than
there is between the greatest Emperor upon his Throne, and the most despicable
Beggar upon the Dunghill. (2) To the meanest of his reasonable Creatures, and
that is Man. It might seem more decent to do it to Angels, but to such a
contemptible thing as Man is great indeed. Lord, what is Man, that thou art so
mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou thus vifitest him, Psalm. 8. 4.
And (3) to Man so mean a Creature, and yet so proud and wilful a sinner as
some are at least in great Degree, (and the worst are not excepted) who
carelessly and contemptuously, continually provoke him, who defy him, proclaim
War against him, and are resolved to persist and die in their Rebellion, and
Enmity against him. But we leave these things to further Meditation.

IV. The 4th. observable in the Text, is the Instrument of Reconciliation, the
Person whom God makes use of in the Execution of his Counsel, and Design of
Reconciliation, and that is Christ, (...), i. e. by Christ. Such is the
ordinary Hellenistical use of the Hebrew [(...)]. So we have it, Acts 13. 39.
(...) rendered by him all that believe are justified. Here might be a large
Field of Discourse, by particularizing the manner and method, which Jesus
Christ, God's Messenger to Mankind, sent to effect and execute this Design of
Reconciliation, makes use of: We shall at present do little more than name
them. The (1) with which God by Jesus Christ begun the Execution of his
Designs, was the miraculous History of Christ, from and before his Birth, to
his sending the promised Gift of the Holy Ghost. This was all along the most
evident Proof of his Mission and Commission, from God for this Affair, and it
was necessary in order to his entering upon, and continuing his Negotiation. (2)
The 2 d. was his Doctrine. Here Jesus was to explicate, open and declare his
Message and Business more particularly and distinctly. He was to tell them who
and what he was, from whom he came, his Relation to Man, etc. that He was the
one only true God, infinitely great, holy and just; but above all, good,
merciful, compassionate, infinitely desirous of their Welfare, and that they
might be saved, or be the Objects of his Eternal Favor and Delight, not of his
Justice and unavoidable Severity, that he was their Maker and Father; that he
would not only receive their Return and Submission with Joy, but effectually
help and assist them in it. Such a taking and moving Representation of God, is
that of the Parable of the Prodigal. He was more-over to acquaint them with the
conditions and terms of Reconciliation, which were Repentance, future
Obedience, humble Submission, and sincere Application for pardon, and that for
the Sake, and upon the Account of himself, or of what he was appointed by God
to do and suffer, the Consequence of their accepting or refusing the Condition
so graciously offered by God. All this was done in his Precepts, Promises,
Threatenings: And thus far the Application was made immediately to Man, to take
away the Enmity that was in his Nature and Will to God, and to qualify him for
the Amity and Friendship of God. The (3) of these means of Reconciliation, was
his Merit and Oblation of himself as a Sacrifice: His most exactly virtuous,
holy and perfectly obedient Life to God, and being an Universal Sacrifice for
all Mankind, who had been Offenders. By the Interposition and Consideration of
these, it became the Justice, Clemency and Wisdom of God, to be merciful and
benevolent to rebellious Mankind, in all these Instances, presently to be
mentioned: That is, it was the wisest way, and of best effect to the World,
better than to have been reconciled without it. And this part of the means
respecting God immediately, was to remove the Enmity on his side, that he might
be just, and yet not cast away all kindness and care, even of all degenerate
Man; but particularly be the Justifier of all them that believe, who should now
become dutiful and obedient to God, by Jesus Christ. We may add to these a
fourth, and that is the continual Intercession of Jesus Christ in Heaven, by
which he still carries on the reconciling Design between God and the World. For
I make account that his Intercession in Heaven, reaches as far as his
Propitiation here upon Earth; that is, to the whole World, bad and good,
unconverted and converted, impenitent and penitent. For the impenitent he
interceeds to God for his patience and forbearance, and his continuance of his
Blessings inward and outward: All the means of Repentance and Conversion to
them, so long as God in his infinite Wisdom shall think fit. For the penitent
and good he interceeds for their general Pardon, upon their general Repentance,
and particular when they fall into any sin. He interceeds also for their
improvement, advance and perseverance in their Duty and Obedience to God, that
they might be preserved through God's Power and Care, through Faith unto
Salvation, and finally, at last, be put into possession of immortal Bliss, be
with him where he is, and see and partake of his Glory.

V. The last observable in the Text is, one principal Effect of God's
Reconciliation, viz. Not impating their Trespasses unto them. I call it but
one, because there are several others, as we shall presently show. More-over,
this is an Effect of Reconciliation, which must necessarily be preceded by
others, and without which this will never follow. For it is not so well said by
some very learned Men, (as it seems to me) that Grot. Satisf. and Outr. de
Sacrif.
there are several Degrees of Remission of Sins, as it would, that there are
several Degrees, or rather Effects of Reconciliation. Suspension of punishment
is not remission. Some of these must go before the other. Let us see them in
order briefly. (1) The first Effect of God's Reconciliation to the World, is
his Forbearance and Long-suffering; not presently seizing and bringing Sinners
to execution, that he strikes not immediately upon our Indignities and
Provocations, and not only so, but during this time of his Patience, affords
them the Obligations, Means, Helps and Assistances of Repentance and
Reformation. Such are all corporal Blessings, his holy Word and Spirit, the
Examples of holy and virtuous Men, who by these means have been converted, and
some of them perhaps irresistibly on purpose, that they might be the means of
others Conversion or Confirmation, and Improvement in Goodness. All this we all
owe to the Merits, Oblation and Intercession of Jesus Christ. I say all, both
bad and good, i. e. those who generally live according to the Flesh, who are
under the Power of Lusts and inordinate Appetite, and those who live according
to the Spirit, who are generally governed by their Conscience, the Fear and
Love of God, a Divine Principle inspired or commanded by the Holy Spirit. The
bad are almost perpetual Sinners, the best in this Life are not altogether
without Sin; the bad live in Sin, the good are sometimes over-taken by it. Now
it may be truly said, that it is for Christ's Sake, that God is so far
reconciled to the World by him, as to forbear the present Execution of his
displeasure or punishment, and to continue the motives and means of better
Behavior; that he waits a bad Man's general, and a good Man's particular
Repentance; that he gives time and means for the Reformation of the one, and
recovery of the other. (2) A 2 d. Effect of God's Reconciliation, is pardon of
sin upon repentance, not without it. Upon our Sanctification by the due use of
the means afforded us, follows Justification, being favored by God, and
particularly in the Forgiveness of past sins. This we see in the Effect,
especially mentioned in the Text, not imputing, etc. but not exclusively of all
others. It Is that which the Apostle thought fit to mention to the Jews, with
whom his dispute was about this matter.

The Question between them was, since all men are sinners, as at least the
Apostle affirmed, how should their Sins be forgiven, or their Trespasses not
imputed unto them. The Apostle tells them, that it was by Jesus Christ; that
God was in general reconciling the World to himself by Christ; and among other
Effects of it this was one, more especial and remarkable, remission of penitent
Sinners (none else) for Christ's Sake.

Accordingly, we see the Apostle every where to insist upon this Article: They
were to preach among all Nations, repentance and remission of sins; and through
this Name is preached to you forgiveness of sins, Acts 13. 38. A 3 d. Effect of
God's reconciliation, is a good Man's improvement in grace and holiness. As God
for Christ's sake is pleased to afford men means whereby of bad they may become
good, so he is pleased to continue or augment them, to increase and multiply
his influence of light, strength, comfort, and joy, in well doing, to make good
men better, that they may persevere and be made more meet still, for
conversation with the Saints in light. 4th. The last general Effect of
Reconciliation, is Eternal Salvation, a Life immortal without sin or sorrow.
After the effects of affording means of conversion, and their proving
effectual, remission of past sins, and perseverance in Holiness, we are to see
God. God will settle us eternally in such a State of Life, where our Aspires
after the spiritual Life of Wisdom, Virtue and Holiness, which were always here
struggling, and sometimes oppressed and mastered by the insinuating or
boisterous Affections and Appetites of the carnal Life, shall be perfectly
gratified, constantly victorious, or without any Enemy to contest withal.

There are yet some more particular Effects of God's reconciliation taken
notice of in the Scripture, such as peace of conscience, confidence, and full
trust in God, access with boldness to the Throne of Grace, a constant,
comfortable and joyous State of mind, which we leave to reflection and
meditation. We have taken occasion, from one of the principal mentioned in the
Text, to reckon up many others, that we may not think it the only one, and at
once see the mighty Advantages of God's reconciliation and friendship by Jesus
Christ, and our as great obligations of duty and affection to them. We shall
briefly now conclude all, with an Inference or two, from what has been
observed and discoursed.

From hence it follows, that we have a just Object of our Admiration and
Adoration too, the goodness of Almighty God, and the blessed Jesus, the Author
and Instrument of our Reconciliation; we cannot give this condescending
goodness of theirs too great Names. St. Paul speaks often of this Love of God,
and Christ most passionately. God commends his love toward us, etc. Romans 5.
8. And God who is rich in mercy, etc. Ephesians. 2. 4. Our Savior himself in John
15. 13. Greater love than this has no man, etc.

That here we may be duly affected, consider we the Parties, what God, what we
are. (1) God is the Party greatly injured, and most unjustly provoked by our
contemptuous Disobedience, our stupid Ingratitude, our contracted Enmity, and
Contrariety of Nature to him. God needs us not, our love and service what can
it advantage him? Can a man be profitable to God? Job 32. 2, 3. God, whose
Power is irresistible, who can avenge himself upon us, when, and as much as he
pleases, though all his Creatures should be our Confederates, and undertake to
defend and protect us. And what (2) are we? the Aggressours, the wilful and
obstinate Continuers of this Hostility. It Is we who are his Creatures, Servants
and Children. It Is we who are under unspeakable Obligations to him, who have
received life and breath, and all things from him, and sometimes the highest
Degree of Honor and Happiness in this Life, and preserved us there in safety,
against all open and secret Enemies. It Is we whom he has provided for,
maintained, taken care of Souls and Bodies here and hereafter. It Is we who are
sometimes the most ungrateful and undutifull, whom he is reconciling to
himself, and beseeching us to be reconciled to him too. Finally, it is we who
are the meanest of his rational Creatures, the Offspring of Dust, the
Inhabitants of Clay and Dirt, the reversion of Worms. It Is such as we that God
is, as it were solicitous, to save and secure from his Anger and Justice, by
persuading and assisting us to be reconciled, and to be friends with him. It Is
not Angels he has been so kind to, for what reason his Wisdom best knows; but
to the Sons of men. And it seems as if God were like some Parents, most
indulgent to their youngest and weakest Children. Oh! the unsearchable Riches
of his goodness, the incomprehensible Dimensions of that love, which passes
all understanding? what, for the Supreme Monarch of the World, whose Throne
fills the immense Spaces of the Universe, whose Footstool is paved with Stars,
whose word immediately flies every where, and pierces to the Center; at whose
whispers Cherubins and Seraphims cover their Faces, worship and obey; for him
to descend as it were from his Throne to a Worm upon a Molehill, to beseech
his Friendship, and count his Reconciliation; to use all the gentle ways to
persuade him to love, imitate and obey him, i. e. to be partaker of his own
Nature and Felicity; to leave a Dunghill a mean and sordid manner of life, and
to qualify and dress himself for an Eternal Inheritance, Residence and
Conversation with himself in his own Palace? what love and goodness ever heard
like this? But 2 d. it is not enough to wonder at so condescending goodness;
but we are to comply with God's Offers of Reconciliation; most gladly be
friends with him, and embrace the Motion, and industriously carry on the Design
without ceasing, till it be compassed and secured.

The motives to this Advice may be reduced to two, (1) the Advantages of God's
Friendship, (2) the terrible Consequences of his Enmity.

(1.) The Advantages of his Friendship are all the good we are capable of. The
Blessings of this present bodily Life, so far as they are good for us, are the
meanest Effects of his favor; the spiritual ones of Wisdom, Knowledge, Virtue,
Goodness, Comfort, Joy, and Peace of Conscience, are greater and nobler; but
those of Heaven in quality and degree, and duration, are beyond our
understanding. If God be our Friend, we need not fear the Power and Malice of
any; if he be reconciled, he will either cause our Enemies to be at peace with,
or defend us from them; as if he be our Enemy, he can expose us to them. If he
love us in Christ, who, or what shall separate us from it? who shall hinder the
Fruits and Effects of it? nothing; so says the Apostle, with as just, as
mighty a Triumph, Romans 8. 15. But (2) what are the Consequents of God's Enmity
at last? In few words, oft-times severe Punishment, in respect of this bodily
Life, and hardened Heart, and a seared Conscience, and a reprobate Sense, to be
forsaken of God, to heap one load of guilt upon another; to die senseless
without Comfort, or with Despair and Terror; and finally, to be condemned
publicly to Eternal Misery, without mercy once despised, but now too late
sought after. If these things be true, as most certainly they are, if Religion
and Reason are to be believed, then surely it is good to be well advised be
times, to make our peace with God, our Adversary, while we are in the way, and
agree with him upon his own Terms, and whilst he continues such kind and
gracious Offers unto us.

It Is too true, that there are too many who will make light of such counsel.
And what is the reason of it? Is it because they think there is no God; or that
he is not powerful, holy and just; or that he is all mercy, or rather
softness; or that they are well enough with him, and sufficiently reconciled to
him already? no more need to be answered to all this, than to ask one question.
Suppose there were at this time, many shrewd Signs of the near Approach of the
End of the World, and the Day of Judgment. Suppose the Sun and the Moon should
stand still, as it did upon Gibeon, and in the Valley of Ajalon, in the Days of
Joshua, for a Month instead of a Day, and the Sun to go backwards really as
many Degrees in the Heavens, as it did Degrees on the Dial of Ahaz. Suppose all
the Seasons of the Year Retrograde, or at a stand, and the Sun growing pale and
sick, as it is said to have been in one of the Roman Emperor's Time.

Imagine we awhile from beneath, horrible Roarings in the Bowels of the Earth,
and its lofty and massy Structures every where tumbled down, or swallowed whole
into an Abyss, the Sea boiling, and the Air filled with fiery and sulphurous
Steams, hideous Storms of Thunder and Lightning, for some Days together. Let us
Imagine, I say, all these, and (it is nothing new but what every one talks of)
would the Men of Infidelity, Security and Bravery, be then of the same Opinion
they are now? would they then question whether there was a God, and a great,
just, and terrible one too? would they then think their Case well enough, and
dare to expect the Universal Judgment, and appear with the same Unconcernedness
and Confidence that they now pretend to?

Should we not rather see all but a few penitent, sincerely, virtuous Souls,
who were indeed at peace with God through Christ, and lived constantly in love
and duty to him. I say, should we not see all the rest, except this small
Number, with trembling Hearts, misgiving, accusing and condemning Consciences,
crowding to the Churches and Altars; nay, every where, in Streets and Fields
crying for mercy, and most humbly begging for Forgiveness and Favor? what
would they refuse to be, or do, so they might have but a gracious look from an
angry God, or a despised Savior? and yet, perhaps, when they should find all
this to prove a Mistake, and their Panick fears over, they would return to be
the same they were before, and live as carelessly, and contemptuously, of God's
most gracious Offers of Peace and Friendship, as ever, be as unbelieving,
secure and confident, as they were in the Days of Noah, till Death or Judgment
really come upon them, when all Repentance and Mercy, Designs and Conditions of
Reconciliation are at an End. Nevertheless, hence it appears, how little reason
they have for their present Infidelity, Carelessness and Presumption; what they
would do then, they should do now. It is really as true now, that they ought to
take care without delay, and to be well assured of being reconciled to God by
Christ, as it will be, when God shall come to judge the World by Christ.

It remains only then to renew the Advice, and to repeat the Exhortation, to
embrace and pursue our Reconciliation to God, with all due Thankfulness, and
Sense of the Divine Goodness, with all Diligence and Industry. If God be in
Christ reconciling the World to himself, I think, we may say, it is our Duty
and Interest to be reconciling God in Christ to our selves also by Repentance,
and constant future Obedience; and in order thereto, by effectually making use
of those means, Jesus Christ has left us for that purpose; his holy Doctrine
and Example for our direction and encouragement; his holy Spirit for our
Assistance; his meritorious Life and Death for our comfort, satisfaction and
assurance. And in his stead it is, as the meanest of his Ambassadors,
according to our Duty and Trust, we beseech, and earnestly pray, all to be
reconciled unto God.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul 's
Churchyard.
1. A Treatise relating to the Worship of God, divided into six Sections,
concerning; 1st, The Nature of Divine Worship. 2 d, The peculiar Object of
Worship. 3 d, The true Worshippers of God. 4th, Assistance requisite to
Worship. 5th, The Place of Worship. 6th, The solemn Time of Worship.

2. A Defense of revealed Religion; in six Sermons, upon Romans 1. 16. Wherein
it is clearly and plainly shown, that no Man can possibly have any real Ground
or Reason to be ashamed of Christianity: By Henry Halliwell, M. A. and Vicar of
Cowfold in Sussex.

3. Miscellanies; in five Essays: 1. Upon the Office of a Chaplain; 2. Upon
Pride; 3. Upon Clothes; 4. Upon Dealing; 5. Upon general Kindness. The four
last of which, are by way of Dialogue: By Jer. Colliers, A. M.

4. Miscellanies upon moral Subjects, the second Part: By Jeremy Collier, A. M.

5. The Mysteries in Religion vindicated; or, the Filiation, Deity, and
Satisfaction of our Savior, asserted against Socinians, and others: With
occasional Reflections on several late Pamphlets: By Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter
of the Church of England.

6. Apparatus ad Theologiam, in Usum Academiarum: 1. Generalis; 2. Specialis.
Auctore Stephano Penton, Rectore de Glympton, Oxon.

7. Guardian's Instruction; or, the Gentleman's Romance; written for the
Service and Diversion of the Gentry.

8. New Instructions to the Guardian, showing, that the last Remedy to prevent
the Ruin, advance the Interest, and recover the Honor of this Nation, is,
1st, A more serious and strict Education of the Nobility and Gentry. 2 d, To
breed up all their younger Sons to some Calling and Employment. 3 d, More of
them to Holy Orders; with a Method of Institution from 3 Years of Age to twenty
One: By Stephen Penton, Rector of Glympton, Oxon.

9. Johannis Antiocheni Cognomento Mallalae Historia Chronica, e M. SS.
Bibliothecae Bodleianae. Praemittitur Dissertatio de Authore; per Humph.
Hodium, D. D.

10. A Sermon preached before the King at Kensington, Jan. 13. -- 95. By John
Lamb, D. D. Dean of Ely, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

11. The Dean of Canterbury's Sermon before the King at Kensington, Sunday,
Jan. 20. -- 95.

12. Dr. Isham's Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Scott, late Rector of St. Giles's
in the Fields, March 15. -- 95.

13. Profitable Charity. A Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, at the Parish Church of St. Brides on Easter-Munday: By Robert Grove,
Lord Bishop of Chichester.

14. The Doctrine of the glorious Trinity, not explained, but asserted by
several Texts, as they are expounded by the Ancient Fathers, and later Divines:
By Francis Gregory, D. D. and Rector of Hambeden Bucks.

15. An Essay to receive the Necessity of the Ancient Charity and Piety;
wherein God's Right in our Estates, and our Obligations to maintain his
Service, Religion and Charity, is demonstrated and defended against the
Pretenses of Covetousness, and Appropriation. In 2 Discourses: By George
Burghope, Rector of Little Gaddesden in Hertfordshire, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Bridgewater.

The End of the Catalogue.

