BALM from GILEAD: OR, THE DIFFERENCES ABOUT THE Indulgence, Stated and
Impleaded: In a sober and serious LETTER TO Ministers and Christians in
Scotland.

By an Healing Hand.

Romans 16.17. -- Mark them which cause Divisions, etc.

Joh. 17.11. Holy Father keep through thine own name those thou have gvien me,
that they may be one as we are.

Si in Necessariis servaremus unitatem; in Adiaphoris, Libertatem; in utrisque
charitatem; quam multo melius se haberent res Ecclesiae?

Rupert. Melden. in Paraenisi votiva pro pace Eccl. A Doctore glorioso, a
Pastore contentioso, and ab inutilibus questionibus, liberet Ecclesiam Deus.

Luth. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry,
over against the Stocks-Market 1681.

The Printers Advertisement to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THIS ensuing Letter having long lurked in some private hands, not communicated
to them for whom it has been principally designed; Transcribing and reading of
large Papers being uneasy, especially to the vulgar, falling now at length
into my hand, I do here present it to thee in Print, for thy ease and profit. I
know not the Author, nor does it much concern you or me, Quis dixit, but, Quid
dictum. Naked truth will doubtless be acceptable to lovers of Truth and Peace,
whoever the Herald be that publishes it. Nor is it my part to write an Epistle
Commendatory; all I shall say is, Toll and Lege, do but once seriously, and
without a preoccupied mind peruse it, and read it through, and it is hoped it
shall not repent you of your labor. You see it is an Irenicum, designed to
cast water upon these unhappy flames, which have burnt up, consumed and
destroyed more of the interest of Piety in that Land, than Tongue or Pen can
express. And since our Blessed Lord has said, blessed are the Peacemakers, it
is expected the children of Peace will not refuse an ear to the counsels of
peace, nor count it an unhappiness to be charmed by the words of truth and
peace here held forth with convincing light, and persuasive power. The Author
it seems has not affected to be like some, Verborum Mare, Rerum Inane. Delight
will projicere ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba, to bogle consciences with big
and busked words; the simplicity of the Gospel seems the most native and proper
dress for the Truths of Christ. Ye know whose character it is, to speak (...),
2 Pet. 2.18. This Treatise being calculated for the capacity of vulgar
Christians, yet not below the Genius of the more Learned (both of whose
consciences, humors at least, needed cure) has studied rather fortia, than
Phalerata, to be sound, nervous, sincere and plain, rather than polite. It is
true, none of those dividers, with whom the Author deals, had than unmasked
themselves, nor run to that height of extravagancy, which some of late have
been carried unto; and therefore all are mildly and modestly dealt with. But
considering the state of the Controversy, and of the persons, as then it was,
and still (for most part) is, it is hoped ye will find this Paper, through the
blessing of the Prince of Peace, not a little useful for clearing doubts,
composing differences, and binding up of wounds. And seeing that fire still
burns (and is like to burn all into ashes) among that poor afflicted remnant,
to contribute my mite of help to extinguish the same, is my aim in letting thee
have it in Print. Farewell.

BALM FROM GILEAD: OR AN Admonitory LETTER to the Honest Ministers and People
in Scotland, Jan. 1674.
Reverend Brethren, and Christian Friends.
WE salute you heartily in the Lord: Grace and Peace, through Jesus Christ be
multiplied unto you. And be entreated, we pray you, to allow us liberty to use
a little freedom with you, being constrained in duty to lay some things before
you, concerning your late Differences, which are like to run to such a
lamentable height, and to have such sad effects, as may make you the
astonishing wonder as well of your selves, as of others. An Address, which we
confess may seem strange, upon diverse considerations, especially that such as
we should presume to interpose with such as you, of whom it becomes us to
learn, rather than to warn and admonish.

But our Apology is, Necessity has no Law. Were your Malady like to heal of it
self, (as we once expected time should have cooled your Fever, worn out such
distempers, and not augmented them), or were it tolerable, and not like to be a
sickness unto death; or, were others (of whom there are many fitter than we)
undertaking the Task, to apply Balm to your bleeding wounds: We should have
been glad to have stood by, and let better hands deal with you, and we to be
joyful spectators of your Cure, as we have been, and are sad witnesses of your
Disease.

We know also how dangerous and thankless an office it is (usually) to meddle
with Divisions; how ready such are (like parters of a Fray) to get the
redding-stroke, and be divided themselves, and torn in pieces by those who are
most out of humor, whether most in the right or not, Act. 7.27. Who can meddle
with such a flame as is kindled amongst you, and not burn his face or fingers,
even when he casts water to quench it? To get behind the hedge, and lie under
the wind, were more easy and secure for us, than to stand up in the gap, and
offer to pacify the quarrel; the contentions of Brethren being (like that of
the Ephramites, Judge. 12.1.) sharper and harder to be composed than the jars
and embroilment of an offended City, Prove. 18.19.

Moreover, true is Solomon's word, Prove. 26.17. He that medleth with strife
belonging not unto him, is like one that takes a dog by the ears. But, dear
Friends, our interest in you, and near relation to you, makes that we cannot
but think our selves concerned: Is not every man called to bring water, and put
to his hand to help, when his Neighbors house is on fire? Hear us therefore in
a few words of soberness and truth, and let no prejudice or bias preoccupy
your ear.

Ah! the noise of your condition, courses, and temper, has come abroad, and
filled all sober and tender hearts with amazement! Serious and solid spectators
wonder what all this stir and bussle among you means; and it puts them
sadly to enquire thereinto, since their concernment in you as fellow members of
the same mystical body calls them to sympathize and proffer their help, and
not look unconcernedly upon your matters. It is not long since we bled for your
sufferings and oppressions under the galling yoke, which reared up it self upon
the ruins of so much of the Lords precious interests, and the casting out and
crushing of so many worthy Ministers of Christ, and harassing so many godly
people for their noncompliance with that course of defection. Yet herein we
thought you happy, that you found mercy to be faithful, and to keep your
integrity, bearing the Cross with patience, and adhering to the way of truth,
with zeal and constancy; until the Lord should arise and plead for himself, his
Altars and People; expecting he would make your patient suffering in due time
mollify the hearts of your Rulers toward you, and be crowned with an happy
outgate.

But alas! no sooner find we the Most High extending mercy to you, in granting
you some favor in the eyes of Authority, inclining them to relent of the
former rigors, and begin to take off restraints under which ye groaned, and lay
by almost useless; and to revive the stones out of the rubbish, by granting a
liberty to some of your outed Ministers to return to Jerusalem, to build the
Sanctuary; but alas! soon (almost) we find you splitting among your selves!
Behold what heats, ruptures and animosities have broken up among you, like to
consume the blessed remnant into ashes! giving your Zion cause to complain,
Behold the wounds that I have received, even in the house of my friends!

When your first Indulgence was granted, how much was we refreshed to see a
little reviving, and none of you casting at a day of small things, but
rejoicing that any nail was got in the holy place; and none that were in
Providence kept still in the Captivity, envying them who in Providence were
permitted to return; nor those that were returned, forgetting their Brethren
who were detained in Babylon behind them, but thirsting, praying, and
endeavoring for their delivery. But since a second Indulgence unhappily
attended with several Grievances, what dividings and jarrings have arisen! some
being free to make use of that liberty, accounting it a mercy that the Legal
restraints which debarred them from the public, free, peaceable exercise of
their Ministry, were taken off; and that it was their duty to take hold of the
indulged liberty, with a resolution to give Testimony in their station against
what their acceptance of the same might be liable to be mistaken in, or be
reputed to Homologate of faults in the Magistrate; as also, not to observe any
unlawful Injunctions imposed, or to be imposed upon them; judging that thus
they wisely separated the precious from the vile, and were obliged to hold fast
that which was good, as well as to refuse the evil. Others of you were unclear
to make use of the foresaid liberty, some upon one account, some upon another;
of which hereafter.

And had your different apprehensions of that matter been managed with sobriety
and moderation, and no soul-wasting and Church-ruining contests been raised
thereabout; but God waited upon, and mutual forbearance exercised, till your
different measures of light had come to some happy accommodation; Blessed had
ye been, Psalm. 133.1, 2. And some, we grant, yea a good many, have obtained
mercy to do so.

But others, alas! have carried otherwise, not contenting themselves to enjoy
and follow their own light, have also laid, and still lay sore at those who
differ from them. What woeful heart-burnings, rentings, alienations, fierce and
fiery clamours, and pitiful confusions, are fallen in among you! as if a
judicial spirit of Division were poured out upon you, (ah! the anger of the
Lord has divided them! and will he no more regard them?) Which who can look
upon, and not be pained at the very heart with sorrow! Who can hold their peace
at such a doleful thing! Whose tongue would not loose, as Croesus his Son's
did, in a like case, and cry, Spare! Understanding therefore such exorbitant
heats and extravagant courses to be in some of you against others, merely for
their following their light in use-making of that License to exercise the
Ministry which they have and hold of the Lord; Albeit we may not presume to be
Palaemon or Umpire betwixt you, yet (judging the part of a Monitor not
incompetent unto us) we cannot but interpose, and with the tear in our eye,
cry, What mean ye to fall at such odds!

Dear Brethren! Can there be no difference among you without division? no
diversity of apprehensions of things without running into Parties and contests
about them? Is difference of judgment in every lesser thing, inconsistent with
unity and peace, concord and communion in things wherein ye are aggrieved? And
may ye not be of one heart, till ye be of one way in things wherein ye differ?
Must ye cast out and contend, when ye cannot all be of the same mind, in such
inferior things, albeit ye agree in the Main? Are ye not united in Doctrine,
Worship, Principles of Discipline and Government? and will ye rent at such a
rate about the Application of one principle to a particular case? Will ye fall
out among your selves, while ye are jointly engaged in one common cause against
a common adversary, who watches for your halting, and says of your jarrings,
Aha! so would we have it! Have ye forgotten the former Persecution, that ye are
so soon fallen by the ears among your selves? Are ye not under their eye, who
rejoice at the sport, clap hands and cry, Hui to the fray? Could ye gratify
them, and disadvantage your selves more than by such reelings? Is not this that
which their very souls longed for? Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur
Atridae.
and now you grant them their desire, as Lam. 2.15, 16. You are riven with a
wedg of your own timber, whom all the enemies fury could not undo! Are ye not
become the scorn of the Adversary, the shame and sorrow of your friends? Ah!
tell it not in Gath, etc. How much also of the indignation of the Lord does
Schismatizing import? What fatal judgments does it portend? Jer. 13.13, 14. And
what a scandal is it to see the Sons of Peace, as it were, intoxicated with the
waters of Massah and Meribah? Will not this be Marah, bitterness in the end? Is
it not your great plague to be thus disjointed, Isa. 9.19 -- 21? Were it not
your rich blessing to be composed, and unite, for the better following of
common duties, Isa. 11.13, 14? And will not your foes carefully improve such
advantages against you? And being broken among your selves, are ye not become
weak and contemptible, and expose your selves a prey to all the beasts of the
field that please to devour? And utterly incapacitate your selves for Duty or
Outgeate? What will probably become of such a distracted divided company;
crumbled into so many Atoms and Fractions? Yea, Subdivisions and new debates
starting daily, fra once Division begins, being like the letting forth of
water, breaches multiplying and waxing wider and wider, Prove. 17.14. What will
this sickness terminate into? We need no Galen nor Hypocrates to foretell its
event. A wiser than they, tells us, A Kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand. May ye not remember your last rupture, how the wild Boar of Devastation
came in at that gap over all your bellies, which might have been prevented, had
not your renting opened a door for it, and incapacitated you to oppose it? and
what may come in at this, is not hard to foresee! Is not Popery, that devouring
Leviathan, at your gates, ready to be ushered in by it? Was not Hannibal ad
Portas, a strange alarm to the Romans to lay by their private jars, and unite
against their common danger? And will no such hazard induce you to let alone
your intestine embroilments? Will neither bypast experience (the Schoolmaster
of very fools) nor present fears and peril warn you? Will ye still dash upon
that Rock on which the Church of Christ has so often split, and God has set up
so many Beacons of his Displeasure? Shall Schism be again the bane and blemish
of the Presbyterian party; and your comely parity be any more like the mother
of confusion, and so the way of God be evil spoken of through you? Or, Is this
the way for the Gospel's prospering? Can they be excellent Architects, who
build the Lords house by firing it, or pulling it in pieces? Or, These good
Surgeons who know no other method or means to heal, but by Dislocation,
Amputation, or other the like dogged Cures? Is this the mean to make Christ's
Kingdom and Crown flourish, by setting his faithful Friends and Subjects at
variance? Did ever Religion indeed thrive by such dividings and strivings of
Ministers or People? Is not Division always distempering, and the very Moth and
Canker-worm of the life of Piety? Look, whatever Religion seems to gain in a
parcel, does it not lose much more in the Bulk, in a factious time? And how
much Profession enlarges her Phylacteries, Practice, Power, Life, and
Tenderness, abateth as much in reality: See Psalm. 122. v. 7. James 3.16. Verily
the mischief of dividing is unspeakable.

Again, Are ye not Brethren? and the Canaanite and the Perizite in the Land?
And will ye yet contend in the very face of the Enemy, and Jaws of
devouring-like danger? Will ye not cease your Animosities, till the Popish
Sword end the quarrel? Will ye be like those of Jerusalem in the Siege, wasting
and weakening your selves by furious intestine Conflicts, while the Roman Enemy
lies about your Walls, ready to swallow you up both? Or like distracted
Mariners falling by the ears together, while the swelling Sea and raging Storm
is like to sink the Ship and you both? (Oh how fatal-like and demented!)
Moreover, Is not Schism a breach of your Covenant, as well as Prelacy? abjured
with that same breath wherewith ye renounce it and Popery? And will ye cry out
of others for breach of Covenant, and yet violate the same so grossly your
selves? Be astonished, O Heaven! and tremble thou Earth! to see men so careful
to run from one evil, and so little tender to hold off another? What, are there
no healing Medicines, nor healing men among you? None to stand in the Gap? Can
there be no accommodating your differences? Is your Breach wide as the Sea?
your wound incurable? Does any of you think it their glory to blow the Bellows,
and to be ambitious who shall act highest in opposition one to another? Then
shall our Soul weep in secret for your misery, and soon may your Fate be read,
Hos. 10.2. Their Heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty: Rent, and
Ruin, Psalm. 55.9. Dividers are certainly Subverters; and will ye burn down the
Sanctuary into Ashes, while ye pretend to defend and uphold it? Ah, how is
almost every Bottle filled, not with Wine and strong drink, but a reeling
Spirit mingled in, to make them stagger and fall? Are they not like a wild Bull
in a Net, full of the fury of the Lord, and of the rebuke of their God? How may
here our Pen stop, and our eye trickle down with Tears! -- Ah Tragedy beyond
Lamentation! -- What shall we do for our little Sister with her cancered
Breasts?

Yet the Most High is to be blessed, that the solid, godly, grave, and
experienced of you, are not for fomenting, but for sopiting and quashing the
differences. But oh! the heat and inconsiderateness of the unsolid, unstudied,
younger sort, and a few eager of the Elder! What unbridled intemperancy of
Tongue and Actions stand they guilty of, before the Lord! And may not every
sober Person say, what Jacob left for Levi's Legacy, Genesis 49.7. Woe is us for
their Anger, for it is fierce; and their wrath, for it is cruel! O our Soul,
come not thou into their secret, and unto their Assembly our Honor be not thou
united! What will such distractions resolve into at last, if the Healer of the
Nations prevent it not? See Gal. 5.15. If ye bite and devour one another, take
heed ye be not consumed one of another. Will ye be like the foolish Knights of
Cadmus, who never ceased Fighting among themselves, while there were any to
maintain the quarrel?

We mean not by this to disparage any's zeal and good affection, but the
preposterous, irregular, immoderate prosecutions of that zeal, which some seem
to be transported in, we cannot approve, Gal. 4.17, 18. We doubt if such of you
as are most busy and greatest sticklers in such an unhappy business, will find
neither thanks or reward from the Prince of Peace, Psalm. 105.14, 15. But happy
they who being persecuted, suffer it; being defamed, entreat; and study by
patience, meekness, and long-suffering, to conquer their Brethren, and to bring
them to a better understanding together, rather than to meet humor with
humor, heat with heat, railing with railing, etc. Such are likest their ever
blessed Lord, 1 Pet. 2.23.

It is said, these quiet indulged men are not such Dunces, but they could well
repay their Antagonists; but (whatever disadvantage they lie at otherwise) yet
in this they seem to have the advantage, that while others are for War, they
are for Peace, ( Psalm. 120.6, 7.) They seek peace and pursue it, they follow
these their angry Brethren with love, while they run from them; they pray for
them, some of whom to their power persecute them, ( Jer. 18.20.) and instead of
holding up Debates, they love rather to let them fall for peace-sake, and to
give their Backs to the Smiters, and their Cheeks to them that pluck off the
Hair, and hide not their Face from shame and spitting; counting nothing dear to
them, so they may finish their course with fruitfulness, and fulfill the
Ministry they have received of the Lord.

But, dear Friends, could ye give us leave (and not take it ill) to use a
little freedom with you, we would humbly adventure to proffer a word of Advice
to you all, which perhaps may be not unseasonable at such a juncture.

First of all, Study Reconciliation with God. We fear your breach among your
selves has begun here at distance with God; you especially has he known beyond
others, and therefore will not let you go unpunished. What higher provocations
are there, than those of Sons and Daughters? And what sorer scourge can there
be, than to be left of him to bite and devour one another? By this means ye do
the Bishops work, and the Papists work, to their hands: Now ye see nothing will
unite you, till ye unite in God; a common cause and common interest will not
unite you, a Furnace will not unite you, no Bonds will cement you, until ye be
One in him who is the Cornerstone, in whom both sides of the Building meet.

II. Get more of the power of Grace into your hearts, and walk in his fear. Did
Grace, not humor predominate, and the fear of God awe you, durst some take the
latitude they do? Get heart-distempers (the cause of heart-delusions) purged
away. Mortify pride and self-conceit (the usual fault of men of parts, 1 Cor.
8.2. and the snare of Novices, 1 Timothy 3.6. yet the usual Makebait of
contention, Prove. 13.10.) As also passion, peevishness, male-contentedness,
self-seeking, peremptoriness, etc. (which are not seldom incident to
sufferers), and all other dividing-co^^uptions, lay them aside; and get Love,
humility, sobriety, meekness, moderation, self-denial, and such like uniting
Graces to possess your hearts and minds. It is our Lords advice, Mark 9.50.
Have salt in your selves, and peace one with another. What is it but the
corruptions, not the Graces of good men, which makes them jar? see Jam. 4.1. 1
Cor. 3.3, 4. Let therefore your furnace refine you, and purge away your dross;
be not the boiling pot, retaining the scum; homogeneous things unite easily and
well.

III. Study the practice of that excellent duty of mutual forbearance: Read
Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Gal. 6.1, 2. Col. 3.12, 13. and seriously ponder what there is
inculcated by the wisdom of God. Do not censure, nor rigidly strain or wrest
one another words or deeds, commenting and putting glosses upon them, or
wringing consequences from them (as prejudice uses to do, 1 Cor. 13.5, 6.)
which they never dreamed of, nor is there perhaps native ground for, Prove.
30.33. Psalm. 56.5. Backbite not one another, talk not of one another failings,
real or supposed, ( Tit. 3.2. Jam. 4.11.) but pity and pray over them, Gal.
6.1. Choose rather to weep in secret for the same, than to tell them for news.
Ye know Constantine the Great, his famous word and deed at the Council of Nice,
when delations and complaints were preferred to him by the Ministers one of
another, I had rather, said he, hide a Ministers fault with my Robe, than
eliminate them; and accordingly he burned their Libels and Accusations, for the
Gospels sake. O let love cover (1 Pet. 4.8.) and not carnal zeal divulge, much
less coin faults and misreports one of another. What would ye give the
Adversaries leave to do but to make you odious with slanders, that your Cause
may stink, and your name rot above the ground? And shall any of you (as some
do) take that trade off their hand, blasting (so far as they can) every bodies
Reputation not of their way? Is this the Spirit of the Lord? Are these his
Doings? See Jam. 3.14, 15. Psalm. 50.19, 20. Gal. 5.21, 22, 23. Luke 54.55. Is
this acceptable service to the Prince of Pastors? see Numb. 12.8, 9, 10.
Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses, says the Lord,
etc. Weigh also, Psalm. 120.3, 4. Is Shimei's vice now become a a virtue? would
it not become you better, in Christian tenderness faithfully to admonish one
another, than by word or writing in public or private to traduce and load one
another with Legends of false stories, and groundless mistakes? and yet what
greater engine is used by some to breed and feed your Differences, than this
artifice? Prove. 16.28. But will not woe be to them who widen breaches by evil
whispers, and cunning surmises? Prove. 6.14. Much more sin they, who dare preach
such things for the Oracles of God.

IV. Fall into serious dislike of Divisions, as most of all your grave and
solid, tender and serious Ministers and Christians abhor them. Know the sin and
evil of them, what bitter fruits and sad consequences they are of. O! read
carefully what these excellent Divines have written (from experience) upon that
subject, who bleeding over the Churches wounds in their time, did essay in love
to lay out the sore, and furnish cure: namely famous Paraeus in his Irenicum,
and learned Junius upon Psalm. 133. But if over-Sea Divines writings seem
strangers to you, read some of those at home, specially Judicious and Holy Mr.
Durham your Countryman, in the last part of his excellent Treatise of Scandal;
and God^y Mr. Buroughs your Neighbor, in his Treatise of Heart-Divisions.
Read, consider, and lay to heart what these Chrysostoms of their age, have by
their Golden mouths and Silver pens delivered against dividings; and see if ye
will dare to make light of rentings any more. -- Godly men may for a time
through infirmity and tentation be led upon that snare, (O sad snare!) as Act.
15.39. Luke 9.49, 50. yet it is not the better for that: It is their infirmity,
not their duty, even to be in the least overtaken with it; but of what untender
(not to say deboshed) Consciences must they be, who (like Salamanders) take
pleasure in the fire, and love to kindle or inflame the combustion? Prove. 6.14,
15, 16, 19. Is it not sad when some who seem strict and tender in other things,
yet are nothing tender of renting the seamless Coat of Christ, and take a
strange liberty to accuse and calumniate their Brethren? Did ye ponder the
woeful evil and mischief of such practices, we think ye would abhor them little
less than the sacrificing to the Dagon of Rome! And yet alas, how prone are
some to pride themselves in such untowardly ways, as if it were a piece of
Religion, yea the Shibboleth and Culmen of Honesty! thus glorying in their
shame! -- We know, and all Israel may know the certainty of these sad things;
We are not such strangers to your Israel, but we have seen of your bitter
Papers, and otherwise had good information of some's strange Anomalies, wherein
we have wondered to see them so transported with prejudice and passion (as Saul
was in his zeal against the Gibeonites) unto speeches and practices which might
have made any sober and tender heart break in pieces.

If any say, May and ought we not to testify against the corruption which we
suppose to be in the Indulgence? And if others say, may not we defend that
which we suppose to be a lawful liberty, against all attackers of it? We
confess, we hear not much Din of any defenses, as if the Indulged trusted so
much to the merits of their cause, that they think its own Innocence might bear
it out, and therefore resolved by patience and prayer to wait on God, until he
bring forth their Righteousness as the light, etc. But all the noise we hear,
is of impugning them, Axes and Hammers breaking down that restored piece of the
carved work, as many take it to be.

Wherefore in order to your bearing Testimony, might we adventure without your
offense to advise you, we would humbly offer these three things to be
considered: (1) Be sure it be a sin before ye appear against it; lest ye
condemn Truth and Duty instead of error and sin. And in this, remember ye must
not too much indulge your own notions, nor every light scruple, which though
they may suspend you from approving, yet may prove too weak a ground for
condemning, see Romans 14.3, 23. and how groundlesly did those contend with
Peter, in Act. 11.1? What if you be in a mistake as those were? Consult
therefore the Oracles of God; hear what your Brethren has to say for
themselves; and condemn nothing peremptorily but what the Scripture evidently
condemns; and in intricate and debateable points (which are controverted even
amongst the learned, godly, and orthodox) be not rash and positive in
condemning all that are not of your mind. Let the Church define and determine
the Controversy before ye conclude any thing peremptorily about it, as to the
judging of others; and that part of the question which they own, what ye are
unclear in, and boggle at, forbear to practice it your selves; but condemn not
others who are not of the same apprehensions, Romans 14.13. what if your
unclearness be your infirmity? shall your infirmity warrant you to censure
others perfection?

(2) Being once sure the thing is a fault, Be sure also your Brethren be guilty
thereof, before ye condemn them for it. What if they be innocent of that you
charge upon them? Think not jealousies, whispers, or uncharitable
constructions, and rash and rigid Imputations, or far-fetched, and not certain
consequences, sufficient to fix guilt upon them. How did Jobs Friends thus
mistake him, and rashly condemn him as wicked, and but an hypocrite, and many a
threatening (true in the general) did they misapply to him in particular? and so
their dispute and arguments were like Arrows shot at rovers, missing the mark,
by mistaking him for the man he was not. Thus innocence often suffers sadly
upon mistake. Whence the Reformed Divines complain of it as a great injustice
done them by their Adversaries, That such and such odious Dogmata of Doctrines,
which their soul abhors, should be imputed unto them, and fastened upon them as
theirs, which are denied by them, yet gathered (by their Adversaries) by some
sort of probable-like consequences, from Principles which they hold: Even as ye
do charge your Brethren with Erastianism, and Communion with the Kings
transcendent Supremacy, etc. while yet they disclaim these as much as ye do,
only by some remote and violent consequences ye would infer it from their
practice of accepting the indulged liberty. Nihil injustius (says Maresius*
loc. 17.. 13.) quam alicui imputare tanquam illius Dogma, (add vel praxiu) id
quod ipso detestat(...) express, eo quod, non evidente, proxima, and
necessari^, consequentia, sed long petitis Argutiolis, putes te id ex ejus
pla^itis (vel praxi) confecturum. All sober men condemn this as a dividing
Principle, and a most iniquous practice. See Learned Davenant in his Sententia
de pace inter Evangelicos procuranda, page 65. And Buroughs in his Irenicum,
page 185. What are your racked Inferences, forced Imputations, and strained
misconstructions, but fancies of your own brains? not the real guilt of your
Brethren? which Chimera's when ye impugn, ye but fight with your own shadow.
And what are your uncertain Historiolae, Tittle-tattle's, and groundless
surmises of your Brethrens practices, but a sandy-foundation to build the
weight of such heavy charges upon, as much of that guilt is ye charge upon
them? O let never your zeal and witness-bearing run at random, and fly at a
venture.

(3) Suppose ye be clear both in Questione juris, and in Questione facti, i. e.
suppose the thing evil, and them guilty, yet let your zeal and witness-bearing
against it keep due proportion; and not exceed the bounds of sobriety. Sure ye
may, and should testify against it in all due ways, manner and measure; yet
how will that justify irregular and exorbitant courses of opposition? or allow
you to over-do or divide? May it not suffice you to do that in your station
which serves to exonerate your Consciences, and deliver your soul from the
guilt of accession? But must ye over-stretch and go beyond your line and
measure? Go tell the indulged your thoughts of it, in seriousness and love
plead with them, expostulate, obtest them. But think not that every fault, real
or supposed in them, will be found before God or man a relevant ground to
warrant contention, separation and division from them. If ye over-do, ye may
undo; and your right side (as ye take it to be) become the wrong side by
mismanagement. Do ye think there can be no sinful excess of heat, violence and
disorder, in prosecuting a good cause? so no less than Jehu's furious march
sufficient to exonerate you? Is there no golden mediocrity betwixt fiery zeal
and Laodicean luke-warmness? Did not worthy Luther once spoil his cause much by
over-acting, and excess of fervor? Let right things be done in a right manner.
And know, that notwithstanding the right were upon your side, the guilt and
blame of the division may nevertheless be yours; for, even truth and
righteousness may be factiously and indiscreetly pleaded and contended for, as
in Act. 15.39, Job 13.4, 7, 8. If ye think and lay it down for a principle,
that every thing ye conceive to be evil, is to be opposed and impugned to the
yondmost extremity and renting, and nothing supposed amiss is to be tolerated
and forborne for the good of the Gospel, for peace and unities sake, ye may see,
that abundantly confuted by Mr. Buroughs in his Irenicum, Chap. 8, and 9. but
especially by your most grave, wise, tender and faithful Mr. Durham in his Book
of Scandal, Part 3. Chap. 8. Confine your selves therefore within the just
bounds of holy zeal, and think it no lukewarmness to be sober; and many of your
extravagancies will hereby be cut off.

V. Consider in sober sadness, what cause is there for all your outcry? What
has these indulged men done, that ye rate them, and persecute them more largely
and briskly than ye do any of the other? What is the quarrel? your edginess
against them would make the world believe they were monsters of men, and have
committed some horrible iniquity in going to feed the flocks of God, to which
people called them, and the Magistrate granted them his Legal leave. Why, what
crime is this? Ye debacchat against them, and yet when we search into the
matter, we can find no such ground of stumbling at them; being in their
Qualifications not the meanest of your party; in their lives holy and
blameless, in their Ministry faithful and painful lovers of truth and peace,
piety and purity.

And for their simple taking occasion of the Magistrates grant of Civil Liberty
to return to their charges, or to officiate and supply in another vacant place,
being called thereunto by the people, until God should open a door of regress
to their former charges, we wonder what fault this should be thought!

Whether is it better to Preach with the Magistrates good leave, or without it?
Seeing both those ways of Preaching differ only in circumstances, which of the
two are most desirable, judge ye. When God makes him do the work of a
Nurse-Father so far, as to permit and allow them the free exercise of the
Ministry, which they have of Christ Jesus their Lord and Master; does the
Prince his civil License vitiate their Ministry, or make it uncleanly, even to
that height (as some in their Paroxisms drive it) that they may not be heard
nor owned, but rejected and separated from, as the height of Abominations? Is
the exercise of their Function the worse, that the liberty thereof is not taken
at their own hand? We hope none of you do nor will allow your selves to think
so; therefore ye will do well to take heed, that your just offense at the
Magistrates faults in other things, do not diminish your respect to the
Ordinance of God, ( viz. that just Right and Authority he is clothed with) and
unjustly prejudge you at the lawful Acts and Favors thereof; and while ye
dislike the abuse of his power, stumble not at the right use thereof. Shall any
think nothing pleases now, but what is cross the grain of Authority? We doubt
not but Ministers have a Right to Preach, and in some cases may and must make
use of that Right, even when the Magistrate denies his permission: yet is it
not much more desirable to have his leave than to want it? Specially when the
peaceable Preaching of the Gospel is not feasible without it, because of Legal
Restraints backed with force, as was their case. Does not the Lord himself
direct Moses (Exodus 3.18. with 5.1, 3.) to desire leave even of Pharaoh, to let
Israel to go and Sacrifice to their God in the Wilderness, Let my People go,
that, etc. Not that their Liberty did depend absolutely and Quo ad jus ad rem,
or in point of Right, upon Pharaoh's good will; but such respect would the Lord
put upon the Magistrates leave, though a Tyrant and Oppressor: And to teach all
men how desirable it is, to have the permission and allowance of Authority to
the free exercise of Religion, if it can be obtained; therefore would the Lord
have this liberty entreated for. And did not Moses and all Israel accept this
Liberty when it was granted? Exodus 12.31. Or did any blame him for seeking and
accepting it? It is true this Liberty was full as to Persons and Things, Moses
being specially appointed of God not to leave one hoof behind, nor a little
one, nor to sacrifice in the Land, Exodus 8.25, 26, 27. Exodus 10.8, 9. Exodus
10.24, 25, 26. yet that does not say, but others may accept of a more narrow
Liberty, till they get more; not having such peremptory Injunctions and Reasons
for the contrary, as Moses had, as hereafter shall be made to appear, nor being
in poss^ss^rio, as He and Israel was, and therefore was not to quit one hoof;
but you are in petitorio, as Esdras was, and the Children of the Captivity, and
therefore may take what ye can get till more come, which is no quitting of what
is not received, as afterward shall be evinced. However, this Instance proves
that the Magistrates civil permission is no blemish, but a desirable mercy to
the public, solemn, free Exercise of Religion, Ministry and Ordinances; and
the more full the Liberty be, the better it is; whence also it follows, that
a snatch, a parcel of that Liberty cannot be in it self sinful, being all of
one kind, though differing in Measure and Degree.

Moreover, See how Paul did obtest the very Heathen Governor for this Favor,
Acts 21.39. I beseech thee (says he) suffer me to speak to the People: And when
he gave him License, he made use of it and Preached. We should not think it a
fault in you, to beg such a Liberty upon your knees, much less to take it when
offered; and did not Paul (Acts 28.30, 31.) Preach for some years at Rome, upon
a Negative Permission, no man forbidding him, viz. neither Emperor nor Senate,
etc. as is there marked? And Acts 26.1. upon a Positive Permission, he not only
Apologized, but Preached to Agrippa. Now, surely, if to Preach Occasionally
upon such a Warrant, be not ill, neither can it be to Preach in a more stated
way (as your Brethren do) upon a stated permission.

And who can deny, but that Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, their Grants of
Liberty (recorded by Esdras) to go up to Jerusalem, and build the House of the
Lord, and offer Sacrifice, etc. there, was a mercy, and more valuable than for
the Children of the Captivity to have gone up and done this at their own hand?
And is this your like piece of Liberty, though of a lesser size, not at all to
be embraced? What would the Protestants in Hungary and Spain esteem of the like
favor?

Further, Did not your selves generally allow of the first Indulgence? counted
it an hopeful beginning of good to your poor afflicted Church? (as can be
attested.) How come ye then now to controvert it? And would ye not yet (as is
informed) accept of a general Indulgence? much more of a complete Restoration
of the Church to her former Integrity? And is it such a sin to take part of
that Liberty, till God put it into the heart of the Magistrate to grant more?
Does magis and minus variare speciem? Will ye either have all or nothing, and
despise a day of small things? (contrary to the Saints humble and good way of
old, Esdras. 3. v. 10, 11. and 9.8, 9.) And will ye cast at the kind, because
of defect in the measure?

Add to this, that ye did all unanimously submit to the Magistrates outi^g you
of your Charges, by his banishing you therefrom, as Solomon did Abiathar
(though here it was just, but in your case undeserved.) Now, since this was the
exercise of a privative power about the matters of God, and consequently near
in kin to that Papal Supremacy which ye so stumble at; strange it is to find
you opponing against this Grant of Indulgence, which is but an Act of his
Cumulative or Auxiliary Power, like a Nurse-father, opening the door again
which he had formerly shut. Ye know that Dictate of Natures light, Ejus est
Restituere, Cujus est Destituere, without doubt much more rightfully may he
License you to return to your Watch-Towers, than beat you from them; and more
laudably may ye submit to the one than to the other. If ye say, It was your
fault to submit to his ejecting you, and therefore no Argument can be drawn
from it to allow his Reponing you: Beside that, herein ye condemn your selves,
and the rest of the Generation of the Righteous in Scotland, England, and
Ireland; and much may be said from Scripture and Reason, to justify that
submission; we humbly beg further to be informed, If ye repent of it, where is
your Confession? and where are the Fruits of your Repentance? Why do you not go
to your charges again, but persist in submission to your Ejection?

But to come nearer the purpose: What is it displeases you at your Brethrens
deed?

I. Is it the Name of Indulgence? Answ. We hope ye will not contend about Names
and Words, 1 Timothy 6.4. Were not such Litigations a bogling at Shadows? and
would savor of Levity or Captiousness? What is such an Indulgence, but a
dispensing with the severity of the Law, letting them have access to the
public, peaceable exercise of their Ministry, from which the Law did debar
them? And may not the Magistrate dispense with his own Law, in whole or in
part, and call this very properly an Indulgence? But away with striving about
words! Call it a Permission, Toleration, or License, or what ye will, so ye but
agree about the thing.

II. Does it offend you that the Magistrate intermedleth with Church Affairs?
Answ. We expect also this not to be your scruple; judging ye still adhere to
the Doctrine of your Church, and of all the Reformed, expressed in their
Confessions of Faith, and the Writings of their Worthies against the Papists,
Anabaptists, and Erastians; who (though against Erastians) they deny the
Magistrate any power in Sacris, or formally and intrinsecally Ecclesiastical,
called in Scripture the Power of the Keys, yet (against the Papists and
Anabaptists) they attribute unto him an Imperative Power circa sacra, about the
matters of God, formally civil, and only objectively Ecclesiastical, and to be
put forth modo civili, in a civil way, and by civil means: so that there is
nothing so sacred in the visible matters of Religion, but it is the object of
his care and Procuratorship, and his power to be conversant about it, in manner
competent, (as Amesius tells, Cas. consc. lib. 5. cap. 25. these. 8.) He being
custos and vindex utriusque tabulae, keeper of both Tables of the Law, of the
first as well as of the second, as the fourth Command appoints; whence it is
called by some eminent Divines, the Magistrates Charter for taking care of
Religion; which is also confirmed from Deuteronomy. 31.9. and Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. with
Josh. 1.7, 8, 9. This power, and by virtue of it, his just intermedling for the
good of Religion, is uncontroverted by Orthodox Divines, and confirmed by that
applauded practice of Artaxerxes, Decreeing, Ezra 7.23. Whatsoever is commanded
by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently done for the House of the God of
Heaven, etc. Which power (if through error or wickedness) the Magistrate employ
for the hurt, rather than for the good of the Church, (though that be a fault)
yet we judge ye will not call it Erastianism, or an usurpation of an unlawful
power, but an abuse or misapplication of a lawful; and will count him peccant
in the matter, not in the Authority or power.

Now this power of his is extended by Divines to no less, if not to more, than
your Indulgence (in so far as it is accepted by the Brethren) amounts unto. And
that, conform to the word of God in the commended practices of several Kings
mentioned in Scripture, who warrantably took upon them by virtue of their
calling to do as much and more, without the least imputation of invading the
Priestly or Spiritual power; Aarons Rod, and Judahs Scepters, remaining still
distinct notwithstanding. Particularly, did not Hezekiah in 2 Chronicles. 29.3. Open
the doors of the house of the Lord, which had been shut for a long time, as v.
7. and v. 4. it is said, He brought in the Priests and Levites. -- And v. 5. he
puts them to their work, to sanctify and cleanse the house. And v. 21. To
offer sacrifices is commanded by him. -- And v. 25. he set (or restored to
their place) the Levites in the house of the Lord with Cymbals, etc. And v. 30.
Commanded them to sing praise, etc. Now in all these things the Priests and
Levites did give obedience not only out of duty to God, as obliged to do these
things by virtue of their office, but also out of respect to the Kings
Commandment, as ye find v. 15, 24. The like is said, 2 Chronicles. 35.2. that Josias
set the Priests in their Charges. From these Citations Note three things:

(1) That as it is proper to the Spiritual Officers of the House of God Operari
in Sacris, or elicitively to act in the exercises of Religion; so it is not
incompetent to the Civil Ruler to command, and put forth his authority about
the same imperatively, but jure he may, yea ex Officio he ought to do so; even
to put the Church Officers to their duty and work, when need requires; and
that not only by removing Restraints and Impediments, nor by naked permission
only, but even by way of Authoritative order and command. As there, the Prince
appoints, and the Priest acts.

(2) That this is especially competent, yea incumbent to him, In statu
Ecclesiae Turbato, vel corrupto, in a perturbed or corrupted state of the
Church, such as then was, and as yours was and is.

(3) That it is no crime for the Ministers of the Lord to obey the Magistrate
in such a case. As the Magistrate acts no Erastianism, nor Papal Supremacy in
this kind of doing; so neither does the Minister homologate or involve himself
in any such crime, nor is to be loaded with such Imputations in and for going
along (in his place) with such appointments of the Magistrate. However Uzziah
was faulty in the one sort (as 2 Chronicles. 26.16, 18.) and Jeroboam in the other
sort of solecisms in the exercise of Magistratical power about Religion, (as 1
King. 12.28, 29, 31, 32, 33.) Uzziah invading the Priests Office, like an
Erastian indeed, and Jeroboam usurping that unlawful Supremacy like Lord and
Head of the Church; yet good Hezekiah did neither of them: Nor does any other
Prince, who contains himself within his line, as Hezekiah did. And the
Licensing of your Ministers to return to their public stations, is no other,
(as afterward shall be cleared) but most like unto Hezekiahs practice in
several points above rehearsed. And consequently no fault in your Ministers
acceptance thereof in so far as it is accepted by them.

Add to this Jehoshaphats approved practice in 2 Chronicles. 17.7, and where we find
he sent the Levites to teach the Lords word in diverse places of the land; who
went accordingly. Whence it is evident,

(1) That it is not repugnant to the Word of God, that in some cases, specially
in a lapsed case of the Church, the Magistrate may dispose upon Ministers, as
to place and parts of a Land, where they may exercise their Ministry, at least
for a time; may send them here and there, the Churches need calling for it: And
that this is no proper Ecclesiastical planting or transplanting of Ministers
(as some invidiously term it), but only a Civil Authorization as to exercising
their function in such a place for longer or shorter time, as need may be.

(2) It is evident also here, that in such a case, the Pastors Ministerial
Mission or Commission to Teach and Preach, is not from the Magistrate, but from
the Lord; nor do they innovate or renounce their Commission from the Lord, by
receiving the Magistrates superadded mission or command and legal warrant; nor
do they therefore cease to be Christ's Ministers or Ambassadors in his name, or
become Council-Curates, (as some opprobriously and injuriously alledg) because
the King by his Council adds his civil Sanction to the Authority they have of
Christ. Who can say, their Levites were Jehoshaphats Curates, and not the Lords
Ministers, for undergoing the like appointment of his power? Does the
Magistrates supervenient Authority diminish or enervate the antecedent
intrinsic power and spiritual authority of their office, or alter its nature?
Is Christ's Commission to his Ambassadors, and the Magistrates adding his Civil
Warrant (kissing and serving the Son of God therein, as Psalm. 2.11, 12.)
destructive and subversive, and not rather corroborative one of another; and
may sweetly conspire together, as being, though Diversa, yet not Adversa; and
contrary one to another? Subordinata, and subservientia, non pugnant. Add to
all this, that several of your General Assemblies, the supreme Court of Christ
in your Church, when they were (as often they were) Indicted and Convocate by the
Kings Authority, and upon his Command and Proclamation did sit; were they (pray
you) therefore but Erastian Courts and Synagogues, deriving all their Authority
from the King, and acting in his Name, like other Civil Judicatories of the
Kingdom, i. e. the Session or Parliament? were they in this case not at all
Christ's Court, nor acting in his name as his Ambassadors, and not the Kings?
was this in them a renouncing of Christ's Headship, and an acknowledging of
another Lord and Master, and a taking of Commission from the Civil Magistrate?
etc. We hope none will be so absurd as to affirm it, or to think that the
Magistrates Auxiliary deed, and their making use of it, was derogatory either
to Christ's Kingly Office, or to the Assemblies intrinsic power, or altered
their nature from being purely spiritual Courts of Christ. Even so, what more
does the Prince, his permitting or appointing actual Ministers to exercise
their Office here or there, in this broken state of the Church, constitute them
his Curates or Delegates? or state them guilty of Homologating an Erastian
power, and establishing a spiritual supremacy in the Magistrate? or infer them
to be such as may not say to people, Over you has the Holy Ghost made us
overseers, but the King? Certainly if the superaddition of the Magistrates
Authority do not innovate nor prejudice the Assemblies Authority in the
exercise of Government; neither does it the Ministers in the Exercise of their
Function. The Magistrate herein but serves the Lord and his Christ, and his
Spouse the Church, and her Ministry, but acts not as in Christ's stead as her
Head and Lord.

Q. The Magistrate his interposing his Authority in this case, what place holds
it then, say ye?

Answ. It is not constitutive of their Office (as was in the case of these
Priests whom Jeroboam did make and constitute of the lowest of the people), but
cumulative to it, ( Accumulando jura juribus) in a subservient and extrinsick
way; and corroborative of its Exercise, and determines them in the exercise
thereof as to some circumstances, namely the place or places of the Land, where
they are to exercise their work. Now this power aforesaid being not improper to
Kings under the Old Testament, why may they not under the New put forth the
like, as your own Divines hold, and none but the Papists and Anabaptists deny?
And if they may in some cases appoint, much more permit, as your Indulgence is,
as hereafter shall be made to appear.

To this Scriptural Doctrine agrees: (1) That general Assertion, That to the
Prince it belongs as Nurse-father of the Church, to take care, and do what in
him lies, in ways and by means congruous to his capacity and sphere, that
indigent people be provided with a godly and well-qualified Ministry; as
learned Mr. Gillespy (that noble Antagonist of the Erastian Exorbitancies of
the Civil power) has it in his hundred and eleven Propositions, Propos. 41.
And before him, famous Mr. Welsh, in his Epistle Dedicatory to King James,
prefixed to his piece against Popery, speaking of the forementioned practices
of Hezekiah and Jehoshaphat, says to the King, Follow these Examples, Sir;
send Pastors through all the borders of your Kingdom to teach your Subjects the
Law of the Lord their God, etc. We hope ye will not think or say that eminent
man of God (who suffered so much for asserting the Churches rights, and
withstanding the encroachments of the time) does here teach the King Erastian
Principles or practices, or Papal and Spiritual Supremacy; and yet as much does
he teach, as your Indulgence amounts unto, in what of it is accepted by the
Brethren.

(2) Ponder how particularly your Church concedeth to the Magistrate a power to
put Ministers to particular Charges, when the Church is not in her ordinary or
well settled case: as in the second Book of Discipline, Chap. 10.. last, they
say, That Kings and Princes that be godly, may by their Authority, when the
Kirk is corrupted, and all things out of order, place Ministers, and restore
the true service of the Lord, after the example of some godly Kings of Judah,
etc. So blessed Mr. Welsh in the formentioned Epistle to King James, approves
of the King his being desirous (as he had professed in two Assemblies) to plant
every Parish within his Kingdom with a Pastor. Which expressions of placing and
planting, used in the foresaid Citations, albeit they mean not of Ordaining and
making of Ministers constitutively, but only a settling of Ministers (already
Ordained) in particular places; yet surely they import no less than the word [
Appoint] in the first Indulgence, and more than the Grant of the second, which
only permits Ministers to Preach in such and such vacant Congregations. Yea
further, in the first Book of Discipline, page 37. it is expressly allowed to
the Magistrate in such a case to appoint Ministers to certain Provinces and
Charges.

. If any except here that this power is ascribed only to Godly Magistrates,
such as Hezekiah, etc. was.

To this we say three things: (1) Is it not hard to seclude any Prince
professing the Gospel, and being a member of the Visible Church, from the claim
at least of Foederal Holiness, notwithstanding he have his own personal faults?
see Job 34.18.

(2) Ye know it is a Popish principle to say, Dominium fundatur in gratia, that
Sovereignty and power is grounded on Grace and Piety. Whence it is when Kings
change their Religion, and turn Protestant (which they call Heresy) the Pope
declares them fallen from their Regality, exauctorats and deposes them. Your
Confession of Faith teaches otherwise, Chap. 23.. 4. That Infidelity or
difference of Religion does not make void the Magistrates just and Legal
Authority. Hence Mr. Calderwood, Mr. Rutherford, and others of your Writers
teach, that neither does Piety add, nor Impiety detract any Legal power, but
only enable or disable to the right use of his power. In vain therefore use ye
the distinction here betwixt Godly and Ungodly Magistrates, as if their Legal
power were not the same.

(3) We find in Scripture, even Pagan Princes warrantably claiming and
exercising suchlike power about matters of Religion, as Cyrus, Darius,
Artaxerxes and others. From all which considerations we see it plain, that the
Regal Power is not augmented by the Princes Religiousness, nor diminished by
his Irreligion; but both the Godly and ungodly Magistrate have the same power
about Religion; though it be true, that without piety he will not have the
Sanctified, nor readily any discreet and good use of it. And indeed, if
Religion were a ground of Authority and power about the matters of God, then
all Saints and Religious persons should have that power, and be as Kings and
Magistrates to act Hezekiahs part; for, a Quatenus ad omne valet consequentia.

As for the Phrase used in the forecited place of the Book of Discipline,
seeming to limit the power circa sacra to godly Magistrates; We answer, The
word Godly is added there, not Reduplicatively, but Specificatively, that is,
not as a Diacritical Limiting designation, (or restriction of the power to
Piety) but as a plain qualification of the Persons who find mercy to use that
power well, which (of Right) is common, and equally due to Princes in the like
case.

If again any say, These Kings of Judah were Prophets, and that power about
Religion (forementioned) appertained to them as Prophets only, and consequently
not to any Kings now adays; nor can their example be for imitation. We answer,
This is a great mistake; how will it ever be proved that Hezekiah and
Jehoshaphat were Prophets, or clothed with any extraordinary power, incompetent
to other Kings? What ground in Scripture is there for this? And how can ye
believe it without a Scripture-Warrant? Moreover, we ask, were the Heathen
Kings, forementioned, Prophets? And yet they intermedled in like manner about
affairs of Religion.

If any further say, Howbeit such a power to interpose so far in and about
Ecclesiastical Matters, to redress and settle things out of course, etc. be
competent to other Magistrates in a broken State of the Church; yet who can
allow it to him who is, or has been the Troubler of the Church himself? To
this the Answer is, (1.) What Reason can there be to debar such an one from
interposing to redress what himself has overturned, more than his Successor?
(for ye grant one may justly interpose thus to Reform what his Predecessor
marred:) What binds up a King from doing the same, as to what himself has
disordered? Who will say, but Manasseh might have done, in the case of the
Church by himself corrupted, whatever Jehoshaphat or Hezekiah did, in her case,
perverted by others?

Would not Reason say, the Prince is the more obliged to Interpone his power,
and extend it as far as others for her Relief, that himself was the Author of
her Malady? And to open the door to Ministers which himself did shut? And to
build what he formerly did destroy? Can any Relevant Exception be assigned
against this? If ye say, This tends to encourage the Magistrate to trouble and
break the Church, and cast matters in confusion, that he may have the more
latitude of power to Act in Church Matters. Answ. Not at all; because with no
reason can it be said, the allowing him power to do good and heal, does
natively and justly encourage and warrant him to take power to hurt and do ill.
We humbly suppose it rather implies a Challenge: Certain it is, no man may do
evil that good may come of it, nor does the good that results upon occasion of
evil, justify Bigones, nor encourage to more in the future. Consider (2.) That
it is not properly his fault of perturbing the Church, but her Necessity and
his Office, which allows him to intermeddle so far; and therefore, as his
fault obliges him to Repentance, (specially if it was done upon wicked design,
to get Scouthroom to act extraordinarily in restoring her again) so it cannot
justly be reckoned to deprive him of power to put things in order again, in as
far as may be congruous to any other Princes, who had not injured the Church
themselves. But on the contrary, His doing her wrong, obliges him the more to
make amends: A Chyrurgeon, who cuts his Pupils Arm, to try an experiment of his
Art and Balsom upon it, has he not as good right to heal it again himself as
any other? Yea, Is he not the more concerned to do the Cure? His foolish or
wicked practice in being the Author of the Sore, does not disoblige him from,
but rather oblige him unto, the Cure.

Now lay what is said together, and since thereby it is evident that the
Magistrate may, in an extraordinary case, put forth himself lawfully (without
usurping Ecclesiastical Power, properly so called, or encroaching upon the
Churches Rights) to allocate Ministers to certain places; may he not much more
Remove the Legal Bars (in whole or in part) which debarred your Ministers from
the free exercise of their Office, and permit them access to return to their
Charges, or to officiate in some other vacancies? which is your very case;
wherein your Ministers did not take his License, as sufficient to state them in
a Pastoral Relation to these Congregations; but beside, they had the peoples
call to determine and engage them to exercise their Ministry there for the
time; so all they owe unto, and hold of the Magistrate, is, that Eatenus
removet prohibens; t. 1. He so far takes off the Legal Restraint, under the
force whereof they did lie, and by permission and allowance of his Authority,
they are freed of danger of the Law, in the public exercise of their Office
there; a thing which He was (in duty) obliged to do, and they to take hold of,
and to count it a mercy and privilege to have it. But say ye, Had he Rescinded,
Revoked, and Annulled the Act at Glasgow, that outed them, it had been clearer
to have been so: But when he lets that stand, and only gives a new permission
or Mandate to Preach, that looks like more. Ans. Not only the Act of Council at
Glasgow, by which they were outed of their Charges, but all other Acts and Laws
by which they were restrained from the exercise of their Ministry any where
within Scotland, unless they conformed, are certainly sufficiently taken off
the Fyle, as to them. For, the King having the Executive Power of the Law,
albeit he did not fully Repeal and Rescind those Acts and Laws, yet by his
Indulgence suspendeth them, as to the Indulged: And albeit this be not done in
Terminis, yet Directly, Formally, and Expressly, yet Materially and Virtually,
in allowing them to exercise their Office in such and such places, any Laws to
the contrary notwithstanding. For, when the Legislative, or Supreme
Administrator, permits or commands a thing contrary to the standing Laws, in
all Law it is understood to exempt and privilege these Persons from the said
Laws, and to indulge them a Liberty and immunity from these Statutes. Now, this
is the present Indulgence; the Native Effect and Operation whereof is, to
dispense with the Legal Inhibition these Ministers were under, but not at all
to invest them with new spiritual power to officiate, as some invidiously
allege. And by this dispensation, the Indulged to their own Charges are really
and in effect restored in integrum, and put in statu quo prius, as to any
Liberty the Laws debarred them from, in respect of their Ministry there; and
these indulged to other parts, are so far restored, as to be indempnified and
licensed to Preach there, being before interdicted to Preach any where.

And by virtue of this Indulgence, neither the one nor the other sort of these
Ministers do Officiate upon a new Ministerial Title (as is unjustly alleged)
the Indulgence conferring or pretending to confer no such thing; only it gives
them a new Legal Immunity to exercise their old Ministry in such and such
places. Any that wrest the Interpretation of this Indulged Liberty to any other
Sense, seems to us, and all unprejudiced men, to put a sinister and malicious
gloss upon it.

But in the third place, perhaps ye will say, it is not the simple taking a
License from the Magistrate, which offends you; but it is the particular Nature
and Tenor of this Indulgence, as under such and such sinful Circumstances,
which seems to illegitimate it.

Ans. What are these?

O, say ye, First, In General, Are not these Acts of Council, wherein the
Indulgence consists and is comprehended, very ugly in several points, and
various respects? Is not their Deed then, in accepting such an ill
circumstantiated Liberty, most disallowable?

For Answer to this, Let us 1. Consider, What these Acts are? (Next) How far
the Indulged Ministers has accepted, or not accepted, the same. And (3.) What
your Exceptions are, against what they have done.

As for the Acts of Council relating to this Liberty, they are namely two. The
one Orders the Ministers therein named, to Repair to such and such Parishes
as are therein expressed, and there to remain confined, permitting them to
Preach in the said Parishes, and exercise their Ministry there. This is
properly the Act of Indulgence.

The other Act, which followed the former, appoints the Indulged to observe
several things, which they call Rules, viz. 1. Not to Baptize any Children,
except of the Parishes to which they are confined, or of their
Neighbour-Parishes, if vacant. 2. To Celebrate their Communions all in one day.
3. That they Preach only in the Kirk, and not in the Kirk-Yard, nor in other
places of the Parish, under an heavy pain. 4. That they depart not forth of
their Parishes without leave. 5. That in their Exercise of Discipline, the
Cases formally referrable to Presbyteries, be by them referred to the
Conformists Meetings, which now are in place of Presbyteries. 6. To pay the
Bursars and Clarks their Fees, as formerly wont to be. This Act is not of
Indulgence, but rather of Restrictions.

Now say ye, How could the Magistrate lawfully make, or Ministers accept, such
an Indulgence, namely, so clogged?

To Answer this, It is necessary (in the next place) to consider what these
Ministers have done, and what is the true state of the Controversy between you
and them. To which we say in the general, that it is no small injury done to
them, to charge them with all and every thing comprehended in these Acts, as if
they had swallowed all down in gross, without exception of any. And
consequently, it is a great mistake to think, whatever may be justly objected
against sundry of those things so enacted, does militate against them and their
deed, seeing they disclaim and never owned most of these things more than those
do who reject all. And is it not hard from their acceptance of a part, viz. the
naked permitted liberty, to infer and cast upon them an Homologation of the
whole contents of these acts?

Here then it would be remembered what the true state of the Question is: Which
is not, (1) Whether these acts forementioned be in all things approvable and
rightly done? But what in all or any of these acts might be and is lawfully
done? Particularly, Whether or not the Magistrate might and did jure order
these Ministers, and repair unto, and grant them a permission to Preach and
exercise the other parts of their Ministry in such and such places as are
mentioned in the Act? In a complex Act there may be many things largely
censurable, and very sinful, upon the Magistrates part; yet may there be other
things not unwarrantable. And in that case the one are not to be condemned out
of distaste at the other. And certainly, whatever incompetency or iniquity may
be alleged to be in other points of these Acts, it will be hard to find any in
the particular forementioned, viz. the Indulged liberty.

(2) It is not so much to be Queried, what is Lawfully, as what is Legally done
in this by the Magistrate; for a thing (for example, the confinement of a Godly
Minister for no fault) may be very unlawfully and unjustly done, and a real sin
upon the Magistrates part, like other acts of Injustice; yet may it be legally
done, that is to say, not Heterogeneous and incompetent to his Office, not
beyond the bounds of his power; and therefore cannot therein be counted an
Usurper (or Erastian), though perhaps not free of Iniquity. This consideration
well observed, may help to clear a frequent mistake in many simple people who
count every act of injustice real or supposed in the Ruler about matters of
Religion, an act of Erastianism or Papal Supremacy.

(3) Neither is the Question so much, What has the Magistrate done in all this,
as, What has the Ministers accepted, or submitted unto? For, perhaps there are
many more things enacted by him, than embraced by them. Now what are the
Ministers concerned farther, than as to what they have accepted, or yielded
submission unto? Let each bear their own burden, and not every thing, wherein
it is supposed the Magistrate has done amiss, be charged upon the Ministers.
--

(4) It is not the Question either, Whether or not it be lawful for Ministers
to have closed with the whole complex of both these Acts? This ye know they
never did; nor do they allow of all contained in these Acts more than you do.
But the Question is, Whether might they lawfully accept of, or submit unto any
thing contained therein, rejecting the rest as evil, or inconvenient;
Particularly, whether they might upon the abovementioned order, repair to such
and such Parishes, and there Preach the Gospel, and exercise the other parts of
their Ministry, being permitted by the Magistrate, and also called thereunto by
the people, and this for such time only (in case it be not their former charge)
until they should have regress to their former Parishes? This ye know is all
they did embrace. And in a complex busisiness, why might not the good be taken
hold of, and the evil abstracted from, waved, and laid by? as is directed in
the like cases, 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, says the Apostle, and held fast
that which is good. And commended in Isa. 7.15. Heb. 5. ult. and recommended in
Phil. 1.9, 10. And whatever the Magistrate did overstretch in, what is it to
the Ministers if they did not close with these excesses, as they did not? If ye
say, the circumstances, or concomitants or parts of an action cannot be morally
abstracted from, or separated the one from the other, seeing all concurs to
make up the morality of the action; Therefore no circumstances or parts of the
Magistrates deed can be by the indulged separate, more than by himself.

Ans. Howbeit the circumstances of the action cannot be justly waved by the
Agent, as relating properly to him; yet no doubt but the Patient well may; and
false it is to say, all the circumstances upon the Agents part, does also
terminate upon the Patient, and reflect upon the one as well as upon the other;
as both Philosophy and Divinity teaches. It is not therefore to be doubted but
a complex frame of Indulgence, clothed with vicious circumstances, and stuffed
with ill ingredients upon the granters part, might very well be divided by the
accepters, and the good separated from the bad, very warrantably; and this to
be counted no more Logical abstraction, but wise and Christian discretion and
discrimination; and consequently they ought not to be charged in this case,
with accepting the Indulgence as circumstantiat in the Magistrate. But more of
this after. And so they are not accessory to the guilt may be complicated in
it, as it comes from the Magistrate.

From all which ye see, It is no small perversion of the state of the Question,
as it is molded by some in their Papers, making it to be this; Whether the
Magistrate, by virtue of his Office, may, of himself, and immediately without
the Church, and the previous Election of the People, assign and send Ministers
to particular Churches, to take the Fixed and Pastoral Oversight of them? And
prescribe Rules and Directions to them, for the exercise of their Ministry, and
confine them to the said Congregations? And then Impugning this multiplex
Question, renders their exceptions against it, as Reasons why they could not
embrace the Indulgence, as their Brethren have done: As if Exceptions at any
part of the Magistrates Deed, did justify their refusing of the whole, and
reflected guilt upon those who did not wholly reject it as they did; or as if
their Brethren embraced all and whole of it, not separating the good from the
evil. What unfair dealing is this? And among the many iniquities observable in
this framing of the Question (whereof severals shall be spoken to afterward,
namely, concerning the Confinement, and Act of Regulation) these two at present
would be noticed. I. That more is charged upon the Magistrate, than really he
has done, namely, 1. It is supponed, that by the Indulgence he gives the
Ministers a spiritual potestative mission (as they call it) for Preaching to
such Congregations, and taking Pastoral Charge thereof: Hence they frame their
Arguments to militate against the Indulgence, as if therein the Magistrate took
upon him the Spiritual Power of the Church in Ordination and Admission. Whereas
all his Mission or Assignment is purely Civil and Local (as appears by the
Tenor of the Act) ordering them to repair to such Parishes, and be confined
therein; only (for mitigation of their Confinement) he permits and allows them
also liberty to Preach there, yet leaving it to peoples liberty to call them,
and to their own liberty to embrace that call, to exercise their Ministry
there, or not, as they pleased; (for their Freaching is not enjoined, but
permitted.) Whence it is plain, there was no Moral or Spiritual Mission, nor
Ecclesiastical Admission and Setting of these Ministers over these
Congregations, like that in Tit. 1.5. Acts 14 23. (unless ye call confinement
to the place, with a civil permission to Preach there, a spiritual and
potestative Mission which were absurd.) And therefore all the Arguments
mustered up (upon this account) against the Indulged Liberty cum larvis
luctantur, fights with their own Fancy only, and makes nothing against the true
question. Yea further, Suppose there had been some sort of Political Mission,
or Appointment and Command, such as Jehoshaphat gave to the Levites, and
Hezekiah to the Priests, as aforesaid; yet that differs toto genere from an
Ecclesiastical Mission, such as the Church gave Barnabas and Paul, Act. 13.2, 3.

The Magistrates political Appointment in this case, being not a Spiritual
Authorization in the Name of Christ, but merely a Legal Warrant; not conferring
intrinsic power and right to Preach, or be Pastors to these people, but only
warranting them (in point of Law) to exercise their Ministry to and among them.
2. It is supponed here, that the Ministers are sent to take the Fixed and
Pastoral Charge of these Congregations; whereas there is no such thing in the
Act; but simply a confining, with a License to Preach, without defining in what
capacity, whether as a stated Pastor of that people, or in occasional way only,
as they and the people should agree: So that as their Assignment is but local,
their Liberty but legal and permissive, their capacity also of Preaching there
is left undetermined by the Magistrate. Thus ye see, more is alleged (in this
sort of stating the question) to be done by the Magistrate, than indeed He has
done. How unequal is this, that men should put their Commentary and Sense of
the Matter, for the Text! And state the Question according to their mistaken
Notion, and not according to Truth?

The Second Enquiry in this stating of the Question, and in determining and
impugning thereof as so stated, is, That it is supposed the Contents of the
Councils Acts were proposed to be accepted all and whole together, or else
none, and nothing at all: And that these who have embraced the Indulged
Liberty, have joined with all. Whereas, so notorious it is, that neither the
one nor the other is true, that we need not insist to demonstrate the same. And
if any be so bold, as to affirm the contrary, it is incumbent to them to prove
it, before their asserting can merit any credit with Rational Men. In sum then,
the genuine and plain state of the question is, Whether or no, when the Law had
outed you all of your Charges, and restrained you most severely from all
public, free, and peaceable Exercise of your Ministry, in any part of the Kirk
and Kingdom of Scotland; whether or not (I say) did the Magistrate lawfully
dispense with, and take off that Restraint, as to some Persons and Places? And
the Ministers thereby Licensed, did they lawfully make use of that liberty,
being withal most seriously called thereunto by the People? Now, what is
exceptable against this? This is the true state of the Controversy betwixt you
and your Brethren; what is your quarrel at it?

There are nine particular Objections (the most material and most usual, so far
as we can learn) which here we shall consider and answer, finding them not
Relevant to prove the conclusion they drive at.

1. Some say, This Indulgence it is mere Erastianism, and an Homologation of
the Supremacy.

2. They object the Rules and Instructions forementioned.

3. Some alledg this Preaching with the Magistrates permission and allowance,
to be a Renouncing of their former Commission from Jesus Christ, and a taking
of a new one from the Magistrate, and an holding of their Ministry of him with
subjection unto him, and dependence upon him, like other Civil Judges of the
Land.

4. Diverse offend at the Magistrates intent and design in this Indulgence.

5. Others stumble at the narrowness of the Liberty, as to Persons and Places;
and also as to the extent of the Exercise of Government permitted to these
Ministers.

6. The manner of their Entry is quarrelled by some, as not being called by the
people, nor admitted by Order of Presbytery, as wont to be.

7. Other some cry out for want of a Testimony against the Magistrates
Encroachments, and other sad grievances, in these and other of his Acts.

8. Some exagitates them for their confinement, yea for their fixing at all,
though it be in their former Charge.

9. Others stumble at this, that so many other zealous and godly Ministers and
people are against it, and all the Godly divided about it.

To all these we shall say somewhat shortly, to clear the mistakes therein.

As to the First, O says some, Is not this Indulgence a Masterpiece of the
States Erastianism, and of the Prince his sinful Supremacy now asserted by Law?
And consequently the accepting thereof, an homologating and supporting of both?

Upon this Head, how admirably do some Triumph, insult, yea and anathematize
the Indulgence, and all that has accepted thereof, or hears the Indulged Men!
What fierce Outcryes are made, especially by some Novices and Vulgars, harping
continually (almost) upon this String, as their most melodious Music to please
themselves with, and their greatest Argument to decry these Licensed Brethren
by; canting these jingling Vocables of Supremacy, Homologat, Erastian, ad Ravim
usque: And yet knows not perhaps what they say, nor whereof they affirm; nor
are able at all to rid marches, and distinctly tell what power about
Ecclesiastic matters does of right belong to the Magistrate, and what not; nor
what is Erastianism, or sinful Supremacy, or Homologating of either. Experti
loquimur.

But let all that quarrel upon this score, seriously ponder these few things,
which we presume to lay before them* to take off their offense as to this: (1)
Be ye well assured, your indulged Brethren and ye agree well enough in Thesi
(in the general), That no Erastianism, nor unlawful Supremacy (properly and
truly so called) is to be complied with? They abhor both as much as you do. All
the difference is about the Hypothesis (or particular application); that they
cannot call every thing so, which you do call so; particularly, that in this
indulged liberty, as accepted by them, they can see neither of these. If you
see further than they, bring forth your strong reasons, plead with them in
love, and labor to convince them. Mean time be sober till ye prove your
Assertions demonstratively, and not ^y confident averring, nor by weak and
unconcluding Reasons. Certainly Fortia, non Phalerata, soft words and hard
arguments were your best for convincing and reclaiming your honest Brethren, in
case they err here.

(2) As for the charge of Erastianism, let it be considered what is
Erastianism, but when the Magistrate usurps in whole or in part the internal;
proper, formal spiritual power of Church Government (called in Scripture, The
power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven)? and so wresting these Keys out of
the Kirks hand, and engrossing them to himself, accordingly exercises them, or
delegates them to others. Now who can warrantably say, this indulged liberty is
of that nature? being merely a Civil or Legal permission to exercise their
Ministry, notwithstanding the Laws to the contrary. Whatever may be deemed of
the Act of Instructions so called, (wherein they are not much concerned, as
after may be cleared), surely this Act of Licensing them to Preach in such and
such places, is no proper, formal, intrinsic Act of the power of the Keys (no
more than the Roman Governors permitting of Paul to Preach, Act. 21.39, 40.
and 26.1.) But rather an Act of the Regal Scepter; and is only objectively
Ecclesiastical: And consequently no Erastianism, nor without the verge of the
Prince his just power, as has been formerly showed. Any that are contrary
minded, we humbly judge their Brethren will think themselves much obliged to
them, if they will convince them of their mistake in this, if there be any.
Mean time it is hoped these Opponents will not obtrude big words, or bold
Assertions, or crafty insinuations, instead of solid probations. Let School
Doctors digladiat nimbly among themselves, contending for the palm of Victory,
rather than for Verity; and let them dictate to their Disciples, as if their
(...), their bare authority were enough to rest upon. It is hoped Divines and
Christians will be far from such humors and practices; and will know, that
every man must live by his own faith, and not implicitly upon anothors word.
Convince your Brethren then of what Erastianism, or overstretch of the
Magistrate his power is in this particular, as accepted by them, if ye find any
in it; and hear what they have to say for themselves, before ye condemn them,
and divide from them, as is taught you, Joh. 8.46. and 7.51. Act. 25.16. Yea,
suppose the Magistrate had stretched a little beyond his ordinary line, in the
permission granted (which yet we see not), nevertheless may not the
extraordinary case of the Church do much to excuse, yea purge it of crime? in
which case the most strict Presbyterians and Anti-Erastian Divines are loath to
charge him with the odious imputation of Erastianism. Read your worthy Mr.
Gillespy, Aarons Rod, page 182. In extraordinary cases (says he) when
Church Government does degenerate into Tyranny (as under Popery it is for the
most part) then -- the Christian Magistrate may and ought to do diverse things
in and for Religion, and interpose his Authority diverse ways, so as does not
belong unto his -- Administration, ordinarily in a Reformed and well
constituted Church: Because exextraordinary Diseases must have extraordinary
Remedies. To this same purpose speaks blessed Mr. Rutherford in his Due Right
of Presbytery, page 416. Here more is conceded by your strictest Writers, than
the accepted liberty amounts unto.

(3) As for the Supremacy, as it is now established by Law, Parliament 2 d,
Caroli 2. Sess. 1. Act. 1. We shall not at present scan the nature of it,
whether it be only (as some of your selves judge) a mere Civil Supremacy about
Ecclesiastical persons and things, but exalted to a dangerous height, devolving
all the Legal power (about matters of Religion) into the Kings hand, making him
absolute, and entirely supreme, Quo ad Statum Politicum, that is, in point of
Civil Prerogative, Arbitrary; so as he may do in Church Matters (in point of
Law or Civil capacity) as he thinks fit, without advice or consent of the
Estates of Parliament? or whether it be (as most others judge) a
Caesarec-Papatus (as they speak) or a Papal, Spiritual Supremacy, [that is] a
power to dispose absolutely in a Sovereign, Arbitrary, Despotical way, (as well
in genere Ethico, as in genere Politico), upon the matters mentioned in that
Act; Particularly, to settle what kind or Form of Government in the Church he
pleases, and in whose hands he pleases; as if all the spiritual power of
Church Government were in him as Head and Fountain, and Modellable by him at
pleasure; even as the Civil perhaps at first was? and consequently it be an
high incroachment upon Christ's Crown, to whom alone, as the only King, Head,
and Monarch of his Church, such a transcendent power and privilege does belong?
We say, we judge it not necessary to examine that matter now. But this we may
offer to be considered, That whatever Overstretch of the Sovereigns power be
made in that Act of Supremacy, as (upon the one hand) none of the Indulged
allows thereof, more than any others; but lament, as much as any, the
extravagancies of this or any other Acts of Parliament, tending to the
prejudice of our Lord Jesus Christ his Rights, or of the intrinsic Rights and
Liberties of his Church; so (upon the other hand) who can, with any reason
affirm, that this Indulged Liberty (in so far as it is accepted by your
Brethren) has any affinity with such a Papal Supremacy, or is a part of the
unclean thing that might not be touched? Any that aver it to be so, we humbly
beg their Reasons: for, hitherto we have seen few, but some quirks and iniquous
lame similitudes and comparisons, which are not Argumentative, as all Scholars
know, however taking they be with the vulgar; and you know too, that,
Affirmanti incumbit probatio, the burden of probation is incumbent to the
pursuer. Nevertheless (for exculpation) we shall lay before you five reasons,
which we humbly judge may weigh much with any sober and unprejudicate persons to
evidence the contrary.

(1) Consider the nature of this Toleration or Indulgence: It is (as has been
showed already) merely an Act of supreme Civil power Circa Sacra, and therefore
differs toto genere (as far as Heaven from Earth), from Spiritual Supremacy,
and is nothing of kindred to it; though somewhat of the name.

(2) A Politico-Papatus, or Papal spiritual Supremacy, seated in Caesar,
consists (as Writers define it) in a power to alter and dispose arbitrarily
upon Christ's Institutions, and to pervert the frame of Religion at pleasure,
and to set up Humane Institutions in their room, as Jeroboam did. But this
Indulged Liberty is not of that nature, but rather an act of his power as
Nurse-Father to the Church, ( Isa. 49.23.) being for restoring and
countenancing Christ's own Ministers and Ordinances, and not of Humane
inventions, for promoving, not subverting of Religion; for the good, not the
hurt of the Church; an Auxiliary, not a privative exercise of his power.
Therefore being an Act of the Magistrates kissing the Son of God, ( Psalm.
2.12.) and ministering to the Church in her distress, (as Isa. 60.10.) surely it
can be no act of that Papal Supremacy, derogatory to Christ's Prerogative. Who
can (with the least grain of reason) say, that the restoring (in any part) of
Christ's Ministers and Ordinances, is a taking of Christ's Crown off his head,
(as some of you call the Indulgence) and not rather an helping to put it on?

(3) Manifest it is, that the Supremacy asserted in that Act of Parliament,
relates directly only to the matter of Church Government, the disposal thereof,
and of persons to be employed therein, and matters to be treated therein. And
so whatever disposal of the Key of Discipline it put into the Prince his hand,
yet no ways medleth with the Key of Doctrine, and power of Order, i. e. the
investing of men with the power of Preaching, and Ministering the Sacraments;
for the Act expressly limits the Supremacy to the ordering and disposal of the
external Government of the Church. But so it is, that this Indulged Liberty (as
the Copies of the Act which we have happened to see, bears) is only, a
permission to Preach (including virtually a permission to administer the
Sacraments also), but no License is mentioned therein to exercise
Church Government (albeit they venture upon some parts of Government also,
competent to a Congregation, being connived at therein); whence it followed,
the Indulgence granted them can be no efflux of that Supremacy, being not ad
Idem. Or if the Act of Indulgence be of this tenor (as is said some other
Copies bear) permitting them to preach and exercise other parts of their
Ministry; thence it is evident that the Act of Indulgence presupposes their
power and right to Preach, etc. and that they have a Ministry, and intrinsic
right to exercise all its parts, antecedently to that Indulged Liberty; but no
way confers a new Copyhold of their Ministry: Only it says, the exercise
thereof was under a Civil Inhibition, or Legal Restraint, which this Indulgence
takes off. But so it is, that the Supremacy, as it is asserted, is a power of
conferring power of the matters therein expressed (as ye your selves grant) as
if the Prince were head and fountain thereof. Since therefore by the Indulgence
the power of Preaching and exercising the other parts of the Ministry is not
delegate, nor derived unto them, but only the free and peaceable exercise
thereof permitted, and restraints removed, plain it is that the Indulgence is
no Act of that Supremacy. And that even the power of Kirk-Sessions, or
Consistorial parts of Government exercised by them, differs specifically, and
in kind, from what the Supremacy can pretend to give.

4. Power of Indulging is a thing which the Magistrate uncontrovertedly had,
and did exercise anteriorly to the foresaid Assertion of Supremacy; for the
first Indulgence was before it, and your selves grant that that Act Assertory
of the Supremacy is not declarative only, (though it run in that Style, as the
Stylus Curiae) but Collative and Constitutive, conferring upon him more than
ever he had before, else why did not ye and your Church Resent it before that
Assertion of it? Whence it follows, that the Indulging Power is not a proper
part of that new Supremacy, being existent before it had a Being; nor the Act
of Indulgence, a Native Product of that Supremacy, but the Efflux of a power
prior unto it.

5. The Act of Indulgence does not, in any the least Syllable or Jot of its
Tenor, Refer unto, or Bottom it self upon, the asserted Supremacy; but runs in
common Form and Style of other Civil Acts of the Council.

Whereas it is observable, that the Act of Restitution of the Bishops, and the
Act anent Constitution of their National Synod, are expressly Founded upon the
Kings Supremacy, as the Narratives thereof bear. Whence it is manifest, that
even the Magistrate himself did not grant the Indulgence as an Act of that
spiritual Supremacy, that new Jewel of his Crown, but merely as an Act of his
ordinary Supreme Civil Power. Why then will ye Strain, Force, and Father it
upon that his Transcendent Supremacy, when himself does not so?

Upon all which Reasons, ye see that the Indulgence, in so far as accepted by
the Brethren, has no Consanguinity nor Affinity with that Supremacy as now
asserted, and as expounded by you of a spiritual Supremacy.

From all these Considerations also it is plain, that the Argument used of late
by some of you, to prove the Affinity of the Indulgence with the Supremacy, is
but a very Sophism, viz. To Enact, Settle, and make Constitutions, concerning
Matters, Meetings, and Persons Ecclesiastical, according to Royal Pleasure, is
the very substanee and definition of the Supremacy, expressed in the Act
Assertory of it: But the Indulgence is to Enact, etc. therefore it is the very
substance and definition of the Supremacy. How do some Triumph in this, as a
Demonstration, and Achillean Argument* But, Beloved in the Lord, take with us a
second look of it, and weigh it in the Balance of Right Reason, and see the
weakness and fallacy of it in these few particulars.

1. The Major Proposition is an unfaithful account of the Supremacy, as defined
by the Act of Parliament; for the Act expressly restricts it to Matters,
Meetings, and Persons of Eeclesiastical Jurisdiction and Government, as is
before observed. And yet the Argument ampliates and extends it indefinitely
unto all Matters, Meetings, and Persons Ecclesiastical, of what kind soever,
even of Worship as well as Government* And indeed it could not otherwise suit
with the Subsumption, which comprehends these. Now, In this general
Comprehension, it is a very great mistake; and if ye Limit it to matters of
Government, (as it should be) then it varies the Supposition, and does not
quadrate with the Subsumption; and would be ex majori particulari in prima
figura, which is bad Logic.

2. As for the Minor Proposition, wherein ye apply your foresaid definition of
Supremacy to the Indulgence, observe these mistakes in it.

1. That it means of the whole Complex and full Latitude of the Indulgence,
as comprehending all the parts and pendicles of it, the Act of Restrictive
Rules and all; for so the Reverend Author in his Paper (called Mr. B.
Testimony) labors to prove his Charge, by adducing these Rules and Canons,
etc. as witnesses of it.

Whereas ye know (as was abovesaid) that is not the State of the Question
betwixt you and your Brethren; distinguish betwixt the Indulgence as Enacted,
and as Accepted: And know, that whatever the Indulgence, as Enacted by the
Magistrate in its full Latitude, may be charged with, or judged to comprehend,
yea or not; sure ye'll find that part of it, which is accepted by your
Brethren, not to be as is by you alleged, being only a permission or allowance
of Liberty to Preach and Exercise the other parts of their Ministry, wherein no
Vestige of the Supremacy (as expounded of a Papal, Arbitrary, Architectonick,
Spiritual Supremacy) is to be found, as has been already cleared. And for
further clearing of which, consider,

2. That in this grant of Liberty, the Magistrate acts not merely according
to pleasure (except it be in genere politico, that is, as to his own deed,
doing it without constraint, control, or countableness to any person) but
rather against his mind in genere Ethico, permitting that which he does not
approve, as Moses did the Bill of Divorce: So that herein he acts not as a
Coesareo-Papa, or Head of the Church, and Fountain of Church-Offices, Enacting
what he will in disposal of Church Matters, as modellable by his pleasure; but
only and simply, as a Supreme Civil Magistrate, he suspends and dispenses with
the Laws which curbed and hedged in your Brethren, and permits them now to
enjoy a portion of their wonted Liberty, for Reasons of State expressed in his
Act; so that while the major Proposition of the Argument tells us, that, to
Enact, Settle, and make such Constitutions about Matters, etc. Ecclesiastic,
according to Royal Pleasure; that is, to make any Acts anent them he will, as
modellable, in their kind, at his Arbitriment, is the Definition of the
Supremacy, (for in this Sense only it is truly so defined, as Apollonius and
others tell.) And then subsumes, that this Act of Indulgence, even as accepted
by the Brethren, is of that Nature; it is apparently a very great mistake;
which might give us occasion to Remark what multiplied Sophistry is in this
Argument, a compositione and divisione, ab (...) ad (...), ab Homonymia, etc.
But these we pass, as also to criticize upon that strange conclusion here
inferred, That the Indulgence is the very substance and definition of the
Supremacy; and consequently the All of it, and convertible with it, as if the
Supremacy and this Indulgence were reciprocal Terms, and whatsoever the
Supremacy can pretend to, to that same is this Indulgence applicable, according
to the Rule, cui competit definitum, ei competit definitio; and vice versa. But
such Logical Remarks we forbear; only we are sorry to find such paralogizing
among you in a matter so grave and serious: But more sorry that such a caption
should deceive and ensnare the simple. Had this Syllogism been applied to the
Act of Ejecting you, and that of demolishing the Church Government, and
erecting Prelacy in its stead, we should have thought it more pertinent and
considerable. These being Acts of his Privative and Despotical power, and
savouring of a more Dominative Supremacy: But while ye apply it to this
Indulged Liberty, which is but a Cumulative and Auxiliary Act of his power, as
Nurse-Father, and call this the very Essence, Exercise, and Application of the
Supremacy (meaning Spiritual and Architectonick) who may not with half an eye
see it a visible mistake? And pray you if the King should write down to the
Council, and thereupon a Proclamation be made, for permitting, yea appointing
and commanding that no Government be exercised in your Church, but the
Presbyterian, and that forthwith it be set up and exercised, and all outed
Ministers be allowed access to the free exercise of their Ministry any where;
would you say, This were the Enacting, Settling, and Emitting Constitutions
about Matters, Meetings, and Persons Ecclesiastic, according to Royal
pleasure, and the very substance and definition of the Supremacy, and so cast
at it, as a thing vile, not to be touched? If not, (as no sober, rational, man,
will think ye should) why judge ye otherwise of this partial Liberty? Both the
one and the other being of one and the same grain, piece, and kind, though
differing in measure. Upon all that is said then, ye see it still plain, that
this indulged Liberty, in so far as it is accepted, has nothing to do with
this asserted Supremacy.

But say ye, Many are of the opinion that this power of so Indulging, though
pre-existent before, yet now is included in the Assertion of the Supremacy.

Answer. Though this be not evident, but much appears to the contrary by what
is said; yet, suppose it were so, that the clean and unclean power of civil and
spiritual Supremacy, were compacted together in the same assertive Law, and
declared Inherent to the same Crown, what then? Being in it self lawful, does
its Neighborhood (in eodem subjecto) with what is counted unlawful, defile it?
Does the Accession or Conjunction of an Incompetent power, nullify or corrupt
the whole Systeme of the Regal Authority? And consequently, even that just
power which did without controversy belong to the Crown before that unjust
Superaddition? And that, to such a Degree, as neither he may exerce, nor ye
make use (without sin) of the Effluxes of the just power, till first he
disclaim, and lay by the Addition of what is undue? How Irrational were this?
For, as Lawyers tell, Accedente injustitia, non decedit, nec corrumpitur justa
potestas. For example, An Husband, Father, or Master, usurping the power of a
Magistrate or Minister, does he therefore lose and fall from his Marital,
Paternal, or Masterly Authority? Or is it a sin in the Wife, Son, or Servant,
to submit unto, or make use of, the exercise of the one, while he does not
disclaim the other? Sic-like Uzzah's going beyond his Line, intrenching upon
the Priestly Office, did it evacuate or vitiate his Levitical Power, so as (had
he lived) no man might lawfully have made use of his Levitical Service? Or did
Saul and Uzzah their Invading the Priests Office, yea or Jeroboam's usurping
that sinful Supremacy in the matters of God, render all their Regal Power circa
sacra, null or unclean, so as no use might be made of it, no not to the best
ends? What a strange Principle were this? And consequently it cannot be
admitted (which some, but few of you, have bigotly alleged) that it is not
lawful either to seek or take any Indulgence or Benefit of the Magistrates
power about the matters of Religion, until he Renounce what he has by Law or
Practice assumed of Ecclesiastical Supremacy. Moreover, were this Principle
admitted, how desperate would it render the case betwixt your Church and the
Magistrate? It not being likely he may be readily induced to Rescind that new
asserted Supremacy (which he takes for a Flower of his Crown:) And it not being
lawful for you (according to this principle) during the Non-Retractation of
that Supremacy, to receive any favor of his hand, were it even to an Universal
Indulgence, or Establishment of the Presbyterian party and Government, among
themselves, or in all the Land. Dear Friends! Have your Senses exercised to
discern betwixt things that differ, and separate what is separable in their
Nature and Exercise: Distinguish betwixt Gods Ordinance, viz. the Magistrates
Civil Supremacy, and Man's annexed Corruption, viz. his Spiritual and
Ecclesiastic Supremacy: And when the former acts its part purely, without
the mixture of the latter, and contains it self intra Sphaeram Debitae
Activitatis, within its proper bounds (as it did in the matter of this Indulged
Liberty, abstracted from the Restrictions and Impositions annexed, and in so
far only it is accepted) what hinders, but ye and your Brethren might take the
benefit of its favorable Acts, notwithstanding it lodges in the same Crown
with the other? Yea, though they did put forth both their Actings beside other,
in different points, in one and the same Complex Law? As was in that Ordinance
of the English Parliament, Anno -- for setting up of Presbyterian Government,
with Reservation of Appeals from the Church-Judicatories to the Parliament.
Here is an Act of that mixture and complexion we speak of, yet your Brethren in
England wisely distinguished and separated the Good from the Evil, Embracing
the one, and Rejecting the other.

. If any be against Distinguishing and Separating betwixt these things so
vastly different, which they suppose to be so confounded and complicated now in
the same Supremacy, that they cannot well be put asunder; we crave leave to
tell them two things: One is (as is said already) That different Powers and
Principles of Acting, may very well remain distinguishable and separable in
their Natures and Actions, notwithstanding their Conjunction in the same
Subject, as the former Instances show: So that in this case, it is (almost)
just as in the case of Jordan running through the Lake of Genesareth, with
which (notwithstanding) it mixeth not, but remains pure and separate. The other
thing is, that when Folk begin to cast at just distinguishing and separting the
precious from the vile, as mere notional and metaphysical Abstractions, unfit
for Christians or Men, (as some of you are pleased to talk:) We fear they be
found Builders of Babel, not of Salem; but love who will to be Masters of
Confusion, far be it from you.

But here some Object, That the Indulgence owes all its Legal Being, Life, and
Warranty, to the Act of Supremacy now established by Law; and therefore it
cannot be abstracted from; nor the Indulgence considered without it, whereon it
so much depends, as its Patron and Protector in Law; it being for the sake and
safety of the Indulgence, that this Supremacy was established in the King.

Thus, we confess, some Argue, who would seem very Nose-wise and prying;
drawing (if their Assertion will pass for proof enough) all things done by the
Magistrate about matters of Religion, to have, either directly or indirectly,
Kindred and Relation to the Supremacy: Alleging what Indulgence was after the
Supremacy, to be an efflux of it, and designed for support of it; and what
Indulgence was born before the Supremacy, must be drawn back to crouch under
the Supremacy, for shadow and shelter in Law.

But to the Objection we answer, 1. This Alledgance, if true, says, that the
Supremacy and Indulgence must needs be of a civil nature, not spiritual; seeing
(as ye assert) both its fountain and end are civil. For, first, being of the
Parliaments bestowing, who never pretended to have any other but a Civil Legal
power, (and more than themselves had, they could not bequeath upon their
Prince), thence it appears (upon this ground of yours) to be but of a civil
alloy. Again, the end and use for which ye say this Supremacy was Enacted, was
for warranting and securing the King and Council in Law, for what was past and
done in the Indulgence, being a dispensing with some poenal Statutes, and
allowing some a liberty to preach contrary to such standing Laws; and for
inabling him and them to do more of that in the future. Whereupon ye say, the
Indulgence owes all its Legal life and being to this Act of Supremacy as its
Charter. Whence it is plain, that ye make the Act of Supremacy to be but a
Legal and Civil security for the King to grant, and Ministers to accept this
Indulgence: and consequently, that the Indulgence derives nothing but Legality,
not any Spirituality from that Act of Supremacy. And therefore no efflux of any
Ecclesiastic Architectonick power is judged to be in it, nor does not
Homologat the same; owning only what is Civil, for its Legal protection.

But passing this, know, 2. That this Alledgance of yours, is but a mere
fiction to cast an odium upon the Indulgence. How instruct ye this to have been
the drift and end of that Act? Does not all that know the mystery of that
matter, know that it was upon another occasion, and for another end? viz. to
curb the insolency of the Prelates, who thinking themselves and their
Church-dignities and power cock-sure in Law, were become bold to speak
liberally of the King, and against his Minions, as the Archbishop of Glasgow
has done. Therefore to keep them in awe and d^^endance, as wholly in the Kings
reverence, and consequently obnoxious to his Minions, that Act was made,
inabling the King with his Council to alter their established frame of
Church Government, and loose the pins of their Fabric at his pleasure; which
then was threatened to them by some Statesmen, to keep them sober; and therefore
the Bishops were very backward to consent to the passing of that Act, till awed
thereunto. That this was the professed end of the Act, can (as we are surely
informed) be attested by the prime movers in it. So that, whether the
Indulgence had been or not, this Act would have been to put the disposal of the
Church Government in the Kings lurch. False and groundless therefore is it, and
non causa pro causa, to say the Indulgence was the rise of this Act, or that it
was done in reference to the same. 3. Suppose the Indulgence had been Illegal
without this, or some other Act to warrant it, yet seeing ye judge the Laws that
were opposite to this liberty were not just upon the matter, it seems strange
to us, that ye, who so much justify, yea magnify the liberty of Conventicling
(which your Brethren do not condemn if rightly managed) taken at your own hand,
against the same Laws, and many more, and consequently as illegal, though not
unlawful; should so decry the Magistrates deed, in dispensing with these Laws,
and granting your Brethren liberty of their Ministry. Maugre them. Is your
liberty taken so Divine? and theirs granted, an illegitimate or Bastard-brood,
as in your papers ye call it? may not theirs be just and lawful, though not
according to Law, as well as yours? does not this unequal dealing say, nothing
of this sort pleases you but what is taken at your own hand? and that your
quarrel at the Indulgence is, that it is granted, not taken?

4. Whether the King had such a Prerogative or not (before the Act) as to
indulge Nonconformist Ministers liberty of their Ministry, beside the Laws
allowance, we humbly judge is not theirs, nor your concern to debate; being jus
tertii, viz. the Parliaments interest. If the thing was just and right in it
self, you and your Brethren were not to ask quo jure, the King took it on him?
Let the Parliament ask that; was it not enough for your Ministers acceptance of
it, that the thing was good and right in it self, and not sinful upon the
matter; the King being to answer for the legality of his own deed? and whatever
hazard the indulged might have incurred for want of the alleged legality, yet
we hope ye will not say they sinned in taking their hazard upon the Magistrates
allowance.

5. We humbly suppose the objecters of the King his not being instructed with
Legal power to indulge, before the Act of Supremacy was made, may find
themselves much in a mistake. Whoever questioned it to be a part of your Kings
Prerogative to dispense with poenal Statutes (we mean in foro soli) at least as
to the execution of them? Has it not been his uncontroverted practice, past
memory of man, as to other poenal Laws? and why should it be denied him in this
kind more than in others? is not a current, uncontroverted custom, equivalent
to a Law? Whereupon you know the King did several times write down before, for
allowing liberty to some Ministers, but it was obstructed and suppressed by the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and his Accomplices; till at last one of you, Mr. John
Smith, was by special and peremptory command of the King to the Council,
allowed to preach at -- and some years hereafter, your first more general
Indulgence came; all this while the King and Council never doubting, nor any
other questioning this power of indulging. How then can ye say, that to this
Act of Supremacy the Indulgence owes its whole legal being?

Upon all therefore that has been said, is it not most evident to be a mere
mistake to think, and a groundless assertion to affirm, as ye do, That the
foundation, basis, fountain, and ground-right of the Indulged liberty, is this
Act of Supremacy; seeing (besides the reasons forementioned to disprove their
affinity) this liberty did, and does subsist without the Supremacy, and
borrows neither its natural nor moral being from this assertion of Supremacy,
and has neither Legal nor Spiritual dependence upon it? Nor is it the exercise
of any other but a lawful civil Supremacy, competent to the Magistrate, before
ever that new Act had a being, and for whose cause that new Act was not at all
hatched, as ye would fain bear the world in hand.

Having thus cleared, that in the Indulgence (abstractly considered, as it is
accepted by the Brethren) there is nothing of Erastianism, nor any sibness
unto, or homologation of the so much talked of Supremacy; let none stumble at
them, nor divide from them upon that score; nor declaim impetuously against
them, as supporters of the unlawful Supremacy; for how groundless that
imputation is, the premises may abundantly show. For our part we cannot see how
their Preaching with the Magistrates Tolerance and leave, can be a pillar and
prop to his Ecclesiastical Supremacy, more nor your Preaching without his leave
is. If ye fancy any accidental influence that may redound from theirs to uphold
it; as ye can hardly name that, so may not the like be found to flow from
yours, by its occasioning the settling of a military force to maintain the
Supremacy, and the Hierarchy depending thereupon, and to suppress your liberty?
which is the States fault, we grant; yet by you occasioned. Consider seriously
then, that their Preaching with the Magistrates Civil permission, is not so
much, let be more, a prop to this Decantated Supremacy, than your Preaching
without permission is: (Though it can be justly attributed to neither.) And let
out-crys on this head, go, and indulge not your humors, while ye cry out upon
this Indulgence! nor state your selves Judges paramount and infallible, as if
you had a Supremacy over all persons, and in all causes, while ye go about
unjustly to task your Brethren with Communion with this justly lamented
Supremacy.

But if still some cannot part with that high-sounding word of Supremacy, and
still will be imputing the indulged liberty to Supremacy, using that ambiguous
word as a Gorgons Head, or Bugbear to fright the vulgar by, and scare people at
the Licensed Ministers; will they be entreated to deal as heartily in their
discourses, as some of you have done in their public Papers, to distinguish
betwixt the Civil Supremacy (whence the Indulgence flows), and the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy (with which it has no affinity), and then the snare
were broken. But to talk of Supremacy in the general, and thence to insinuate a
compliance by the accepted Indulgence, with the Ecclesiastical Supremacy in
special, is to argue a genere ad speciem, affirmative, (from a general to a
particular, affirmatively), which is fallacious and unfair dealing.

And finally, what better reasoning is it to say (as some do), That because the
Magistrate nominates in the second Indulgence such and such Ministers to preach
in such or such a place, if they and the people please to have it so, without
imposing a necessity or compulsion upon them thereunto; therefore he takes upon
him the Election of Ministers, and judging of their Qualifications and fitness
for these places, and consequently (say ye) he acts in this Erastianism and
Supremacy.

For removing this mistake, first, as to the Nomination, consider, (1) This
does not concern these of the first Indulgence, who were pitched upon,
nominate, presented, and petitioned for, by some representing the Parish,
before the Council Licensed them to the place.

Consider (2) that the Nomination of Ministers in the second Indulgence, was
primarily a Nominating of them to confinement in the place, and but secondarily
to the free liberty of Exercise of their Ministry there; but not to state them
in the relation of Pastors to those people. The peoples call does this.

(3) Suppose in this troubled and unsettled state of the Church, the Magistrate
had nominate them to be Pastors there, what is that but what the Books of
Discipline of the Church of Scotland allows in such Exigents, as in the
forecited place, Book 1. page 37. For this present (say they) we think it
expedient, that either your Honors by your selves Nominate so many as may
serve the forewritten Provinces, or that ye give Commission to such men as ye
suppose the fear of God to be in, to do the same. And the same men being called
into your presence, shall be by you, and such as your Honors pleases to call
unto you for consultation in that case, Appointed to their Provinces. Where you
see the Nomination of the Superintendents, and the Designation of their
Province is given to the Council for that juncture, yea, and they to be called
Coram, and in praesentia, in the face of Council to be appointed to their
Charges. And Charges were they much beyond what your Brethren pretend to in the
places of their confinement. Nor was it here thought a subjecting the Ministry
to the Magistrate, or putting on him an Erastian power, or a renouncing Christ,
and a taking of the Ministry from the Magistrate by a new Commission, For
Ministers to appear Personally before the Council, and be appointed to
Provinces: Will you say, your Church here establishes Erastianism, or a sinful
Supremacy? or allows an encroachment upon the Church and peoples Right? And
does not your Presbyterian Writers, such as Mr. Bowels in his Pastor
Evangelicus, Lib. 1. Cap. 1. allow the like?

(4) Whatever pretense this Nomination might have of oppressing the liberty of
the people; yet we wonder ye count it Erastianism, being no Act of
Church Government, no exercise of the power of the Keys; else when people, to
whom no power of the Keys belongs more than to the Magistrate, does nominate
and elect a Minister to themselves, they should Erastianly usurp and invade the
Government of the house of God. Your own Divines assert Election to be a matter
of Liberty or privilege, not a power of Jurisdiction.

Next, as for the Magistrates alleged judging of Ministers Qualifications and
fitness for places, we presume to propose four things to be considered:

(1) Whereupon ground ye this plea? what Act of Judicial cognition, or
definitive Determination concerning your Brethrens gifts, did the Magistrate
put forth?

(2) What judging upon Ministers Qualifications did the Council here exercise
more than in the forecited case of their Nominating and Appointing the
Superintendents to their Provinces? or, then people does, when they elect a
Minister to themselves?

(4) To clear all, distinguish betwixt a Charitative, or Discretive judgment,
and a Judicial, Forensick, Definitive judgment. The former ( viz. a judgment of
Discretion) is not, ye know, to be denied to any man or people concerned, much
less to a Christian Magistrate: and more than that, yours did not take upon
them; yea, nor that either, but supposed these Ministers able and qualified,
being before tried and ordained by Presbyteries, to no less eminent Charges
than now they were indulged unto. And for the latter, ( viz. the judgment of
Jurisdiction, which is properly the work of Church-Judicatories) they meddled
not therewith. What then did they in this matter, without their sphere? If ye
say, by his Majesty's Letter they were appointed to License only Sober and
Peaceable men; and is not this to judge of their Qualifications?

Ans. Manifest it is, that that is meant only of some Civil or Moral
Qualifications, not of Pastoral Gifts; and this also they considered and
cognosced upon only Discretively, not by a Judicial and Declarative sentence.
Did they at all, in foro, Institute a trial and cognition of these or any other
their Qualifications? not at all, but contented themseves with a Negative
Testimony thereof, that is, if no body objected against their peaceableness.
What Erastianism then, or Ecclesiastical Supremacy was here?

But finally, suppose the Magistrate had overreached and gone beyond his line,
in nominating these Ministers to such places, and judging of their Ministerial
parts and fitness: What is that against the Ministers themselves, who did not,
does not preach to such people upon the Magistrates Nomination or Designation
(except in so far as it imported a taking off their civil Restraints) but upon
their own office (as their Missio Potestativa) and the peoples call (as the
Determiner of them to officiate in that place)? neither did they submit the
trial of their Ministerial Qualifications and fitness for such a place to the
Magistrates cognition: But as the Magistrate presumed they were competently
fit; so, they (without any Judicial Recognition of their abilities and
suitableness) condescended upon the peoples earnest call to employ their
Talents, whatever their measure were, for the edifying of that people for an
interim. Now, upon all this, what just ground of outcry is there against your
honest Brethren? wherein have they homologate Erastianism, or a Spiritual
Supremacy?

The Second Objection is, Concerning the Act of Rules or Instructions (so
called) wherein the Magistrate does, by his Civil Authority, Statute and
Ordain, that such and such things (already mentioned) be done and observed by
the Indulged, under Civil pains.

This Act is Represented unto People (in odium of the Indulged Ministers) as
both most censurable upon the Matter, and Erastian in its Nature, and as
inseparable Clogs, yea Conditions, of their Liberty. But, Dear and Worthy in
the Lord, consider in sober sadness, what can be justly charged upon these
Brethren in this matter, and what not. For our part, we cannot apprehend; and
therefore wave to examine, whether this Act be formally civil, and only
objectively Ecclesiastical, and that only in a few particulars, the rest being
Civil; or whether the Magistrates Error here be in the Form, usurping an unjust
Power; or only in the Matter, abusing his just power, and misapplying it to
unjust purposes, as sometimes he may do in civil cases; which we think, the
inverting of these Rules to their contrary, may help to clear. Nor is it
necessary to dip into that Question, Whether it be altogether heterogeneous and
incompetent, as well as it may be inconvenient, for the Civil Ruler to make
Civil Laws and Constitutions about the Circumstances, Order, and Exercise of
matters of Religion, without the previous cognizance and pre-determination of
the Church thereupon; And that even in the most broken and ruined State of the
Church, when there is no Governing-Church existent, that can be owned. Passing
also to consider, whether or no this Act be properly an Act of Pastoral
Instructions (such as only Christ Jesus, and no mortal man can give to his
Ambassadors)? or, whether they be properly Ecclesiastical Canons (of the same
formal and specifical Nature with Church-Decrees, about matters of Order)? Or,
whether, they be only improperly and abusively called Instructions and Rules:
As in some sense, all Laws, even Civil, are said to be Regulative and Directive
of Practice? Whatever may be said to these Questions, upon the one side or the
other, to excuse or condemn the Magistrates Deed, seems little to concern the
purpose in hand, seeing your Indulged Ministers, looking upon these Statuted
Rules, at least ways, as unjust upon their matter, have never embraced nor
observed them, except it be in some civil points (inflicted on them as penal);
and that only so far as they judged might be lawfully submitted unto, however
unjustly imposed. What ground then is there, of stumbling at them, upon this
Head? Does not their non-acceptance, and non-observance, of these Rules, free
them of all crime supposed to be therein?

But to satisfy the Objection more fully, consider in serious sobriety, That,
be this Act of Regulation as censurable as you will, yet was and is it quite
extrinsick and accidental to the granting and accepting of the Indulgence; and
therefore the vitiousness of the one, cannot defile the other; nay nor be so
much as the Ministers personal guilt, unless they had closed with it, which ye
know they did not. But to evidence this consideration to be true and
considerable, ponder these two things which serves to clear the point of this
Act of Regulation its being extrinsick and accidental to the Indulgence.

(1) That Act of Rules is no part of the Act of Indulgence, but a distinct Act
by it self, Enacted after the Indulgence, even in another meeting of the
Council (as is informed) though the same day: nor was it at all legally
intimated to the indulged (but lay dormant in the Council-Books) until a
considerable time after their entry to their Charges. Now who can with reason
think, that a Posterior Law, imposed only subsequently to their acceptance of
their Liberty (for how soon so ever it was past in the Council-Books, is
nothing to them, seeing Lex non promulgata est quasi non lata, a Law not
legally intimated signifies nothing) how can it, we say, be thought to affect,
burden, and prejudice their acceptance of their Liberty, and to constitute it
sinful, which was long in being before that Act of Rules came forth by
Publication into the world? Hence plainly appears, that it is no Constituent
part of the Indulgence, nor an Inseparable attendant; much less Terms and
Conditions of the same, as some invidiously call them. Had it been intimated to
them conjunctly with the Act of Indulgence, there had been some more appearance
of its being an Onus Libertatis; but since it was not so, who can say with any
show of reason, that it was a burden affecting their liberty, and that their
acceptance of the one was a compliance with the other? Suppose a man purposed
to dispone his Estate to another, with such or such a provision or burden of
Legacy, Debt, or service upon it; if this Clause was not inserted into the
Disposition, nor therewith delivered in a Paper apart unto the Successor; but
the Disposition was at first sine onere, pure, free, and unconditional, as it
was drawn up, subscribed and delivered unto the man; yet sometime the Rester,
the Cedent, thinks fit to add in a new Paper apart, such a burden and clog to
his former disposition, intending to affect his Assignee with it. Now who will
not think such a Posterior oneration altogether extrinsick to the disposition,
and no ways to affect the Estate or Successor? And that the Assignee's
acceptance of, or adherence to the foresaid disposition, does no ways
Homologate that subsequent addition, nor oblige him in Law to own it (if
gratitude and kindness constrain him not thereto); but still he stands free of,
and unconcerned in that new-added burden? It signifies nothing here to say,
that the Disponent never intended to dispone his Estate otherwise than with
that burden; but in his mind, or some private personal deed lying by him, he
purposed from the beginning to have his Successor affected with it, as a
condition annexed to the disposition; yea, and perhaps talked of it to many; so
that the Cessioner was not Physically ignorant of his mind and matter. What
then? does his purpose, or private separate deed, infer any obligation upon his
Assignee? or private significations of his mind, import any thing in Law
without Legal and timous Intimation? No surely. The Cessioner is still free. Is
it not just so in your Brethrens case? How can they be said to have accepted
their Liberty cum onere, seeing there was no such terms proposed to them in the
Act of Indulgence delivered to them, nor with it at their acceptance? (as the
extracts of their Licenses sent to them will testify.) And these Instructions
(so called) was not intimated to them, till long after they were in possession
of their liberty; and when intimated, refused; nor was it equitable they should
have abandoned the favor of their liberty, upon the intimation of these Rules
to them; because not proposed (even then) as terms, but imposed as Laws. And
also being supervenient, like a superfoetation, and consequently extrinsick and
accidental to the favor. If ye say, The Magistrates imposing them by way of
Laws, was but out of State, as counting it below him to seek their consent
thereunto.

Ans. May ye not say the same of all Laws? and so threap upon the subjects,
that they are terms, though no consent be explicitly sought? which were
absurd. Again, know, that when the Council minds to deal with any, even a
single person, by way of terms, they do not count it below them to require
consent, yea subscription: As in some of your banished Ministers case, who was
required to, and did subscribe their own Act of Banishment; and some others of
you at home, for redeeming their Liberty from Process, were required, and did
take the Oath of Supremacy. But to leave this: we only add, If ye by your
avowed and bold alleging the Indulgence to be granted and accepted upon the
terms of observing their Rules, do teach the Bishops* (who will like well to
confirm you in your Arguments and Objections, thereby to blow at the coal of
your Animosities and Contentions) and put it in their heads to speak in the
same language, blame your selves for it, but use it not as a Testimony against
your Brethren, not being witnesses (in the case) without just exception.

If, finally, ye Object, that the Kings Letter concerning the first Indulgence,
comprehended in the bosom of it an order also concerning the Instructions which
after followed; and consequently these Instructions cannot be divided from the
Act of Indulgence, in considering Ministers acceptance thereof.

Ans. That Letter of his Majesty's to the Council, was to them directed (not to
the Ministers) as the Councils Rule and Warrant, not the Ministers Legal Act of
Indulgence; and therefore (whatever was in it) it did concern the Ministers no
further than was legally communicate unto them; and this at first was only in a
very simple and unconditionate, or unclogged Act of License, as the Copies
thereof under the Clerks hand sent unto them, evidenceth. The Injunctions were
not intimated unto them till upwards of a year thereafter. Now it is only the
Councils Act put into the Ministers hand, which is the public legal deed
wherein they are concerned; the Kings Letter, though Registrate in the
Council-Books, is a private matter as to them, as for any thing not intimate
unto them. Whatever they did Physically know thereof (by private information),
which these not indulged also knew) signifies nothing; at least no more to them
than to others. So that still it is plain the Indulgence was sine onere.

If it be said, The Kings Letter was read to the first Ten indulged, when they
were called before the Council; and did not their silence, and not bearing
Testimony against these Injunctions, and other things of the like nature,
import an Homologation thereof?

Ans. Besides that the matter of fact alleged is much questioned, yea plainly
denied as false, let us suppose the Letter to have been all and whole read to
them, yet the speech delivered by one in name of the rest, by showing
positively how they held their Ministry, did (in all sober men's judgment)
sufficiently (though indirectly) intimate their disallowance of all things
repugnant thereunto; for, Rectum est norma, and index sui and obliqui. But
suppose they failed in not being plain, full and free enough in their
Testimony, is that a ground sufficient to charge the odious imputation of
Erastianism on them? or to illegitimate their indulged Liberty, or their
Ministry, so as it were unlawful to hear them? or what is it to the rest of the
Brethren, who were never called before the Council, nor the Letter and its
Contents read to them? must the failing of some few be cast upon all? and all
alike condemned as guilty? what partial and unjust dealing is this?

(2) Consider the form or quality of these Statuted Rules; viz. That they were
not proposed to them, as prerequired, or simultaneous, or future conditions of
their Liberty; but imposed as Laws, and authoritatively enjoined under Civil
pains, Penalties and Certifications, like other Laws.

Suppose then they had been antecedently unto, or conjunctly with the grant of
their Liberty, intimated unto them (which yet was not); yet seeing they were
not proposed as terms, by way of Bargain required to be approved and consented
unto, or observed as Irritant conditions of their liberty, nor promise to
observe them, sought or given, nor at that time pretended or declared to be
Conditions upon which the Indulgence was granted; but were simply imposed upon
them as Laws, but not consented unto, nor accepted by them: Who can think the
very making and being of such an Act, did justly bar them up from making use of
the liberty granted? or does now so affect it, or the Exercise of their
Ministry by it, as that they are wholly polluted thereby? or, that the bare
acceptance of that Liberty, does necessarily and natively involve them in the
guilt of that Act, and of all comprehended in it, even albeit they observe it
not? Will not equitable Judges think these Rules so Enacted, were and are only
the Lawgivers, not the Ministers sin, no more than the Law enjoining and
appointing the Declaration, or Abjuration of your Covenants, to be taken by all
Magistrates of Burghs, can be justly interpreted to six guilt upon every one
that happens to bear that Office, albeit he conform not to that Law? Who will
charge such a Magistrate as guilty of accepting the Office cum onere, with the
burden of the legally annexed Declaration? and that his separating between the
Office and the Declaration, is morally impossible, and but a cheat? or, that
his bearing Office in this case is an Homologating the Act anent the taking of
the Declaration, as ye do charge your Brethrens acceptance of the indulged
liberty, in reference to that Act of Rules? Certainly it were no small wrong to
such honest Magistrates, your selves being judges, to charge them with that
guilt. And is not your Brethrens case just the same? Add hereto, put the case
the Council emitted an Edict licensing and allowing Conventicles to be kept in
House or Fields (while there is no access to your Churches) adding withal,
certain Rules and Restrictions of an Erastian nature, and savouring of the
asserted Supremacy, in its most spiritual part; would ye therefore have judged
your selves obliged to have forborne Conventicling upon that account, or yet to
give it over? or, that ye sinned if ye did Conventicle, merely because of the
Injunction of those Rules, albeit ye observed them not? We suppose not. And is
not this a like case with your Brethrens, as to the point in hand? pray you
then, have not diverse weights, and diverse measures.

And yet the more strongly does this defense militate for your Brethren, that
these restrictive and encroaching Impositions were not antecedent unto, nay nor
concomitant with their Indulgence, (as is before said) but subsequent even to
their entry, and long after, even for some years after the first Indulgence,
and many a Month after the second. And do ye think in reason, that upon the
intimation thereof unto them at that after-time, they should have given over
their Ministry for that very cause? If that were a Relevant reason, then were
it easy for the Magistrate, when he pleased, to lay aside all Ministers, you
as well as them, by making and imposing such kind of Laws and Acts of Rules
upon you. Was and is not non-obedience sufficient to discharge them of
compliance therewith, as is reckoned in the case of other Laws, albeit
publicly and solemnly promulgated? Yea, to this non-observance of these
Instructions, remember to add this, that in July -- Anno -- 1673, in face of
Council, when those Rules were intimated unto many of them, it was declared by
them, that they could not observe them, but should rather submit to whatsoever
penalty or punishment, as the written Narrative of their carriage at that time
does attest. So that when they were intimated unto them, if ye call them the
condition of their Liberty, you see that Recusabant onus and conditionem
repudiabant.

All which things impartially considered, it is hoped whatever evil be in that
Act, ye will let it rest upon the Authors, and not impute it to the Ministers,
being so innocent of compliance with it by any Rule of Scripture or right
reason. Oh then away with these hideous out-crys, which are made amongst the
people upon this score, by some Trafficking Novices, and their Pragmatical
Followers; who teazle up this Act to the height of all imaginable wickedness,
and then Applies it to the Ministers, to make them odious; dealing herein with
them, as the Heathen did with some Christians in the Primitive Persecutions,
who first clothed them up in Wolves Skins and Bears Skins, and then hunted
their Mastives at them, which did run upon them, as not men, but wild Beasts of
the Wilderness, and so did tear them into pieces. Ah sad! to see the like done
to honest men, by pretending Friends, but herein real Foes, dressing them up in
soul mis-representations, to egg on peoples envy and wrath against them, and
all to break and tear their Ministry down! Is there any persecution or grief
like to this? Oh that our Heads were Rivers of Tears, to mourn for such
unparalled Animosities, which, all things considered, has scarce ever had
its like!

The Third Objection is, Some allege this Indulged Preaching with the
Magistrates permission and allowance, to be a Renouncing their former
Commission from Jesus Christ, and their dependence upon him, and a taking from
the Magistrate a new Commission, and an holding of their Ministry of him, with
subjection to him, and dependence upon him, like other Civil Judges of the
Land, and Ministers of State.

Answ. Ah bitter and groundless Censure! nor could we have believed such an
Imputation would have been laid upon the Indulged by any Person of a spark of
Reason and Religion, yea or of common sense, had not our Eyes seen, and our
Ears heard it. But to the matter we say,

1. Dear Friends, How prove ye this charge? Is confident asserting, enough to
ground such an heavy Accusation? If your Brethren have unawares committed such
an Abomination, O why do ye not run to them, and plead with them about it, to
save them from the Error of their Way? Why have ye not ere now seriously
Remonstrated this dreadful guilt to themselves, and not whispered it in corners
unto others? Certainly, to deal with them at this rate behind theit backs, to
speak or write this of them unto others, First, for a long time by private
Suggestions and Surmises among the People, then by Missive Letters and
Libellous Papers; and yet never to have waired a Word or Line upon themselves,
with any reason, to evince the Charge: What Spirit savoureth this of, and to
what good can it tend, even your selves being Judges? And till the Charge be
proved, is it not a sufficient answer to deny it? But for further Vindication
and Satisfaction (for we hope it is but a mistake, there are such hard thoughts
taken up of them) we humbly propose to you,

2. Were the Priests and Levites in Hezekiah's days guilty of this Charge,
because they had, by the Magistrates Authority, access to their service of the
Temple, and did make use of the same? Was their Office altered or innovate, and
quite spoiled thereby, as if they renounced their dependence upon God, their
Lord, and Head, and Master, and subjected their Function to the Civil Ruler,
and took it holden of him, because of his Supervenient Civil Liberty granted
them? Or, were the Levites subordinate to Jehoshaphat, like other Civil Judges,
because of his, not only permitting, but appointing them to go Preach through
the Land? And does not your Ministers hold as little of the Magistrate as these
did? Can any with truth say, that the Prince his Permission or Ratification of
the exercise of their Office, or their use-making of the same, implies a
Renunciation of Christ, or Resignation of their Office into the Kings hands for
a Novodamus? How will such a Paradox-Point be made out?

3. Will you say, Because ye were outed of your Charges by the Magistrates
Interdict of the Act at Glasgow, Anno 1662. or other the like, and did Ced
thereunto, that therefore you did hold your Ministry of him (like other Judges
and Officers of State) and were deprived of it by him? If not, What more does
your Brethrens Civil License state them in subordination unto, and dependdance
upon him, than your quitting of your Cha^ges at his command did you? For,
outing and ining of Ministers seems to be of the same Category, and to argue a
like dependence.

4. Distinguish (as Apollonius and other Anti-Erastian Divines do) betwixt the
Substance of the Ministry, or the Function it self, and the Exercise thereof.
Your Ministers, by their Indulgence, has not their Function or Office derived
from the Magistrate; by it they do not Renounce their old Office, Master, and
Head, Jesus Christ, nor get any new Office, or Ministerial Power conferred upon
them by the Magistrate, prove the contrary if ye can: Yea, the Tenor of the Act
of Indulgence will declare it; being a permitting them to Preach, not a giving
them power to Preach; and therefore false is the Charge above alleged* All
that they hold of the Magistrate, is only somewhat about the exercise of their
Function; somewhat like an Ambassadors getting a Pass from another Prince, to
pass through or stay in his Territories without Let or Molestation; or to
discharge his Embassy within that Dominion, unto some certain Persons he is
sent unto. Does that Ambassador, by taking this safe Conduct or Leave of the
Prince of the Bounds, quit his own proper Master, and take Commission-power of
that other Prince? No, no. Now as to this sort of Dependence which Ministers
have upon the Magistrate, in the Actual Discharge of their Office, for clearing
thereof, distinguish next between the exercise of the Ministry simply and in it
self considered, and the circumstances of that Exercise: Or, Distinguish
Subordination into that which is Absolute, and that which is only secundum
quid, or in some certain respects. Now, as by this Indulgence, your Ministers
do not depend upon the Prince Essentially and Derivatively, as to their Office,
and Authority, and Matter of their Embassage; so neither simply and absolutely
for the exercise of it (both these they have and hold immediately of Christ
alone) but only and merely in regard of the Circumstance and Adjunct of the
peaceableness and Legal Immunity of the public exercise of it in such and such
places of his Realm: Even as the exercise of the Protestant Religion, being
Authorized by Law, depends upon him; and as the exercise of your Ministry
within any Family, depends upon the Master of the Family. And your selves, in
your Papers upon this Subject, acknowledge this kind of Subordination and
Dependence ( viz. in respect of the public, free, peaceable, exercise of the
Ministry) to be not unlawful. To this Apollonius also accords, Part last,
Sect. 2. Cap. 3. Neither is it to be thought that this does subject the
Ministry, but the Man; not the Function, but the Person, to the Civil Power;
except it be (as some of your selves say) in obliquo, Indirectly, and
Objectively, even as the other matters of God are, being Objects about which
his Imperative and Coercive Power is conversant.

Thus ye see that it is only in respect of Circumstances of the exercise of
their Ministry (at most) wherein the Indulged depend upon the Magistrate, and
that that is no absurdity, nor no ground for your objected Alledgance: being
not unlike to this case; as if an Ambassador of another King or State, were
sent to your King, or any part of his People; albeit in his Authority and
Embassy he depend not upon your King, but allanerly upon his own Master; yet is
it not in your King's power, and depends upon him, whether he will admit him
in his Territories to discharge that Message? Or, when and where he shall have
Audience, etc? Ay, but your Parallel of Civil Judges and their Offices
depending on the King, corresponds not adequately unto this, but is of a
different nature and wider extent, being otherwise subordinate unto, and
depending upon the Prince, viz. Directly and Derivatively as well as
Objectively; and consequently he has a power over them, which he has not over
Indulged Ministers, viz. to ex auctorate and divest them of their Office at his
pleasure, as well as to thrust them from the exercise thereof within his
Dominions; whereas, as he does not make the Indulged to be Ministers, so
neither can he unmake and unminister them: All he can take from them is, what
he gives, viz. his own Civil Toleration.

From all which it is apparent, How groundless this Objection is; They
retaining and exercising their very former Ministry which they had of Christ;
and getting no other, no new Ministry from the Magistrate, no more than your
selves do, and consequently are Christ's Ambassadors and Sent-servants still,
even as you are; only they have the peaceableness and civil freedom of the
public exercise of their Function from the Ruler: A thing they were and are
bound to pray for, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. -- That under him they may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; and consequently, or by parity of
Reason, in the exercise of their Ministry. And if this may and should be prayed
for, as it is his duty to grant it, so it cannot be their crime to accept it.

The Fourth Objection is, From the Magistrates design in granting this
Indulgence, which design ye suppose to have been evil, and consequently its
fruit evil, and not to be meddled with.

Answ. What is that Project ye suspect? And how is your Alledgance verified and
made out? Surely, Liberty to Preach the Gospel, in it self (and ex condition
operis) could be of no ill tendency, natively. Whatever then may be deemed to
have been the Finis Operantis, or Sinister Intention of the Granter, what is
that to the thing it self, being so good, so necessary? And the Agents Design
being altogether extrinsick to it? Does the Permitters Latent Intention defile
the mercy, that it might not be touched? Or, what is it to any that takes the
favor, and makes good use of it, and concurreth not with the alleged ill
Design? When Julian the Apostate gave an universal illimited Toleration to all
Religions, and among the rest, to all Sects of Christians, on purpose that the
several parties among the Christians, being hot in their Differences and
Animosities amongst themselves, might by their mutual Digladiations and
Contests, weaken and wear out one another, and so consume the Christian
Religion at last with their own hands; did the Orthodox Christians ever
scruple, or ought they to have refused, to take their share of that Tolerated
Liberty, either because of the Sin of the vast extent of it to all Sects, or
because of the evil design thereof? No, no, but accepted and improved what was
their part, not being concerned in the Emperors part (further than to
sympathize with Gods Honor and Interest wronged by him) but leaving the sin of
his ill designs upon himself.

But to be more particular: What suppose ye the Evil Design to be? And why do
ye not convince your Brethren of it? And of their Accession to it, if any be?
We find some talk of three several Designs: Let us consider them severally.

First, Some say, It was designed to be a Wedg of Division.

To this we Answer, 1. How could a thing, in it self so innocent, have any just
and native tendency to such an end? Does the permitting or taking of Liberty to
Preach the Gospel, intrinsically, and ex natura Rei, level at dividing the
Ministers and Professors of the Gospel? What a Paradox were it to assert that?
Any Tendency then if might be supposed to have hereunto, must be only ex
Accidenti, through your Corruptions, Opposition, and Discontents, which might
have been imagined likely to stir thereupon; at least, through the weakness and
proneness to mistake, that some of you might be under. And thus the best of
things may be an occasion to men's humors and mistakes to work upon, and so
become a Ball of Contention. But should the innocent Object bear the blame of
your Corruptions rising? Moreover, If ye took this to be the Design, Why were
and are ye so unwise and unjust, as your selves to cooperate with that design
with both your hands, and carry it on so eagerly by Renting and Separation? Why
are ye so subservient thereunto by your contradiction and contention about the
Indulgence? Had it not been as well your wisdom as duty, to have defeated their
Design by your constant Unity, (though ye could not be of Unanimity?) Since
then, this Indulged Liberty is not properly a Cause, but simply an Occasion of
dividing (as Christ our Lord himself sometime was, John 9.16.) but the true and
proper cause is your Corruptions, such as Malcontent, Short-sightedness, etc.
who can justly quarrel at that which in it self is a mercy, because of the ill
use Dividers and their ill humors make of it, more than at the Gospel, which is
often a Stumbling-stone and Rock of Offense, set for the falling of many? And who
are most to be blamed? whether these who are Active in Dividing upon this
occasion, Romans 16.17. or, the Indulged, who are more passive, and an innocent
occasion of the same, through their necessary use-making of the liberty of the
exercise of their Calling? Matthew. 15.12. Certainly, the Indulged and Unindulged
might well have abode in Unity, notwithstanding of the difference of their
Lots, and various capacities of Acting in the Gospel, as well as those that go
abroad Conventicling; and those that necessarily stay at home, may and should
remain nevertheless one in the Lord, and in Christian Love and Peace.

But to remove the Objection further, we demand, 2. How does it appear that
this was the scope of granting the Indulgence? May every man abound in his own
Sense, and fasten that upon it which his roving Fancy leads him to dream to
have been the purpose of it? De occultis non judicat Ecclesia; Secret things
belong to the Lord, revealed things only to us; De non-entibus and
non-apparentibus, idem judicum: Surely, the Ruler professed no such end, as the
Act declares; and secret ends fall not under our Judgment, nor alters the
nature of things. Since then, the Patent, not the Latent ends of things; their
certain and declared Scope, and not our imaginary, fictitious, or conjectural
Suspicions, are the just measure of Judging and Acting; it is hoped that upon
serious review of this, ye will cease quarrelling your Brethren upon this Head.
Otherwise, if still you make the latent and conjectured ends of Agents, the
measuring-line of the goodness of things, as to others use-making thereof, what
if some sagacious people or Ministers should take up that same Argument against
your selves, and tell you they are jealous (not without pregnant presumptions)
of no good ends in some of your Preachers and their Preachings, and therefore
judges it unlawful to hear them, join with them, or any way countenance them
therein? Would you think it valid reasoning? And were ye not but met with your
own Ell-wand?

2. Some are bold to say, The intent of the Indulgence was to subject the
Ministry and things of God unto, and bring them all into dependence upon the
Civil Magistrate; and, therefore not lawful to meddle with that that serves for
such an end.

Ans. Had this been said of the Outing of you, it might had more color; the
Exercise of, and submitting unto the Magistrates privative power, circa sacra,
tending more natively hereunto. But how this can be justly alleged of the
Exercise and acceptance of the benefit of his Auxiliary power and act of his
Nurse-Fathership, in indulging part of that liberty formerly taken from you, we
see not.

Again, as ex natura rei, it puts Ministers into subjection unto, and
dependence upon the Magistrate, not in regard of their Function, nor of the
Exercise of it simply; but only in regard of the free and undisturbed Exercise
thereof, (which the Objectors themselves grant to be not incongruous), so
neither does this end appear (by any Demonstrative Evidence) to have been the
Project. No man's guessing, and Magisterial Alledgances, suffices here for
proof. Non-constat's and Non-liquet's may very well be repelled as
Non-entities, specially if there are presumptions to the contrary, as here
there are.

3 ly. Some more colourably Object, That the very professed end of this
Indulgence (as the Act bears) is to remedy (or remove) Conventicles, which
the Act calls Disorders. And is not this an evil end? And to accept that
Indulgence, is it not to comply with that end?

For Answer to this, consider, (1) That the Act calls Conventicles Disorders,
only in a Civil sense, or in point of Law, being against the standing Laws; not
in a moral sense, or in point of Conscience, this is abstracted from; as the
former cannot be denied to be de facto true, though the Law forbidding them is
not indeed to be justified.

Consider (2) that this excluding of Conventicles by the Act, seems rather the
intent of the Confinement, as the Tenor of the Act manifests; but the intent of
the Indulgence plainly appears to be, to mollify the confinement. And
therefore though the Argument might plead against strict observing of the
confinement, yet no ways against the Indulgence.

Consider, (3) That suppose this to have been the intention of the Granter of
the Indulged Liberty, yet it cannot be the native tendency of the thing
granted, seeing Liberty of public Preaching is not contrary unto, but may well
consist with private Conventicling too, when need and occasion requires.
Subordinata non pugnant. If any assert them incompatible and destructive the
one to the other, either in the same person, or in diverse, do they not injure
and reflect upon Conventicling, as well as upon the indulged free exercise of
public Preaching?

(4) Giving and not granting, that this indulged Liberty did exclude
Conventicling pro tanto, that is, in so far as it gets place, (and further it
cannot be supposed to be intended to sec^ude them than in these places who get
the benefit of it), what prejudice were this to the Pastor or people who enjoy
it? being no other but a commutation or exchange of a lesser good for a
greater? For clearing this, remember that Conventicling (so called) and
Indulged Preaching differ, not in substance* but in mode, accidents, and
circumstances only, viz. the one is a public, peaceable, free, allowed way of
Preaching, without hazard of the Law or violence; the other a private way; or
if public, liable to the lash of the Law, and the violence and disturbance
that may happen thereupon: the one has the convenience of a public
Meeting House; the other hampered in a private corner, or exposed in the fields
to the injuries of the weather. The one has access to the legal maintenance;
the other is cast upon peoples benevolence, and burdensome to their private
purse, etc. Now which of these Circumstances are most eligible to enjoy the
Gospel in? Who will say then, that there is any wrong done to a Minister or
people, if in lieu of their hazardous, etc. Conventicling, they get Indulgence
of free, etc. Preaching?

The fault then here seems to be, not that there is an Indulgence instead of
Conventicling in some places, but that the Indulgence is not extended to all
persons and places without exception, that so all might enjoy the liberty of
public, peaceable Preaching and Hearing of the Gospel, without molestation or
hazard, as these few do. And thus your selves say, in your Professions and
Petitions to the Magistrate for a General Liberty, that that granted,
Conventicles would cease a while; meaning in so far as they are in opposition,
and not in subordination unto the public Ordinances, according to the Rule,
Desiderium boni imperfectioris cessat, acquisito perfectiori. Doubtless, when
public liberty is denied, House-Preaching (rightly gone about) cannot be
condemned. But if any take up the conceit, that as these Modes of Preaching are
in themselves lawful, and in some cases necessary; so are they always
necessary, yea and perferable to the most extended Indulged Liberty: who will
not think them under some dotage? And indeed, if Conventicling (so called) were
so preferable, much more if it were the only blessed way (as some talk), then
would it follow, that the Magistrate had done you no wrong in thrusting you
from your public stations into corners and trouble; nor yet did they you wrong
in keeping you there, casting you thereby upon the necessity of so
Conventicling; nor should he do well to restore you and the Church to your
former state, because it would infer a wearing out of Conventicles. How
unreasonable then must this principle and exception of yours be, judge ye your
selves!

(5) Consider, that howbeit this Remedying of Conventicles as Legal Disorders,
be put into the Narrative of the Act, and suppose it were ill, (as indeed we
will be far from justifying any that condemn those honest meetings of the Lords
people, which have been so much owned of him), yet Ministers compliance with
that part of the Statutary part of the Act, which permits them liberty of
Preaching, cannot rationally be judged to involve them in the guilt of what is
in the Narrative. Because Narratives of Laws express only the grounds and
reasons moving the Magistrate to enact such a Law, not the reason of the
subjects. And consequently, if the Ratio motiva, or motive inducing the
Legislator to such a Statute be sinful, the guilt thereof rests with himself,
but does not reflect upon the subject; as might be cleared by several examples.
And indeed, otherwise it were easy for the Magistrate to bind you up in
Conscience from all necessary Duties of Religion, by commanding or permiting
them upon bad Narratives and ends. Know, that the Law tells us, Quod continetur
in Lemmate legis, ad Caesarem, non ad subditum proprie spectat. It suffices
then to warrant the subject to give obedience, if the Statutary part be lawful
as to the Matter, and the Authority enjoining the same be competent. Specially
if withal they competently declare and testify their disallowance of these
grounds the Magistrate goes upon.

(6) This holds yet more strongly, when the case is not of a preceptive, but a
permissive Law: and the thing permitted, not an indifferent thing, but a
necessary duty, as in this case it is. For example, let us suppose the Ruler
had made an Act, like that of Darius's, Dan. 6.7. discharging all Preaching,
(as he did Prayer to God), and the Rester should grant liberty of all sort of
Conventicling, upon this ground and intent, to wear out and put away all
Preaching in a settled way, would ye think he that should Preach, were it but in
a corner, were guilty of this sinful Narrative and end? we suppose not. Or, if
he should discharge all Family Prayer, and the Rester license it, upon this
Narrative, and with respect to this end, that it might satisfy people, and
exclude all seeking after public Preaching, etc. would it in that case be
unlawful to perform Family Prayer? Or, would doing the same, conclude you under
the guilt of compliance with the Narrative and grounds whereupon the Ruler
permits it? we suppose ye will not say it. And why any more should ye aver it
in this case of the indulged Preaching, which is no less a necessary and
commanded duty, than that of indulged Praying, etc?

Thus you see how little ground there is to scruple at the Indulgence, or
question the Indulged upon this score, of a supposed all design in it.

The Fifth Objection is, The narrowness of the Indulged Liberty, both as to
Persons and Privileges; not all the outed Ministers being comprehended in that
favor, nor all places made partakers, nor liberty of the whole Presbyterian
Government had; but only a part of Ministers and people has it vouchsafed on
them; and no more of the Government restored, but only Congregationl Sessions
at most. And is it not a fault to accept of such a straightened liberty?

To this we say these five things: (1) This Objection supponeth the Indulgence
in its nature not unlawful: else, how can the Objectors plead for its
enlargement, or complain of its straitnedness? for, were it intrinsecally evil,
the more ample it were, the worse it were.

But (2) know, that its straitnedness is the Magistrates fault, but the
Ministers affliction only; and should not the Magistrates fault rest with
himself, and not be imputed to the Ministers? Let every man bear his own
burden, Gal. 6.5.

And (3) as his not granting all he should, did not make it simply unlawful to
grant a part; so who can rationally say, that Ministers might not take, and
make use of that part, till God should incline him to grant more? Grieved was
their souls that the liberty was not universal, and all persons and places
concerned not, made sharers, all their own rights not fully restored. And their
hearts desire to God, and endeavor with man, was and is to have it extended.
They sit not down upon their privilege, careless of their Brethren, who were
secluded and debarred for the time; but sympathizes and laments their hard lot,
praying for redress, even as they who returned out of the Captivity before the
rest, forgot not those who were detained in Babylon behind them, Psalm. 126.1,
2, with 4. But who will say, that because in Providence others bonds are not
taken off, therefore they should have casten at the mercy of their liberty? or,
that it was their sin to take hold of it and improve it? no more than it was
Pharaoh's Butlers fault to accept of his Liberty and Restoration, though the
Baker and Joseph were left still in prison behind him, Genesis 40? Did Joseph
quarrel or discharge the Butler to accept of his liberty, unless all his
fellow prisoners were partakers of the like? no, but only says, When it is well
with thee, then remember me.

To state this for a Principle, That it is not lawful for any man to preach the
Gospel, having liberty, while his neighbor gets not the like liberty; or, to
preach in any one place, because he is not licensed equally to all places; or,
that one place should say, I will not be rained upon while other places and
fleeces are dry; it seems to savor more of humor than of solid and
justifiable reason. Was it a crime for the Children of Judah and Benjamin to
come up out of their Captivity to Jerusalem and build the Temple, offer
Sacrifice, etc. (as Ezra 1.5.) because their Brethren of the Ten Tribes were
not also permitted to return to their land, and concur in the Building? yea, or
that part of the Jews who came up at first with Zerubabel, did they sin,
because they returned, while others stayed still in Babylon, (perhaps detained,
notwithstanding Cyrus his Proclamation) till afterward Esdra obtained of
Artaxerxes liberty for himself and them? (as Esdra 7.6, 7.) or, if twenty of
you were incarcerate for the Gospel, and in providence the Civil Power were
moved to liberate ten of them, ought these ten necessarily to reject their
offered Liberty; or were it their sin to go forth of Prison, because their
Fellow Prisoners obtain not the like? Or might, and should one Nation refuse
the liberty of the Gospel, because all other Nations has not the like? In a
word, where no Law is, there is no Transgression; and what Divine Precept is
broken, in accepting Liberty to Preach in the West, because Orkney, Shetland,
and the High-Lands, etc. are not provided for, nor privileged with the liberty
of a Presbyterian Ministry? But further, Consider, (4.) That it is not left at
Ministers Option or Choice, to Preach or not (having liberty) as they please. A
Dispensation is committed unto them, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17. and woe upon them if they
preach not, having an open door from the Lord set before them, by the means of
the Magistrate, who had shut it. It was and is therefore not indifferent unto
them, to accept or reject the liberty and open-door of Preaching, as seemed
best to them; but was, and is a necessary, indispensable duty to take hold of
it. Hence it follows, that whatever Neighbourliness and Kindliness might seem
to plead for Refusing, yet surely it was and is no breach of Conscience to
accept, nay rather were it not a sinful, fond Affection, to slight such an
opportunity of serving God in the Gospel of his Son? Because, forsooth, some
Neighbors get not the like liberty, were not this too high a complement of
kindness to your Neighbor, to prefer the taking an unnecessary share in a
common suffering with them, unto a sinless liberty of necessary serving of God
in the highest Sphere of Gospel-acting? In like manner, (5.) As for taking the
liberty of all Christ's Ordinances, competent to a Congregation, without liberty
of Classical Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, or General Assemblies? What
Scripture or Reason pleads against this, or proves the Accepters Sin? Namely,
what is withheld; being their Involuntary, and not consented-unto want. Must ye
have all, or will ye take nothing? Yea, and count it an unpardonable crime to
accept of a Day of small things, till God incline the hearts of Rulers to
condescend to further? Had it been unlawful to Zerubabel, to have accepted a
considerable part of the Vessels of the Temple, if the other part had been kept
back? By this ground was not Esdra in a mistake, when he blessed God for a Nail
in the Holy Place? Esdra 9. And was not your own Church far out, when in the
late Usurpers time, and afterward, her liberty of General Assemblies was
broken; yet kept Synods, Presbyteries, and Sessions, holding fast what of her
Liberty she could, while the other part was infringed? Is aut Caesar, aut
nihil, your Principle? We hope such Axioms ye will not own; nor charge the
contravention thereof, as a fault upon your Brethren. Were Christ's Clothes
taken from him, what forbids, but ye might lawfully receive back his Coat to
put upon him, until ye get his Cloak also? Remember here, that what part of the
Churches Liberties is kept back from your Ministers, is not discharged nor
quail by them; nor what they have got accepted in lieu of the whole; but only
taken as a part of the Churches right, till more come: Like a Creditor's
receiving part of his Sum, to be doing with, for the time, until he get the
rest. In all this Detension, are not your Ministers merely passive? And what
they receive, is cumulative, and but praejudice, not privative unto what
remains to be sought and granted thereafter, when God gives occasion.

From all these Considerations, is it not plain, what a groundless stumbling
there is at Ministers accepting this straightened Liberty, Lame and Narrow as it
is? which imperfection of it, should be, and is indeed a Gravamen, a grief of
heart, and burden to their Spirits; but could be no just Ligamen Conscientiae,
a thing to have hedged up Conscience from making use of it, or that imports a
violation of the Law of God, and a Breach upon the Conscience, if it be made
use of.

If any say, The accepting of this partia^ Indulgence precludes from, and
stands in the way of a more general; and if this had been refused, a full
Liberty would have been granted e're now.

Answ. We confess these are Politics strongly asserted by some who would seem
very prying; but founded upon so little Reason or Religion, yea or common
Sense, that it transcends our capacity to comprehend them. What probability or
ground of Assurance can ye produce for such an expectation? By what Almanac do
ye Divine this? yea, suppose some weak probables might be adduced for it, yet
how can it be thought that such uncertain, conjectural Politics, relating unto
Future Contingencies, should justly have debarred these Ministers from
entertaining a present, certain Mercy and Duty? But, Dear Friends, Did ye find
the first Indulgence bar the door upon, and not rather make way for, the
second? And if we might take a liberty to foretell, as you do, might it not be
said upon no less Reason, that, had the Second been kindly entertained and well
improved, the good effects thereof might have induced many to seek, and the
Magistrate to grant, a third, more ample than any of the former: But your
carping disobligeth him, and your reeling makes you contemptible, and thought
unworthy of Favor.

If again any say, How can we be content, when some are thus favored, and get
leave to dwell at ease under their Vine, while others are hunted and harassed?
We will never be right, till all be in one condition again, either all out, or
all in.

Answ. May not people object the same against one another, to whom Providence
carves out various Lots? And what, Shall there be, should there be no peace,
until all be of the same outward Lot and Condition? O Salamandrin Paradox! And
what is this else but the very foam of envy, like the Patriarchs envying Joseph
for their Fathers kindness unto him beyond them? or, as if Joseph should have
grudged at the Butler his getting and accepting of Liberty, while himself lay
still in prison, till the Irons entered into his Soul? Or, as if the rest of the
Children of the Captivity should have quarrelled at Daniel and his Fellows
promotion, while their Brethren sat by the Banks of Babel weeping? Why should
your eye be evil where the Lords Hand is good? Are ye worse that it is well, or
any whit better with others? Count ye what is granted to your Brethren,
detracted from you? and their Liberty, your Misery? Why grudge ye? Do ye well
to be angry? might not the suffering part of the people grudg and quarrel in
like manner, that all their Neighbors are not in Prison with them? or, that
one or more gets out of Prison, while others are detained? Should there be no
peace among you, unless all be in the same case, and have the same Lot? Is not
this much like the fault of the Corinthians, who schismatized and rent the Body
of Christ, because of their different places and employments in the Church,
that all was not Eye, or Ear, or Hand; 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10, 11. with 15, 16, 17,
18, 25? And shall there be no concord, but a standing mutiny in an Army,
because some are put up into Quarters, others in Garrison, some to lie in the
Fields, others to range abroad in parties, etc. In Acts 8.1. we read, There was
a great persecution at Jerusalem against the Church, and all were scattered
abroad except the Apostles: And v. 4. They that were scattered abroad, went
every where preaching the word. Here are different Lots, and different
employments; some persecuted, some spared; some going abroad to preach at their
peril, others staying at Jerusalem in a more fixed way, as James and other
Brethren did, as is clear by comparing this place with Acts 21.18. yet who
finds any discord among them upon this account? Remember, that it is the
Magistrates fault, not your Brethrens, that ye are not all equal sharers: Why
then do ye let forth your Crab at the Innocent? O look higher than Man in this!
Is it not the different dispensation of his Sovereign Providence, who is not
countable to us of any of his matters, Prove. 29.26. 1 Cor. 12.18. and may do
with his own what he will, Matthew. 20.15. may set up one Star to shine, and let
another better lie by? Who may say to him what do thou? Is not this
difference of dealing to be stooped unto and adored, and not to be quarrelled?
Toll quod tuum est, ut vade, Matthew. 20.13, 14. Submission unto, and
Improvement of, your own Lot and Case, and not to dive much into others, is
your blessed Duty, John last. v. 21, 22. But to say no more, not a few, and
these none of the simplest, do judge, if your fierce Divisions and brisk
Animosities did not so much serve the bad Designs of some, who bear sway in
Affairs (who therefore love to cherish them, by fretting you with exclusion
from favors, while others get) belike you might soon have your desire of a
general liberty. But your contendings are too good a game (for promoting their
ends) to let them die out for want of fuel: O then let not this defectiveness
and lameness of the favor, be a bone of Contention any more!

The Sixth Objection is, the manner of their entry unto these Charges, wherein
they Officiate, not being called by the people (as is alleged) nor admitted by
the Presbytery, as wont to be, and so they seem not to come in at the door, (in
an orderly way) but at the Window, or by a by-way.

Answ. Here indeed, there are strange, but groundless, and unjust outcryes made
against them: For evincing whereof, and satisfying the misinformed, let these
following Considerations be pondered.

First, As to the alleged want of the peoples previous Election and Call, we
say these things.

1. What needed these Ministers any new Election or Call, who were, by the
Indulgence, returned to their own former Charges?

2. As for these who were licensed unto other parts, we affirm, it is a great
mistake to say they came without the call and consent of the people: For, in
the first Indulgence, Licenses passed not but upon Address first made to the
Council for the same, by some in Name of the Parish; and as representing them,
which after the License passed, was backed by a second and more ample Call, and
most serious Invitation by the Elders, Gentlemen, Masters of Families, and
other such most considerable parts of the people, in their own name, and of the
rest of the Parish; earnestly beseeching these Indulged Ministers to come and
labor among them in the Gospel, till God should open a door for their return
to their former Charges: So that they had the Election of the People doubly,
both Prior and Posterior, unto the Councils License; and always anterior to
their own minting, in the least, to come to the Charges they were Licensed
unto. Sic like in the second Indulgence, albeitt the Magistrate waited not upon
Peoples Election, but supponing all these outed Ministers men of approved
qualifications, (being formerly ordained by Presbytery, and in no less eminent
charges, than he allocated them unto; and also much flocked after by people,
when they Conventicled:) And thinking his Grant of License or Act of
Toleration, did no more (stricto jure) depend upon peoples call, than their
call does upon his Toleration; did therefore do his part anteriorly to the
Peoples call, (a method indeed, though not simply and intrinsecally sinful, yet
full of hazard, and liable to many inconvenients in a constitute Church;) yet
none of these so indulged did offer to come to bestow their labors in these
Parishes, without the Parishes call first had. Now, what does it import to the
Ministers, whether the Peoples call did precede or follow the Prince his Civil
License? Or what reason has any to object, if the people was satisfied with
the Minister Licensed, and did cordially call him? If any think the Prince his
Nomination, was a taking upon him the peoples right of Calling, it is a great
mistake; being only a Civil and Legal Licentiating, not an Ecclesiastic
Calling.

If ye say, It praelimited the people in their freedom.

Answ. Not at all: They were still left to their freedom, as well as when a
Presbytery gives them a List, as often wont to be. Hence some people called
others, and obtained the Licensing of them too, and passed by such as the
Council did nominate for them, as less fit for them. However, if the Prince did
in this method prelimit, and incroach upon the peoples freedom; as ye will
readily find it an Act of Oppression only, not of Usurpation; so is it his
fault alone, but does not cencern the Minister, nor can be any just exception
against him whom the People acquiesced in, and cordially called; and hitherto
we have heard of none of them repenting of their choice. Moreover, Suppose the
Magistrate had nominated and elected such and such Ministers to such and such
places (which yet he did not) in this broken State of the Church, we desire to
know what wrong were done thereby, more than when your States and Council did
nominate and choose the Superintendents for such and such Provinces, as your
Church allows in her shattered case, in the first Book of Discipline, p. 37.
Sic like, did not all the Ministers in the Church of Scotland, before the year
1649. enter by Presentations from the Patrons, without the Election or Call of
the People? But was this ever counted a Relevant Objection against their
Ministry, or for separating from them against the lawfulness of hearing them?
Why then are the Indulged men's entry quarrelled as sinful, and their Ministry
as defiled, who yet wanted not the peoples full call? Thus ye see it is a
mistake, to alledg their want of a due and valid call: And for the quibbles
about the method of it, how weak a ground are they to cast at them, and plead
for Separation from them, for the same; since they militate only against the
Magistrates precipitant or preposterous proceeding (if so you judge it) but
makes nothing against the Ministers; it being all one to them (as to the
validity of their Call) whether the Peoples Election was antecedent or
subsequent to the Rulers License: See Ames. Cas. Consc. Lib. 4. Chap. 25. Th.
29. Yea, Divines tell us, that peoples consent subsequent to a Ministers entry
(though it absolve him not of disorderliness, yet) does ratify and make good
his right to labor among them as their Pastor; even as Leah (unjustly obtruded
upon Jacob) did by his consequent consent become his Wife; and might no more
after that be repudiate, than his beloved Rachel, whom he choised before he
married her.

But here, some as we understand, Object, How can Ministers having another
people, to whom they have a prior standing relation, be counted, though elected
and called, the Pastors of these people, to whom they are indulged? Can a man
have two charges at once? To this we answer, (1) That they may very well be
called, counted, and submitted unto by the indulged people, as their own
Ministers, just as your honest Ministers Mr. Robert Blair, and Mr. John
Livingston, and others, became Pastors of Churches in Scotland, notwithstanding
their relation to their former charges in Ireland, from which they were driven
away by the violence of the time. And as famous Mr. Welsh did take charge of a
Congregation in France, being banished Scotland. And as we suppose your
banished Brethren in Holland would not scruple to take charges there, if
Providence offered the same, even as others of your number has accepted of
Charges in Ireland, and that without the consent of your Church in Scotland,
and also without your quarreling at them. We wonder why ye impugn those
indulged men so briskly, when others of the same practice as to this are
allowed. Shall it be counted vice in the one, which is counted virtue in the
other?

(2) Not to debate, if when by violence of a time, a Minister is incapacitate
to exercise his Ministry among his people, (as your Ministers were by Law, and
that backed with force), and so it became morally impossible to discharge his
Office unto them; whether in that case he be Civiliter mortuus, dead in Law
unto them, and his Ministerial tie and relation, Divino nutu loosed, or
Providentially broken and dissolved, as Ames. asserts in his Cas. consc. lib.
4. cap. 25.. 35. We are made to understand that some of these who impugn their
Brethren most hotly, are of this opinion, and therefore count not themselves
obliged to look after their old Charges, more than after any other. Whereupon
we wonder at their calling their Brethren men of Pluralities of Charges, whilst
themselves take the whole Church universal for their charge, at least all the
Parishes in Scotland indefinitely, and aequo jure. But let us suppose the
relation to stand undissolved quo ad habitum, or jus ad rem; yet seeing there
is a Supersedeas put, by the times to the actual exercise of it, what hinders
but they may and should lawfully bestow their labors in any other part of the
Lords Vineyard, being called thereunto, until Providence open a door of regress
to their former Charge? In which case, though they be not simpliciter and
absolutely the fixed, stated Pastors of these people, yet are they
conditionally, and for that interim; and not like mere itinerant and occasional
Preachers. Their call determines them unto, and stateth their relation to
these people, until occasion of regress. Nor is it absurd for them to have
relation to two different flocks at the same time in a different manner, viz.
to the one habi^u, to the other actu; or thus, to the one (...), or by way of
propriety, to the other (...), or by way of loan and use for the time.

Next, as to the plea of their not being admitted to these places by the
Presbytery, as wont to be. For taking off this, know (1) that they being
Ministers already, needed no new Ordination or Mission. As for that solemnity
of admission used formerly in Transportations, what is it as to the stating the
man Pastor of that people, but a public solemn Declaration of the peoples
consent and subjection unto him? and a solemn Introduction of him into his
work? and was materially had by the indulged in the peoples express and full
calling of them, and practical subjection to their Ministry: Which they did
exhibit, not only de futuro, as when they call an expectant; but de presenti.
That solemnity therefore of Admission (so called) being at most, and in best
times, not necessary ad esse, but only expedient ad been esse, that is to say,
not essential and absolutely necessary, but only for solemnity and convenience
of stating the relation, (as learned Voetius shows in his Desperata causa
Papatus, page 263.) What hinders but it may be wanted without any detriment to
the relation? like marriage consummate without some of the Rites and
Solemnities, ordinary, and fit when they may be had. Can any with reason say,
that Preaching of the Gospel by actual Ordained Ministers, invited and
earnestly called thereto by people, depends so absolutely and essentially
upon that punctilio of order; and Substance is such an underling to Form, that
if this be not (nor possible to be had) that should not, may not be in no case,
no not of much extremity, and urgent necessity, as this was? Sure what Divines
say of Baptism, may be applied here, Non privatio, sed contemptus damnat, so
not the bare want, but the neglect of Admission is a fault and marring defect,
being only a point of order, which in such a broken time could not be had. And
therefore the want of it derogates nothing from the validity of their interest
in that people, nor from the lawfulness of their laboring among them. And to
object it against them, seems to favor more of prejudice than of any real
scruple.

But (2) remember this was a broken state of the Church wherein ordinary
Formalities and Solemnities (fit to be observed in a constituted Church) could
not be obtained; for, seeing there were no Presbyteries in being, who can
justly quarrel these Ministers for want of the Presbyteries solemn concurrence?
Namely, if Brethrens consent and approbation was generally had disjunctly (as
far as there was access to acquaint them with the matter in the scattered
condition they were in) either formally and expressly, or tacitly and in some
equivalent way. What more could have been done in such an extraordinary case?
and the extraordinariness of the case, did it not sufficiently dispense with,
and excuse the want of that usual point of Order? which therefore in this case
is no irregularity and disorder, privative.

(3) It meriteth Consideration, that the indulged did not come unto these
Parishes like transported Ministers, to fix with them without an eye of return
to their former Charges; but only for an interim, till access to their old
flocks be granted; and consequently there was no necessity of the Solemnities
usual in the admission of transported men.

From all this is it not plain, that their manner of entry is not so culpable
as it is by some represented to be? and we hope these probationers and others
who come and Conventicle within the Indulged men's bounds, or in other places,
not only without, but perhaps against the consent or due call of the Ministers
or Elders, and people of these bounds, let be without any Presbyteries Mission,
as wont regularly to be, according to the Acts of your General Assemblies, will
not think it fair and just to make use of this exception, lest it fall heavier
upon themselves. Shall it be a right door for the one to enter in at, which is
reckoned wrong in the other? or contrary?

The Seventh Objection is, The want of a full and free Testimony (as is
alleged) against the Encroachments and Usurpations made upon the Churches
Rights, and Christ's Prerogative, in and by this Indulgence, and otherwise.

Ans. (1) Since the Indulgence as accepted by the Brethren, is free of all
Erastianism, or Homologation of the Supremacy, as is already cleared; what are
these Encroachments where anent the Indulged were concerned to bear witness
more, than the rest of you? why then single ye them out, and make them the Butt
of this Objection?

(2) We are informed, that at the first Indulgence, sufficient was said by one
of their number, in name of himself and the rest, before the Kings Council, to
clear that they hold their Ministry only of Christ, and did not at all allow
of, or comply with any jot of Erastianism. And further, that all of them, both
of the first and second Indulgence (the most part having no immediate access to
declare before the Magistrate) did at their entry to their several Charges,
publicly declare to their people to the same purpose. As also, that diverse of
them being convented before the Council in June -- Anno -- 1673, did express
their sense of that Act of Rules then intimated to them, to the satisfaction of
all sober and unprejudiced persons, as the Narrative of their carriage at that
time at more length bears. Though it be true, we grant, enough was not said to
stop the mouths of all Cavillers, whom nothing would satisfy, except it had
amounted to have produced the effect of Imprisonment, as befell one of them,
etc. Yet sure it was more than any others of you did, when ye were Convented
before the Council for not repairing to the places of your Confinement, etc.
Does it not then savor of prejudice and partiality to accuse only the Licensed
Brethren as deficient in a Testimony, when no others had done so much, let be
out-stripped them, except it be in a corner among some vulgar people?

Moreover, it is credibly informed, that the indulged upon all competent
occasions, testifies against the iniquities of the times in their Sermons, as
well as others do; (though not indiscreetly to irritate, rather than edify);
and particularly, they have not been wanting to testify against all things
contrary to Christ's Prerogative of being the alone King and Head of his Church;
as their constant Hearers can witness. Whence it is apparent they are not so
sinfully silent (as some alledg) though they make it not their ordinary Theme
as some others do. Neither are they involved in any Interpretative compliance,
or symbolizing with the evils under consideration, so far as a just Testimony
can exonerate them thereof. And moreover they are not wanting to give Practical
Testimony for God against the evils of the time, in refusing all practical
conforming thereunto, or compliance therewith; and is not this more than much
Verbal Testimony?

Yet (3) because many do force misconstructions upon their accepted liberty,
and have been ready to take offense that so little has been said or done by way
of Testimony against the encroachments of the time, it could have been wished,
that (besides your Nonconformity thereunto, and suffering upon that score which
the sober cannot but think a real, material, great, practical Testimony of far
more importance and significancy than much verbal; as is plain from Luke 21.12,
13. Matthew. 10.17, 18.) We wish there had also been, or yet were, a formal,
solemn, express Testimony, in ample and discreet form, agreed upon, and
published by both the indulged and unindulged Ministers and people jointly,
being jointly concerned therein as a matter of common interest, that the world
might see plainly your mind and harmony in this. And this ye know the Indulged
were never refractory unto, more than others; yea, was forward for it; but ye
know by whom it was obstructed, and who did draw back and decline to concur
with them, and so by deserting them, discouraged them from proceeding in so
choice a duty. But albeit this general concurrence in a full Testimony, seems
necessary for sundry grave Reasons, namely for the benefit of posterity and
after-ages; yet seeing nothing of this kind is done, yea counted by some scarce
practicable in the Circumstances ye are in, let all of you join in lamenting
the defect; and seeing the unindulged are no less short in giving the
Magistrate a true information and just representation of the sinfulness of
these matters, and have stood as little up to witness and plead for God before
the Ruler as the indulged, let both the one sort and the other, lay their hand
on their mouth, and confess fainting and failing, and pity and pray for one
another. But none to upbraid it to another. However, be it supposed, the
Indulgent were deficient in this point of duty, even beyond others, yet what
were that but their personal failing, but nothing justly to reflect upon their
liberty, nor to cast at their Ministry, unless ye make every personal failing
of that consequence; which were a wild and dangerous principle?

The Eighth Objection is taken from their observing of their Confinement (as is
alleged), yea, their settling at all in a fixed Ministry, and not rather
continuing loose of all particular charge to serve the Church in an indefinite
itinerant way, as others do in this time of her need.

As to the matter of their Confinement, we say, (1) The Act of Confinement,
being not of a Spiritual, but of a Civil nature, like Imprisonment, however
unjust it be, yet we hope ye will not call it Erastianism, nor Spiritual
Supremacy in the Magistrate to impose it; nor an Homologation of that
Supremacy, if Ministers submit to it; it being in its kind not extra f^rum
civil, or illegal and incompetent; no more nor other Civil punishments and
pressures unjustly inflicted upon, and submitted unto by the Godly in all
Generations. And surely, to confine one particular Minister, or the whole
party, is all of one kind, differing only in magis and minus, which varieth not
the kind, whatever Incommoda or ill consequents follow upon the one more than
on the other, that also makes no Intrinsecal difference.

(2) We would fain know why ye quarrel your Brethrens submitting unto, and
observing of their confinement (though exercising their Ministry in the place,
to the edification and service of this poor Church not a little), more than ye
quarrel others submitting unto, and observing inviolably their Banishment from
their former Charge, yea and others their Banishment from Scotland, by which
means this Church is wholly deprived of their service?

(3) We hope, ye will not say, that it is simply and absolutely unlawful to
submit, even to unjust confinement, or to observe it for any time; for that
were both against Scripture and Reason, and to condemn the Generation of the
Righteous, who have submitted to the like, yea to more hard and prejudicial
sufferings. Did not John the Apostle submit to his Confinement unto Patmos?
Rev. 1. and Paul to his at Rome, Act. 28. Did not your worthy Mr. R. Bruce
submit to his Confinement unto Innerness? Others also to theirs, in Kintyre,
Boot, Arran, etc? and Mr. D. Dickson, to his at Toraff? Mr. Rutherford to his
at Aberden? when yet their Ministry was no less needed elsewhere, yea much
more than your Brethrens is now. And if any Confinement or other prejudice
redound to the Gospel, through the restraint laid upon their persons, they
being passive therein, and only the Magistrate active, what guilt lies at their
door, more than if they were imprisoned? are not sufferers to be held innocent?
Is not Confinement (upon their part) a sad piece of suffering? and shall they
be counted sinners for suffering? Look on it then henceforth as their
affliction, not their sin.

(4) Whatever sinfulness might be alleged in submitting unto this sentence of
Confinement in an absolute way, as being obstructive to several necessary
duties that lie upon them, which cannot be followed with a peremptory
observation of Confinement; yet what does that say against a limited
observation thereof, viz. in so far as may be consistent with necessary Duties
to the Church and Gospel, and in as far as they are not called by any duty to
break it? what fault is it to observe it, while it does not compet with any
duty? that is, while no duty occurs which cannot be gone about without
transgressing it? And who of all the indulged did ever submit further unto it?
being ready to disobserve it, when ever duty otherwise called them so to do.
Only they love not to trample upon the Magistrates Authority, to transgress
without just cause his hardest sentences. Yet so far only, and no further, do
they regard such sentences, as that when the Authority of God interposes,
disobliging them to observe them, they scruple not to say with the Apostles,
Better obey God than man.

(5) Seeing the Confinement is a Civil sentence, though mollified with a
liberty of Preaching, questionless the transferring that Confinement to another
place with the same liberty, is of the same very nature; and no pure exercise
of Ecclesiastical power and Government; whence it is evident that it is a great
mistake to say, it is a planting and transplanting of Ministers Ecclesiastical;
but a mere civil and local mutation of their Personal abode, which only
consequently draws along with it the Exercise of their Ministry, wheresoever
their persons go; even as if they were translated from one Prison to another.
And who but Papists will say, but Ministers bodies and persons are under the
Magistrates Jurisdiction as other men's? and that it is no Erastianism at all to
dispose of them?

(6) What reason is there to say this Cantonizing of those places and
Ministers, and confining of the Gospel, is their sin? for, albeit it be the
Magistrates fault to shut them up thus into corners, yet who can justly lay it
to Ministers charge being sufferers therein? and albeit they be put under
chains and fetters of Corporal confinement, as Paul was at Rome, and John in
Patmos, yet the word of God is not bound, 2 Timothy 2.9. but may have, and has
free course, notwithstanding people not being debarred from coming to them,
though they like Jeremiah be shut up (as it were) in the Court of the Prison
that they cannot go far abroad among people, see Act. 28.30, ^1. Further know,
that Ministers (as above said) submit no further to their Confinement than may
consist with the duties of their calling; so that when God calls them to go
visit or Preach to other parts, in that case they observe it not, nor stick to
transgress it, God calling them thereto, as he did Peter to go forth out of
Prison, Act. 5.19, 20. when yet Paul and Silas having the same open doors, but
not the same call to go forth, lay still till Authority put them forth, Act.
16. 26, 28, 37. As to all this, that it seems a strange conceit, to say the
Gospel is quite confined and shut up wherever the persons of so many Ministers
are confined; as if there were no Gospel to be had in the Land, but from them;
no not from the hand of the rest of Non-Conform Ministers not comprehended in
this confinement.

Next, As to their fixing, and that in this case, when there is such paucity of
honest Ministers, and the necessity of the Church is great, calling for men's
labors to be extended throughout all the Land; observe,

1. That this Objection militates nothing against the use-making of the
Indulged Liberty, in the general, but only against the containing the exercise
of their Ministry within these Parishes; an Objection common against all fixed
Ministers, what way soever they enjoy it: And therefore it is wondered at, that
the Indulged only should be pressed with it, and all the outcry made upon
them; when they are not alone in the fault, if a fault it be. How many of the
outed Ministers lie by in corners, less extensive in their usefulness to the
Church, than the Indulged? And yet the edge of the Objection is whetted only
against the Licensed Brethren: what this savoureth of, we leave to your selves
to judge.

2. We demand, What is this great necessity, so much decantated and objected
against the Indulged's Fixing? What, are ther^ not enough of hands besides to
overtake that work, were they all put to it, and regularly disposed of? Sure,
the principal Objectors, however they make clamor of the necessity of desolate
and indigent parts, to cast odium upon fixed Ministers, yet seem they to be
able enough of themselves alone for that work; yea and to spare now and then a
visit also to Indulged men's bounds, or near their Confines, whither their
People may resort. What necessity is there of this? And why do not these
Objectors go and labor in a more permanent way, in these needy places, and not
be so often where there is so little need?

3. If the Harvest be great, and Laborers few; Christ's Direction is, Pray the
Lord of the Harvest to raise up, and thrust out Laborers into his Vineyard, as
in Matthew. 9. But where does he advise, that till all the Vineyard be cultivated
and dressed equally well in all its parts, at least provided with Laborers,
none should fix to a particular Station or Charge? Do we not know, that in the
primitive times there were no less necessities of the People, and paucity of
Ministers; the Church then being but in her Infancy, and much of the Country
Pagan? Yet did they not settle Pastors in every Church and every City, as they
could have access? As in Acts 14.23. Tit. 1.5. And in the times of your first
Reformation, was it not your Church her care (though her need was sevenfold
more than now) to settle and fix a Ministry, by degrees, as it could be
attained? Settling, and not unsettling, being ever accounted the great(...)
perfection of the Church.

4. Consider, That the Indulged, as upon the one hand, they look upon
themselves not as being Apostles, or actually universal Ministers of the
Universal Church (though Ministers of the Church Universal, habitu and actu
primo;) neither as Pastors at large, in the Prelatick way, to take a whole
Province for their Charge and Diocy, as the Prelates do; but for ordinary, and
statedly, they are Watchmen, to stand at a particular Post; or like Shepherds,
to feed a particular flock, of which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers, (
Acts 20.28.) And consequently, that the charge of all the Churches does not lie
equally upon them; Pastors being, by Office, fixed Stars: And it being proper
to the great Luminaries, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, to have no definite
Sphere to move in; so upon the other hand, they do not fix in their Charges in
the Independent way, as peremptorily tied and limited to that particular
People; but they fix in the good old Primitive and Presbyterian way, viz.
ordinarily, and in a stated way, to labor in a particular charge; yet so as
they may, and will, upon a sufficient occasion and call, go and Preach any
where for a time, for the Church's good. And who can look upon this qualified
and scriptural fixing, as a fault?

5. The Indulged (we judge) do exceedingly compassionate the need of other
places, so dark and desolate; and are willing to concur to propagate the Gospel
in these places, so far as may be competent unto them, Romans 1.14, 15. But they
may perhaps humbly desire to be considered these few things, which seem to
plead excuse for their not going so much abroad, as some would have them, who
complain of their not doing as others do.

First, Until all the Ministers out of charge (who have no other work to do) be
put to it, to supply needy places in a way of watering, at least; and that
done, it be apparent, that the work of the Gospel cannot otherwise be carried
on, unless the Indulged relinquish their present Station, and go forth and
Travel in an Evangelistical way to promote it: They think the need of them not
so very great.

Secondly, It would be considered, they are not idle where they are, they are
at work in the Lords Vineyard in this Land; (not wholly useless to this needy
Church, as some worthy Brethren in exile are) yea and in a peculiar sort, tied
to labor in these places before others; and these places needing and desiring
all they can do and more, How then can it be any other, than to Rob Peter to
pay Paul; to put them from their present needy people (who think they cannot,
without loss and prejudice, want them almost a day) to go and travel among
others? And would it not give Ministers just ground of complaining in the words
of the Spouse, Cant. 1.6. My mothers children were angry with me, and made me
keeper of the Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept. Look what
advantage ye think their going abroad would do to other places; would it not
damnifie their own people as much? And should they rob their own, to supply
others?

Add to this, Thirdly, That the Indulged Ministers stand in such Circumstances,
that if they adventure, were it but to go for a time, to labor among other
people, contrary to the Rulers leave; ye know what inevitable hazard they are
in, not only of personal prejudice, as others are, but of loss of that public
peaceable exercise of their Ministry they now enjoy: A privilege, which all
the good may be done by their excursions to preach here and there, will not
countervail the damage of losing it; specially, since many of the Indulged, were
they deprived of their Liberty, and laid by, would be certainly rendered useless
and unserviceable to the Church, at least much less capable; being unable to
traverse up and down, and preach in the Fields, as others do. And what
advantage will redound to the Church, by hudling them up again in a corner, who
now are steadable in their public Station to whole Country-sides about them,
who resort to hear them, though they go not forth unto them? Since therefore it
is doubted by them, if it be in majus bonum Ecclesiae, for the greater good,
and not rather for the greater detriment, of the Church, to adventure upon that
which inevitably draws the ruin of their present liberty along with it; who
can blame them not to be rash therein? Namely, considering, that if Hazard be a
sufficient argument to excuse the banished Ministers their not returning to the
work, and others their lurking when looked after by the Magistrate; certainly
it cannot but plead as strongly, and more, for excusing the Indulged for not
going to preach otherwhere; their hazard being more than any's, viz. not only
Personal, but Ministerial. And further, the people over whom they now are,
being particularly interessed in them, it seems they are not sui juris, i. e.
not free to dispose of themselves to preach where they may (upon all perils, as
other Ministers are) without their Flocks consent, to whom they owe all they
can do, as Ministers; and whom they may not adventure to rob of their Ministry,
by exposing themselves to the danger of that itinerant preaching, without their
leave: Till therefore their peoples consent be had, pardon them to be shy of
this matter.

Fourthly, Since this general way of Preaching, which some would put them unto,
if practiced by them, would doubtlesly infer the forfaultry and loss of their
present Liberty; and they may Preach their Valedictory to their present Charge
that day they go forth to the new: We would fain know who shall put them to run
this Risk? And who shall direct them where to go unto? or for how long? We
think ye will not say, they should run at random uncalled or unsent. Sure, they
need such a Relevant Call and Mission as may warrant them to hazard their
present freedom, and may quiet their Conscience in case of suffering the loss
of it, besides personal sufferings, which may by and attour happen them. Now,
what is the call or mission they have to that work? Will ye say they should go
proprio motu, of their own heads? What a door might that open to Confusion? And
will that satisfy their Conscience, when it is said to them, as to Elijah,
What do thou here?

If ye say, they should go to satisfy their Brethren, who grudgeth at their
tarrying at home, and be disposed of, and ordered by them.

Answ. Who made these Rulers over their Brethren? And were not this to set them
up as Prelates and Dictators to their Brethren? And to prostitute their
Ministry to gratify the humors of men, even to sacrifice it to their
discontents? Wherein what peace or answer of a good Conscience they would have,
namely, if suffering come, we see not.

All which Premises being seriously weighed in the Balance of Christian
Sobriety, who can justly wonder that they stick so closely by their present
Stations? Neither need this difference of practice make any Division, no more
than the different employments of Soldiers in an Army, allows them to mutiny;
some being allocate to stay in Garrison, some to lie in the Fields, others to
scout forth here and there, as the Prince pleases to order. As the Indulged
wishes a blessing upon the Labors of their honest Brethren, who visit needy
places; so it were fit those, who, in providence, are loose of all particular
charge, would be doing at that general, indefinite, itinerant way of Preaching,
unto these needy parts, till God otherwise provide; and not grudge at their
Brethren, who are not idle at home, though they be not free to come abroad with
them. And, least of all, should people make it an exception against hearing
them; to say I will not, should not, hear such a man Preach within his Parish,
because I get him not also abroad elsewhere to hear, How ridiculous were that!

If it be said, Then what shall be done to supply the needy parts of the Land?

Answ. If there be not enough of hands among the Unindulged (who seems lies
nearest that work, wanting other work) then let an orderly way be taken, by
common consent, to provide for that; and it is not (we judge) to be doubted, but
the Indulged will submit unto whatever shall, by common counsel and consent, be
determined and laid upon them, as competent unto them, and consistent with
their present Ministry; yea and albeit it tend to undo their present Liberty,
if it be judged by the Judicatory more for the good of the Gospel; they are
willing to be Ruled by the common advice and determination of Brethren. But to
unhinge and cast themselves loose upon no other warrant, than to please some
male-contented Spirits, will ye not think it very pardonable in them to forbear
it? Specially, while all others not in their condition, are not put to work;
who seem to be more nearly concerned in that itinerant way of Ministry, having
no access unto a settled Ministry, as your Brethren have.

If ye say, Peoples Necessity is Call enough to determine Ministers to go and
Preach to them.

Answ. 1. Then must ye go to the Indies rather than stay in Scotland; and to
the Highlands, rather than Lowlands of Scotland, because the necessity there is
greater, yea and access also, if ye will but try it.

2. Necessity alone is only Relevant to determine idle men, or Freemen, that
are at their own disposal; such as the Indulged are not, being tied to
particular charges, as others are not. Should they commit Injustice, in robbing
other Churches of their Labors, (whose debtors they are in a special way) to
the intent they may charitably relieve the necessities of others? Ought not
Justice to preponderate to works of Charity?

Now Ninthly and Lastly, It is Objected, That this Indulged Liberty is, and
could not but be, of direful consequence and effects; and the Indulged in
accepting it, have done more ill than all the Bishops and Curates in Scotland:
What an unhappy, unhallowed Hemlock must it then be? Not a plant of Gods
planting?

Answ. Pitiful it is, what a deal of Hue and Cry is here set against honest men
by virulent passion! We are astonished at such rage and raving! why, what are
these bad effects the acceptance of their liberty does natively produce? Ye
say, more ill have they done thereby to the Church, than all the Prelates and
their Party. Were this true, why then has the Prelates and their Friends such
an antipathy against it? Do not all know it was granted over their Bellies, and
sore against their Mind? It is their eyesore as it is yours; and to this day
never did they like it, except in so far as ye made it an Apple of Contention
among your selves, and thereby diverted your edge of them. Did not many of them
say, it was the high way to break, undermine, and wear out their Government?
Thinking that as Dagon could not stand before the Ark, neither Prelacy beside
any little of Presbytery, without losing ground daily? Did they not exclaim
against it as a reviving, perpetuating, and rivetting the Presbyterian
Interest, which they thought had been quite broken and bvried? Sure they have
other thoughts of it, than you.

Again, What one point of the received Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government of the Church of Scotland, has your Brethren, by their Indulgence
receded from? whilst the Prelatick party have overturned the whole Fabric of
her Government, and bears down all that join not issues with them therein? Does
your Brethren persecute you as they do? do they not rather plead for you,
excuse your extravagancies; protect and shelter and feed you, so far as they
can? Or is the pure and free Preaching of the Gospel by them, any harm to the
Church? Is the restoring of so much of an honest Ministry to the free exercise
of their Ministry, a Nail of the Lords Interest, in the Holy Place, such an
intolerable evil? The Prelates indeed count it no small evil, and are you and
they in so far agreed? But while ye charge them so heavily, what if they should
retort and tell you, that as Heretics destroy the Fundamentalia Doctrinae; so
do Schismatics and Dividers, Fundamentalia Ecclesiae, by dissolving the
Compages of Christ's Mystical Body into so many fractions; and that a Mutiny in
an Army is no less destructive, than Treachery; and cutting and wounding of a
man's body, may be no less fatal to his life, than stripping him of his Clothes
and Ornaments, yea or some grains of poison.

But because Dolus versatur in Generalibus, we pray you condescend upon the
evils particularly, which their acceptance of this Liberty has done: And
because Si accusasse satis esset, quis erit innocens, we pray you prove what ye
assert and allege upon them. If ye strike upon the old string of their setting
up Erastianism, homologating the Supremacy, etc. that is refuted, and they
vindicated therefrom already. But there are three Instances further, we hear
somewhat of.

1. Say ye, By this means the rest of their Brethren are exposed to suffering,
who are not free to accept that liberty, or are secluded from it; did all stick
together, it might be more safe.

Answ. Here is strange Policy, instead of sound Divinity: What trouble comes
on any for refusing or not getting a share in the Liberty? On this score who
are put to suffering? What accession then has Brethrens acceptance, to the
trouble of the Refusers? If trouble befall them upon other accounts, what is
that to the Indulgence? Or, would the Indulged, their refusal of their Liberty,
lenified the Magistrates offense, and protected all the rest from suffering? or
rather irritated him more, and drawn on suffering on themselves with others?
Who will say, those of the Children of the Captivity, who returned to
Jerusalem, when Liberty was granted, did expose the rest who stayed still, or
were detained in Babylon, to further bondage and suffering? Will ye not be
pleased if suffering befall you, unless all drink of that same Cup; albeit in
Providence they be not called unto it? Must your Brethren tarry and take part
with you, merely for company-sake, and let the Lords work, to which they have a
call and free access, stand? and refuse a lawful Liberty of a necessary duty,
only because others are not pleased, or not partakers? But, as we think they
wrong the Indulged who look upon them as altogether free of suffering, seeing
their very Liberty is annexed to Confinement; so we bless God to see the
Generality of other Ministers as yet meeting with so easy a measure; and some
of those that make the greatest noise of complaint, enjoying their own
accommodations (God so providing) every way comparable, if not preferable, to
these so much magnifyed, falling to the share of the Indulged. But in fine,
while ye speak of their exposing you to the Magistrates displeasure by their
acceptance of the favor, think how ye can clear your selves of exposing your
Brethren to the Peoples obloquy and fury, by your non-acceptance.

2. Some say, It tends to shut up the Gospel in a corner, and to harden the
Magistrate in his Erastian Encroachments.

Answ. As for the former of these, it is taken off already in answer to the
Eighth Objection: Sure their confinement is a grievance, an affliction, but not
their sin: If the Magistrate, who has power over their persons, do shut them up
not only in one Province, but in one Parish, yea in one Prison; and if they
submit and yield their bodies to the power of the Magistrate, what fault in all
this can be charged upon them, who are merely sufferers in the case? And as for
the alleged hardening the Magistrate; unless ye prove that their acceptance of
the Liberty is either in it self sinful, or at least but indifferent, and no
ways necessary; what does your Hypothesis and arguing reprove? Must duty be
deserted because any stumble on it? But besides, your Hypothesis, we humbly
suppose, is groundless, and merely alleged by you, who pick quarrels at, and
strain all Topics to sugillat their foresaid acceptance: Sure it has no
native tendency to such an effect. But see if your refusing to accept, do not
harden the Magistrate in his hard thoughts of you, and of the persuasion ye
own, and in the severe resolutions and courses used, or may be used, toward you
and the Cause.

3. Some do criminate the accepted Liberty, as a (...), has occasioned much
Division and Difference, and is much disliked by many godly; and therefore
cannot be sonsy, but some woeful, unhappy thing.

Answ. This was briefly cleared before in answer to the fourth Objection; and
therefore we shall now say no more to it, but these five things.

1. That there are as many, and far more, godly, not against it, as are against
it: Is it not too Pharisaical a Censure, to monopolize the Title and Reputation
of Godliness to you and your party that be against it, and to condemn all as
ungodly and backslidden that are for it? Good Information says, the generality
of the grave, judicious, serious, and sober godly, are not against it, as it is
accepted by your Brethren; yea and that fewer are for dividing and renting from
their Brethren upon that score. It is by good hands said, there are not above
ten or twelve Ministers, and but few also of the old Christians, in all the
Land, against the liberty as it is accepted, but only against the Complex of
the Business, which the Indulged are not for either, as was cleared in stating
of the Question: Neither are there many of these Ten or Twelve for making it a
ground of Division or Separation.

The only persons that be simpliciter against it, and for dividing, (so far as
we can learn) are a very few, and those mostly of the younger inconsiderater
sort, both of Preachers and Professors.

(2) As for difference of practice, that needs no more breed division or
animosity, nor Jephtha's was a just ground of Ephraims quarrel, Judge. 12. 1, 2,
3. Or these Disciples was for the rest their snarling at it, in Luke 9.49, 50.
When some of the Children of Judah returned to Jerusalem upon Cyrus his
Proclamation, and others stayed still, or were some way detained in Babylon,
what ground of division or outcast was this? or should difference of lots
divide your hearts and affections? See what was said to this before in answer
to the fifth Objection. And further, suffer us to tell you, that as when the
generality of Non-conform Ministers were ejected, some were in Providence
overlooked and spared, and that without the envious eye or grudg of heart of
those who were thrust out; so we wonder how this difference of lots when some
are favored with liberty, others not, should make any breach among sober men.

Is not God to be eyed and stooped unto in this, and to be waited on by faith
and patience till it be otherwise?

(3) Do we not find our Lord Jesus himself, his Gospel, and Gracious Miracles,
sometimes a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense, matter of division to many
visible professors of Religion? as Luke 2.34, 35. Joh. 9.16. Joh. 10.19, 20,
21. Mat. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 12.49, 51, 52, 53. Joh. 7.40, 41, 42, 43. Act.
13.45. Act. 28.22, 24, 25. But who will therefore say, they were not of God,
but unhappy things being the matter of such disturbances, obloquy and
contradiction, every where spoken against, and occasioning sad consequents?
they that take offense, when no just ground of offense is given, let them see
to it, the blame lies at their own door, Mat. 15.12, 13. Suffer us to say, like
as Christ said of himself, Mat. 11.6. Blessed is he whosoever shall not be
offended at a thing so innocent, so necessary as this permitted liberty (in so
far as it is accepted) is.

(4) Since, as was said before, your Brethrens acceptance of that liberty is in
it self a guiltless practice, then sure, however it be an occasion, yet can it
be no culpable cause of division. The only cause (that should bear the blame)
is men's mistakes and corruptions, whereof even professors are not free. These
are the wedges of Division which actively rents you asunder.

(5) We are made to understand that any of the truly serious Godly their being
against this matter, is through want of right Information, yea some's
industrious practicing upon, and daubing them with most injurious
representations of the state of the matter, and odious calumnies of their
Brethren, done on purpose to draw honest people away after them, Act. 20.30.
Who (almost) of all these good people understand the Controversy or true state
of the Question, but are led, not by light, but prejudices, and biased
affection? Are they not made to believe that the Indulged have closed with all
the whole Complex of the Magistrates Acts forementioned, and have Homologated
the Spiritual Supremacy, and joined issues with Erastian Encroachments, and
other such like false and foul alledgances, whereof the Brethren are free, as
is above cleared? How have we often been ashamed upon your behalfs, to find in
your writings, private discourses, and public Sermons, your greatest Topic,
and Achillean Arguments to be Reproaches, and groundless Accusations of your
Brethren? and these born in upon people as Divine Oracles, and certain Truths?
Thus good people have been and are abused by some Ardelio's, who make it their
work to infuse into their minds prejudices at the Brethren, as guilty of a
defection, and then to work upon their misinformed zeal, to turn their edg
against the Brethren? How many can attest these undeniable Verities? whence it
is evident how much honest peoples case is to be pitied and lamented, as hugely
abused and imposed upon for strengthening of a party, and making up a faction,
the tendency whereof is not seen by well-meaning people, who are led like
Absaloms followers in the simplicity of their hearts. And had not the indulged
Brethren been too silent for peace-sake, to speak for themselves, expecting
that God and Time would have cleared people of their mistakes and
misapprehensions, much of all this misleading of people into such rancors and
rage, might have been happily prevented by a full and true stating and
vindicating of their practice. And if this mean Essay of ours do contribute
clearing unto any one, even the least of Saints, and shall provoke some of
these Brethren to do such a necessary work better and more fully, being better
able for it, we shall not repent our adventure, but bless the Father of Lights
for it, Jam. 5.19, 20.

Now, Dear Friends, all these things considered, how little ground seems there
to be for making so great a stir, as ye do? as if the All of Religion lay at
the stake in all this matter, and these honest men had made the vilest
defection! Whereas lay aside prejudice, bias, and personal slanders, and let
any weigh their cause in an even Balance, the Balance of the Sanctuary, they
will be found in it not so black by far, as some take them to be. Be entreated
therefore in the Lord to hearken to that warning, Act. 10.15. What God has
cleansed, that call not ye common or unclean. We hope ye will tremble to be
found perverters of the right ways of the Lord. Call not light darkness, no
more than darkness light. Is not as well he that condemns the just, as he
that justifies the wicked, an abomination to the Lord? Prove. 17.15.

And suppose all that is said, do not meet with, nor fully clear every scruple
(it being hard to satisfy where prejudice is great; and a quibling wit may
start more Objections than we have heard of, or has leisure to speak unto), yet
conceive by what is said (though weakly), more charitable thoughts of your
Brethren, and of what they have done; and let them not stand condemned with you
under so gross a character as hitherto; Romans 14.3, 4. 1 Cor. 10.30. But unite
in the Lord, notwithstanding your Differences, the Grounds thereof being so
inconsiderable as has been seen.

We doubt not but themselves could, and would, give you a more convincing
vindication, were not their aversation even from seeming to contend, and their
hopes that their Integrity will defend it self, makes them loath to enter the
lists. However our ardent desire to beget a good understanding between you, has
thus far carried us forth unto, not an Eristick debate, but a serious
disquisition for discovery and removal of mistakes.

To return then to our proposed course of Advices.

Advice 6. In the sixth place, let us lay this before you, That however your
judgment stand in the matter contraverted (for we are to impose upon no bodies
judgment, but to leave every one to their own light), yet ye who are against
the Indulgence, as accepted, and fomenters of the Division, consider, though ye
be but few, yet the stir ye make is great, and one man will easily raise more
fire than twenty will be able to extinguish. Therefore be exhorted in the fear
of God to carry the difference more soberly. Are your Brethren willing to let
you enjoy your judgments, and serve your light in your own practice? and to
live in peace with you, notwithstanding the difference? And as to things
wherein ye and they are agreed to join with you therein, till God in his time
clear up the mistake that is betwixt you, and show upon whose side it is? and
will not ye be content, unless ye impose your apprehensions upon them, and have
them conform unto, and lackey after your opinion and practice? must your
judgment be the Standard and Canon to every bodies else? and all be
Anathematized that differ in the least from you? Can there be no peace with
you, unless ye have leave to trail them at your heels? will ye agree with none
that are not of your mind in every thing? then Actum est de pace, peace is gone
for ever on this side of time; for, Non datur intellectus Averroisticus, men's
minds to jump to an Ace in all things is hardly to be expected. While we know
only in part, will there not be perpetually different measures of light? and
diversity of Apprehensions in many things? Theology having its own Problems,
even in greater points than this, which calls for sobriety and mutual
Tolerance.

As we are not for Skepticism, nor sinful Syncretisms; so we tremble at the
vanity of Dogmatizing in things of this nature. But whatever ye deem it, Treat
not your Brethren undiscreetly. Speak or write to them, rather than of them.
Argue the case with them, convince them if ye can, Luke 19.17. But usurp not a
Magistery over them; presume not to be Dictators to them more, than ye would
take it well they should impose on you, Jam. 3.1. Remember they must serve
their own Consciences, and be guided by their own light, and not yours, Romans
14.12. Ye think them wrong, so do they, no doubt, you: But how would ye take
it, if they served you as ye do them, with outrageous out-crys, virulent
Epistles, and Philippick Declamations? What if they did Preach against you,
your Divisive Principles, and unbrotherly practices, as Erroneous and
Donatistical (if not worse), as ye call theirs Erastian? What a pitiful taking
would ye and they be in by such Contradictions and Invectives? Do therefore no
otherwise than ye would be done unto, Mat. 7.12. Think ye are but men fallible,
and may be mistaken in not a few of your confident notions; and that it is
possible they may have as much of the mind of Christ as you. Therefore
reverence their Judgments, so far at least as not lightly to trample upon the
same: Or, if ye were sure they were in the wrong, yet think, surely they mind
honestly (as they judge ye do) and have not wickedly departed from the Lord,
Psalm. 18.21. If they be stepped aside, it is but for want of light, which ye (who
think ye see more) should pity and bemoan to God, and labor to discover their
mistake unto them, (for as yet ye cannot charge them with contumacy, sufficient
conviction never being yet held forth unto them.)

But, O! reproach them not; rate them not behind their backs; go not to Preach
them down, nor out of the hearts of honest people, much less to Preach their
own people from them! What service were that to Christ, or his Kingdom? or what
edification unto people? Sure ye do more hurt than ye are aware of by this
course, staggering and unsetling people, weakening your honest Brethrens hands
in the Gospel, and marring the success of their labors what ye can. See Jam.
3.16. Gal. 5.14, 15. But what? are not ye and they agreed in chiefest
Principles and Theses? What Is your difference then but about the application of
Principles to some Hyp^theses or particular cases and practices? The Intricacy
whereof, with the sense of your short-sightedness, may teach you to think,
speak, and act more soberly, and with all due respect to them that differ from
you.

O fall not into a stated Schism upon so small and disputable a matter! nor
lift up your selves in conceit above your fellows! Are ye Preachers of Christ?
so are they: Have ye the seal of your labors, so have they; and that they have
not more, is perhaps through your fault, your contending with them, thereby
confounding and distracting their people; and taking them off their souls ease,
by your perplexing controversies and exceptions against their Ministers. And if
ye continue by this contending, to discourage your Brethren, and enervate the
work of God in their hands, fear lest ye be found guilty of destroying so much
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and countable for the blood of these souls
whose edification ye mar, by abusing and amusing them with your bartering at
their Ministers, and bringing them and their Preaching into disesteem, so far
as ye can, as Zach. 13.7. Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.
And what have ye gained when this is done? What advantage is it to the Gospel,
to break so many faithful men's Ministry? And what peace will it yield you when
accomplished? Bella geri placuit, nullos habitura triumphos. It were but a
Cadmean victory. What! may still the old question be put unto you, Does your
piety aed zeal lie all in Negatives? (as theirs in Col. 2.21.) Are ye only
skilful to destroy? and bold to treat the friends of Christ like foes? Preach
the Gospel, and propagate real Godliness as much as ye can: but O! beware of
hurting the Lords work and vineyard in your Brethrens hands! Will it not be but
a poor vassalage to preach down you^ Brethren, while ye should preach up
Christ? and to propagate your private opinions more than the power of Piety? or
to draw Disciples after you more than after Christ? Were it not better make one
real Christian, then proselyte twenty to your side and party? Ye complain of
your Brethrens want of success, as Peninnah upbraided Hannah with her
barrenness; but do not ye much mar their fruitfulness? O be tender of them, for
the Gospel's sake! Go, we pray you, convert the profane to Piety, rather than
preach Professors into faction and parties. Mind the great interest of the
Gospel more than your particular debates, or personal interests. Away with
selfish designs under a spiritual mask! Beware of giving ground for that old
complaint, Faciunt causam suam, causam publicam. Let not not your excellent
parts, fervor, zeal and spitits, be spent upon so unprofitable a task, as this
of jangling, plunging, and confounding is. And tempt not people to any unhappy
courses, which your selves may repent of in the end, and come off with that
inconsiderate Warriors word in your mouth, Non putarum -- It is easy to
kindle a fire, but not so easy to set bounds unto it, when and where ye list,
saying, Hitherto shall thou come, but no further. Nay, once kindled, it may
rage whither soever the winds and aptness of the matter to take with it, may
carry it, till all be burned down to ashes. -- And finally, let not your
Brethren have cause to take up that sad regrate of the Psalmists, Psalm. 55.12,
13, 14. Had it been an enemy, etc. How bitter is this? Were it Rampant
Romanists, or Inimical Prelatists, or foul mouthed Sectaries, who thus battered
at honest Ministers, it were more tolerable? But to see Brethren at such odds,
tearing the flesh (as it were) off the bones of their Brethren, by bitter
railings and reproaches, (which are as drawn swords, Psalm. 57.4.) how
incongruous and unkindly is that? and may not the world wonder at it? What!
shall all your edg and sting be turned against them, no less upright than your
selves? Shall they have no such Adversaries as you whom they love and desire to
be at peace with? and with whom they agree in all things (almost) else? Will ye
do the Prelates work for them, in breaking that little liberty which at first
they trembled at, till they saw you made it a bone of contention? and so more
likely to break your selves and it both than to hurt them, while ye stumble so
upon it. What thanks will ye get for joining issues with them? See Obad. v. 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. And will ye so positively condemn your Brethren unheard, ( Joh.
7.51.) and persecute them as Apostates, before ever ye wair an admonition on
them? It is our admiration and astonishment, that some of you (as is informed)
takes the confidence to baffle them in Sermons, Letters, and private Discourses
to the people and others; and yet to this day never used the brotherliness to
write or speak unto themselves, what might have sufficed to convince them of
their error, if any be. The grossest of Heretics are not allowed by the rules
of the word to be so hardly dealt with, Tit. 3.10. Pronounce no Anathema upon
them, till ye first take pains sufficient to reclaim them, and find them
obstinate. Shall ye be sharper scourges in their sides, and thorns in their
eyes, than any others? Do ye like it, to put them to cry to God against you,
and (like Job) to complain of their friends mockage, injustice, and cruel
usage? Shall not God visit for these things? Zeph. 2.8. Obad. v. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. Beware of inventing, or venting Stories and Reproaches of such friends
of Christ! And make not calumnies the strongest Arguments you plead against
them with. Monopolize not the reputation of honesty to your selves; give your
Brethren charity, and treat them not disrespectively. To stigmatize your
Brethren with black Characters, and odious Imputations, consider again and
again what spirit it comes from, Jam. 3.9, 10, 11, 12.

Upon all these Grounds, and many more which might be added, be entreated (in
the bowels of Christ) to remit and relent of your Acrid fervor, and bring your
dispositions and differences to some temper, and manage your discord with more
sobriety. We think we may say, the two part of your differences lies more in
the Acrimony of your spirits and alienation of affection, than in the distance
of your Principles. Would ye let go the misunderstanding and prejudices that
are between you, and God heal your dispositions and distempers, the two part of
your Disease were away.

Advice 7. Ye who are Indulged, a word next to you: O bear with your Brethrens
differing from you; and judge charitably of them, as to the most part at least.
Construct it want of light, not sinistrousness of intention or affection. He
that keeps a day, keeps it to the Lord; and he that keeps it not to the
Lord, he keeps it not. In Problematick questions not defined by the Church,
allow others a latitude, and continue your brotherly forbearance. If even with
Infidels and Heretics the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle,
etc. (as 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.) how much less with sick and feverish Brethren? If
any man's inconsiderate and opinionative zeal carry them unto any unbrotherly
word or deed toward you, be not ye overcome of their evil, but overcome their
evil with your good. Pack up their Reproachings, and say, Father, forgive them,
they know not what they are doing. Let not their vexing you fret you into a
wearying of your work, ( Psalm. 55.6, 7, 8.) nor unto any disaffection or
lessening of your respect unto them. Love them as Brethren, notwithstanding all
injuries (as Joseph did his), and honor their zeal in the Lord, and pray he
may channel it right, and set its bounds; for so it might do him excellent
service.

Tolerate also good peoples Infirmities; let none of their capricious humors
(which these reeling times tempts them unto) diminish your tender care of them.
Seek that which strayeth, heal the diseased, and by gentle dealing convince
them that ye walk in the Spirit of Jesus, whom ye serve.

Hard things (we confess) are cut out for you; but put on patience and holy
resolution, stand your ground notwithstanding all Batteries, and do your work
over the belly of all discouragements, ( Heb. 12.2, 3.) What though ye be the
Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, ( Rev. 11.3.) your Crown will be the
massier.

Serve the Lord through good report, and ill report, honor and dishonor; and
make full proof of your Ministry, which is thought so considerable by Satan,
else he would not oppugn and oppose it so, upon the right hand and the left.
You are the eyesore of the Prelates and their party, and the Butt of those
your Brethrens mistaken zeal. Be strong therefore in the Lord, etc. Our soul
pities you, being as the speckled Bird among the Birds of the field, laid at
upon all hands, and grinded as betwixt two Millstones, viz. the Prelatick
parties enmity upon the one hand, and the fierceness of these male-contented
friends upon the other, (and who may stand before envy? Prove. 27.4.) But learn
of your Master to endure Contradiction, and to be set for a sign to be spoken
against, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed, ( Luke 2.34, 35.)
Endure the Cross, and despise the shame. Wounds in the house of Friends as well
as of foes, must be born till he arise and plead your cause, and bring forth
your Righteousness as the light, etc. This is the day of your trial, and these
are the Instruments chosen of the Lord for that end; acquit your selves like
men, like Christians, like Ministers in it. Bear the indignation of the Lord
patiently, because perhaps ye have sinned. If Shimei rail, he may be a good
Monitor, though a bad Judge.

Take your vexations as so many whetstones, to keep you in an holy edg, that ye
blunt not in these up-sitting times, and as spurs in your sides, to prick you
up to diligence in duty; and so may you get meat out of the eater, etc. Stoop
to your lot, there may be a blessing in it, (2 Samuel 16.10, 11, 12.) But bitter
though your life and labor be, yet faint not, O faint not! but approve your
selves to God and man in your Masters service; and by piety, painfulness and
powerfulness in the Gospel, convince gainsayers, stop the mouths of those that
speak evil of you falsely, and Preach home again all the respect and affection
which these times of difference has derogated from you. What? have ye not the
seal of your Ministry (a witness of Gods approbation) upon the hearts of many?
even of some who perhaps are now alienated from you, who once spoke of a
blessedness in your Ministry, and received you as Angels, though now in the
hour of tentation, they are become as an enemy? Gal. 4.15, 16.

Though Conversion of Sinners be not so frequent (and yet some there is) yet
has not God been evidently with you for Confirmation and building up of the
Saints, and for Conviction upon all, who, whether they be better of you or not,
yet are forced to say, God is in you and with you, and a Prophet has been
among them? as Ezekiel. 2.4, 5. Now, may not these eminent Divine Assistances,
Successes, and Proofs of acceptance, abundantly compense all your tears,
sufferings, and sorrows? and answer the questioning of your being sent of God,
being proofs of Christ speaking in you? Consider, the privilege of your
liberty, and think, is not service to God and his people (which hereby ye get
done) well worth the enduring much contradiction, obloquy and heartbreaking
reproach?

Remember also your Brethrens sufferings are sad at other hands, though none at
yours; and let your sympathizing with them sweeten your own at their hands.

And Oh! be stirred up to make good use of your Liberty which costs you so
dear. Let your people find through Gods help, that it has been their mercy,
that ever ye were sent among them; or whether they hear or forbear, that there
has been a Prophet among them. Keep in good terms with your Master, stand in
his counsel, know the Times, and tell what of the Night, and what Israel ought
to do; be faithful in all his house as servants; and good Stewards of the
Mysteries of God.

Bear burden with your Brethren in their tedious sufferings constantly. And
pray for a blessing upon their Preaching of the Gospel, albeit some of them
would ruin yours: And whosoever of them may preach Christ out of contention, or
fast for strife and debate, supposing to add affliction to your griefs, and to
detract from your esteem, yet rejoice ye that Christ is Preached, and that
sincerely by the most, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18.

Eighthly, Both of you, Take heed ye bring not your differences any more unto
public, nor otherwise put them among the people: Keep them amongst your
selves, where they may abide with less hurt, Romans 14.1, 22. Considering the
mischiefs of evulgating them, it will evidently appear happy to bury them in
silence or oblivion. If ye interess and engage the people therein, then are ye
gone; and beside other inconvenients thereof, ye shall not get leave to unite
again without their consent, which may be hard to gain. How long shall any
affect popularity, and thereby subject their Ministerial Authority to the
humors of men and women, for drawing them to their side, to strengthen their
party? by which means people are taught to domineer over Ministers, and may
fore-run you, and cast at your selves next, when ye begin to sit up and not go
along with all their notions and inclinations. Ye may perhaps find no small
difficulty to regulate and bridle their humors, being once aloft, Fortur equis
auriga, non audit currus habenas.

Moreover, what do ye by filling peoples heads with such intangling
controversies, but divert their minds, and take them off the main thing? and
turn Religion into factions and debates? and wear them out of heart-tenderness,
real exercise of Conscience, and the serious study of universal Holiness? If
any make it their work to kindle in Religious Hearers, a factious, opinionative
zeal, you may thereby trouble their heads, not better their hearts; and may
sooner make them firebrarnds to burn down the peace, purity, and order of the
Church, than living polished stones for the New Jerusalem. Yea, likely you may
unhinge them so, as to tempt them to cast at all Ministers, at all Religion,
and turn either Atheists, or Seekers, and Sectarians, as woeful experience has
many times proved, even in our own days; so small a friend to the promoting of
piety, is division.

Avoid then carefully to discover your intestine jars and animosities before
the people in public or private. Bear not your nakedness to their eyes. --
Teach them not to meddle with things above their sphere, and beyond their line,
( Psalm. 131.1, 2.) and turn them not aside unto vain janglings, Tit. 3.9. 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. 1 Timothy 1.6, 7. and 4.7. and 6.4, 5. Make it rather your work to
edify them in the Substantials of Religion, and Vitals of Piety, such as
Faith, and Repentance, Humility, Sobriety, Mortification, Self-denial, Love and
new Obedience, etc. How much better were it to fire their hearts with the love
of God and man, than to heat their heads with puzling debates, which do but
perplex, not edify, and are far out of the way of their Salvation or Duty, and
does not at all concern their practice. What profit reap they by being
inveigled into such quicksands? we have seen many unfleeced of their wool, yea
torn in their flesh, by being involved in such thorns, but never any advantaged?

Ninthly, Study Moderation in all things: Let not Christian prudence pass with
you for wisdom of the flesh, nor Christian Moderation for Laodicean
lukewarmness. Let your moderation be known to all men; let it be visible and
apparent, both in your passions, opinions, and discourses.

1 st. Moderate your Affections, let not wildfire take the place of zeal, nor
zeal turn passionate, pickish, peevish and bitter. What is (...), but (...)?
Nor does the wrath of man work the Righteousness of God.

2 ly. Be moderate in your Opinions: This Moral Idol of the mind ( Opinion) is
too apt to be adored, and oversway. Put a temper to it, and hang a Balance
upon it, to keep it in poise and course; for true is that in common experience,
though a fallacy indeed, that Opinio est veritate major. And for Moderation in
Opinion, study well,

(1) Your Fallibility and aptness to mistake, and consequently to dwell in a
constant self-jealousie and suspicion. We like not to allow of fluctuating and
Pyrronian doubting about necessary and vital points, nor to hang all opinions
either (like Mahomets Tomb between the two Loadstones) in an aequilibrio. Yet
too much confidence in matters of mere opinion is often a vanity, refuted
sufficiently by the new discoveries time and industry produces, compelling us
to alter. But what one thing does contribute more to beget and continue
ruptures, than conceit and Idolizing of self-wisdom, and self-opinion, with an
undervaluing of all that differ from us, while yet (perhaps) they may hit
nearer the mark of truth than we, and have better advantages to discover it
than we?

(2) Study self-reflection, to consider how often ye have found in time your
(once confident) opinions to have failed you, that you have been necessitate to
change and take up new Measures. And this will help you to much moderation,
experience being the Schoolmaster of very fools.

(3) Be moderate in your Di^cours^s; how are some's tongues dipped in gall, and
set on fire of Hell! and instead of edifying Communication that may minister
grace to the hearers, little other than rigid censuring, and bitter backbiting
of one another! O when shall our tongue be our glory, not our shame! but to
bridle the intemperancy of the tongue, study to speak nothing but what God may
hear, and as in his hearing; speak of others as of your selves; and this will
make you speak sparingly, charitably, and with due moderation. And were tongues
once well governed, and that unruly evil tamed, no doubt but differences would
soon diminish. Let your moderation then in all things be known to all men, the
Lord is at hand. Moderaion in our way, is like the symmetry in the humors of
the body, which keeps all in health and happiness.

Tenthly, Seeing ye are generally reputed the best of Ministers, let both of
you prove your selves to be such indeed, by shining in the exercise of real
goodness, and of a lively Ministry, as ye have access to it. Let not the world
be mistaken of you. They judge you pious, painful, sober, grave, learned,
judicious, and truly zealous for God, making his Statutes (not humor nor
interest) the men of your counsel, and rule of your actings. They take you for
excellent heart-warming Preachers, etc. O deceive not their good opinion and
expectation of you. Let them have a proof that ye may be ill wanted from the
work of the Lord, and that it is no small loss to the Church for you to be laid
by, and creep into corners.

Take not mere Nonconformity for Religion enough, nor honest-heartedness for a
ground to justify miscarriages, or to excuse weaknesses, much less for
Canonizing all your practices and opinions as Sacred, as if ye were infallible
because honest. It is believed there are not so many able and godly Ministers
and Christians in any party, proportionally to your number. Yet if any of you
be found weak, raw, unstudied Divines, will it not reflect upon all, and
blemish the party? Be not satisfied then with the applause of those that follow
you, who may in their charity commend you, while others, impartial or inimical,
may observe censurable weaknesses. O study hard, read and pray much, that you
may be found Champions for God, and accomplished Divines, 1 Timothy 4.15, 16. O
that some of your Novices, Itinerants especially, would take more pains in
study, that they might be well furnished Scribes, etc. and not be rash, to
bring forth crude, undigested Preachings or Resolutions of Cases of Conscience.
It grieveth souls to get (at any time) empty, unedifying Harrangues of Railing
or Reflections, instead of soul-feeding Sermons or Discourses. Beware of a Ga'd
of venting your passions, rancour, bitterness, under pretext of Preaching
against the sins of the time. Subtle are the tentations of Sin and Satan!

Eleventhly, Exercise your selves unto stedf^stness, and repentance: Be men of
Principles, and understand your Principles, and stand to them, Rev. 3.3. Quit
not easily good old Principles for any plausible new ones. Hold fast by the
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government of the Church of Scotland, to
which ye are so solemnly and strictly tied. And let not new interests start new
Principles, nor put you out of the good old way. Take the Law and the Testimony
for your only supreme Judge of Controversies, Rule of Faith, and Directory of
Duty. Cleave to the Lord with full purpose of heart; and be not soon shaken in
your minds with any blast of tentation, nor bewitched with any Novelty, ( Gal.
3.1, etc.) Keep your Garments clean in all Revolutions; and change not Articles
of your Creed and Duty, with change of times, as most of Conformists do.
Ecebolius's (or Weather-cocks) are hateful to the Lord, Jer. 2.11. It becomes
honest men to be no time-servers, or fickle Changelings, 1 Cor. 16.13. and
15.58. Col. 1.22, 23. 2.5, 6, 7. Add to this fixedness, the exercise of
Repentance. Be sharp upon your own, even severer against your own faults, than
against any others. Witness against the public ills of the time, as ye have
access in your station; but neglect not your own iniquities, for which God is
contending so hotly. For what cause is his Controversy pleaded so long against
you, but for the provocations of Sons and Daughters, and the iniquities of your
holy things? Is there no accursed thing among you, which makes you fall before
the Adversary? Blame no^ one another, but rather each suspect himself, saying,
Is it I? Is it I? Every one of you, no doubt, has laid to your coal to make up
this great indignation. Therefore let every one be mourning as the Doves of the
Valleys, each one for his own iniquity (persons and families apart) as well as
keeping public Fasts for the Abominations of the Land. What a Token for good
would this be? and would put you in case to sigh and cry, and wrestle with God
for the Nations sins. And were ye thus lying in the dust before the Lord for
your selves and Zion, and running with your Censer in your hand, between the
living and the dead, for Atonement, crying, Spare, O Lord, etc. we doubt not
but your heats and animosities among your selves would soon cool and calm.

Twelfthly, Guide wisely and tenderly honest people, yet so as still to keep
your own place; to be their Guides, and not let them guide you. Cherish their
good, bear with their infirmities; but humor them not in their conceits and
follies. Let never Popularity be your snare. Spare not to admonish and rebuke
with discretion and authority, when need is. Take pains as well to inform their
Consciences rightly, as to raise their affections keenly. Study prudently to
cross and cure what may be healed, and patiently to endure what cannot be
cured. But clap no persons heads in their mistakes, or irregularities, for fear
ye lose them if ye cross them; else ye may be made to lose them upon a worse
account, with an ill conscience to boot. Despise not the counsel or admonition
of any, Job 31.13.) Yet if you permit them to turn Dictators and Leaders to
you, your well-days and peace are gone, ( Prove. 29.21.) Luther said, there is a
Pope in every man's belly; ye may find a Bishop in every man and woman's breast;
each inclines to think themselves infallible, and would be a Lawgiver unto
others, and cannot endure others not to conform to their mind in every thing:
Which usurping disposition in people would be checked. Be sure if once ye give
up your selves to serve humors, as it will put you out of Service to God, Gal.
1.10. so will your servitude be a sort of Egyptian bondage; and if ye sing not
to every tune of theirs, the upshot will be as bad, as if ye had never
gratified them at all. O be tender of their Consciences, and wisely regulate
their humors, not by servile compliance, but by happy conviction, or canny
diversion. Austerity and fondness are (almost) equally dangerous. And that ye
may manage them rightly, not only seek Gods good guiding, but also be denied to
their applause, and dead to their censure. The sober and wise will approve you,
when perhaps the peevish or proud kick at you. But it is enough if wisdom be
justified of her children.

Thirteenthly, Live daily in the prospect of further sufferings, and therefore
unite so far as ye can; lest the enemy finding you in a divided, distracted
condition, prey easily upon you. Doubtless your trial is not at an end. The
furnace is heating sevenfold more. Think not at every respite the bitterness of
death is over, and the worst is past; and so begin to pluck up your Crist, and
wax wanton and secure; if ye do, it says a new storm is near, 1 These. 5.3.
Psalm. 30.6, 7. The Prelatick violence is indeed sad enough; but what in
comparison of the Papistick, which is at your door? And is dividing, biting,
and devouring one another, fit providing for such a storm? Were it not more
your wisdom and happiness to be hearkening to the Apostles Rule, Phil. 3.15,
16. to be composing rather than heightening differences; and wherein ye agree,
uniting, and forbearing one another in points of difference, till the Lord
decide the Controversy? otherwise the enemy may perhaps decide it with the
broad sword. Will ye be like Archimedes, who while he was busy at his
Mathematical Lines, the Enemy entered the Town, and killed him at his Skeams?
Or like the Zealots in Jerusalem, who while they wasted one another within the
Walls, Vespasian and his Army are ready without to invade and destroy both?
Shall it be that Dum aguntur parts, perit Saguntum? How weak are ye, and a
ready prey to every beast of the field that pleases to devour, while thus
disjointed and separate! Vis unita, fortior. If ever ye mind to stand
effectually to the maintenance of the Gospel, unite in time, it will be too
late when the Papist is got upon your back.

Fourteenthly, Notwithstanding the severity of those in Authority, unto you, be
not ye tempted to slight duty unto them. Let not their commanding unlawful
things diminish your readiness of obedience in things lawful. Remember they are
the Ordinance of God, and reverence them accordingly, ( Romans 13.1, 2, 4.) Pray
for them, (1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4.) Else if ye cast them out of your prayers, God
may justly leave them to be a sadder scourge unto you; and ye may have little
peace of Conscience there-under, considering how little ye wrestle with God
upon their behalf, that he would guide them right. Ye might perhaps rule your
Kings heart, Counsels and Courses, were ye Nehemiah-like, or Ezra-like, high in
Court with God, and plying the Throne of Grace hard for him. Be admonished
withal not to speak evil of Dignities, ( Exodus 22.28. Act. 23.5.) Despise not
Dominions, ( Jud. v. 8.) However they miscarry, lament ye that to God, yet
speak not disrespectively of them. Bear all due reverence to them, for the
Lords sake, as the fifth Command obliges; and while they gall you, do not ye
fret your selves to any reciprocal exorbitancy. Let not sharp sufferings canker
and imbitter you. Learn to be subject and respective, not only to the good and
gentle, but to the bad and afflictive, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Obey none of their
unlawful commands, yet submit (not uncheerfully) molesting of you, bearing the
Cross patiently, meekly, contentedly, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And who
knows what mollifying influence upon the heart of Rulers, your meekness in
suffering might have? see Prove. 25.15. Eccles. 10.4. However, we are persuaded
in the Lord, your patient Christian bearing of hardest things, will adorn the
Gospel, and in end be victory to your cause, come of persons and particular
interests what will, see Revel. 12.11. Romans 8.36, 37. Often has the Church and
Truth of God conquered more by sufferings, than by actings. Sanguis Martyrum,
semen Ecclesiae. Crescit sub pondere virtus. But beyond many other things,
beware of wronging your Conscience and Cause by being tempted by your
sufferings to take up either ill Principles, or ill practices against the
Magistrate. Let none dare to think, as we hear some one or two begins to
mussitate, that the Magistrates miscarriages about the matters of Religion,
does forfault him of his right to govern, and so cadens titulo, is no more to
be owned as King. A principle which all sound Presbyterians abominate, as
witness your Confession of Faith, cap. 23.. 4. Sure none but Papizantes, or
Novaturientes, will own such unwarrantable Principles. O let no severities
bias your judgment unto error, nor tempt you to put forth your hand to
iniquity; if any unhappy one or other, by so doing, bring an odium upon an
honest cause and party, whose soul hates to espouse such things, they have
much to answer to God for. And no less injustice will it be for any to lay the
dotages of one or two bearing your name, to the charge of the whole. We
heartily wish in so far as may be without sin, (and farther we desire it not),
that Friends of Reformation (as you pretend highly to be) would instead of
irritating, stretch themselves to insinuate upon the Magistrate; and to set
what value they lawfully may upon any thing of favor from him. Whatever the
Rulers have done, or are, (for which ye are to beg repentance and remission,
and reformation to them), nevertheless they are the Ordinance of God to be
submitted unto, tendered and respected for Conscience Sake. And though we are
not to set limits to the Sovereign Grace, Wisdom and Power of God, who can
deliver his people and interests when and by what means he pleases; yet we are
sure ye are in the way of your duty, when ye look to God for deliverance by
their means, by the returning of Judgment to Righteousness; being sensible that
if he take not that method readily, he will plead both with Rulers and people,
which will rather increase spiritual Plagues than diminish them. And in order
to this, it is your duty and wisdom not to foster the Magistrates jealousy
that Christ's interests cannot rise but to their prejudice, which (it is feared)
has no small influence upon them; but rather by all your deportment, to
convince them, that they do well consist together, and that the promoting of
Christ's interest, and showing favor to the friends thereof, is the security
and stability of the Throne. Dear Brethren! we doubt not but all these counsels
are your study and care, yet pardon us to stir your pure minds, and let that of
2 Pet. 1.12, 13. be Apology for our presumption. And hoping God writes his
Laws in your hearts, and after the hour and power of darkness is over, will
recover you from your distempers, we shall therefore supercede to say any more,
a word to wise men being enough.

Only in the last place we would speak a word or two to you the good people,
who adhers to the Truth, and labors to keep your Garments clean of the public
pollutions. Verily, your resolution, courage, constancy, and zeal for God, your
affection to the purity and power of Ordinances, your respect to an honest
Ministry, etc. are most commendable; your adventuring to suffer hardest things,
rather than stain your integrity in the meanest point; your taking joyfully the
spoiling of your Goods, and tedious Imprisonments, exile from your Native land,
and other severities, and all for the sake of Christ; is no small document of
much good in you. Pity it were such a choice Generation of forward Christians
were not always rightly acted, or did in any thing stumble. Yet alas! who that
looks with an impartial eye, may not see several things to be lamented in you?
To meet with, and amend which, suffer us, dear friends, to propose a few
counsels unto you, in like manner. We hope ye shall not find them dissonant
from the mind of Christ, nor find cause to refuse to follow them, as causing to
err.

First of all, Let not all your Religion consist in public matters. Make sure
your personal interest in God; neglect not your own Vineyard, your own souls
case; and werr not out of Heart-exercise, and self-judging, etc. while ye are
so much taken up about the public; but let Personal Godliness be happily
joined with publick-mindedness; else your selves may be cast-aways, after ye
have done and suffered much for the name of Christ, 1 Cor. 9. ult. 1 Cor. 13.2,
3. Particularly, let never your public sufferings, or the Righteousness of
your Cause (as to man) hide from you your Personal failings and guiltinesses
before God. Neither pride your self in being strict and tender in public
matters, and mean time lax enough in your Personal Walk and Moral Duties. Will
ye not hear a Conformist? and yet make no conscience of lying, slandering your
Neighbor? etc. will ye run after Preaching? and yet make little conscience to
practice what ye hear? O place not the sum of your Religion in public things,
though true it be, they are much to be regarded. Beware also of spending your
time and spirits in debates, and vain janglings one with another, to be
tentations one to another, raising your own and others passions and
corruptions, instead of holy Conference that might minister Grace to the
Hearers. Mind well the Apostles Caveats in 1 Timothy 1.4, 5, 6, 7. and 5.13. and
6.3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.16, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Is it not observable, that the
greatest sticklers in differences, the greatest disputers and contenders are
usually the most distempered and barren hearted? like the mountains of Gilboa,
high and hot indeed, but dry and unfruitful; warm, but withered; the unkindly,
foolish, heat of division and debate, eating out the life, sap, and native heat
of real Religion, which evanisheth then into airy notions and litigious
strivings, whereof no edification comes. O let not Religion fly up from your
hearts to your heads, and evaporate into airy foams and forms, and turn vappid
and insipid. Be sure by Questions and Disputes, as well the power of Religion
is enervate, as the Majesty of it infringed. The many Disputes about Religion,
commonly overthrows the practice of it, which consists not in Discourses, but
in doing. It is easy for a Formal, moth-eaten Christian to hold up in the one,
while he cannot bear up in the other, as Seneca observed anent Moral Virtue,
Omnes disputare malunt, quam vivere, more prone are people to debate about the
things of God, than to practice what is uncontroverted. If Heaven could be
obtained, and God pleased with jangling and debates, a profane Sophister
should sooner have the one, and do the other, than a holy Christian, who knows
that it is not talking of, but walking in the ways of Gods Commandments, that
is most acceptable in his sight. But to say no more, listen to the Apostles
Oracle in 1 Cor. 11.16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God. Love perverse disputings who will, (which ever
corrupts the mind), flee ye them as death, 1 Timothy 6.5.

II. See, that while ye resist one evil, ye run not upon another; and that
fleeing one extremity, ye fall not upon another: Is it not preposterous to be
hot against Prelacy and Erastianism, (sad ills indeed!) and yet friendly enough
toward Schism, Error, and some other things repugnant to the Word of God, and
your Covenants, as well as these? Let your zeal be universal and impartial
against all evil, hating every false way; and while ye shun Scylla, dash not
upon Charybdis.

III. Meddle not with every Controversy that falls in among your worthy
Teachers. Many a Litigation may fall in among them, wherein ye are no further
concerned, than to sympathize and bewail. Mourn for contestings, but do not
interess your selves therein, to engage with them; nor dip in disputable
points; too nice and high for your heads, and nothing edifying for your hearts;
much less foment the differences by factious siding, tale-bearing, or otherways
begetting misunderstandings betwixt them, Prove. 26.20, 22. rather carry water
to quench the flame, than blow at the spark. He or She that intermedleth beyond
their Sphere, will find it a snare, Prove. 26.17* And they that sow discord, or
blow the Bellows, and stir up strife and alienation, will find it no blessed
employment, Prove. 6.14, 15, 16, 19. whereas to the Counselors of Peace is joy,
Matthew. 5.9.

IV. Usurp never to be Teachers of your Teachers, o^ Guides of Guides. Take
not, like Corah and his company, too much upon you, albeit ye are not to follow
any man blindly in matters of Religion, but humbly and seriously to examine all
things (like the noble Bereans) and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
yet your Teachers ye are to reverence and humbly learn from them, Heb. 13.7,
17. and have them so far in regard, as not rashly to oppone your judgment to
theirs, much less to dictate and prescribe unto them, and not let them have
your peace, unless they follow all your opinions. What intolerable Arrogance is
it, for weak heads of Men or Women (whom God has set to learn, not to teach) to
leave the place of Disciples, and presume unto the Chair, to teach and give
Laws unto their Governors and Guides? Has he not said, Mal. 2.7. The Priests
Lip^ shall preserve knowledge, and men should seek the Law at his mouth; for he
is the messenger of the Lord of hosts? But where has he said that Ministers
are to be tutored and led by the people? Is it not an high degree of pride, for
persons of your Station and understanding, to arrogate to your selves to be
wiser and judi(...)iouser than your best Ministers, who make it their(...)aily
work to read, meditate, and pray; to stand (...) the Lords Counsel, and learn
his Mind, and like Watchmen stand on their Watchtower to know what (...)f the
Night? With whom is this Urim and Thummim (...)ore than with his holy ones? If
ye find them fail in (...)ny thing, admonish them gravely and discreetly: Tell
Archippus your thoughts humbly and seriously, (...)et presume not to impose
your apprehensions on (...)m, nor to censure him shrewdly, if he do not
forth(...)ith become of your opinion; for ye are fallible, (...)nd may be in
the mistake. Brethren (says James, (...)ap. 3. v. 1.) be not many Masters. This
Spirit savours (...)tle of sober-mindedness or self acquaintance; suffer (...)
to tell you, that as for your sincerity, zeal, and (...)fectionateness, many of
you are your Teachers (...)y, and that it is not a little they have done and
suf(...)red for your sakes, and their Bowels yern to have (...)ore and more of
Christ formed in you; so for un(...)ilfulness in the word of Righteousness, for
being (...)ch Babes in knowledge, and inability to scan in(...)icacies and
discern between things that differ, not (...) few of you are their shame and
grief; and yet will (...)e be their Leaders? Ye know, it is the blindest who
(...)sually are the boldest and most confident, Prove. (...)4.16. Be not
therefore high-minded, but fear, and (...) self-jealous: The holy Ghosts rule
is, Be swift to (...)ar, slow to speak, slow to wrath, James 1. Think (...)ey
do but flatter you, who would puff you up with (...)lf-conceit, as if it were
people who keep Ministers (...)ght, and not Ministers the people, and would
teach (...)ou to usurp over your Leaders.

V. How much soever constant Adherers to the Truth ye should be, yet be not
therein turbulent and unruly; else that may be to your profession a bane, and
to your cause, as the dead Fly: Wherein ye differ from your Pastors, or from
one another, carry it humbly and soberly, with meekness of wisdom; and be not
seditious, untractable, or too peremptory. Shall your Ministers be put (like
Moses, Numb. 11. v. 10, 11, 14, 15.) to sigh over you, and groan under you, and
complain to God for your ticklishness, frowardness, and stiff-neckedness? And
that your reeling is like to undo all? Be not a snare and tentation to your
Ministers, but an encouragement and strengthening of their hands. Be neither too
facil, nor yet like the untamed Heifer; be neither coldrife, like Laodicea, nor
drive furiously like Jehu. Stupid dulnes(...) and unconcernedness (upon the one
hand) and frothy light farraudness and fraziness (upon the other) are both to
be shunned; and destroy not the true interest of the Gospel by either, while ye
pretend to b(...) the great pillars of its support.

VI. Take the Law and the Testimony for your alon(...) Oracle in all things,
Isa. 8.20. Set not up your own imaginations, nor yet take any man's bare
assertion(...) for the Supreme Judge of Controversies, or rule o(...) right, and
directory of your way. Listen to Ministers, and be not lightly suspicious of
their Judgment, but take nothing upon trust; but see with your own eyes, as
they Acts 17.11. well said, Ambrose, de fid(...) ad Gratian. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Noli argumento credas Imperator and nostrae disputationi: Scripturas
interrogemus* interrogemus Apostolos, interrogemus ipsum Christum* Prove all
things by the Word, and if any, were he an Angel from heaven, speak not
according thereunto, think there is no light in them.

Let nothing that wants a Scripture-warrant, pass current with you, nor condemn
nothing which the Oracles of God condemns not: Take never the visions of your
own heart, nor the dictates of them, for your Bible. Gods word alone, and not
Man's, (...), is the unerring Rule of Faith and Duty, Romans 3.4. Stick therefore
close by it in all things, without declining to the right hand or the left,
Deuteronomy. 5. ult. If any thing be brought unto, and pressed upon you, without a
real Thus says the Lord, receive it not, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 2. Tremble to give an ear
unto, or to be swayed by sophistical and unscriptural Reasonings about any
matter; hold fast by the sure word of Prophecy, and be safe, 2 Pet. 19.

If ye state your selves into parties, as the Corinthians did, how will ye
avoid being puffed up for one against another? And what one says, be taken as
an Oracle, and what another says, cried down according to Interest and
Affection? Cum res transit in affectum, perit judicium. Beware of a wrong Bias
upon your affection, for that will bias and bribe your judgment, and forbear
rash judgings and spurning at Ministers, 1 Cor. 4.5. Censure only what the
Scripture censureth, and approve only what it approves; else ye may soon take
Light for Darkness, etc.

VII. Cleave close to your Reformed Religion and covenanted Duties, against
defections on all hands. Consent never by word, write, or deed, to any thing
contrary thereunto, specially what is expressly and plainly renounced thereby:
Yet take heed of captious glosses, and sinistrous applications of your
Covenant: It may be wrested, as some do the Scriptures; always stick to its
true intent and native meaning* faithfully; and resolve to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, through thick and thin; and be rather arming your selves
for suffering, than contending in the very fire. A common Prison, or burning at
one Stake together, may perhaps be made to agree you (as it did Ridley and
Hooper) who would not in your liberty accord, and serve the Lord with one
consent, without a jar, as was your duty to have done.

VIII. Next to Fidelity toward God, study to adorn your Cause with Loyalty to
your King, in the Lord, Romans 13.1, 5. Prove. 24.21. 1 Pet. 2.13. Give unto God
the things which are Gods, and unto Caesar the things which are Cesars; that
hereby ye may stop the mouths of them that falsely speak evil of the
Presbyterian Interest and Party, as inimical to Kings Crowns, 1 Pet. 2.15. Did
he not in the Usurpers time find you the most faithful party to him of any? And
albeit ye be but ill Requat, yet discourage not to follow your duty for the
Lords sake. We are apt to believe, if any other party in the Nation had been so
crushed and harassed by his Power as ye, none would have born it better. Let
him still find that no discouragement will fret or tempt you from your duty,
and that for conscience sake, without by-ends; yea, bear due Allegiance to him,
so far as may stand with your Allegiance to the King of kings, and Lord of
lords. And who knows what a conviction this may produce in end? 1 Samuel 24.17,
18. testifying to him and all men, your Cause is of God, which leads you to be
so conscientious toward man; and that you are the only fast and faithful
friends to Authority, who will cleave to it in a stormy day, out of the fear of
God, when all its self-seeking friends will desert it, when their Interest
parts with it; and that it is not humor, but conscience, which keeps you off
from complying with his will in the matters of your God, wherein ye differ from
him.

IX. Spend more time in praying together about what is amiss in the Public,
than in empty talking about it, Jer. 50.4. Remember you have somewhat else ado,
than to be idle News-mongers. Go spread ay your sad matters before the Lord, as
good Nehemiah and Hezekiah did; Table all your complaints in Heaven. This would
be both a present ease to your mind, and the compendious way to a blessed
Remedy. How much sooner might ye get a good account of matters, if ye did put
them more in Gods hand, who has the Balm of Gilead for such sores? And it would
sweeten your spirits and carriage thereunder. Bleed with Zion in all her
bleedings. Do not laugh while she sighs; nor yet look idly on, and only talk;
but be her careful Remembrancers before the Throne; especially let the
divisions of Reuben breed great thoughts of heart. Let your Pastors differences
(which are your great judgment and skaith) be your sorrow, and lie heavy,
heavy, upon your spirits. They who bear them lightly, or rejoice in them, what
a deserted and distempered frame must they be in? But would ye oftener meet and
pray about these lamentable matters, who knows but ye might pray away your
Ministers differences, and cement your own hearts in greater Christian union,
by uniting and concentring in God? And might pray home the Ark out of
Captivity, and get the Lord to arise and build Zion as in the days of old!

X. Be not easily tempted to cast at your Ministers, of whose heart-honesty you
have had sufficient demonstration. If once Satan get you to begin a little to
spurn at them, he will not cease tempting, and Providence may justly let snares
be rained on you, occasions of stumbling be afforded you, till ye turn quite
off, and become wild. Notorious it is, that peoples idolizing, inamouredness
with some, and rooted prejudice at others, upon partialities and by-respects,
are both a cause, foment, and consequent of woeful divisions, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12.
and 3.3, 4. O esteem your Pastors highly in love for their works sake, and let
not every petty difference cast you and them out: Keep not distance with them,
but go and lovingly confer with them anent what ye and they differ in: And if
ye get not satisfaction, recommend the matter to God, but let Love and Peace
stand entire notwithstanding. What is Satan's great Engine, and consequently his
design for marring your good of Ministers; but by stating prejudices in your
minds at them? Shut your ears and hearts then to all charms that would suggest
ill thoughts of your honest Ministers, Receive not lightly ill reports of them,
spread perhaps industriously to make them odious, ( Jer. 20.10.) to alienate
you from them, as Gal. 4.15, 16. Be not then too credulous, try e're ye trust,
and admit no bad impressions of them, before ye have found that truly they
deserve.

To add no more, In the XI and last place, Carefully avoid the Sin of
Separation, as well as Conformity, so called. Is not Schism one of your abjured
ills, and contrary to the Word of God, as well as Prelacy? O run not upon the
one rock, while ye shun the other: Guard well against compliance with the
Prelacy, and all Erastianism too, (which ye see by what is said, your Ministers
are free of) but stand no less at distanee from dividing and separating, either
from Communion with your Ministers, or with the Congregations whereof ye are
stated Members. We hope we need not insist to convince you of the evil of
Schism, what a sinful, and what an hurtful ill it is! Nor when, and in what
cases it is that Separation is unlawful. Read precious Mr. Rhetorfoord his
Piece against the Separatists, entitled, Peaceable Plea, Chap. 10. Also the
eminently, godly, and Learned Mr. Durham, in his Commentary upon the
Revelation, Chapter 2. Page 172, 173. and his Treatise of Scandal, part 4. chap. 7
nor dare we think ye will contemn to peruse also some of the English
Presbyterian Writers upon Schism, who treat thereof judiciously, and with
tenderness; such as learned Cartwright, holy Hildersham, pious Mr. Bayn; but
namely Mr. Bradshaw his Book of the Unreasonableness of Separation; and Mr.
Ball his Trial of the Grounds tending to Separation: As also Mr. Hales Tractate
of Schism, Brinsley his Arraignment of Schism, and Mr. Baxter in his Christian
Directory, part 3. cap. 8. These and such others will inform you, in what cases
Separation is unlawful, how unwarrantable and weak many pleas for Separation
are, (and yet perhaps more plausible and stronger-like than yours) and what is
the lamentable mischief of it. Read them carefully, and ponder what of the mind
of Christ they hold forth, and see it no Presbyterian, but a Brownistical, and
Independent Principle, to be either for rigid or moderater Separation, where
Communion may be kept without either natural or moral Bars in the way, as there
are none such in your case. Referring you therefore to such Writings, we shall
say the less, only this to the case in hand, that if any of you, through
instability or seduction, be tempted to separate from, and shake off, your
Indulged Ministers, so as merely upon account of their Indulged Liberty, you
shall refuse to hear them, or communicate in the Sacraments and other
Ordinances of God dispensed by them; specially if your separation be usual and
ordinary, total, and perhaps also out of contempt; and withal not only
Negative, statedly withdrawing your self from them, but also positive, erecting
altar contra altar, setting up in distinct and opposite societies by your
selves, tempting others also perhaps to desert them, and that both by word and
deed; we dare be bold to affirm before the Lord, and entreat you to believe it,
that it will be your grievous sin, your fearful judgment, and a woeful sign.

1. It will be your Sin, being a voluntary, groundless, unjust, rash
Separation; in regard you are not fugati, but fugitivi; not driven away by any
violent or sinful conditions of Communion imposed upon you, (as your Fathers
were when they separated from the Church of Rome) but run away of your own
accord, and that without any Relevant Cause, which may hold weight in the
Balance of the Sanctuary; for joining with them in Church Communion, is
neither upon sinful terms (there being none at all required of you) neither of
it self does it involve you in any sin, their Ministry being lawful, valid, and
without stain (as has been before evinced.) What spot, we pray you, can you
prove to be in their Office, or its exercise, which may prove it unclean to
you, or justify your withdrawing and casting at them? The usual Alledgances
are confuted and wiped off before, and we take no pleasure eandem cramben
saepius recoquere and rep^nere, as some of yours, ad nauseam usque, do.
Consider what is said to the nine Objections, and ye'll find the most material
exceptions taken off, and both their office, their investiture with it, and
their access to the exercise of it, justified and fairly acquit from all
Homologation of Erastianism, or the sinful Supremacy, etc. But beside, suppose
there were some petty Defects or Irregularities in their entry to the exercise
of their Ministry (which yet appears not from any reasons which hitherto we
have seen) yet ye should know, it is not every lighter fault of that nature,
which will warrant Separation; but only such attrocious crimes as either
destroys the Essence of the Ministry, and makes it null and void (as your
Reverend Mr. Brown teaches in the Preface to his Book against Wolrogen, and
excellent Mr. Bowels in his Pastor Evangelicus, lib. 1. cap. 4.) for recte
fieri is one thing, and ratum esse is another, and multa impediunt Matrimonium
contrahendum, quae non dirimunt contractum;) or else does so vitiate their
Ministry, as people cannot join therewith in its Ministerial acts without real
and native participating in the sin, in Gods account, and in the construction
of his holy Law: Otherwise if there be any pollution adherent to their
Ministry, which neither evacuates the essence thereof, nor so intrinsecally
leprosieth it, but ye may communicate in its Acts abstractly from and without
touching the spot; the sin rests on the Men themselves, and ye are not
concerned therein farther than to lament it, but not to be skared and debarred
by it from joining in their Ministerial Administrations, they being to you
clean, whatever they be to the men themselves.

Now plain and sure it is, neither of these evils has place in the case in
hand; nor can ye instruct the contrary. Your bare alledgance or apprehension of
Homologation, accession, etc. will not serve the turn here. Therefore since ye
may communicate with them without sin, it will be sin in you to separate. O
shake not off these lightsome Guides whom God has set up and over you, by the
warrantable Instrumentality or means of men. Leave it to the adversary to cast
down these blessed stars; let the Philistines stop those Wells God has opened
for you; but make not ye it your work. Forsake not lightly the Shepherds Tents,
lest ye meet with the Wolf in your wandering. If these Ministers should
causelessly, or for trivial or tolerable faults, Excommunicate you, would ye not
judge it their sin? and can ye be innocent, when as groundlesly, or for
frivolous reasons ye cast them off, and in a sort depose them?

(2) It will be as well your heavy judgment, as your sin. What a plague is it
to be thus alienated from feeding besides the Shepherds Tents, or to refuse to
go forth by the footsteps of the Flocks (as Christ directs) to feed in the
Pastures where he feeds and makes his flocks rest at noon, Cant. 1.7, 8? will
ye not then be scorched, wax lean and wither? and be in hazard to turn aside by
the flocks of the Companions? Do ye not then put your selves out from under his
leading and feeding hand? and tempt the Lord to refuse to feed you (except it
be with wormwood), yea to break his staff of Beauty, seeing ye break the staff
of Bands, Zach. 11.7, 8, 9, with 10. Certainly, God is the God of order, not of
confusion; of peace, not of jarring: He dwells not in Babel, but in Salem.
Besides, is not Schism and Separation readily the fruit of other sins, such as
pride, (Isa. 65.5.) formality, wantonness, waywardness, etc. and can that be
but a plaguey fruit that grows off so bitter a root? Moreover, does it not (as
it were) divide Christ and his Heritage into pieces? afflicts his Church and
Servants? yea, and tends to destroy Religion and his Kingdom? and demolish
them into a ruinous heap? And to say no more, where ever this bitter root of
rigid Separation does spring up, does it not defile many? specially in leading
unto error, if not profanity? for as of old it was observed, Omne schisma
desinit in haeresin: so Ames. cas. consc. de Shism. So also Jerome. Comment. on
Tit. says, Every Schism leads to error, to patrocinate its separation. In a
word, it is a mother-evil, an inlet to an ocean of other evils.

(3) It will be an evil sign, both Diagnostick and Prognostic; will it not
argue you to be much deserted of God, and left to your selves? and evidence
much simplicity and weakness, if not instability and giddiness, and spiritual
distemper, Jud. v. 18, 19. Moreover, what a black Omen will it be of Gods
forsaking the Land, and being about to give a Bill of Divorce to your Church?
is it not as well a fatal-like as an unkindly thing, to see the sheep kicking
at, pushing away, or running from their Shepherds? Certainly it is one of the
blackest Clouds hangs over you, of malignat influence for the present, and
(unless it be removed) of dangerous consequence for the future, Mal. 4. ult.

Upon all which, and the like Considerations, we would obtest, yea charge you
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by your appearing before him to
beware of Schismatizing, 1 Cor. 1.10. and 12.25. Heb. 10.25.

And as ye would hold off splitting on this Rock, we make bold to present you
with, and to entreat you to observe these rules, besides what are mentioned in
the preceding Advices.

(1) Take heed of lesser differences: Small Wedges make way for great ones;
petty differences (slighted) grow up to stated Divisions, and Divisions to
Schism and Separation. Therefore (as much as in you lies) be precise to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and crush the Cockatrice in the
Egg, lest a little leaven neglected, leaven at length the whole lump.

(2) Affect not, be not too much taken with novelties and new guises in
Religion. Itch not after Singularities, nor be dazzled with the busked beauty of
niceties. Truth and Piety is lovely in every dress, no less in her old coat
than a new. Nothing more leads to separation than new fangleness.

(3) Be tender either of giving, or taking offense. Be not easily stumbled,
Mat. 18.7. Study Charity, and be apt to construct doubtful matters in your
Ministers, into the best part.

(4) Labor to see God in and with them. And if God be with them, Christ
speaking in them, how will ye dare to spurn at them, and kick them off? If ever
ye heard them ordinarily, can ye deny but ye have seen it evident, that God was
in them, and with them? How often has some of you spoken of a blessedness in
their Ministry, before ye were put upon your dividing notions, and took up
prejudices at them? Have ye not found a Divine presence and assistance with
them, which made you cry in your hearts, as Joh. 1.29. Come see a man that has
told me all things, etc. And thereupon been made to honor them in your hearts,
and say as 1 Cor. 14.24. Of a truth God is in them? Have you not often been made
to say, the Indulged Ministers Preached best to souls cases, though ye said the
Field-Preachers spoke best to the Times? Now, how unchristian is it to depart
from their Ministry, with which Christ continues yet his presence? Have you any
warrant to leave them before Christ leave them? Will ye be stricter and holier
than he? Will ye cast off whom the Lord casts not off? When Jacob found God in
Bethel, he set up his Pillar there.

(5) Beware of having the persons of men in admiration, either for gifts or
grace, or because of advantage, Jud. v. 16. This was it which occasioned the
Schisms in the Church of Corinth, admiring their Teachers, they were puffed up
for one against another, and one said, I am of Paul, another, I of Apollo,
others, I of Cephas, etc. even according as their humor and liking led them?
take heed of being taken in the same snare. All flesh is grass, none
infallible, and therefore none to be doted upon. Ne judicemus ex personis
fidem, sed ex fide personas, said Tertullian. Let not your eyes be so dazzled
with whatever eminency of Parts or Graces ye apprehend to be in any, as to set
up their bare word for your Oracle, or their example for your rule. This was it
which drew many of the Jews (and Barnabas among the rest) into a sinful
Separation, ( Gal. 2.12, 13.) because they saw Peter a leading man, a prime and
eminent Apostle, going that way before them. And yet that Pillar of the Church
did therein halt, and walked not with a straight foot, and was to be blamed;
and consequently to be not imitated, but shunned. It is dangerous to shape our
course by another compass; as many a Ship has been lost and run on Banks by
following their Admirals Lanthorn. Give eminent and godly men their due
respect, but put them not in Gods room. It is Divine Rule, not Humane Example,
we are to walk by. Follow no man further than he follows Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.

(6) Take heed of pretending to greater purity and strictness about
Church Communion, than the word of God commends, or the examples of Christ, of
the Apostles, and the Primitive Church commends. Nor be so extremely rigid as
not to bear with things they have tolerated. Be not over-righteous, lest by
over-straining ye both sin and do harm; yea, and plainly bewray it to be
faction or humor, not Conscience, which acts you. Calvin c^ntra
Anabaptistas, Act. 2. says, Cum sub specie studii perfectionis imperfectionem
nullam tolerare possumus, tunc Diabolum nos tume facere superbia, and hypocrisi
se ducere, moneamur. Suppose your Ministers were guilty (as they are not) of
most of things ye lay to their charge; Yet what an unparalleld, unheard of,
unexamplified Separation is yours from them as to any warrantable precedent?

(7) Make nothing necessary to the unity of the Church, or to the Communion of
Pastors and people, but what God has made necessary in his word, or directed
you to make. Put not every new opinion into your Creed, nor every new course be
added to the Decalogue; as if ye were to impose them upon, or require them of
others, as such substantial Articles of Faith, or necessary duties, that ye
must renounce all Religious fellowship with them who are not of that way, Act.
15.10. There is not a greater divider or separater than this tantizing or
screwing up of debateable points, wherein God has left us so much latitude, as
not to make either the one or the other part of the Controversy, a necessary
condition of Church Communion. O take no burden of strictness on you, that is
not of his imposing, Rev. 2.24, 25.

(8) Enslave not your selves to any person or party, so as to be over-desirous
to please them, or over-fearful of their censures. Is it not servile
man-pleasing, and cowardice to do so? and leads many to sinful compliance with
dividing courses? when therefore any fervent self-conceited person or people
would carry all down by their censoriousness and passions, it is high time for
Pastors, and the aged, graver, and maturer sort of Christians, openly to rebuke
them, to appear against them, and stand their ground (as Paul did, Gal. 2.11.)
and not to comply with the misguided sort (though well-meaning), and their
preposterous zeal, that by connivance or compliance ye may escape their
Censures and Reproaches. He that thus saves his name, shall lose it, and
perhaps on a worse account. Be not therefore cowed to silence or Amen to their
way, for fear of the scourge of Tongues. Be valiant for the Truth, and against
such ills; else fainting will feed their humor, and invite them to be more
insolent. Put on Authority and Gospel-austerity to check their petulancy and
untowardliness.

(9) As well should ye beware of real ills, so be not scarred from good by the
name of evil. What a trick has some of stigmatizing things with odious and
terrifying names, thereby to boggle simple and well-meaning people? If the
rattling and canting names of Erastianism, Supremacy, Homologate, etc. falsely
applied, serve to fright you from Indulged Ministers, your skittishness is to
be lamented. And it may be said of them as of old the Apologist said of
Christianity, in like manner branded and bogled at, Toll Nomen Criminis, and
nihil erit criminis, nisi Nomen.

(10) Beware of suffering prejudice or fancy to be to you for Reason or
Religion, or to raise in your minds unjustifiable distasters at your Pastors.
Separation is a thing not to be lightly ventured upon. And yet what are
oft-times peoples exceptions against union with, and pleas for dividing from
their Ministers, but light and frivolous, when weighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary? yea, suppose ye seem to have Scripture to plead, what if you be
mistaken of the sense or application, or wrest the same? Be not so arrogant as
to set up your apprehensions thereof for infallible Oracles. Humble, sober,
self-jealous folk, get usually most of the mind of God, Psalm. 25.9. Whereas the
confident are most readily in the mistake, Prove. 26.12, 16.

(11) Charge not upon your selves unwarrantedly other men's faults, but look to
your own ways and duties. Labor to understand distinctly what it may be on
your part, that may constitute you a partaker in the sins of your Ministers (if
any be), lest through ignorance hereof, ye be led to take improper courses, and
unlawful midv's for avoiding Communion with their (imagined) guilt, and so run
upon real guilt of your own in seeking to shun accession to theirs. Suppose
there be some faults in your Ministers personal actings, or in their way of
entry to their Ministry, or in their Ministerial Administrations (such as want
of due freedom against the evils of the time, etc.) yet know ye will hardly
find a ground in Scripture for it, that your simple hearing them, and not
shaking off their Ministry, does natively render you adopters of their sin. It
is not enough that you and others think so, unless the Lord construct it so,
and declare it so by the Rules of his word. Now search all the Rules of the
Word, wherein he declares how men communicate in others sins, and ye will find
none of them quadrate with this case. Are their (alleged) failings merely
Personal? such as neglect of duty to their Brethren, etc. These (ye know) does
not vitiate their Ministry, nor have ye any Communion therewith, in
communicating in their Ministry; for as your own Divines teach, personal faults
rest on the person, and does not pollute the Office. Or, are their faults some
lesser failing in the discharge of their Ministry? such as not being so free
and full in Preaching and witnessing against the sins of the time, etc. do not
these also sist upon themselves? and not render it unlawful for you to hear
them Preach the Gospel to good purpose? Is the Ministers defect the Hearers
sin? Or, is it not lawful to own the Minister who comes not up all the length
we would, in testifying against public corruptions, but thorough pusillanimity
faints, and falls short? What if you require more than is really expedient? or,
what Scripture requires you to separate from one of that deficiency? To his
own Master he stands or falls; you will not be holden answerable to God for
it, merely for your joining in the Ordinances dispensed by him, though with
that want, especially if ye admonish him of his short-coming, Col. 4.17. Do ye
not read how defective many of the Angels in the Churches of Asia were, in
fidelity against sins of the time? yet not a word from our Lord to People to
desert them therefore, Rev. 2, and 3 Chap. Or, are their (alleged) faults in
the way of their coming to the public, free exercise of their Ministry? such
as neglect of a testimony against the Erastian Usurpations of the time, which
some judge to involve them in a constructive compliance therewith, etc. Yet is
not that only their own personal guilt? but defiles not their Ministry to you.
Nor does your joining with their Ministry involve you in the guilt of their
(supposed) irregularities or Homologations committed in coming to the peaceable
exercise of it by the Indulgence. For your participating in the Acts of their
Ministry does not terminate upon, intermedle with, or natively imply a joining
with, or approving of these faults (which are altogether extrinsick and
accidental to their Ministry and its exercise, and rests upon their persons
alone), for ye hear and join with them simply as Ministers, and your Ministers
being called by you; but not as such and such Ministers reduplicatively under
such and such Formalities and Considerations as ye apprehend to be faulty in
them, (even as these who Mat. 23.2, 3. heard them that sat in Moses Chair, whom
all know to have entered with many Irregularities, nevertheless did not hear
them under such notions and respects, but simply as Moses Successors in the
Chair); and therefore your deed involveth you not in any accession unto, or
participation in their (pretended) sin; not inferring or importing (in Gods
construction, signified in the Rules of the Word) your consent unto, or
allowance and approbation of that their sin. It is no countenancing of them in
their (alleged) sin, but in their Ministry simply, which ye cannot deny to be
sound and lawful, abstractly considered from these supposed disorders or
defects in their coming by the free exercise thereof with you. Ye communicate
only with their function, in its substance (which is the Ordinance of Christ)
not in the naevi adnascentes, or sinful circumstances. And the more evident yet
is the needlesness of your separating in this case, if ye testify to them your
dissatisfaction with, and disowning of the (apprehended) transgressions in
their way of coming by the licensed exercise of their Ministry; which draws a
line of Separation between you and those ills; and consequently stateth you
guiltless, albeit still ye embrace the benefit of their Ministry in it self.
Neither is this, as ye say, protestatio facto contraria, the protestation and
deed being not ad idem, not relating to the same thing, and consequently does
not cross and destroy one another. Doubtless if bare hearing and joining with a
Ministry, having such Naevos, blemishes, adhering thereunto, does make the
people Homologaters of, and communicaters in these defilements, our blessed
Lord would never have insinuate (in Mat. 23.2, 3.) his approbation of partaking
in such a Ministry. If further ye scruple and think your hearing the Indulged
Ministers may harden them in their (deemed) sin, which to be accessory unto
thereby, ye judge would be your sin. We answer, does the spotless and holy Lords
making his Sun to shine, and rain to fall as well upon the unjust as the just,
tend to harden them? what more does your hearing tend (natively) to harden and
encourage those Ministers? We grant it may be abused thereunto (were they in a
course of sin as ye suppose) yet that is but accidental, not natural to your
deed, and therefore you are innocent; especially your deed being otherwise
necessary. Surely it makes you no more guilty of their hardening (in case they
harden themselves upon it) nor subjects loyalty and duty to their Prince (who
having a righteous title, yet has used some indirect means to attain
possession of the Crown and Government) does render them guilty of hardening
him in impenitency for these evil arts used for getting into the Throne. Ought
ye not to remember that whatever forbearance of matters of Liberty and
Indifferency (such as intimate personal unnecessary converse, or the like)
another man's abuse thereof calls you unto; yet necessary and weighty duties
(such as your keeping Church Communion is, Heb. 10.25.) may not, must not, be
omitted upon such a score, of an accidental emergency; for as evil is not to be
done that good may come of it; so, nor duty to be left undone, for avoiding
such an accidental abuse thereof; else it were in the power of others by their
stumbling upon, and abusing of our doing of duties, might vacate us from them
all, and so make all the Commandments of God of non-effect; yea, the Scripture
it self should be (on that reason) laid by, because many wrest it to their own
destruction. If they will harden themselves upon your not separating, your
following of duty is merely the innocent object and occasion thereof;
themselves only are the transgressors, because you are purely passive, they
active in the case. Thus ye see, that supposing there were such real faults in
your Ministers access to the public undisturbed exercise of their Ministry as
ye talk of, (whereas in sober and unprejudiced search you will find none),
albeit these should call you to mourn to God for them, and endeavor their
conviction and reformation, yet not to separation. Since without accession to
these faults, ye may join with the men and their Gospel-administrations;
Lugendum and ferendum est, quod mederi nequit* says Judicious and Holy Calvin.
Be ye therefore Monitores and Correctores (if ye can) non Desertores. But
blessed be God there is in truth so far as we can see, no just ground of
stumbling at them; so, at least as to scare you from their Shepherd-tents. And
would some lay aside prejudice, passion, self-interest, etc. and not be over
righteous, nor over wise, (which the wise Solomon dehorteth from in Eccl.
7.16.) nor (by scrupulosity or censoriousness) make more sins than ever God by
his Law has made; nor seek a knot in a Rush (thorough niceness, or
timorousness, or captiousness); we persuade our selves your Controversies would
soon be at an end, and your terrible Convulsion-fits of dividings and
separating, no more overtake you.

But to draw to a close* We shall say no more, nor had we said so much, had not
the urgency of your case compelled us. Only this we add, that having thus far
presumed upon your patience and candor to speak our mind freely concerning your
case and carriage, out of Christian compassion to your distractions and
distempers, and affectionate zeal to your recovery, we humbly crave you pardon
for our freedom: entreating you in the Lord to consider what is said, ^t
agnoscere quod Dei est, and ignoscere quod bominis est. Himself give
understanding in all things, which concern his honor, the good of his poor
distressed Church and people, and your own duty and peace. And finally,
Brethren, we bid you farewell; wishing the Prince of Peace, after ye have
suffered a while, to stablish and settle you. And to him tha^ is able to heal
your breaches, to keep you from falling, and to recover the fallen, and present
you spotless before the Father, be Glory.

And if in any thing we can serve your edification and peace, we willingly
subscribe our selves.

Your affectionate Friends and Servants in Christ.

FINIS.

