A TREATISE OF PRAYER.

With Several Useful occasional Observations and some larger Digressions
concerning the Judaical Observation of the LORD'S DAY, the External Worship of
GOD, etc.

By George Bright, D. D. Rector of Loughborough in Leicestershire.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, at the Crown on Ludgate Hill. 1678.

DONAVIT REV. VIR

RA. PERKINS, L. L. D.

ECCLESIAE hujus CANONICUS. A. D. 1732.

To the Right Honorable Theophilus Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Hastings, etc. And
Lucy Countess Dowager of Huntingdon.
Right Honorable,
THe Discourse which some time since you were pleased to honor me by your
Commands of appearing before you with, was but a proof of a larger Treatise
concerning Prayer, not long before dispatched. It was then far from any design
of publishing: but I since finding many things by me, and many more coming to
my Mind not altogether unworthy (as I thought) the perusal of the more candid
and intelligent, which might most conveniently appear somewhere inserted in the
handling of such an Argument, I was inclined to make use of the Opportunity.

I own the most ordinary and common Reasons of Dedications, viz. to testify
the real and inward Honor and Respect I have for the many excellent Qualities
of your Honors, to express my Acknowledgment particularly to your Lordship and
noble Ancestors in my own and others Names, and to perform some small service
to you in the Subject treated of.

I am not unsensible that such a thredbare Argument (hardly any one thing
having had more Authors) in such a plain if not sometimes an offensive Dress as
a great part of it appears in, without the advantage of any Ornament, may seem
somewhat an unsuitable Present to your Honors. But as there are many things in
it (as I think) not observed, and many not in such manner delivered by others:
so I know too that your Honors are not to learn from me that generally the
most familiar and well known matters are truly of the greatest and most
constant use, and to prefer plain and important Truths before that which is
only fine and new. Besides that so great Goodness as yours will not forget to
excuse me, by considering that the Persons among whom I am now placed make it
my most proper Employment to explain and teach the most ordinary but useful
Dutys of Religion; Sometimes at least in the most plain and simple manner I
can: and then so little prudence as my own serves to tell me that the place it
self may put me in mind of acknowledging in some mean way rather than none at
all (my little leisure and my very broken Health not permitting me to do better
at this time or perhaps hereafter) the great Bounty of your Lordship's
illustrious Predecessors to the Church and University, to Religion and Learning
(without doubt the two best things in the World) who were pleased to bestow the
Patronage of this Rectory and three other of plentiful Revenue upon the happy
place of my many years thoughts. Your Lordships most advantageous Temper, great
Capacity and happy Education under so virtuous and learned a Parent seem not to
permit any departure from the same generous Inclinations. May others imitate
them, especially in this profane and foolish Generation, in which true and
useful Knowledge, Virtue, though wise and manly, Piety though generous and
excellent are attempted to be trampled upon by ignorant and conceited Drollery,
and not only an unchristian but an unmanly Debauchery; which nothing so much
supports as the Dullness and Confidence of the Brutes that practice it.

These either, they know not how to separate Superstition (an ignorant Fear and
Zeal) from Religion, and to secure themselves from the one without throwing
away the other: or they gladly take Occasion through the secret persuasion of
their foolish and hurtful Lusts from the former to do the latter. They must
needs put away the Wheat with the Chaff, not only an ignorant and base fear but
also the most reasonable free and ingenuous Reverence, Honor, Love and
Obedience to their Maker, the most amiable and satisfying Object the Soul of
Man can behold and embrace; without whom we can never be what we should or
would be; whom if we possess not by Contemplation, Love and Likeness to, we are
either so little minded as never to enquire for, or so unhappy as in vain to
endeavor after our most complete Perfection and Felicity.

As for some small Service which I proposed to my self of performing to your
Honors, I hope it was not without some reason. Some of the Contents of the
ensuing Treatise may not be altogether incapable of it; and I have not had the
Honor and Happiness of Converse with any Persons of your Quality, Age and Sex
who are more able to judge of what is true and profitable, or better disposed
to make use of it. Those who know your Honors will easily make the personal
application. And yet (Madam) I humbly beg your Leave to be but in one word so
just as to let others know as well as my self that your natural Parts, your
acquired Learning, your discreet Piety and Virtue, your obliging Goodness are
such as moreover render you the just Aemulation and Pattern of all of your Sex
and honorable Condition and me in particular (as I also am your Lordship's)

Your most Faithful and Humble Servant in all Christian Offices, Geo. Bright.

Imprimatur Hic liber (cui titulus, A Treatise concerning Prayer, etc.)

G. Jane, R. P. D.
Dec. 12. 1676. Hen: Epis. Land: a Sacris Dom.
THE PREFACE.
AFter all the vast and not unpleasant ramble that the mind of Man may take
through the Universe, it must at last set down content (and well it may) with
the Knowledge and Practice of Religion as the possession of the greatest good
it is capable of: The plain end and sum of which is to fear and honor God so
as to keep his Commandments of loving him above all things, and our Neighbor
as our selves, and therefore our selves; that is, willing and rejoicing in the
greatest Happiness of all Beings existent considered together as one Body, and
therefore of each Particular so as is effective of the greatest happiness of
the whole. For by Religion (of the Object not Religion of the Subject or
Religiousness) I mean nothing else but a System of Doctrines made known from
God to Men concerning their Duty, or concerning other Matters which may be any
way means or helps to practice and observe it. These Doctrines may be made
known either by our natural Faculties of invention and reasoning, or by
Revelation. Those which are made known by our natural Faculties with which we
are born may be called natural Religion. As for Example, That Good is to be
willed; that therefore a greater good is to be willed more than a less, and the
greatest most of all: that is, the greatest good as to Intension, Extension and
Duration is to be willed with the greatest force and intenseness of our Minds,
and always. For by the same reason that good is to be willed by us, the
greatest is so too: nor is the propriety of any thing but the goodness of it
the only reason why it is the object of our will. In few words, That the
greatest good of the whole Universe in respect of Intension and Duration be the
ultimate Object of our Wills always either immediately or mediately actually or
habitually, and not that of any part and therefore not of our selves. In which
one Doctrine is all formal Virtue contained, and from it are all particular
Virtues easily deduced. This is the first and great Law of Nature, or which is
invented or judged true by our natural reason. 1. Plainly like as in the animal
body or rather the compounded creature man (that we may comprehend the nature
of Virtue by a most easy similitude) all the functions and operations of each
particular member are supposed to be performed not for its own or any other
member's proper good but for the greatest good of the whole body, or rather of
the whole man; in which their won too so far as it is constitutive or any way
effective thereof, is necessarily included; so very easy and obvious is the
confutation of all those false systems or hypotheses of morality which make
virtue to consist in all our dutys to be deduced from ultimate self-love. The
vast and most universal importance of this truth and its not being yet so
commonly minded as it should, may, I hope, be a sufficient excuse for the
seeming importune and unnecessary mentioning and interposing of it in the
following Treatise. Add to this those other as they are ordinarily called Laws
of Nature. Such as are that God or an all-perfect Being is to be worshipped,
that is, honored, prayed to, be obeyed, etc. that we ought not to make happy
the wicked nor unhappy the righteous or those who will and endeavor the most
public or universal good, that we ought to be beneficent, grateful to our
Benefactors, and particularly to Parents, and scores the like. All which are
nothing else but such Dispositions and Actions which by Reason or Experience
have been found and concluded to have more good Effects than their contraries,
or than their Omission, or to be most for the universal and common good: and
are indeed Rules or Directions for our Prudence. 2. (As are generally the
voluminous resolutions of those which are called cases of Conscience) to
obtain the ultimate End of all our Wills and Actions, viz. the greatest good
of the Whole, in the willing of which E^d only is that which I call Virtue, and
without which there is none at all. These, I say, and such like Doctrines and
Truths being made known from God to the Minds of Men by their Faculties of
Invention and Reasoning with which he has caused them to be born, are very
well term^d Natural Religion.

Those Doctrines concerning our Duty, etc. which are made known either
immediately or mediately by Revelation are called Revealed Religion. I say,
immediately or mediately. They may be made known immediately from God to the
Person himself who is to know and practice, and no Man can tell how much this
is or has been in all Parts and Ages of the World: insomuch that a good part
of that which has been thought natural, especially some more spiritual and
extraordinary Truths, may be rev^aled, inspired or suggested to some Men;
though the same things may have been known naturally by others too. For who can
tell just how much to whom and when God has immediate Influence upon the
Understandings of Men?

Again, They may be revealed mediately by others; and that by Angels or Men.
The first was done to all the Prophets, except Moses* according to the Jews.
The second to all Men who have received any Doctrines from the Prophets.

Among the Prophets by whom God has revealed these Doctrines there have been
two the most eminent and illustrious. Moses first and then Jesus Christ the
Messiah ^ore-^old and promised by Moses himself and many other of the Prophets.
The first of these gave the Jews an entire System of La^s and other Doctrines:
The second partly by himself but princip^lly by some of his Disciples delivered
a great many to all Mankind. The first is called the Mos^ical or Jewish, the
second the Christian Religion.

From this sense of Religion it is (...) that it can be nothing but S^^^shness,
^g^orance or Madness that can make Men hate or despise it in general. For is it
possible for any thing else to put no difference between Actions, to have no
Rules thereof, to despise that which teaches them, as if all things were al^ke
^ligible? and yet there are such bru^^sh Persons who would not be troubled with
the Choice and P^rsuance of any (...), though it be only their own personal
good: But would rather ^ollow their fortuitous Imaginations and Inclinations.
They hate to take any Pains to consine or direct their Choices and Inclinations
by any Rules though such as are only to obtain their own greatest bodily and
worldly good.

But indeed those generally who contemn or hate Religion mean by it not all
Directio^s of their Li^e and Actions (for they have Wi^ enough to like well
Epicurean brutish Morality) but the true natural and especially revealed
Religion, which contain such Rules of their Duty and other Doctrines as are
contrary to their selfish inordinate and immoderate Appetites or Lusts of
Malice, Pride and Sensuality which teach and help Men to restrain and mortify
them: and to introduce a Universal Goodness, Piety, Charity, Humility,
Spirituality and other as comprehensive Virtues which want Names. But what can
be more evident than that if ought be to preferred before ought not, if the
greatest Perfection and Felicity of the whole World, nay, of every particular
Person be valuable and to be preferred before their Imperfection and Misery, It
must be insufferable Selfishness and Pride, together with desirable Ignorance
and Folly that must cause them to regard it without the greatest Reverence and
Love.

And as for the Christian Religion it is certain that in general all its
Doctrines are so confirmed or at least uncontradicted by the natural and
Catholic Religion: and particularly all those which concern our Duty are if
rightly interpreted so perfectly such, (not any being yet deprehended or made
good to be otherwise by the most witty and malicious, or wise, honest and
unprejudiced) with so much assurance, simplicity and sincerity delivered: Also
all its other assistant Doctrines concerning God's Nature and Actions, Jesus
Christ the Messenger of it, good and bad Spirits, Mankind, their Original,
Nature, Duration, etc. (This may be no inconvenient Method for a System of
Christian Religion) are so truly useful to make Men the most perfectly virtuous
and holy or to perform their Duty, so pleasant to contemplate by reason of
their strangeness and greatness, that it must needs be the most seriously and
deliberatedly loved and admired by the wisest and best men.

One part of the Doctrines that all Religions contain is concerning that
infinitely perfect Being called God; viz. his Nature, infinite Power, Wisdom
and Goodness; his Actions, Creation, Preservation and Providence; and then our
Duty toward him, which is in one word to Worship him: that is to contemplate,
honor, love, rejoice, trust in, desire from, imitate, obey him, etc. and to
signify this by convenient signs.

Among these our Dutys toward God one, viz. to love God for himself is a part
or Instance of Virtue or Universal Goodness, the rest are Instruments or Means
thereof.

The Duty of Prayer so as is explained and described in the ensuing Treatise is
not only to desire and petition any thing from God: but contains all his
Worship, nay it necessarily infers all our Duty universally. Our solemn
profession and resolution of Obedience and consequently Imitation of God (God
having commanded us to be like himself) which is one Ingredient in a Prayer
necessarily imports the practice of all our Duty whatsoever. For God is or has
commanded one way or other by natural Light or Revelation all we ought to be
and do.

The Nature and Uses of this ordinary Duty are so particularly described in the
Treatise it self, that I shall not here add any thing but only that I hope they
are so plain and reasonable as to be understood and approved by all who are
g^^dedly good Understanding, and to secure it from the u^just Contempt of some
who may neglect or desp^se it.

These are, First, the Ignorant and Vulgar whose Souls are sensual and dull
that they are very in^pt to all Spiritual things, and therefore much incapable
of such an Employment. These are as much as may be to be better instructed and
rendered more capable of it. In order to which it would be well if the Affairs
of Humane Li^e were so ordered that the meanest might h^ve more l^isure and
opportunities for Religions Dut^s of Reading, Praying, Hearing; and have more
vacancy from bodily labor and motion and hardship which require and make a
tough and strong but gross and dull temper of Body. And it is likely that if it
were not for the insatiable Covetousness and Ambition of Frin^es and States
which perpetually fill the World with Wars and cons^quently make necessary,
hardy, strong Bodies and dissolute Manners and a hundred little subservie^t
Employments. (Such good reason is there for the L^tany Petition for Unity,
Peace and Concord to all Nations.) Were it not for the Pride and Luxury of
private Persons; there would be much fewer Necessities of Humane Life and much
more time to all sorts of Men for Spiritual and Divine things. The moderate
Care and Labor of Men sparing some time each day and some whole days probably
would sufficiently provide for all such conveniences of the bodily Life as may
render it the least Impediment or the most subservient (which is its right use)
to the spiritual one. The principal part of which is the Conversation of Men's
minds with God; the Imitation of his most perfect and happy Life to the utmost
of our Power in the greatest Knowledge and Virtue, Wisdom and Goodness,
Prudence and Beneficence. Wherefore I cannot approve the Temper of many now
adays who seem to make it the only End and Design of Government to increase
Riches and People and Trade in a Nation, from whence they take all their
Reasons and Measures of all Laws and Constitutions. As if Men were made for
nothing but to enjoy all the Conveniences and gratify all the Appetites of
this present pitiful fleshly Li^e, to eat, drink, enjoy Wives, Children and
Relations, to live in Health, Strength, Ease, to be safe from all their
Enemies, or to extend their Fame and Dominions abroad. Whereas in truth the
whole Furniture of this bodily Life is but in order and should be subservient
to the spiritual or intellectual one, that we might live it with less
interruption or disturbance our selves, and propagate it in others, and there
is nothing more plain than that the inordinate and immoderate gratification of
our bodily Appetites, or those which are proper to this fleshly Life,
especially sensual ones is the most inconsistent with a spiritual and virtuous
Temper, and consequently with the most perfect and happy Condition of Mankind.
Nor seems it much to be hoped to see the World in better Posture till the
Affairs thereof are otherwise ordered, or it shall please God more immediately
by a larger Effusion of his Holy Spirit, by his Power and Virtue upon the Souls
of Men to frame, temper and dispose them.

A Second sort of those who are apt to think somewhat meanly of this religious
Duty of Prayer, are the learned, who are most conversant in Science and addict
themselves to Speculation. These oft-times very much neglect Practice, they
little and seldom mind Morality, of which I reckon Piety or our Dutys toward
God to be without compare the most excellent part. By how much the Objects of
our Speculation are of a more different and remote nature from God (as are all
corporeal things with their Affections) by how much they are more numerous and
various, by how much they require a greater Intension of Spirit (as very subtle
and profound things in the Mathematics and Metaphysics:) So much the more
still do they draw away the Mind from Religion and Piety: insomuch that the
greatest Scholars are not always the best Men. It is true indeed that some
Knowledge where the Objects of it are intellectual (as that of our own Souls
and the mutual Relations and Respects of things) by spiritualizing our Minds
does prepare and dispose us to apprehend and be affected with God: but then
also by more vigorously employing the Application of our Minds and more
intensely pleasing them, it perhaps more effectually detains and withholds us
from Piety than our Converse with sensible and external Objects. Nay, in Moral
and Religious Knowledge it self it is not only possible but I believe very
frequent for Men to be so inordinately and immoderately pleased, taken and in
Love with the mere Knowledge or Speculation of the Objects thereof, as to have
very little Care, Esteem and Love for the Practice, or the really having it in
their own Hearts, that is, their Wills and Affections. They are altogether
different things for a Man to perceive and understand and that very distinctly
and clearly the Perfections of his Inclinations, Appetites and Affections, and
to possess them or have them really in himself: to know all the Rules of
Morality and therefore of Piety, and to practice them. The one is a quality of
the Understanding, the other of the Will and Affections. They have two
different faculties and actions of the Soul for their Subjects, and therefore
the one may be and full often is in the same Soul where there is nothing of the
other; (though I acknowledge that usually the best and clearest Knowledge of
Humane Nature is from a Man's own Experience of himself, of which the reason is
obvious) and consequently a Man may have one for the Object of his Esteem and
Delight, and the other not at all. Nay, the more he minds and loves the one not
in order to or for the sake of the other, the less will he mind or love this
other. In few and known Words mere Speculation even in Religion and Morality
may and most often does more please Men than the Practice; and the more the one
is for it self prized and beloved, the less is the other. It Is like as when
some unweildy or lame Person with much pleasure conceives, describes and
teaches others the best Postures and Motions of Vaulting or Dancing who never
was nor is able nor cared at all to perform them himself: or like Hunters who
are only delighted with the finding and catching their Game but care not for
eating it.

But because the Effects of Men's Science and Speculation are generally more or
less beneficial and acceptable to the World. (Which is not so in their
possession of Honor, Riches or sensual Pleasures) the immoderacy of the
Appetite after it is not so much observed or blamed.

These Persons are to be remembered that Morality of which as I said Piety is
incomparably the most excellent part, is infinitely to be preferred before
Speculation; a generous Virtue before Knowledge; the perfect^on of our Wills
before that of our Understanding. For the first (as I have somewhere else had
occasion to mention) being nothing but an habitual designing and intend^ng in
all our Actions the Universal Good, in its own Nature necessarily tends only to
an infinite good and is unconceivable to be ^ver made otherwise by the will and
power of God himself: the other barely and in its own Nature considered only
delights our selves. Nay, not so much as that perhaps but only by God's Will.
Speculation therefore is an idle and useless thing compared with Action.

And even in Speculation it self, that which has God a Being of Perfection
unsearchable and incomprehensible by any but himself for its Object, is
incomparably the most ravishing to the Soul of Man. And yet it is most commonly
seen that every small Speculator or Theorist, a Philosopher, Mathematician,
Linguist, Critic, Politician and Theologers too, especially Polemicks are very
prone to despise and look down upon Piety and practical Religion as a great way
below them; to leave them as ordinary things sit only for little and vulgar
Minds* whilst they are employed in Matters of higher Concern and Importance.

The Third Sort of those who hate or despise Piety and all Religious Dutys
toward God are vicious and debauched persons. These do it often partly because
of their dullness, principally because Piety is inconsistent with the
gratification of their Lusts: and particularly in Men of fierce, haughty and
swelling Tempers, because it is opposite to their Pride, because it confines
and controuls them, takes away their Liberty, puts them in mind of their
Meanness, places them in the same rank with the poorest of Mortals. For they
affect Uncontroulableness and Licentiousness, they would be subject to none,
acknowledge no Superior, would be and do only what they themselves list, at
least have some privilege above others. It is certainly inconsistent with such
Tempers to acknowledge God's infinite Superiority to themselves and their
entire Dependence upon his Will and Pleasure, to desire any thing from him with
a humble reference of all their Petitions to his infinite Wisdom and
Righteousness; or to return any Thanks unto him, to own and pay the most just
Tribute of Obedience as well as the meanest of his Creatures, to confess,
disown, despise or pity themselves, be grieved for their unreasonable Self-will
and Disobedience; to acknowledge their Guilt and deserved Punishment, and yet
God's Right of Remission upon their sincere Repentance and their humble and
important Request; and that too for the sake of another who was that which they
have been shamefully deficient in, (viz.) the most perfectly righteous and
obedient: All these and such like most just Dutys to our Maker these dissolute
licentious and proud Creatures must needs hate and despise as repugnant to
their Lusts, controuling their Liberty and obliging them to the most sensible
Reflection upon and Confession of their Meanness and Baseness. Hence they^l
sometimes deny or cavil at them, and the very Existence of God himself, as much
as their wit and care of their safety will give them leave. Or for want of
these when they have little or nothing to say, and with them too, they will huff
at them, with a scornful pish, throw them away and neglect them as a Cheat or
at least a thing uncertain and trouble some. Those who are governed by a Belief
of God and Duty toward him they pretend to look upon as weak, of no Parts or
Wit, timorous, superstitious, little and low minded, whilst they conceit
themseves to be great Spirits and noble Souls indeed.

Alas for them! goodly things indeed they are! To whom in short it is to be
answered, that it is a wicked thing to affect to have what they should not, and
as silly to desire what they cannot obtain. It is a wicked and unreasonable
thing for thee to desire thy Liberty from the Direction and Government of him
who is infinitely better and wiser than thy self; who is infinitely good, and
immutably delights in the effecting of the greatest good of the whole Universe,
and is infinitely wise and infallibly knows what does effect it; who knows and
can do all things, upon whom are dependent all the Natures and Existences of
things possible to be; who therefore has all the right that can be conceived
to be the Lawgiver of the Universe. If thou or any the most accomplished and
perfect Being besides himself comply not with or conform not to his Will, thou
can not be innocent, but thou must be he who preferred thy own self before
the whole Universe, and have in thee that Insolence to desire that all may
minister to thy Pleasure: than which what can be more prodigiously unreasonable
wicked and unjust: But if it be reasonable to be obedient to and to be like God
because he will and commands all for the Universal good, then is it also
reasonable that we should perform all other Dutys of Piety to him
(Acknowledgment and Contemplation of his Perfectins. Honor, Petition,
Thankfulness, Confession of and Grief for our Transgression of his Laws, etc.)
which dispose and cause us to obey and imitate him

Nor are these swaggering Hectors less foolish than wicked. For whether they
will or no they ought to be and shall be what God wills. All things that are
any thing really existent must be the Effects of his Will, and dependent upon
him who is Infinitely Perfect, for otherwise he is not so. All that he wills
concerning us, is either what we should be (the due Relations of our Actions to
their Objects) or what we shall be: the one is ordinarily termed his Commands,
the other his Decrees. Now what God commands, whether we think or will so or
no, is certainly our Duty: we cannot alter the due Relations of our Actions to
their Objects, no more than we can conceive that God will ever do it. And so
our present and suture Condition are and shall be what he decrees or appoints.
The good or evil things we at present enjoy or suffer from the least to the
greatest, are and must be all from him, whether we will acknowledge or ask or
deprecate or thank him for them or no. Our future State of unspeakable
Happiness or Misery after a short time shall be by his Sentence, which shall be
passed upon us without our leave according as we have observed or violated his
Commands, for all our affectation of Liberty and even Superiority. We be
lawless? We the Governors and Judges of the World? What Sottishness is it in
Mortals or any Creatures to affect such things which are neither fit nor
possible? Nor is it at all a sign of a great Mind to arrogate and aspire to
such things for its own self, not abiding it any where else; but rather of a
stingy and contracted one, which refers all to it self though never so little
and contemptible.

No Selsishness can be great, except in him who is at least virtually all
himself, and upon whom all other Being and Happiness necessarily depend. A
great Mind is equally pleased with the existence of Infinite Perfection (and
consequently of the greatest Happiness in the World either fit or possible) in
any other as well as himself. It is indifferent to him where it be, so it be:
he is infinitely in Love with it and rejoices in it: he despises and hates
such a selfish Temper as to wish it no where, because it is not in himself.

Wherefore there is nothing more inexcusable, more odious and despicable than a
licentious and proud and consequently a negligent ungrateful disobedient
Creature toward God his and all the World's Maker and Universal Benefactor. To
see Ignorance, Folly and Wickedness exalt it self against Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, and a pitiful Worm to wriggle his dirty Body, and turn up his
contemptible Snout against Heaven, mere Impotency and Weakness which cannot
stand of it self to strutt against Almighty Power: To see him defying and
huffing at God, who must by and by ly sprawling and grunting, and suffer
himself to be insulted over by every Fly and Worm: What can more move
Indignation, Contempt, or Pity?

These are the Creatures too who have made Religion and Piety, the Worship of
their Maker, a Droll and Jest. Who have not only hated them, but endeavored to
render them the Objects of their Contempt. A thing very easy to do. There is
not the most excellent thing that may not be represented contemptible and
ridiculous. For it is but observing something therein or related to it, which
compared with others greater is really mean and small, or made to appear so:
but to conceal what is truly great in it; as its being the cause of some small
effect compared with others greater, or being like to something that is mean
and contemptible. And in this consists the whole Art of Drollery. Nor there is
nothing which has not some such things belonging to it. Even God himself (with
Reverence be it spoken) may by an Atheistical l^'itt when he shall hear it
affirmed, that there is not the least Motion but what is produced and
communicated by him only, be called contemptuously more than is convenient to
be named, or plenus negotii Deus, as the Epicureans slouted, because it is in
part like to a Man who impertinently prying into and employing himself about
every trisling matter; though in very truth it is demonstrable, and it is
absolutely necessary to Infinite Wisdom and Poxer that all things greatest and
least together should be known to him, and proceed from him, and be dependent
upon him: Nor can a Sparrow fall to the ground, as our Savior says, without
his Providence.

Now the Passions of Hatred and Contempt (as all other Passions) naturally
farnish the Invention or cause to come to mind those things which maintain them
and that is any mischievous Quality or Imperfection: but they keep back or
conceal any thing that may abate them. Whence it is manifest how easy it is
for an ordinary Wit but proud and ^^iteful to render any thing it pleases
contemptible or odious. And thus may it do by Religion, observing only that it
is reverenced by the poor and ignorant weak and fearful Minds: but not taking
notice that it is in the most wise and generous, and that always the greatest
and wisest So^ls not influenced by any Appeti^es but those of Truth and Right,
have had the most profound and serious Reverence and Love for it. But they can
be none but those who have no Understanding themselves, which can suffer their
Judgments and Affections to be determined by such Persons.

To th^se it is Religious and Godly are become the most ordinary words of
scorn. But would one ever have thought that that which signifies something
appertaining to our Duty to our Maker should have been so? Or that it should
not be deemed the most honorable Quality and Condition, to be a Servant to the
infinitely Great, Wise, and good Sovereign of the Universe? In the mean time
they may assure themselves that there are some such saithful Servants of God,
who are so sensible thereof as to contemn and hate such degenerate Souls be
they as big as they will, so far as they are the Causes or Subjects of such
Impiety; and yet seriously to pity them as capable of better things. Wise and
virtuous Souls as much despise and detest hectoring Vice (though I say with
deep compassion for the Persons) as it can Religion and Piety.

Nor is this humor but too much among the rich and great only, but (as is
usual) the fashion is followed by the inferior sort. And it is ordinary enough
for them to think that they have wit and worth enough to despise Religion and
the Priest. And although the Office if it be discre^ly and conscientiously
discharged, is certainly in it self of all public Employments, the most truly
profitable to Mankind; the most uneasy, painful, and solicitous to men,
generally while in this fleshly Life: yet by experience it seems at present,
generally the most thankless, and even too much useless. For the bad examples
of those who administer it, do a great deal of harm; and yet their good ones do
little good. If they misdemean themselves (which cannot be too seldom) their
faults are magnified and published with no good intent, but out of Envy,
Contemptuousness, or to justify and excuse men's own licentiousness: But if
they demean themselves never so worthily and blamelessly, as if they only were
by way of punishment bound to their good behavior; their good example is
little heeded, and less imitated. I think there are no Persons in a
Commonwealth who better deserve what may be esteemed ^ reward, and consequently
Honor and Revenue, than those who are constantly in any Employment, the effect
of which is the public good, and much more still if the Principle of it be so
too: and yet often they are undervalued by those who enjoy themselves and live
at their ease, and are only born to, or by some indirect means arrive at that
which others better deserve.

But all this will little cool or abate the Aspires and Resolutions of a
sincerely and generously virtuous Soul. Which although it knows very well what
reward Virtue deserves for its Maintenance and Encouragement, and is well
assured that how little soever it receives here (which it does not much prize
or envy) it shall not want what is ^it sometime or other from the Governor of
the World: Yet it would fain raise it self above all Personal considerations,
and would please God, and do as much good as it can, though it were possible
(as it is not) never to receive any thing for its pains.

Some of the seeming causes somewhat more particular and remote of the Neglect,
Hatred, and Contempt of Piety, besides that Universal one, the Pityable,
Natural Inep^ness to, and Aversness from Spiritual and Divine things in M^n,
and what has been before observed, may be some such as these. Which I crave
leave with all due Deference and submission to wiser observers but just to
mention. Some want of Education of Persons designed for the Clergy in serious
and intelligent Piety; want of longer continuance in places allotted for that
purpose, and of more careful examination of sit Qualifications before they are
admitted to that Office: Want of more places for Retirement and Consideration,
where Men may learn to rectify their Opinions, to Moderate and Govern their
Passions, to Direct, Form, and Temper their Inclinations: Want of sufficiency
of Revenue for the sufficient and deserving Officers of Religion in very many
Places, and especially in almost all Corporations where their work is, and
their worth should be the greatest, and there is most need, not only of
Artificial but Natural Authority. Their Revenue also, especially since Religion
in general and the National Discipline in particular is so much neglected and
slighted, consisting in most places of many and small things is too solicitous
and contentious. Their number likewise, both of Superior and Inferior sort
seems to be too small, with us probably, computing the whole Nation, there will
not be found above 5 or 6 Hundred, but in most Corporations and populous Towns,
one to two, three or four Thousand. And in some Protestant-Countreys, and
particularly our next Neighbors, though they are a constituted Commonwealth,
and flourish in Riches and Greatness: Yet I conjecture in some Cities, there is
not one Clergy Man to five or six Thousand, I speak of their National Church,
not of their Dissenters. I know there are some Lay Elders as they call them,
which may be some help to them. And this may be one cause of the increase both
of Papists, and other dissenters amongst them (if it be true as has been said)
notwithstanding the advantages which those of their National Church enjoy. But
in those places where the Romish Religion obtains, as in Italy, Spain and
France (in which last, I have some ground for my Conjecture) there may be about
one to twenty or thirty. And in the Divine constitution of the Jewish
Commonwealth, we know one whole Tribe was assigned for the Ministry of
Religion, or Gods Worship; which might be then about a Fourtieth part of the
whole people: And yet their Offices and Employments, if they be considered,
will I think be sound to require much less time and leisure, than those which
are incumbent upon the Clergy in the Christian Church.

It is true, he may be of opinion that their number is already rather too great
who seems to make that their only use and employment, which is sometimes but
the smallest part of it, viz. to speak to about a Thousand Persons at once,
being as many as can conveniently hear in one place; though I think, if only
that were performed as frequently and as well as would be best, it would
require a greater number. Add to these the great neglect and even conculcation
of Teel siastical Discipline both over Clergy and Laity, especially in Manners.
To which I heartily wish there were not too great Encouragement in the Civil
Government, by the Neglect of the Execution of its own very sage and sober
Laws, and the undoing Examples of those who are entrusted with it. Omne animi
vitium tanto conspectius in se^ Crimen habet quanto is qui peccat major habetur.
The neglect also of the Religious Government of Families those little
Commonwealths of which the greater are composed, may be here reckoned. The
Encouragement of judicious, plain, and affectionate Exposition and Application
of the Christian Doctrine, or of Preaching. seems a very fit and proper Means
for the Propagation and Advancement of Piety, as all Popular Orations, are for
the Maintenance of the Esteem and Practice of any Opinions or Actions. For
whatever some please to think, so long as the nature of Man is what it is now,
and they pursue all other things besides Religion, with such real and mighty
passions as they do: If they be not frequently passionated for Religion and
Piety too, it seems not likely that it should ever Naturally be prevalent in
the World. What God may otherwise do we know not.

If men would have not great affections in Religion, they must also bring Men
to have none in other Affairs, or else they will betray it to loose all its
command and efficacy; but only there where men are little or nothing concerned:
Of this the Romanists, especially in France, seem very sensible, and therefore
in some places are very diligent in preaching, but especially zealous even
beyond their Adversaries: where their Auditors in their capital City (for other
places I know little) are so numerous and attentive, that their Preaching and
Catechizing seemed to me the principal cause of the Reputation of their Church
among the people, and that were it not for them, their Mass and all the rest of
their pompous Religion would not keep the best, if not the most of their Sheep
from running out into their Neighbors pasture if both Gates were set open.
This Preaching must not be like Schoolboys Themes, or young Academicks
Orations, or School-Lectures, But such discourse as is commonly used in the
greatest Affairs of humane life (not comparably so great as the reforming Men's
manners and saving their Souls) as at the Bar, in the Senate; in serious and
useful private Conversation: where men speak in good earnest to inform,
convince and persuade their Auditors. And because the generality of men through
the want of ability or good will, mind not so much Religious matters as the
concerns of this life, it must be oftimes performed to do any great good with
many, even studied or allowed defects: which to some more witty than prudent
for want of experience, and who think others too much like themselves, may seem
contemptible. It must be oftimes done with frequent Repetitions and
Inculcations, many homely Similitudes, many most easy and obvious Inferences
and general Prooss: or else the greatest part of Auditors, and even of those
who are of good understanding in other Affairs, will never take the pains
themselves to mind, understand, remember or be affected with what is delivered.

For the frequency of the performance of this Office, it seems necessary to
augment the number of those who are to discharge it, that so it might be done
the better. The too often and frequent performance of it by one Person does
cause it to be done generally very meanly, and injudiciously, sometimes very
coldly and dryly, and sometimes with a great deal of nonsense and noise, to
supply the place of sound Sense and discreet Affection: In sumn, oftimes to
little and sometimes to had purpose. Nor is it long since that this very mean
performance of Preaching, was one principal cause why the Office was so
shamefully invaded by every one who had a hot Head and great Lungs, with such
success, as to be thought by themselves and the people too, to be as good
Preachers as the best; and even to be inspired. For how else (thought they)
could illiterate men Extempore equalize and exceed those who had the advantage
of Education and Study.

And as it may be of great use to multiply and encourage, accommodate and fit
Instructers of the People: So it seems necessary that there should be some of
more speculative calm and subtle, and others of more prudent Tempers, who
should be the Judges and Determiners of the Truth of Doctrine and the
Expediency of Discipline. For neither these Popular nor yet more Courtly
Orators are usually so sit for that: though generally they are apt to take it
upon them, and often have done it, despising the other Sort of Persons of
fitter Qualities for it. They have much more pleased and been more applauded by
the Generality of Men than the other; whence they have not only judged
themselves in general, more deserving and valuable (which may be oft-times) but
particularly more fit to be Governors and Directors, which has seldom proved
so. For commonly as they are Persons of great and it may be good Passions: so
they are but of general confused and narrow Appre hension, and oft-times of too
much employment; and besides extraordinarily prejudiced by the frequency of
their Zeal and other Passions to judge things true and great which are often
not so. It seems certain they are very excellent and useful Instruments, but
not so fit to be the uppermost Masters and Governors. And we see Men sensible
of this in Civil and Secular Matters; where every Haranguer is not thought sit
to be a Judge or Privy Counselor. Finally it is to be heartily wished and
endeavored without the least envy or contention, that every one might have
Opportunity and just Encouragement to make use of his Talent greater or less in
the Church of God and every where else for his Master's Service the doing of
good. And as to direct and improve it for that End is every Man's greatest
Perfection, so it is we know the only Condition of his Reward.

But many of these things and many more seen in this our Age, to be rather
wished by those who Cordially desire the Propagation of Religion, than hoped
that they should be so much as taken into Consideration. However, we may and
ought by our humble and importunate Petition perpetually solicit the Great
King and Lord of all things, that he would without or with what Means he
pleases erect his Kingdom in the Hearts of Rebellious Mortals, and dispose
their Souls to a free Obedience to his Laws howsoever promulated or made known.

As for the following Treatise to which this somewhat long Preface leads, It
pretends to no great Matters: The Subject of it being the most common and
beaten in our own Tongue, and a great part of it composed at first for a very
plain Auditory; it cannot be expected but that a great many things which Occur
therein should be ordinary well known and more vulgarly expressed in a dress
suitable to it, and probably with too many little defects of style left hanging
about them. Nor is it fit that in a Treatise of the whole argument they should
be emitted, provided they be but true and profitable though but to meaner
capacities. Nevertheless I think I shall not be mistaken in saying that there
are in it many things of good Importance not at all observed, many not so
distinctly, many not so much with their respective Reasons delivered by others.

If it should be otherwise, and there should be no valuable difference between
this and other Discourses of the same Subject in our Tongue: yet it might not
be altogether superfluous. For this might fall into the Hands of some and be
read by them for some Consideration or other, when others would not. I look
upon such Books as many Shops of the same Trade which sell the same Commodities.

Though one might be sufficient to furnish all Buyers if they would come
thither: yet many would omit their own Conveniences and never buy at all, if
there were not others nearer hand or in their way, or belonging to some Friend
or Acquaintance.

Finally, if it should happen that the same things may be had elsewhere better
and with more advantage, I shall be seriously glad of it; and much more pleased
at such a reason of my Mistake, than troubled at my Mistake it self. However it
was thought best to err on the safest hand, and considered, that Superfluity
does less Harm than Want. I pray God it may be somewhat serviceable to his
Honor and the good of Men.

G. B.

THE Contents.
CHAP. 1. COncerning the Principal Parts or Ingredient of a Prayer.
Sect. 1. The Introduction to the following Treatise, Page 1 Sect. 2. The
Definitions of Prayer, and of A Prayer, the principal ingredients of a prayer
recited, page 9 Sect. 3. The first Ingredient, An express attention to and
acknowledgment of the Divine Perfections, the proper and other occasional uses
thereof in a prayer, 12 Sect. 4. The second Ingredient, A Confession of past
and present sinfulness or iniquity of our actions and temper or inclinations.
Of this also the proper and other good uses in a Prayer, page 27 Sect. 5. The
third Ingredient, A solemn profession of future obedience and amendment. Of
which briefly the proper and collateral good effects, 35 Sect. 6. The Fourth
Ingredient, Thanks giving, or an actual loving of God for his favors already
conferred. The like here as in the foregoing particulars, p. 40 Sect. 7. The
Fifth Ingredient, A rehearsal or particular proposal of ones wants, and what
one is about to desire. The uses of this, p. 46 Sect. 8. The Sixth Ingredient,
An express petition or desire that God would relieve and grant them unto us. A
Prayer thus performed contains all the parts of Divine Worship, p. 52
CHAP. II. Contains some of the most usual distinctions of prayer, p. 57.
Sect. 1. The first into Mental and Vocal, p. 58. Sect. 2. The second into
Ejaculatory and set prayer. ibid. Sect. 3. A third into diverse or the same,
where some advantages of each and many other things observed concerning public
and private Forms of prayer, premeditated prayers each time, extempore prayers
by natural parts or supernatural gifts or present inspiration, p. 63 Sect. 4. A
fourth into prayer alone and prayer with others commonly called public,
private, secret, where many things proposed concerning the public, external
Worship of God, p. 103 Sect. 5. A fifth into prayer for ones self or for
others, p. 129
CHAP. III. Contains the matter of that part of a prayer called petition,
together with some observations thereon, p. 131
CHAP. IV. Concerning the great benefits of prayer, p. 151
Sect. 1. The good that we may be the instruments of to others thereby, ibid.
Sect. 2. The benefits to our selves. 1. Goodness. 2. Comfort. 3. Some good
things, the common causes of both: it begets, preserves, increases
goodness or boliness in us. 5. Ways among others: viz. (1.) by being an
occasion of the exercise thereof, or of those things which are immediately the
most frequent and effectual means thereof, where it is largely shown that not
all prayers may have this effect, but that some may make us worse. p. 162 to
182. Sect. 3. A second way how prayer preserves and increases goodness or
holiness in us, is by suggestion and bringing to our minds our duty or those
things which are means to dispose and engage us thereto, p. 182 Sect. 4. A
third way how it does it is by being an occasion of imitation of God. p. 188
Sect. 5. A fourth way is by bringing to our minds the condition of our
Petitions being granted, p. 191 Sect. 6. A fifth way is by remuneration or
reward, p. 201 Sect. 7. That the second general benefit of prayer is comfort,
joy, delight of Soul, and that four ways. (1.) Immediately from the operations
of our souls in prayer, p. 205 Sect. 8. More particularly prayer is the cause
of joy and delight by the exercise of says, hope and repose in God, p. 212
Sect. 9. Prayer is the cause thereof (3ly) by reflection upon our having
performed our most just and reasonable duty to God, and upon some more than
ordinary excellent qualities in our selves which may upon this occasion appear.
Where two things observed which make a man more sensible of this part of his
duty. The first is its excellency compared with other parts of our duty: the
second the unusualness thereof: A caution against vain conceit and pride, p.
224. Sect. 10. Prayer is the cause of delight and joy by God's special
immediate influence, p. 237 Sect. 11. The third sort of benefits of prayer are
some things which are causes both of goodness and comfort of which two only are
mentioned: viz. Spirituality and greatness of Soul. An affectionate Exhortation
to make trial of these benefits of prayer, p. 239
CHAP. V. Contains directions for prayer
Sect. 1. The directions for prayer of two sorts Is It. to propose the due
qualifications of a prayer. (2.) Some means to obtain them. The 1st* again are
of two sorts: (1.) Those concerning the things contained in a prayer. (2.)
Concerning the signs of those things. The qualifications of the things
contained in a prayer are again of two sorts: (1.) Those concerning the sense
of a prayer. (2.) Concerning the operations of Soul in prayer. The signs are
either of our sense or operations of soul: which are (1st.) Speech. (2ly) All
other gestures. The due qualifications of the sense or objects of a prayer are
(1.) its truth, where some instances of more considerable mistakes, in all the
parts of a prayer, p. 252 Sect. 2. A second qualification of a prayer is that
it be just, p. 280 Sect. 3. A third, that it be principally of the greatest
importance and concernment, p. 284 Sect. 4. A fourth is, that it be as
extensive as may be: this how meant, p. 293 Sect. 5. The directions for the due
qualifications of the operations of soul in prayer, are (1.) that they be
sincere: of which the meaning in two respects, p. 298 Sect. 6. The second due
qualification of our operations of soul in prayer is that they be intense and
fervent, p. 310 Sect. 7. The third that they be frequent, p. 325 Sect. 8. The
fourth that they be seasonable. (1) in respect of the whole action of praying.
(2) in respect of the several parts of a prayer. (3) in respect of the
particular instances of those parts or ingredients. (4) in respect of some
adjuncts of prayer as vehemence, length. The fifth qualification very briefly
that all our petitions be in the name of the Lord Jesus, p. 334 Sect. 9. The
directions concerning the due qualifications of the signs of our sense and
operations of soul; are 1st. that they most perfectly convey the things
signified, p. 346 Sect. 10. (2) That they draw not the attention therefrom
either by too much pleasing or displeasing and offending, p. 347 Sect. 11. (3)
That they somewhat please and invite the mind to attend to them, p. 350 Sect.
12. (4) That they be the most universal, p. 352 Sect. 13. (5) That they be the
most natural, p. 356 Sect. 14. (6) That they be the most clear, p. 359 Sect.
15. (7) That they be the most distinct, p. 363 Sect. 16. (8) That they be the
most short, p. 364 Sect. 17. The first direction to obtain the former due
qualifications of our prayers, is to re^^ and understand well the holy
Scriptures and other good Books, p. 372 Sect. 18. The second is to meditate,
consider and examine, p. 380 Sect. 19. The third is to make use of prayers
composed by others. Four steps in the use of this means commended to most
persons, p. 385 Sect. 20. The fourth is to pray to God for those due
qualifications, p. 391 Sect. 21. The fifth is to be sincere and humble in the
desire and possession of the gift of prayer, p. 396 Sect. 22. The sixth, refer
all thy petitions most freely to the Divine Will, p. 397 Sect. 23. The seventh,
be not content with any prayers, p. 398
CHAP. VI. Contains the excuses or pretenses why men do not pray, p. 401
Sect. 1. The first pretense is that there is no need of it; this answered,
ibid. Sect. 2. The second that they have not ability to pray; answered, p. 411
Sect. 3. The third; that they have not time answered. The couclusion, p. 416
ERRATA.
Page 2. lin. 9. dele it is so. p. 14. lin. 3. for he has not, read it is not.
ibid. lin. 22. dele so far. p. 16. l. 3. for or read and. ibid. l. 9. read but
also to. p. 20. l. 2^. del. promises. p. 29. l. 11. in the void space, Sect.
IV. p. 63. l. 12. del. one. p. 71. lin. 16. del. of. p. 75. l. 16. our
Judgments. p. 81. l. 1. del. affections and maintain them in our selves. p.
121. l. 15. read (...) p. 152. l. 5. theirs for others. p. 157. l. 12.
v^ndicate for vindicate. p. 165. l. 18. to for of. p. 174. l. 1. of what. ibid
l. 27. tyrannical, imperious. p. 194. l. 4. add in the Margin, Tal. Bab. Ber
cap. 5. p. 229. l. 21. read immediate action. p. 230. l. 10. read degree
thereof, and del. Holiness as might be particularly showed and consequently of
Universal Love in which it consists. p. 257. l. 7. del. i. e. p. 265. l. 29.
add but only a just consequence of it. p. 315. l. 2. read mouths full. p. 320.
l. 16. read (...) p. 351. l. 17. unacceptable for acceptable. p. 358. l. 8.
them for their. p. 368. l. 25. del. not. p. 398. l. 17. unjust for just. p.
402. l. 24. affectation for affection. p. 404. l. 16. condition for Caution. p.
407. l. 6. holiness for happiness.

A TREATISE CONCERNING PRAYER.
CHAP. I. The Nature and Parts of Prayer.
SECT. I.
AS the Christian Religion is upon many accounts the most excellent, and it is
to the most truly and perfectly wife and good Man (that is, one who best
discerns and loves what is true and the most beneficial for the World) the most
eligible thing to believe and practice it: So particularly it is so, because it
has made known, or confirmed and taught with ^o great certainty so many things
for the Comfort, Solace, and Support of poor indigent and impo^ent humane
Nature, both as to this present and the future State. As in that great minded
Discourse of Jesus's to his Disciples concerning Divine Providence ( Matt. 6.)
where it seems to be wondered at that Men should be so solicitous and careful
concerning the Necessities or Conveniences of this present Life, when there
was so easy and certain a way undoubtedly to obtain and secure them: viz. by
being first the faithful Subjects and Servants of God, and particularly at that
time as sending his Laws and Commands by Jesus himself, or by being sincere
Christians. That it was not to be doubted in the least but that God would
provide for and take Care of his Servants in those respects so much as was for
their Good. And again, if they should want them, and have evil things befall
them, and undergo Afflictions; even this shall certainly be for their good: For
all things work together for the good of those who love God. And as to the
future Life, the State after Death, and the Dissolution of our Bodies into Dust
and Vapor* what great and magnificent things are told and assured us? such as
were never known at all, or not with any Certainty comparatively considerable
before. A State so perfect and happy is promised, that nothing less than Glory
and Crowns, and Kingdoms, and Joy and Life, the most admired and esteemed
things among us, are used to represent and signify it. And all this upon the
Condition of our preparations for it, by those holy Dispositions in our Souls,
of Righteousness, of Love to the Universe at once, or as one, to God and to
every Creature, that it may be as perfect and happy, as is consistent with the
greatest Happiness of the Whole (which is best known to infinite Wisdom) of
Self-denial, of perfect Mortification of Lusts, that is, of the Inordinacy and
Immoderacy of all our Appetites. And yet further, that impotent Men may obtain
these, the Conditions of all our other promised Happiness both here and
hereafter, God has absolutely promised us his Influence upon us for our
Assistance to be, and Comfort in being holy and good, his Pardon and
Forgiveness for the most eminent and illustrious Merits and Death of Jesus, of
all our past sins and faults, when we are become good.

Among these, one very comprehensively comfortable, as well as profitable
Doctrine, is that which is taught concerning Prayer; ( viz.) that all things,
both those of the future and of this Life too, if good for us, and it be
reasonable and just that they should be particularly granted us; that is, if it
be for the greatest good of the whole Universe, of which God is the Maker,
Sustainer, and Governor (and to be so disposed, as never to desire any thing
otherwise, is our own Perfection, and consequently must needs be more joyous
and delightful, than the contrary Disposition of unjust-Slefishness) I say, all
such things may upon our Request, such as it ought to be, be obtained. Upon
which account we are not only advised, but commanded to lay aside every where
all Solicitude, all anxious Care, using only calmly and cheerfully the just
Prudence and Diligence, which we may judge the Goodness of every thing to
deserve, and dutifully commending our Desires, and the Success of our
Endeavors to God, and perfectly acquiescing in the Event, be it what it will.
So is the Apostolical Precept, Philip. 4. v. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in
every thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, let your Request be
made known unto God.

Whether we in general implore the Divine Favor and Good Will, and
consequently the Forgiveness of our past Miscarriages, and Violations of his
Laws; or whether we beg his gracious Assistance, to make us holy and good, and
by this means capable of all the other Instances of his Bounty; Whether more
particularly we desire any excellent Ornament or Qualification of Soul, of
Knowledge or Goodness, Gift or Grace, as usually called; Whether our dull and
confused Heads want Light and Clearness for the Discovery of Truth, or we would
have the manifold unruly disobedient Motions and Appetites of our Minds to be
tamed, abated, and at our due Command, and our Breathings and Endeavors after
Holiness and Virtue excited and increased. Whether there we would have our Lusts
abated and mortified, our Corruptions subdued, our Graces and Virtues quickened
and strengthened; Whether we would have the good things of this Life, as Health,
Strength, Peace and Quiet, Plenty, Liberty, Good-name, Friends, Families,
Relations; Whether with the solicitous Merchant, we would have our Adventures
and Commodities come safe home; or with the Soldier, escape the Dangers and
Hazards of a Battle; or with the industrious Tradesman, we modestly desire
competent Custom, honest faithful and just dealing, good Commodities, the
Success of our Labor and Skill; or with the Husbandman, proper Seasons,
plentiful Crops and Harvests, and that we might reap the fruits of our Labors
and enjoy them. In a word, In all things whether they be little or small, and
the most inconsiderable, as not being below God to take notice of; or they be
great, and of the most valuable Consequence, as not being too big for God
Almighty to grant or bring to pass, it is but making known humbly our Request
to God, and if our Desires be good for us, and consistent with God's Government
of the World, or with the Universal Good (and we are mad and wicked Men if we
put not in that Exception) we need not in any of these things be careful or
solicitous, but be confident we shall not fail of Audi^nce and Acc^ptance.

Wherefore I the more wonder, that that which is so vast and great a Privilege
to, and Security for poor impotent infirm and weak Humane Nature, insufficient
to defend it self from, or to remove Griefs and Pressures, and yet obnoxious
almost to infinite in this Life, and destitute of so many good things it is
capable of enjoying, should be accounted by us a Task or Burden. For we see in
the World, a Man accounts himself to be, and able to do what he or his Friends
is able to do by his Procurement. And if he be (as the best provided is much)
indigent and in want, weak and insufficient, obnoxious and exposed to Evils; he
supplies and enriches, fortifies and strengthens, defends and secures himself
by the Aid and Assistance of others his Friends. And who would not
indefatigably labor to obtain, and abundantly rejoice in, and constantly make
use of such a Friend as God, who is instead of all, who can do all, and
infinitely more for us than all the World besides; nay, we can have no Friends
but from him, nor can any Creature do any thing wi^^out him: So that if he be
our Adversary, or forsake us, we must be utterly destitute and forlorn. But it
is sufficient for the present to hint the true Reasons, ( viz.) Ignorance of,
or rather Non-attendance to our entire Dependency on God, so many second Causes
for the most part intercepting and stopping our Mind, and not permitting it to
enquire further, and to extend it self to God; or else Wickedness, Men knowing
that God Almighty hears not Sinners, but if a Man be a Worshipper of God, him
he hears, Joh. 9. v. 31. And that the Prayer of the Wicked is an Abomination
to the Lord, and the Sacrifice of the Wicked, how much more when he brings it
with a wicked Mind* Prove. 21. v. 27. And again, The Sacrifice of the Wicked is
an abomination to the lord, but the Prayer of the Upright is his ^elight, Prove.
15. v. 18. Again, He that turns a^^y h^s Ear from hearing the Law, even his
Prayer shall be an abomination, Prove. 28. v. 9. And yet Men will not leave off
to be Sinners and wicked; but it seems will choose rather to part with all their
Interest in God himself, in infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness, than their
Lusts, and that Delight and Pleasure their corrupted and degenerated Souls
perceive from them.

For there is no other Condition God requires, for the obtainment of this
incomparable Privilege, in all good things besides Holiness, but Holiness, a
good Mind, and well instructed to use all other things he shall give, to their
right Ends of doing good and pleasing God; which Condition too, God himself is
the most ready of all to give when asked. Foolish Men! Were the Condition harsh
in it self, who would think it not easily to be perform*d, for such a vast
Privilege and Advantage? But were it hurtful and grievous, and not absolutely
necessary; upon our first Address to God, he himself would remove it, or else
the Privilege would not be made good to us. But in truth, the Condition of
Holiness and Goodness, is the greatest Good and Advantage to us; and the best
use we can make of the Privilege granted, is to ask it sincerely and
importunately: So cannot that infinite Goodness but heap and crowd good things
together; nor could any thing that is now to us harsh and unpleasant, proceed
from him, or be enjoined by him, if the Circumstances of our miserable, because
apostate State, did not make it a necessary profitable Good.

Cast then away anxious Solicitude, do not any more tear and vex thy self with
briary and thorny Thoughts, let not busy and unsleeping Cares prevent thy
Rest, or disturb thy placid and composed Soul; love but God, make but thy Self
by his Grace (which is ready for thee when duly desired) good, and capable of
his Favor, do also thy own endeavor in any Office, and use the best Prudence
thou can, with an even and tranquil Mind, and then make known thy Request to
God thy Heavenly Father by Prayer and Supplication.

(...)

To lift up Hands to God above
Is surely good, for God is Love.
What is discoursed in this ensuing Treatise concerning Prayer, is in Answer to
these Six Enquiries.

1. What is Prayer to God, and what is a Prayer, and the usual Parts of which
it does or may consist? or rather what things may be usefully mixed with that
which we most properly call Prayer, and the reasons thereof.

Secondly, What the principal Sorts of Prayer?

Thirdly, What the Matter or Contents of Prayer?

Fourthly, What are the Excellent Uses and Benefits of Prayer?

Fifthly, What good Directions may there be concerning it?

Sixthly, What are the Excuses men usually have why they do not pray in
public, private, secret?

SECT. II.
FIrst, What is Prayer, etc. By Prayer therefore most strictly may be meant
nothing but a Desire signified unto God, that he would grant or bestow some
good thing upon us; which may be either positive or privative, either that he
would give us the Possession of some good thing, or the Security or Deliverance
from some evil thing; both which are good things. To signify this our Desire
unto God, needs no more than to conceive the Desire in our Souls; for God knows
every Thought of our Hearts, every Motion of Soul, as soon as ever it is
existent. He that made and sustains the Soul in Being, and therefore is always
intimately present therewith cannot be ignorant of all that is in it. Ou^
Words, or other external Signs, are principally to signify our Desires to
others, that they may have the same, and concur with us, i^ they please, or at
least may understand what we do desire; or they are to help and assist ou^
Conceptions of the Things we pray for, or to promote our Affections, with which
they may be conjoined, and for some other Reasons.

A Prayer generally signifies many such single Desires or Prayers, put and
composed together* with the other usual Additions, which are commonly called
Parts of Prayer. Those are ordinarily said to be Confession and Thanksgiving;
so that a Prayer is made to consist of three sorts of Parts, ( viz.)
Confession, Petition, Thanksgiving. But there is no reason to confine a Prayer
to these Parts only, there may be other things as usefully and properly
introduced; such as are Profession of our Obedience, and of our Resolutions to
be good for the time to come, the devoting our selves thereto, the express
Acknowledgment and Belief of the Divine Perfections and Excellencies, the
proposal or calling to Mind the reasons of our Desires, and the ground of our
Hopes, that they shall be fulfilled and performed. Finally, in general, any
other Thing which may increase and augment our Desire and Longing for what we
would have, which Desire is the very Essence of Prayer; and this is the very
general reason, why in a Prayer all of them, are to be introduced and admitted
thereinto some more nearly, some more remotely. And hence we may easily Judge
what is proper, and what is more or less impertinent thereto, that is, what
does and what does not, and what does more or less than another thing in its
place obtain this End.

Some of the Things which are pertinent Parts of Prayer, may be these,

First, An express Attention and Acknowledgment of the Divine Perfections and
Attribut^s.

Secondly, Confession of past and present Faults and Sins.

Thirdly, A solemn Profession of future Amendment and Obedience.

Fourthly, Thanksgiving, or actual Love to God, for his Favors already
conferred and received.

Fifthly, A Rehearsal, Proposal, or Explication of ones Wants, what a Man would
have, or is ready to desire, a more or less particular Declaration of a Man's
Case, together also with the true Difficulty or Danger of it, and other the
reasons of our Desire. And this not for God's sake, that he might know them
more distinctly, or the like, but for our own; that we might more adequately
and distinctly, and longer attend to our own Necessities and Wants, our own
impotent and mean and imperfect Condition, and consequently more earnestly
desire Relief; of which hereafter.

Sixthly, An express Desire and Petition, that God in these Cases would relieve
and help us.

SECT. III.
1. THerefore an express Acknowledgment of, and Attention to the Divine
Perfections and Attributes, to attribute and ascribe them to God, that is, to
Judge them to be in God. Such as are

1. His infinite Power, that he is absolutely able to do any thing what he
pleases, and this at all times, and that he is uncontrollable; none is
superior to him, to hinder or restrain him, nor that he needs any other thing
or Person, but can do all things without them, and even they are all dependent
upon him, all perfectly at his Command, subject to his Will and Pleasure, even
the highest and most perfect Creature. So far as we deny, or doubt, or are not
assured of this, or do not take it for granted, so far it would cause us to
Judge it impossible or less probable that our Desire should be effected; and
this will either quite extinguish or flatten our Desire: for no Man ever surely
desires what he Judges an Impossibility. And as for that which he has no more
reason to judge he may than he may not obtain by his Prayer, mostwhat he will
not trouble himself about it, much less still about what he judges less
probable. Or if he may venture a Prayer, as it were, it will be mostwhat very
coldly, and not often: or in general, the Prayers will be such whose Pains are
not more than the Probability of Success.

Secondly, An Acknowledgment of his Infinite All-comprehending Knowledge. That
all things past, present and to come, possible and impossible, are always
present to his Infinite Mind and Understanding; that therefore he always know's
what is absolutely best to be done, or for the Universal Good, and therefore
Just; and that when any Desire or Prayer is propounded unto him, he can never
be ignorant or doubt whether it be to be granted or not, and how far, and
therefore cannot upon that account refrain or delay; as we know it may be in
the wisest of Men, nay in the most perfect of finite Creatures, Saints and
Angels, unless it should be revealed to us that God would always make it known
unto any of them whether any Desires which were proposed t^ them were just or
unjust; as it is certain h^ has not. And again, That he being thus Infinit^ in
Knowledge, all the Desires of our Hear^ though signified by no external Signs,
in al^ Places at all Times are perfectly seen by him Nay all the least Motions
and Operations o^ our Souls, as of all other Spirits both in Heaven and Earth,
are all open and plain to this Omnipresent and All-pervading Mind and Spirit
God; the most imperfect, unformed, confuse^ Desires of our Souls by Sighs and
Groa^^ sometimes expressed, are not hid from him Nay, He sees our Thoughts afar
off, and known what they will be, as the Scripture affirm^ Wherefore we are
sure he hears us and know^ our Desires, and we do not in the least doub^ of it:
If we did, our Belief and Confidence tha^ we shall receive what we ask, would
so fa^ fail, and consequently our Prayers or Desire so far sink, grow cold and
flat. This is the most proper and pertinent use of this Acknowledgment of the
Divine Wisdom i^ Prayer.

But there are several others by the by, an^ therefore still make it the more
reasonable. A^ (the Divine Holiness supposed) it engages us t^ Sincerity of
Intention in our Prayers; that b^ sure we do not ask any thing, with any
mixture of wicked and unallowable Intention, t^ gratify any Lust or unlawful
Appetite, that we may secretly design or glance at only, and not openly or long
attend to; as if a Man should ask of God Riches, that he might have wherewithal
to live in Luxury or Intemperance, or to maintain other sensual Lusts, or to be
equal or superior to others, to oppress them, to gratify his Envy or Revenge;
or as if we should pray to God, to keep us from the more gross and more
scandalous Sins of the World, and that we might do our Duties more to him,
perform our Religious Duties (suppose of Prayer, Hearing, Reading) that we
might be a holy People externally, nay in internal Actions too, (though so far
as we do this, we clean contrary render all bad we do) with a secret and sly
Intention and Design, that we might have Reputation for our Sanctity, be
thought well of by such and such, and consequently gain Riches, Preferment,
etc. that we might be better than others, whom we have some Anger or Envy
against, for some Difference in Persuasion, etc. and consequently diminish
their Credit or Reputation, and advance our own, and propagate some Way or
Opinion because ours, not because we sincerely see it for the Good of Mankind,
and therefore pleasing to God. When we expressly acknowledge, and attend to it,
that God knows these sly and concealed Ends, Intentions and Designs of our
Hearts, and withal knowing him to be righteous and holy, this deters us
therefrom, lest instead of being heard, we should be punished for this our
Insincerity or Hypocrisy. For Men know, that the Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, how much more when he brings it with a wicked Mind.
Nay, the Acknowledgment of the Divine Wisdom in our Prayers, engages us not
only to Sincerity of Intention in our Prayers, but to an universal Holiness. So
far forth as we are conscious to our selves, of our sincere Desires to be good,
so much more is our Confidence in God, and consequently our Desires more
heightened: But so far as we know any Sin in our selves indulged, allowed,
approved, neglected to be reformed, so much less reason and confidence we shall
have, that God will hear us, or be good to us in any kind, when we expressly
mind our selves that God sees and knows it. How dare thou that have vile
Thoughts, Designs, Affections, Inclinations, secret Actions, all as well known
to God, as if they were exposed to the Meridian Sun, ask any thing of him, or
so much as think of him? And should thou not fear, that he should punish
thee for thy Impudence and Dishonor thou do him?

3. An Acknowledgment of the Divine universal Goodness or Righteousness, which
in effect is all one; his always doing that, which is for the greatest
Perfection and Happiness of all that he has made considered together. This
gives us Assurance (and consequently emboldens our Desires) that every thing
that is righteous and just (a Condition we are always to remember in our
Prayers) shall be effected and granted. And here we may take notice of the two
Branches (for so they are) of his universal Goodness or Righteousness, viz. his
Justice, properly so called, and his Mercy. The first is the Method of
effecting the Universal Good, by permission and in^licting of Evil. The last,
by bestowing of Good.

The good use of the former is, as has been said, to engage us to all
sincerity and purity of Heart, when we approach him with our Prayers and
Desires. For he is so good to the World, that when he sees fit, he will also
certainly punish wicked persons and sinners; which may be sometimes by taking
away what they have already received and enjoy; but much more by the denial of
their Petitions for any thing they want. And so likewise God s^nercy engages
us to be good, if we would have so great a favor from him as the granting our
Petitions. For God is no more merciful, than he is just, at random: but so as
is for the best government of the World, or for the greatest good thereof and
therefore he is principally so to those who are good, to those who obey and
serve him. God indeed may sometimes see it good to bestow good things upon bad
men: but it is very little probable that he should give to a bad man any
particular good thing because asked by him at any particular time. Nay the
contrary is far more probable; viz. That he should deny and reject his petition
as a sign of his just displeasure against him. And this the consciences of
wicked men very often let them know, and make them afraid and ashamed to send
up the least desire to God; or if they do, it is with a strange faintness and
indifferency, as if they little hoped it should be accepted and return with
success. Moreover, God's mercy (as has been said of his universal goodness or
righteousness) gives us particular assurance of his granting our desires for
any thing that is good for us, if it be just and consistent with or rather part
of his universal Goodness, or his goodness to the whole World. That he is not
tyrannical, imperious, cruel, envious to the meanest of his creatures: but that
every thing which can and ought to be done, shall be done for us. Now the
express belief hereof together with his infinite Wisdom and Power begets in us
assured hope and trust for the granting our just Prayers, and consequently
enlivens and encourages them. And in some cases God himself has told us, that
it is just for him to hear our Prayers; as when we pray for pardon of sin for
Christ's sake upon our sincere repentance, and for grace to repent: Things of
so great consequence to us that we need not be much solicitous concerning any
other. Where we have not the certain assurance of the justice of our desires we
must only propose them with reference to the divine wisdom: As it is in the
case of Health, Riches, Honor, Parts, Gifts, nay all instances of power or
ability to do any thing whatever, unless it can any where appear to us, that
God has by Revelation or Reason in some particular cases promised them to us.

And here it may be useful and proper to reflect upon the several ways or
instances of God's Mercy, as they are also of his Power and Wisdom: such as his
making, sustaining, providing for all his Creatures in all respects, his
affording Means, Helps, and Assistances of being good and wise, and keeping Men
from being bad; the external ones of Direction, Instruction, Example; the
internal of the immediate Influences of his Spirit upon Men's Understandings,
Consciences, Affections, Inclinations; God's forbearance and long-suffering
till Men do repent, which may be more especially taken notice of; And lastly,
all or any (more particularly as occasion may be) the Conveniences,
Commodities, good things of this Life, as Health, Strength, Plenty, good-Name,
Friends, Deliverance from Evils or Dangers, all which will still more evidently
prove to us, and cause us longer to attend to, and more clearly to see, and
more sensibly and strongly to be affected with the divine Mercy and Bounty:
That indeed the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
works: That he is merciful, gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth. If God be not good, whence are these and all other good things to
the World? Since God is infinitely powerful and knowing to do what he pleases,
what can be the cause, besides his goodness, that there is any thing in the
World but the extremest misery? Hence consequently our Faith (that is, our
Belief and Trust) and then our Desires will be strengthened and emboldned.

Here too we may make a Reflection upon God's Veracity or his Goodness in
performing his Promises, which in the Old Testament is very often called by the
Names of Faithfulness and Truth. We may reflect generally upon God's Goodness
in the performance of what he has said, and therefore of his Promises, and
more especially upon those Promises which concern Persons in our particular
cases, if it appear there are any, he has any way by Revelation or Reason made
known and signified to us. Here further we may call to mind the past Instances
of God's Mercy and Bounty to us, and principally those which are the most like
that which we now petition for. The Reason is, because that which has been
done or come to pass has more of probability that it may and will be done
again, than that which has not. Wherefore this also will confirm our Faith,
and consequently encourage our Desire or Prayer. Of this there are many
Examples in the Scripture, especially in the Psalms.

But besides this more proper and pertinent use and effect of the express
Acknowledgment and Recital of the Divine Perfections and Attributes in Prayer,
and some few others mentioned, we may add here in short only that it causes us
to admire the Divine Perfections, to honor and reverence God in the most real
and serious manner, and in the highest degree we are capable of, to love him
freely, cheerfully, earnestly, ardently, with all our souls, with all our
might, all the strength and vigor of our spirits; all which is extraordinary
delightful, and only satisfactory to the soul of Man.

And if we leave out God, we can no where find comparably the like. God has
made us capable of the most intense and ravishing Pleasure in this enjoyment of
himself, that is, in the employment of the operations of our Minds about him,
than which, together with imitation of him, we know nothing better or greater.
A whole Universe without God or infinite Perfection is nothing comparatively:
And if we give our Minds leave to enquire, and be at l^isure long enough to
think, (...) Minds can find satisfaction, or repose no wh^re el^e.

The reason o^ which is, that there is nothing besides infinite, which is so
great, but th^^ we can conceive, and c^nsequently desire som^thing greater.

And this, among others, is one chief reason, (...) the Exercise of Prayer is
so pleasant an^ sweet to a Mind disposed to this Conversati^n and Communion
with God; to make up which complete on God's part, he may at the same time have
particular Influence upon our Souls.

Further, This express Acknowledgment of and Conversation consequently of our
minds with God spiritualizes our Minds, makes them by Use and Exercise more
capable of apprehending and being affected with all Spiritual things, as God
himself and his Perfections, our own Souls, and what belongs to them, Virtue
and Vice, Holiness and Sin, the Rewards and Punishments of Heaven and Hell, the
future States.

Again, This also enlarges and widens our Minds, makes us to be capable of and
desire and breath after the most excellent and perfect Objects; it makes us
have an Opinion of the smalness and meanness of all other things below God, and
therefore of all things that are temporary and proper to this Life, to despise
them comparatively, to aspire and breath after the greatest Perfection of Life
and State we are capable of, things every way as near infinite as we can. And
therefore a soul that has been able to be much or long thus employed,
converseth with worldly things with a kind of condescension, and more out of
necessity of this humane life, (cheerfully notwithstanding acquiescing in it as
the divine Will) than out of choice. But of this more particularly hereafter.

Again, It begets in us Humility, and maintains it, whilst we cannot avoid
sometimes reflecting upon and comparing our selves with God, to whom, what a
nothing are we when we are clothed with our best qualities, and adorned with
our most beautiful Plumes, for which we are so apt to be immoderately taken
with, and to have too great an opinion of our selves. Whilst also we take
notice we have nothing from our selves, but are fain to be Beggars and
Almspeople for all we have. God the Almighty and All-good is the great Father
and Householder of all the World, his Family; And neither we nor any thing else
have the least Crum of Bread but what is by his Provision and Appointment.

And lastly, To name no more, all this Conversation of our Minds with God,
disposes us certainly to an universal Imitation and Obedience, and
consequently to universal H^liness and Righteousness, to all manner of Virtue
and Goodness in the greatest sincerity, generosity and constancy, (for so he
is, and so he has commanded) and consequently to our own Perfection and
Happiness, by procuring of, and being instrumental to, according to our own
Measure and Proportion, the greatest good of the whole, the last end of all
Being and Action.

And these are the Reasons of this part of Prayer, of some of which again, and
more in another general Head.

Of this first thing in Prayer, we have every where Examples in the Scriptures.
In the Lord's Prayer our Address is made to God by the name of Father, which is
to put us in mind of the tender goodness of God in producing us, sustaining us,
providing for us constantly, educating and bringing us up, providing Portions
for us hereafter. And the first Petition is, That his Name may be hallowed,
that is, that we might have a due Opinion of, and a just, and therefore a
peculiar Honor for him, whereby he is separated from all other things. But
especially that which is called the Doxology, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. is
nothing but this sol^^n acknowledgment of God's Excellencies; and it is set
down as a Reason of the preceding Petition, Deliver us from Evil, For thine is
the Kingdom, etc. that is, Thou indeed art King emphatically, thou have right
and power to grant these things: And thine is the Power, Thou indeed art
powerful, to thee eminently belongs Power; for in thee it is infinite, supreme,
uncontrollable, nay all Power is thine. Thine is the Glory, that is, All
glorious things for which one is to be praised, extolled, honored, glorified,
(an ordinary Hebrew Metonymy) are in thee, and appertain to thee, and therefore
we ought to pray unto thee.

So when the Apostles and Disciples were to choose either Barsabas or Matthias
by Lot into the place of Judas, they prayed and said, Thou, Lord, which know
the Hearts of all Men, show whether of these two thou have chosen. To their
Petition they premise an Acknowledgment of God's Omniscience, very proper to
that Petition: they desired that God would choose, and that because he knew
certainly which was fittest to be chosen, Acts 1. Verse 24. Another Instance of
a pretty long Prayer of the Disciples we have, Acts 4. Verse 24. When Peter and
John were commanded by the Rulers, the Elders, Scribes and High Priest, that
they should not speak nor preach in the Name of Jesus, but threatened them
probably with Death or very severe Punishment if they did; their Prayer or
Petition was, That God would behold their Threatenings, and grant to them, that
notwithstanding they might with all boldness speak God's Word; to which they
premise God's infinite Power and Wisdom in the creating of all things, and his
Providence in foreseeing them; that therefore he knew what was then done or
designed, and was powerful to secure them from all their malicious and severe
threats, and to bear up their courage against them, yea and against the
Execution of them too. Ver. 24. Lord, thou art God which have made Heaven and
Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is. In the Old Testament read
Hezekiah's Prayer, when Sennacherib, King of Assyria, sent that blasphemous and
vaunting insolent Letter to him; Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive
thee, etc. Kings 2. 19. 10. and Verse 15. etc. He prays, O Lord God of Israel,
who dwell between the Cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all
the Kingdoms of the Earth; Lord bow down thine ear and hear, open thine eyes
and see, and hear the words of Sennacherib, which has sent him to reproach the
living God, (in opposition to the dead Idols, whether the Images themselves, or
inanimate things, or dead persons represented by them.) And Verse 19. Now
therefore, O Lord our God, I beseech thee, save-thou us out of his hands, that
all the Kingdoms of the Earth may know that thou art the Lord God, even thou
only. He premises the express Acknowledgment of the Divine Supreme and
Uncontrollable Power to his Petition, both as an Honor to his God, and a cause
of Confidence and Faith in himself, and consequently of his petitioning God.
And this especially was most seasonable, where there was some Power, (viz.)
that of Sennacherib and his false Gods opposed to the true God, and which
indeed had prevailed against the reputed Gods of other Nations, which were in
truth no Gods. And so it is always most proper where there is any thing that
seems to flatten or weaken our desire, there to take notice of some Attribute
in God just contrary, which may easily excite and embolden it.

In David's Psalms nothing more frequent, and particularly in the 86. Psalm:
Read the whole Psalm at leisure, Verse 5. After several Petitions, he
strengthens and confirms his Faith and Prayer, by the Consideration of the
Divine Goodness; For thou, Lord, art good and ready to forgive, and plenteous
in Mercy unto all them that call upon thee: And Verse 8, 9, 10. from the
consideration of his Supreme Power; Among the Gods there is none like unto
thee, O Lord, neither are there any works like unto thy Works. All Nations whom
thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorisie
thy Name. For thou art great, an^ do wondrous things; thou art God alom
Verse 13. is a particular Acknowledgment o^ God's Mercy, and a Reslection upon
his pa^^ Goodness to him, For great is thy Mercy to wards me, and thou have
delivered my Soul from the lowest Hell. That is, my Life from the low Grave, or
from Death. And lastly Verse 15, 16. But thou, O Lord, art a God fu^ of
compassion, and gracious; long-suffering, any plenteous in Mercy and Truth. O
turn unto me and have mercy upon me, etc. The Reader may himself casily observe
many places in these Excellent Psalms; and I cite these Examples, to give him
an occasion of observing these, and such like places of the Scripture.

And to make our Apprehensions of God^ insinite Excellencies and Persections
more clear and strong, we may here mention o^ take notice of our own
Infirmities, Weaknesses, or Imperfections, that so by the apprehension and
compare of these contraries we may the more clearly apprchend the Greatness of
the other. It will also well come in as a distinct Particular just after this,
or immediately before our Petitions to render them still more earnest and
ardent, because we do not use to ask of any one, or at least importunately,
when we can probably or possibly have it done elsewhere, and least of all if we
can do it our selves.

Nay, here we may mention and reslect upon the insufficiency of all the
Creatures in the World without God and independent upon him, to help us and do
us good; and that what they can do is only by his power and appointment. And
that therefore there is a Necessity of God's Help, or we must be quite
helpless; This necessity of having all from God, will still make our Desires
more importunate particu'arly toward him: But more of this hereafter.

II. The second Action or Operation of Soul in a Prayer, is generally
Confession. For sometimes this Part, as also others of Prayer, except Petition,
may be omitted or used more sparingly according as the Occasion is. By which I
mean (as in all parts of Prayer) not Words, or any other external Actions or
Postures, but an express Attention to, and Judgment that we are or have been
guilty of some Sins or Faults directed and proposed to God, which supposes a
free and impartial Disallowance, Disapprobation and Dislike, and consequently a
Determination and Resolution of Soul to quit and abandon them, and to do so no
more. An express and willing Judgment concerning our selves, that we are guilty
of some things which are not reasonable and cannot be justified, is certainly,
I say, a sign of a present changed Mind and Resolution to be guilty no more;
for what we have no mind to leave, and yet know it not justifiable, we conceal
it from others and our selves too, as much as we can, and will not attend to
it, nor take notice of the unreasonableness and iniquity of it, lest we should
be engaged and pulled by contrary Appetites, (as that of good Opinion of others
and of our selves concerning our selves, and that of Virtue, Justice, Right,
often signisied by the name of Conscience, (of which last there is somewhat in
the worst of Men) to leave that which we love better, and be disturbed in the
enjoyment of it, and consequently possess it with less delight and satisfaction.

After this Change of mind, must needs also succeed a hatred and aversation
from the sin for the time to come, and a serious and sincere sorrow that we
have been so foolish, unreasonable, unhappy for the time past; on set purpose
that we may be the more cautious, and flee more therefrom for the suture.

This Confession is very proper in Prayer, for it does strengthen and embolden
our desires thus: It is a sign to us of a serious and real goodness in us, as I
have just now said; and what is so, confirms our Faith and Hope of God's
particular goodness to us, and that we are more capable of his Favors: As
being conscious to our selves of the Badness and Wickedness of our Temper, of
too great kindness for any sin, weakens and oppresses them. For we all
naturally know God is righteous and good to the World, and that it is most for
the good government of it, that he should put good men into a good, and bad men
into a bad condition; that it should be well with the one, and ill with the
other generally. But now what confirms our Faith and Hope, emboldens our
desire; what weakens and sinks them, and makes it less probable we should
obtain any thing, though we should desire it never so importunately, cools and
allays our desire too.

And here the more comprehensive and particular and accurate our Confession is,
so that we conceal not the least Fault, but take notice even of small ones; the
more it is also principally of the greatest and foulest, the most dear pleasant
and delightful sins, the more it is of the aggravating circumstances of any
sin, that is, of those things which are signs of a greater degree of sinfulness
in us, (such as are, being against great means to be better, against much
knowledge both of our duty and of the mischievous consequences of our sins,
against the divine bounty, elemency, or justice, or the like) I say the more
our Confession is thus performed, the more still it is a sign of a greater
degree of sincere and real goodness, and consequently still more confirms and
strengthens both our hopes and desires.

Besides this more immediate and proper use thus of Confession, there are also
many others. As that it is an exercise of our disapprobation, hatred, sorrow of
and for sin, an^ consequently confirms it, and our resolution to be good, or it
strengthens us in goodness The more often we attend to the ugliness an^
unreasonableness of sin, and are affected wit^ actual hatred and sorrow for it,
the more shall we be resolved against it, earnestly desire to prevent it,
especially what we man be in most danger of, to be purified an^ purged from
what we have still remaining in us, to have it quite extirpated out of o^
minds, never to have it come near ^ again, as he that has and understands the
danger of the Plague, or some killing insectious Disease. Moreover, a hearty
and fre^ Confession, if we have been guilty, gives u^ a great deal of comfort
and joy and ease in ou^selves, as an evidence and sign of goodnes^ in us, and
consequently that we are in a sa^^ condition. The same which that pious Soul
David seems to affirm of himself, Psalm. 32. Verse 3, 5. Whilst I kept silence,
my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long. Probably he
particularly refers to his two great sins, in which he lay for some time,
concealing them and passing them over as well as he could, but his conscience
could not always be quiet, he was sometimes full of fear and shame, and
sadness and anxiety, and secret complaints. But then in the 5th Verse, he
acknowledged his sin unto God, and his iniquity he did not hide, he consessed
his transgressions unto the Lord, and God forgave him. As the other caused
great disquiet, this gave him ease. Besides, it begets and maintains in us some
branches of humility; it gives us a just and true opinion of our selves, of our
imperfections, as well as perfections; it makes us more see and acknowledge our
obligations to and dependence upon God; it makes us less fastuous and
unreasonably contemptuous of others compared with our selves; It makes us more
to observe, and be sensible of the desert of the great punishment due to sin
(God's goodness not considered;) and more earnestly, to desire and sue for
pardon and forgiveness from God, and more to reckon our selves obliged to him,
and more to love him for it when granted; all which have further good effects
still.

The Examples of this in Scripture are frequent, ordinary and well known; as in
Nehemiah's Prayer, ( Nehem. 1.) for God's acceptance and favor in general to
him and the Jews; and particularly, that he would give him favor with the King
of Persia, that he might go and build Jerusalem. He confesses, that he and his
Fathers had sinned, had dealt corruptly and proudly against God, and had not
kept his Commandments: A more large and particular confession of the Levites,
is in the 9th Chapt. of Nehem. In David's Psalm are every where Examples,
especially when he prays for the pardon of his sins: in Psalm 51. he earnestly
importunes God for the forgiveness of his two great sins, Verse 3, 4, 5. and
then follows, I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.
And more generally, the corruption or depravation of his nature (it seems the
most probable, as it is a true sense) is confessed by him, Behold, I was shapen
in Iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. And Psalm 79. Verse 5. O God
thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee. He petitions
God for help and deliverance, both before and after. And here, after
confession, it may be seasonable to ask God pardon for the same faults we
confessed, and consequently that we may be the more capable of his favor in
granting the other Petitions we shall make to him at the same time.

SECT. V.
III. A Third Ingredient of Prayer, is Profession of future Obedience. An
express devoting our selves to God's will, and consequently to all instances of
goodness and holiness. An actual resolution directed to God, that we will not
be any more guilty of those faults we confessed, nor any other to the utmost of
our power. This, if it be sincere, is usually accompanied with a very serious
and earnest entreaty, and beseeching of God's grace and assistance for that
end, and a dependency upon him, and trust in him for it. Now this proceeds from
the same habitual temper of mind that free confession did, which sometimes may
be preceded also by some actual resolution; but here it is more express. Here
is excited on purpose by the soul her self, an actual inclination, will and
resolution, determination, bent purpose of particular and universal obedience.
The principal reason of this is the same with the former, and in the same
manner, it strengthens and emboldens our Petitions and Desires. For this
express and vigorous devoting our selves to obedience to God, is certainly an
evident sign to our selves of so much goodness in us, and consequently that we
are more capable of God's favor, and that it is more consistent with his
universal goodness, righteousness or distributive justice to bestow good things
upon us, and particularly this which we now ask from him.

This further therefore excites in us an Opinion or Faith, and consequently
Trust, that our Petitions may and will be granted, which, as I before said,
confirms and strengthens our Desire. Whereas on the contrary, finding the Soul
backward and detracting, loath and withdrawing it self from this frank Obedience
to God, as having some sin it knows well, and is unwilling to leave, makes a
Man very justly ashamed and afraid to ask of God any thing. And here we shall
do well to have a special care we do not cosen our selves by a rash and
heedless, or premeditated Forgetfulness and Non-attendency, out of
Self-flattery or Pride; and think and protest we do most universally quit our
love to every sin, and give up our selves to divine Obedience; when, if we took
time and carefully examined, we might find something for the present, (it may
be many Lusts) unmortified, which upon Occasion would be too hard for our
Obedience. Nor may it be amiss to remember that there may be some lust, which
we might never have had the experience of, and consequently which we cannot
discover with strictest examination. Have we a care also that we do not mistake
in the Nature of Goodness, its Instances and Degrees: and confusedly fancy and
conceit our selves good, when we are not so, or much more so than we are; and
that we being therefore without doubt very dear to God, he must needs hear us;
a thing but too frequent. Wherefore much Care and much Modesty well becomes us,
and we should refer our selves to God who perfectly knows the habitual Frame
and Temper of our Minds after our own best Examination of our selves.

But besides this Principal and most proper Reason, there are also (as before)
some others. As that this strong and vigorous Act of our Souls confirms and
strengthens their habitual Inclination to Goodness. This also confirms in us
and makes more ready at hand the Opinion of God's Universal Goodness and
Justice, and engages us to expect nothing from the Hand of God asked or
unasked, except we be in some degree good. Examples of this are very frequent
in the Psalms. Psalm 7. Verse 1. David prays to God to save him from his
Enemies, Save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me. And Ver. 6.
Arise, O Lord, in thine Anger; lift up thy self, because of the rage of mine
Enemies.

But Verse. 3, 4. he reflects upon his past Innocence, and particularly in
something his Enemies or his Conscience might suggest whether he was not
guilty, and upon the greatness of his Goodness and Charity; that he had not
only done good to his Friends, but even to his causless Enemies; [and surely he
judged himself to be still the same, and that he was not changed for the worse]
which without doubt gave him humble Boldness and Confidence of success, and
consequently was the cause of the Earnestness and Strength of his Desire, that
God would be pleased at that time to do that favor for him. O Lord, my God, if
I have done this [that is, it may be, something his Enemies might accuse him
of, or his Conscience bid him to enquire into; or more particularly, if he had
done that to them, which they did to him, ( viz.) persecuted them, and
endeavored and contrived to do them mischief causlesly] If I have rewarded
evil to him that was at peace with me, (viz.) his Friends, or who had done him
no hurt: Yea I have delivered him who without cause is mine Enemy: Then let the
Enemy persecute my Soul, yea let him tread my Life down in the Earth, and lay
mine Honor in the Dust. If David had been conscious to himself of the like
Injustice, or of any other Sin approved; that he had been, was, and would be so
for the future; he would not have had the Confidence to have desired this of
God. And so in many places where he prays to God for some Favor, he professes
himself God's servant; Psalm 86. Verse 4. Rejoice the Soul of thy Servant.
Verse 11. He prays to God, to teach him his way, and he would walk in his
Truth. That which was truly God's Way, and was truly right and to be done. And
Verse 12. he professes he would praise God and glorify his Name; which were
Signs and Branches of his Goodness. And then Verse 16. he prays, O turn unto
thy Servant, and save the Son of thine Handmaid Psalm. 119. Verse 94. I am
thine, save me, for I have sought thy Precepts. He had endeavored and desired
to obey God, and he had given himself up to him ( I am thine) (or God had
especially designed him to serve him in the Kingdom) therefore he was bolder
to pray God would save him, or deliver him from the Evils he was in danger of.
And Psalm 143. Verse 12. Of thy Mercy cut off mine Enemies, and destroy all
them that afflict my Soul (Suppose them so to continue as long as they had
life, and were able, and not to repent) for I am thy Servant. And this is the
best sort of Vows, when a Man not only upon Condition that God will give him
any certain thing he craves, expressly wills and obliges himself to do this or
that particular good Work, or abstain from this or that Fault or bad Action:
but beforehand he gives up himself entirely to God, and vows and promises he
will be his servant universally; and more particularly it may be too, where he
thinks he may do the most good, or where he has been the most faulty: And as
for his Desires and Requests, he refers them to the Divine Righteousness and
Wisdom. He makes no bargain with God, only those Duties which can only be done
upon Condition of God's bestowing his requested Favors, may be promised and
professed by him conditionally. As for example, to thank and praise God
particularly for any Favor conferred; which cannot be, if it be never received.

SECT. VI.
IV. A Fourth Ingredient in Prayer is Thanksgiving; that is, an actual loving
of God for his Benefits already received. And this contributes to the
strengthening and invigorating of our Prayers and Desires too. It is (as the
rest before) a necessary Sign, according to the degree of its vigor and
frequency, of the same degree of Goodness in us. For if we love God for his
Benefits, we shall naturally desire to please him, and to seek to know what
does so: and that, we cannot be ignorant, is by doing his Will, or by keeping
his Commands with Care, to be universally holy, good and righteous in the grand
Instance of universal Benevolence, and consequently Self-denial, and all the
Branches thereof. I say according to the degree of its Vigor and Frequency.
For it is no wonder to see one who loves God for his Benefits, but seldom, now
and then only, for one Fit, in a Prayer, never thinking of it afterward; or in
mean and low degree; one who loves God less and less often than many other
Objects: I say, it is no wonder to see such a Person to sin and offend as often
as these Objects are his Temptations: But if we loved God vigorously, and more
than any other Objects, and so frequently that it became an habitual Temper of
our Souls, it would most certainly produce in us the Effect of universal
Holiness. And so far forth as we find it in intensness and constancy in our
selves, so far is it a sign thereof, and gives us reason consequently to think
our selves acceptable to God, and that it may be the more reasonable and just
for him to bestow the good things we ask.

I do not think that Love to God for his Benefits conferred upon ones self, or
Thankfulness is a principal Virtue, but an excellent instrumental one it is: It
is not an Instance of formal Goodness or Virtue, but it is a very frequent
means thereof, and therefore a sign. But to love God for himself as a part, or
rather infinitely, the most considerable thing in the whole Universe, and
therefore above all things, and with reference to the whole; this is indeed the
noblest Instance of our Holiness. The free and generous Acknowledgment and
Resentment of God our Benefactor, of the Divine Favors already received, is
one good Use, Effect or Improvement of them, which has a further one still; (
viz.) it causes us to please God by keeping his Commands, and becoming
universally holy and good, as I have before instanced; and being a very
probable sign of this, i^ gives us a just Faith and Confidence, and heightens
our Prayers and Desires from God. Ingratitude, that is, a Neglect or Contempt
of God's Favors already bestowed, we may be sure can give us no Encouragement;
but it is a sign of a dull, sensual, selfish; or wicked Mind, and so at least
of defect o^ Goodness.

Again, actual Love to God for Favors received, impresseth upon our Minds the
Memory of his past Goodness, and consequently gives us reason to argue he may
be good to us again [supposing we see no Circumstances to alter the Case] in
those things we now ask: And the more still, if the Favors we have already
received be of the same kind with those we do now desire. If it were before, it
may be now [for ought we see] just and reasonable for God to hear us. And this
emboldens, animates and enlivens our Petition or Desire still more.

There are besides these more proper, other collateral good Effects of
Thanksgiving to God. It is a very pleasant thing. For what more so than Love?
what more delicious and sweet? And what Friend is capable of being loved more
than God? Where Is such a Friend and Benefactor as he from whom we have all?
Again, the Reflection upon our own Security, upon our own Assurance of good
things for the future, from the Experience of and Attention to the Divine
Benignity and Goodness, is a very pleasing and satisfactory thing, that we are
in the Hands of Infinite Goodness; all which our Thanksgiving gives occasion
for. And this we are most sensible of, when under any Frights or Fears of some
great Evils just ready to fall upon us: then we greedily call to mind God's
past Goodness.

But here we must have a care of loving God ultimately and only for being
particularly good to us, without at least some habitual reference of it to the
use of pleasing him by doing the most Good we can; as a Man might love a good
Master or any Person or Thing that is useful to himself, not much caring
whether he be so to any body else: all which indeed is no better than
selfishness: But we must look upon God's Goodness to us as one particular
Instance of that Universal Goodness to all for which we love him, and whereby
we are engaged to love and please him, and consequently to do good to all
himself does, and to be perfect and happy i^ so being and doing: all which
together is t^ be our last End. We are indeed for the m^ part more sensible of
those his personal E^vours, because ordinarily we cannot so we apprehend others
Satisfaction and Please as our own: But we ought equally to that God for his
Benefits to others and our selve^ if we could alike apprehend them.

And here we may do well sometimes (...) to aggravate God's Goodness, that is,
to t^ notice of those Circumstances which a^signs of the greatness thereof. As,
that is the most free and undeserved. For wh^ Addition of Good can we make to
him? (...) what can we give him that is not his ow^ or what Law or Power
superior to Hims^^^ (to his own Nature) obliges and controlle him? We may
also remember our selves (...) God is good to us when we are bad, wh^ we are
negligent and take no notice there ungrateful, undutiful, nay make ill use his
Favors, abuse them; [for this God m^ do for some reasons, though we have (...)
advantage of probability to expect it] whi^^ is a sign of more pure, free and
sincere Goo^ness or Love to others. For we think no Person can expect any
Recompense for his Goo^ness from one he knows is unable, much le^ from one he
knows unwilling and loves hi^ not. All this is to be done, that we may be more
deeply affected with the Divine Goodness for the Ends aforesaid. We may read
Jacob's Prayer to be delivered from his Brother Esau as an Instance, Genesis 32.
Verse 9, 10, 11. In the 10th Verse, before his Prayer, he takes notice of God's
manifold Mercies to him without doubt with Thanks, and particularly of his
Wealth and Increase that God had blessed him withal. I am not worthy of the
least of all thy Mercies, and of all the Truth, which thou have showed to thy
servant; for with my Staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
Bands. In the Psalms we meet often with Thanksgivings and Petitions, Praises
and Prayers joined together. Psalm 144, in the two first Verses, David blesses
and thanketh God: Blessed be the Lord my strength, who teaches my Hands to
war, etc. who subdueth the People under me. And then Verse the 5th, he
petitions and prays for the long continuance of the like Goodness in God: and
Verse 7. Send thine Hand from above, rid me, and deliver me out of great
Waters, from the Hands of strange Children. And Psalm 3. Verse 3, 4, 7. And
Psalm 9. to Verse 13. is most Acknowledgments and Praises, and then a Prayer,
Have Mercy upon me, O Lord; consider my Troubles which I suffer of them that
hate me, thou that liftest me up from the Gates of Death. And Psalm 13, after
his Petition in the 6th Verse, he says he will sing unto the Lord because he
has dealt bountifully with him.

SECT. VII.
V. A Fifth Ingredient in a Prayer, is som^times particular explication of o^
Case, either of the one or more go^ things we desire to have, or of the Evil
thing we desire to be delivered from; a more ^^stinct Representation and View
of them ^rected to God. And this then especially when we intend to make a more
particular expre^^ Address to God in secret or in public, alo^ or with others,
for one or for some few co^tain things.

It may be done sometimes [as when (...) find our selves very sensible and
clearly apprehensive of, and affected with the goodne^^ of any thing] in our
Prayers for ordina^^ and general good things. Here also m^ come in the reasons
or grounds of our gre^^ Desires at this time; such as now the gre^^ Goodness of
the things, their Necessity, Diff^culty, if not Impossibility by any second
Ca^ses we yet see, or the like.

Now the use of this is not to acquaint God more particularly with our Case, or
to move him to be the more favorable to us, or pit^ us, by giving him a
distinct Knowledge of what we need or desire: not so much as the most general
Prayer and Desire is needful for that such as the Poets was approved by
Socrates, and extant in Brodaeus's Collection of Greek Epigrams: Plat. Alcib.
2. Brod. Epig. lib. 1. Xenoph. Memorab. lib. 1. (...).
viz. That Jupiter would give him good things whether he asked them or no, and
keep evil things from him though he should pray for them: And another of his
mentioned by Xenophon, viz. That the Gods would give him good things, leaving
it to them, as best knowing what were such, to choose for him: No, but one
principal reason is, to cause our selves longer to attend to our Wants, we
doing it more particularly and distinctly, and consequently to be more affected
with them, and so more passionately, earnestly and importunately to desire the
supply of them. A very confused general short transient Apprehension of the
Goodness or Badness of things, does not generally so deeply affect us, or raise
up such strong Passions in us, as a more particular, distinct and longer one,
by frequent smart Bouts (yet not so continuedly long as to tire us) does.

For the same cause may the grounds or reasons of the Greatness of our Desires
be mentioned, such as the great Consequence of the things, nay their Necessity;
which is nothing but so great a Goodness of the things as we cannot be content
to want, nor help it, but that the want thereof will afflict and pain us. Here
sometimes the many good effects of the granting our desires may be more
particularly reckoned up and insisted on: as also the many difficulties and
improbabilities of our desires being effected by an^ second causes we see. For
these more distinctly and longer attended to, do make our Prayers directed to
God immediately for h^ Care and Influence more strong and fervent Things judged
of little moment, will hardly draw any, or but a slight Prayer from us Things
that we see in the Power of secon^ Causes, which we can command to effect we
judge them in a manner done and effec^ already; we see the thing future in the
Cause and therefore rather to be praised than prayer for: Things also that are
easy to be done ^ second Causes, have a great probability of the^ being done
and accomplished without o^ Prayer, and therefore much slackens or coo^ our
Desires.

But here we must provide that all these grounds be true; that the things we
judg^ of such particular good Consequence and Effect really be so; that there
is really so much Improbability, Difficulty or Impossibility to us in the
obtaining our Desires any other way than by God's special Influence; as we say
there is: of which somewhat hereafter* The Example of this we have in
Hezekiah's Prayer before cited: 2 Kings, 19. Ver. 17. Of a truth, Lord (says
he) the Kings of Assyria have destroyed the Nations and the Lands, and have
cast their gods into the Fire, etc. This seems to intimate some Danger, that
they might do so to him and his People too; some Probability of it, some
Difficulty to prevent it: But yet he gives himself a reason why the Lord their
God could prevent it, though those other Nation's gods could not: though there
was Difficulty or Danger as to second Causes; yet none as to the Lord Jehovah
their God; and therefore he prayed to him to save him out of Sennacherib's
H^nds, Verse 19. with this reason, That all the Kingdoms of the Earth may know,
that thou art the Lord God, even thou only. This reason is an Instance of the
Goodness of the thing he desires; it is one good Effect and Consequence of his
Deliverance by the Lord, which therefore made him more bold and earnestly to
desire it, ( viz.) the Knowledge and Honor of him the only true God in the
World, and especially in their neighboring Idolatrous Nations.

In the Psalms [most of which have some Prayer or other in them] it is very
frequent. The 88. Psalm, most of it is o^ this Nature. From the 3d Verse to the
9th, is David's recital to God of his Case, most in general Terms; only one
Verse is more particular. Verse 3. My Soul is full of Troubles, and my Life
draws nigh unto the Grave; I am counted with them that go down into the Pit:
I am as a Man that has no Strength. That is, his Anxiety and Grief was so
great, so heavy, that it was near killing and oppressing him quite. And Verse
7. Thy Wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy Waves.
That is, with many and many sorts of Afflictions. And in the 8th Verse more
particularly: Thou have put away my acquaintance far from me, etc. One Evil he
complained of was, that his Friends were false unconstant, turned his Enemies;
either the^ dared not, or could not help him. As in the 18. Verse again, His
Acquaintance were it Darkness ( viz.) in Prison or Affliction, o^ they were
gone he knew not where. An^ then in the 13. and 14. Verses. He prays t^ God for
his Favor to help and rescue him From the 15. Verse again to the end he
proceeds in his rehearsal of his pitiful Condition In the 10, 11, 12, Ver. too
he mentions the Necessity, and one good Consequence of hi^ Deliverance from
these great Pressures Will thou show Wonders to the Dead, etc. An^ shall thy
Loving Kindness be declared in the Grave, or thy Faithfulness in Destruction^
shall thy Wonders be known in the dark, and thy Righteousness in the Land of.
Forgetfulness? The sense of this is, That he should soon die, if God did not
help him, and put him into a better Condition. That these kinds or instances of
Favors, ( viz.) Deliverance from such his Enemies; and the like could not be
shown but in this Life; not after Death. And then again, one good Effect of
God's Pleasure to deliver him here, would be great Thanks to him, and Praises
and honoring of him, by his publishing and proclaiming this his especial
Goodness, and that in particular of his Faithfulness, which would not be in the
State after Death: or at least his Death and Destruction by such means would be
no such Argument of his Goodness to him, as his Life and Preservation would be.

The like we have again in the 79. Psalm, which is a public Prayer, and most
probably was written after the Captivity of Babylon. And the Title Psalm of
Asaph, may signify that it was composed either by some Asaph about that time,
or else by some other devout Person in Imitation of Asaph. From the first to
the fourth Verse is a Declaration of the miserable State of the Jews. O God,
the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance, thy holy People have they defiled;
they have laid Jerusalem upon Heaps. And then Verse 5. How long, Lord? will thou be angry for ever? That is, we earnestly beseech thee, that thou would
not, etc. and so on in Verse 6. the rest is a mixture of those two, ( viz.)
Declaration or Proposal of their Condition, and Petition. Only in Verse 10, and
13, are mentioned good Consequences of the granting their humble Desires as
Reasons of their Hopes and Prayers, ( viz.) the Prevention of the dishonouring
the God of Israel among the idolatrous Heathen. Wherefore should the Heathen
say, where is now their God? And then their Love, Praise and Thankfulness to
him for his Deliverance. So we thy People and Sheep of thy Pasture will give
thee Thanks for ever, etc. These are but for Instances, we may observe the like
in most Psalms.

SECT. VIII.
THe Sixth and last Ingredient in a VI.
Prayer, is Petition, an express Desire that God would bestow upon us some
thing. This I make the very essence of Prayer, without which no Prayer. A
Prayer may be without the rest of the ingredients, but no Prayer could be
without this; It would be called by another Name; they are all principally for
the sake of this, as I have in every Particular showed. They are but Helps to
make this more fervent or more comprehensive, particular and distinct, or more
continued and lasting, etc.

Now there are two things generally herein to be considered and regarded, the
S^nse and the Passion, together with some consequent Disposition impressed upon
the will, which is the effect of all passions: the Things prayed for or
desired, and the Desire it self. And so in all the other parts of Prayer. In
Acknowledgment are the divine Persections acknowledged, and the Affections of
Admiration, Honor, Reverence, Fear, Love, Joy, etc. In Confession the sins
acknowledged, and Grief, Sorrow, Hatred, Conter^pt of them and for them: In
Profession the sense of what we profess, and the Passion and Disposition of
Devotion, Resolution or obediential Inclination. In Thanksgiving, the Things
thanked for and Love for them or Gratitude: Nay, in the R^^ital and Explication
of our Cases, the Sense recited, and our Passion of Fear, Grief, Desire. The
Sense or Things desired, and the Passion of Desire and its degrees, are
variously expressed and signified in the same Sentence. The general thing
expressly or supposedly desired, is, That God would grant us the thing we desire
(An account of the particular things to be desired will be another general
Head) by many words in the Scripture expressed both proper and figurative; as
give, grant, hearken, see, behold, look down, regard, turn not away, hide not
thy Face remember, forget us not, etc. many more such figurative expressions
especially may be met withal; because when Men will and are inclined to grant
any thing to a Petirioner, there are these bodily Motions or mental Actions
which accompany it, or have some Relation to it: All which in God signify
nothing but to will the thing desired, and to effect it; that he would command
or will such a thing to be done. The Passion of Desire is sometimes expressed
in Sentences with Interrogations, or the like Schemes o^ Speech.

In the Psalms which are very Rhetorical (one part of which is to have Passions
and great ones well expressed and signified) nothing more frequent: As Psalm
88. Verse 14. Why castest thou off my Soul? why hidest tho^ thy Face from me?
That is, I earnestly beseech thee not to withhold thy Favor from me. And will thou be angry with us for ever? Will thou draw out thine Anger to all
Generations? That is, we importunately desire of thee that thou would be
pleased to cease to punish us. And so sometimes Multitude of Words more
signify some degree of Passion than any different sense. Nay very often the
multitude of single Words do not signify any different Senses or Idea's, but
only some degree of Passion. For the use of many words to express one thing
commonly proceeds from the m^nds being longer detained in the thought of it by
some passion. As when I call a thing noble, excellent, incomparable, all th^se
Words together generally express or are a sign of not so many different senses;
but only of a degree of Affection; nay very often some certain single words or
phrases signisie not the Idea's or Conceptions of things only: but withal a
degree of some Affection or Passion; as of Admiration, Love, Desire, as in the
words just now mentioned. So the word wretched Sinner to some Persons signifies
not only the sense or conception of a man's being a great sinner: but withal a
greater degree of Hatred or Contempt or Indignation, than the word great
Sinner. But of this more, and more particularly where we give some Directions
concerning the Signs of our Sense and Passions, such as are Speech and Gesture.

From what has been discoursed concerning the Ingredients of a Prayer, we may
observe, that it thus performed contains all the parts of divine Worship. For
there can be no other or more than to have God the Object of the Operations of
our Souls, which is internal Worship, and to signify this by some s^nsible
signs of certain Motions either of some part or of the whole of our Body, which
is external Worship. And more particularly to have him the Object of our
Understanding, Will, Affections: and more particularly yet, to think of and
contemplate as distinctly as we can his Nature and Actions, his Attribu^es and
the infinite variety of the effects thereof, generally comprehended under the
three heads of Creation, Preservation, Providence: To honor, reverence and
admire God for those his infinite Perfections, to love him for them and for the
particular Effects thereof to our selves and to all his Creatures, to desire to
please him, to desire him, that is to desire to enjoy him by Contemplation and
Love, and to desire from him all things, to rejoice and delight our selves in
him, i. e. in the enjoyment of himself and Possession of his Favor, to put our
Trust and Confidence in him, to devote our selves to obey him, nay universally
to will as he wills, both what ought to be done, or the Matter of his Commands,
and what shall come to pass in the World, or the Matter of his Decrees o^
Appointments: The former of which may be called active Obedience; the latter
passive, etc. I say these things, and such like when signified and expressed by
any sensible signs of the Motions of some part or the whole of our Bodies, as
Words and external Actions, contain the whole of Worship; and to do all these
in such manner as the Infinity of each of the divine Perfections respectively
requires is divine Worship. That is among other things for instance sake only,
to do them universally in all things, perpetually, habitually, with the utmost
vigor and strength of our Souls; to God ultimately; with the greatest Company
or Number that can conveniently do it in one place; at the same time with all
others in different places; and finally to him alone, as a sign of his unity,
or of his being God alone, which is one attribute of his nature: to discourse
all which particularly belongs to another Argument.

CHAP. II. The Second general Head is the several sorts of Prayer.
THe Divisions of Prayer may be numerous, as many ( viz.) as there are Logical
Relations. Many of the ordinary ones are of no great use; some of them may be
these.

SECT. I.
I. ONe Distinction is into Mental and V^cal, from one sort of Adjuncts:
Me^tal, is that which is conceived in the Mi^ only: Vocal, that which is
expressed ^ Words. This Distinction, if of any concer or use to be mentioned,
should have been in^ a Prayer not signified to others, or signify both by
Words and other external Signs ^ bodily Action or Motion.

SECT. II.
II. THey distinguish it into ejaculato^ and set Prayers, or into occasional a^
fixed or designed. The one is when any thi^ occurring to a Man's Thoughts, and
^^pearing on a sudden very good or bad, ^^ cites some smart Passion in him, and
cause^ him to dart up a Desire to God to give it hi^ or keep it from him. As
when one observ^ an approaching Temptation, and perceive himself in danger to
be overcome, his ino^dinate Appetite or some Passion beginning^ stir, and to
grow boisterous, he smartl^ breaths out a warm Desire for the divine Assistance
and Help, oft-times utterly unobserved by any, though perhaps in the mid^ of
Company. So when a person in his s^ Reflection or occasional thoughts takes
notice of and clearly apprehends the Iniquity, the Unreasonableness, the Folly,
the Mischievousness either of Sin in general, or of any particular inordinate
and immoderate Appetite, or Lust; or on the other hand the profitableness, and
consequently the reasonableness and wisdom (if there be any difference in the
World in our Actions, and all things be not alike eligible) of Virtue in
general, or of any particular one, as of Charity, Self-denial, Humility,
Spirituality; I say when one clearly apprehends these things, his Soul may of a
sudden swell and burst with a mighty Desire that the Almighty, and Allgood God
would purge, rescue and preserve it from such base and detestable things as his
Lusts* or that he would ingenerate, increase and confirm in him that noble,
excellent most perfect Temper of Virtue. And so likewise there may be
Ejaculations or sudden dartings out of other Affections and Passions besides
Desire, and therefore in all the other Parts of Prayer, as in Acknowledgment of
the Divine Attributes, upon a clear Sight and Apprehension of any of them in
some Instance, or upon any occasion according to the Nature of the Attributes
apprehended, mighty Admiration, Honor, Reverence, Love, Joy, Faith or Trust,
etc. may on a sudden break forth. In Reflection upon and Confession of ones
Faults, a keen an^ sudden sit of Hatred of them, Shame a^ Sorrow for them may
be excited, and so in the rest. When Men are on a sudden surprised ^ frighted
with any great Evil, how natural^ do they shoot up a swift and strong Des^^ for
God's Protection or Deliverance, a (...) have Mercy on them; though they nev^
otherwise prayed. A designed Prayer is wh^ one does sum up his Petitions
forethinki^ them (and so of the other Ingredients ^ Prayer) with intent to
propose and direct the^ to God.

This may be ordinary at some constant ^ times, and most-what of general things
wi^ occasion^l Additions, as once or oftener ^ some set part of the day: Or
extraordinar^ when a Man sets some one time on purpo^ apart for it, when a Man
expressly propose^ to en^ert^in himself with such Thoughts a^ Affections
according as he may have Opportunity and Ability. Ejaculatory Prayer are
usually very servent, because the Good ^ Evil of the things so occasionally
desired ^ very clearly and strongly apprehended, and then the Soul for such a
short time can better intend its Strength and Vigor; and finally all Passions
Mental or Corporeal (especially these last) in a little time fail and grow
weak. But here we are to have a care too, as much as we can, to proportion the
Strength of our Desires to the Goodness of things, and to get an habitual
Judgment thereof.

These kind of Prayers thus directed, and therefore especially in spiritual
things, if frequent, are of excellent use well to dispose, secure and guard a
Man's Mind, and to obtain all other the good Effects and Benefits of Prayer
hereafter to be mentioned.

SECT. III.
III. A Prayer is usually distinguished by one Adjunct of the Matter or
Contents of which it is composed, viz. that it is the same or diverse.

A Prayer may be the very same with another (that is like to i^) in Sense,
Passion, Speech or Words, and other external Signs and their Circumstances, as
Order: or it may be diverse therefrom. A Prayer may be the same, only in Sense,
but not in Speech or other external Signs, they may change; and it is ordinary
to express the same Things and Passions too by diverse Words or other Signs.
Sometimes on the contrary, a Prayer may be the same in Speech and Words and
other Signs, and not the same exactly in Sense and Passions. Nay I think it
hardly ever is, and tha^ no two Men who use the same Words and external Sign^,
have exactly the same Idea's and Sense, and the same Passions and Dispositions
neither as to Nature or Degree. Nay it seems more probable that even the same
Person using at two several times the same Speech or other external Signs, has
very rarely, if ever accurately the same Sense and Passions signified. Bu^ let
it be enough just to have mentioned suc^ a minute Speculation, and yet not
useless i^ its Place, but of greater consequence in di^putes and controversies
than all are awa^ of. When a Prayer is the same with another both in Sense and
Words, it is called^ Form of Prayer, which may be more or le^ called so as it
is more or less often repeate^ and has more or less of the same Sense an^
Words, so that there are Degrees. And for is in premeditated and extemporary
Prayer, which may be more or less diverse from a^ other Prayers.

This Form may be composed by ones se^ who recites it, or by another. And
according to this Sense of the Word, a Prayer tha^ is recited by one but once,
whether composed by himself or others, is not a Form* but if more than once, or
often, it is. Where also it may be observed, that hardly any Man's Prayer but
is more or less a Form, that is, it has more or less of some Prayer which has
been before said or recited by some person or other, at least by himself,
whether it was of his own or another's Invention. I say it is a Form more or
less, and that not only in sense, but in Words and in the Order too.

The greatest Difference even in the Prayers of those who are of most copious
and various Conceit and Invention, is usually in Words and Expressions, and
Order of Things, which sometimes may be one way, sometimes another, and yet the
Coherence not very remote, but very good by reason of diverse Relations of
things one to another. As one one and the same thing may come in, in a Prayer,
after one thing as its Cause, and so as a Means; after another, as its Effect,
and so as a Motive; after another as one of its Kinds or Instances, etc. and if
the Prayer be premeditated by a Person used to reasoning, this Variety is more
easy, but if it be extempore (supposing his Prayer be one continued thing
without Interruption) his sight of the Relation of things and his Reasoning
must be very quick, or else oft-times the Order and Coherence will be very
impertinent, and unaccountable. Though the Truth is, that it is a thing of less
Concernment, so the Matter be but true and profitable; and oft-times great and
just passions cause a Man utterly to neglect Method. To affect Variety in
Prayers as every where else, merely for it self, is a light and childish thing,
and the being pleased therewith is at least an Effect of Impr^dence, and so
much unseasonable, as if no^ to be wholly excluded, yet to be sparingly
admitted; because otherwise it will usually take off Men's Minds from those
things which are of greater Concernment, and to which they are to attend in
their Prayer in the first place; that is, the Truth and Goodness of things
spoken, plainly conveyed and expressed. Truth and Goodness of things a^^ called
substantial things; that is, of ever way greater Use, Benefit, or Profit; that
Multitude, Variety, Unwontedness, Novety, and all Elegancy of Sense and Words
Things and Expressions. And we deserved blame and undervalue this Childishness
^ want of Judgment of the Excellency, Usefulness and Value of Things every
where else in all other Writings, in all our ordinar. Conversations and
Employments. Thing most useful and true, are to be first and pri^cipally
minded, though never so common and ordinary; and if it be necessary, Varien of
other things is chiesly to commend them and cause them more to be attended to,
^^ please, and to be applied to Use. These substantial things are like Bread in
our Diet. or our daily Food; other Varieties are but^ (...) to repair our
Appetites, and restore them (...) and ^uch like more wholesome Nourishment.

If the Prayer be diverse from any other; it is either each time premeditated,
or left to extempore Invention, Judgment and Memory, and that natural or
inspired. A Prayer diverse from another might be otherwise from other Respects
distinguished: but because these things are most talked of, and very useful
things concerning them may indeed be observed, I shall take notice only of this
Distinction, and further observe some things (not intending accurately to
disenss the so siercely agitated a Controversy which is best) concerning each
of them.

Some therefore of the Advantages of Forms of Prayers of all sorts in some
degree or other, are,

First, For the most part the Truth of what is prayed, as also a more extended
great and constant Goodness of the Things according as they have been allowed,
or not excepted against, and remain so: for there has been more Time and more
Persons for the Consideration and Examination of their Truth and Goodness, th^n
in premeditated or extempore Prayers, and this still the more they are Forms;
that is, the more there are the same Things and Words in them, and the oftener
they have been repeated, and espccially oy a greater Variety of Persons. For
more Persons have had longer Time to attend to, to take notice, examine and
consider the Truth and Justice of the things contained; and to remark what is
unlawful, dubious, false, of little or of no good effect, or hurtful and
mischievous. And therefore it is most L^kely they have actually examined or
taken notice of them; and if they have done so, it is more likely they would
have discovered such things if they had been there. This, I say, is a very
probable sign of the Justice and Truth of the Things therein contained, and
which is wanting in premeditated or extempore Prayers: I do not say it is a
necessary one; for many things dubious, uncertain and not right, may escape the
Notice or the Correction of many Ages. In a Prayer of; Man's own Composition,
the oftener h^ has used it, the more probable sign it is hereof.

And here therefore public Prayers have the advantage generally, so far as
they are no^ excepted against; and where they are, ye it is not to be doubted,
that if most Me^^ Prayers of their own Composition premeditated, but especially
extempore, were exposed as long to public Censure and Ex^mination, there would
be more justly found i^ them more Desects and Faults, and some shameful enough.
And sometimes so many and so very bad, that their Prayers would be worse than
none, or but little better. The Things and Sense being uncertain, false,
trivial, unlawful, ill expressed; of which more presently. Nevertheless it is
to be acknowledged, that as extempore, premeditated or private Forms of Prayer
are more obnoxious to the Falsehood, Frivolousness, Injustice, Disorder of more
of what is contained therein, and to many other Defects, than public Forms: So
public Forms not only of Prayers but of all other things will have those they
have longer continued.

For first, sometimes their Authority makes them less suspected and examined;
and then when any Defects are suspected or known, they are not so readily
declared out of Fear or a just Modesty; and when they are declared, they are
more prejudicedly and partially defended, and that generally by Persons of the
choicest Wit, and greatest Ability; and when they are acknowledged by the
generality of the Society and of the Governors themselves, it is dissicult to
have them altered, because of the Number and Variety of Persons both Governors
and Governed, who are concerned to agree. And the Inconvenience or ill Effects
of Alteration is a greater Evil oft-times than the Continuance of many Defects.
For it is first difficult to get all the concerned Persons together; and
amongst so many Persons many things are objected and debated, which takes up
Time and Pains, especially if some being (as there always are) passionate and
prejudiced, do not only calmly propose, but contend and contrive that their
Opinion may be retained or received. Sometimes it is difficult to cause a new
Constitution to be known, or practiced by the governed; and many other
inconveniences may there be. We see by experience, how hard a thing it is to
have any Defect, though plain enough, altered in public Opinions and Practices
constituted. Wherefore the Constituters of public Forms of Prayer, and so of
Opinions and other things, have the more need of being wiser and uprighter than
the Authors of private ones, which notwithstanding is not always so: But
sometimes they may be composed and constituted in an ignorant, hypocritical,
profane, cunningly Tyrannical, or Sensual age. There are many Prayers
constituted or allowed of by that no less boasting than corrupt Church of Rome,
which in respect of their Falsehood or Uncertainty, their Trivialness and
Uselessness, their Impertinency, Disorder and Confusion, a Man of ordinary
Examination and Understanding would disdain to use himself, or appoint for the
use of the meanest and most ignorant. And I think I could instance in some as
contemptible as any fanatical Mechanic among us has blundered out extempore.

2. Another advantage of a Form of Prayer consequent upon the first, is, that a
Man may more join in his affections with all that is prayed, and especially if
it be a Form to him, that is, he has often heard it repeated. For he being
more reasonably satisfied, partly by Testimony, partly possibly by his own
Examination of the Truth and Righteousness of the things in the Prayer, has
nothing to do but to send up the Desires of his Soul, or to raise up other
suitable Passions and Affections in himself; whereas a Man being more reasonably
obliged to examine other Prayers, and to know both these before he be affected
with them, his Time will be taken up therein, and little or none left for
Affections. Nay, he may be so long in attending to the Truth or Justice of one
thing spoken, that he may neglect the greatest part of the rest. Besides that
Examination and Attention to and Judgment concerning the Truth of Things,
naturally indisposeth for all Passions, but most especially just at the time
thereof. The reason why this Disadvantage of premeditated or extempore Prayers
of single Persons has not by most of the Despisers of Forms been taken notice
of, is because they have taken all for true and good which Persons have said,
and never examined, or they have formerly and perhaps often heard the same
things from them and others in Prayers; and so far these very premeditated or
extempore Prayers are indeed a Form to these ^earers.

3. Another Advantage of Forms where the same Words are used is, That in them
the Sense is better conveyed, the Meaning of Expressions is better understood.
Men, especially the vulgar, by often hearing and attending to Words and
Expressions, usually know better what they mean, than those which are new and
not before heard.

4. Another Advantage of Forms is, that they are very useful for the Memory:
being often repeated, they are more impressed upon the Memory, and so if they
contain any good useful thing, are always the more ready for Use, come oftener
to the Mind, and thereby do some general good. They can also be better quoted
and cited by one to another upon Occasion of Advice or Reproof; when one asks
another whether he be, and advises that he would, or minds him that he is not
so good as his Prayers. Besides, it has some more Authority; it is a Prayer
which he himself has liked, approved, joined in; it is readier therefore for
use; a Man needs not stand first to prove the Truth or Goodness of the Thing,
but presently apply it: Whereas in Prayers which are always diverse, there is
little by most remembered of them, and if they be forgotten, they can do no more
good then what they did at the present when spoken: nor if they be remembered,
can they be so presently made use of, nor have they so much Authority, as
Forms. On the other hand, the Advantages of a premeditated Prayer may be,

Frist, Increase of Knowledge, there being usually more Variety of Things, and
Things more particular and distinct. This is an Effect of premeditated or
extempore Prayers, not of a Prayer: Of many diverse Prayers opposed to a Form
not of one only, for one Form may contain as much variety of things, as one
premeditated or extempore Prayer: but many diverse premeditated or extempore
Prayers opposed to the same Form as many times repeated give Occasion for a
more various and distinct and particular Knowledge of of Things. It puts Men
upon Invention and Consideration of things, it prevents I^leness, and
consequently which most-what follows Ignorance, Dullness and Sensuality; it
causes Men more to employ their Minds about the two most excellent Objects of
them, Truth and Goodness. It seems therefore in this Respect of one very good
Consequence generally (for there is Exception) that the Clergy be at least
permitted to compose Prayers of their own as well as Sermons: but then it would
be of better Effect still if they had at least sometimes one or more Governors
to be their Auditors to overlook them, and prudently to encourage them when
they did well, and direct them when they might do better. There may be both too
little and too much Employment: they both are generally Causes of doing very
slightly and ill what is done.

(2.) Consequently for Attention to what is contained in a Prayer, premeditated
Prayers are a help thereto. For what we very well know, what we have often
heard, we are apt to neglect: What is new whether Sense or Expression, we are
apt to take more heed to, ^o mark and observe; and this because of all our
natural Appetites to increase our Knowledge and the Perfection thereof. It is
reasonable we should gratisie this Appetite; but then we must have a care that
we do not preser it before a better: that is, that of the Profitableness or
Excellency of the Objects of our Knowledge. We must not prefer the Novelty or
Variety before the Utility of our Knowledge, and so it may be Trisles before
very useful Things: We should order it so too, what we can, as to make them
consistent one with another, and one subservient to the other. As that the
Variety be of profitable and excellent things. But very often Variety and
Utility of Conceit are naturally inconsistent, and the first is often a sign
and sometimes a cause of the want of the second.

Men of very various conceit are often defective in Judgment, or rather in the
percepcion and sight of the Truth and Usefulness of things, of which the cause
might easily be more particularly sh^wn, if it were here proper. Wherefore we
should be so far from a general Approbation and Admiration of Men merely for
Variety and Multitude of Conceit, that it should rather (if we see no other
reason to the contrary) dispose us to undervalue them, as being a probable sign
of the Defect of a far better Quality than that is.

(3.) Another Advantage of premeditated Prayer, is the seasonableness and
pertinency of things in Prayer. For there may happen some Wants which could not
be foreseen at any distance, and therefore not provided for; or if they he, yet
some may be more particularly and distinctly, and with more Variety of Phrase
or Speech, and other signs both of our sense or meaning and of our affections
(which may be of good use though always the same persons should be our
Auditors, much more when there are many of different capacities) insisted upon
at some Times and Places than at others.

The Goodness of such things too thus seasonable, pertinent and present, is
more clearly apprchended, and consequently prayed for with more strong and
vigorous Affections. It may often happen to some persons, that when their
inventions are warmed with a serious and affectionate reciting their ow^
premeditated Prayer, they may see in some things a greater excellency then
before the^ had taken notice of: whence their passio^^ on a sudden may be more
raised, and the^ expressions of them in words more various natural and proper
than at another time Sometimes also they may have some ne^ things start into
their minds of great u^ and very pertinent. When this is, an extempore
interposition may be seasonable, and n^ to be excluded, especially in private
and seer^ Prayer.

(4.) Another Advantage usually (not always) of diverse premeditated Prayers is
reality and fervency of affection by reason (...) the variety of the matter.
Men generall^ are less affected with old and well known things than with new.
The reason of which is the boundlessness of men's desires. There is no good so
great, but we can conceive an^ consequently desire a greater still, till we
come to infinite. Whence it is that we take off desires from what we already
posses^ and consequently our love and esteem, a^ least for the present, and
reserve them for some other good still, of which we are ignorant. We generally
think it a mean thing ^o sit down content with less than what we are capable of
enjoying. We are like the ambitious and covetous man who grows cold in his
esteem and love of the greatest places of honor and profit which he has long
in^oyed: he is still pursuing and grasping at more and greater: either he would
make an addition to what he already has, or find out greater than they are.
This reality and fervency of affection is truly a very great benefit, supposing
the affections to be rightly and in due degree directed to things true and
useful: but if that be not supposed, it may be as great a mischief. For great
inordinate and immoderate affections miserably corrupt the judgments and
inclinations; they render them erroneous and superstitious: and I think one of
the principal causes why of late diverse premeditated, nay extempore Prayers
have been preferred before Forms, whether public or private is an immoderate
love to great and busling affections for any thing though never so unworthy of
them, to which we may add great variety, and quickness of conceit and
invention, as in extempore Prayers.

The Advantage of Variety and Copiousness of Conceit is both in premeditated
and extempore Prayers: and is because there are many of them used in Opposition
to but one as often a repeated Form, as is before said. But quickness of
Conceit or Invention is only see^ in extempore Prayers: where if the thing
invented be but indifferently good, there hardly any Quality of our Minds that
is ^ much esteemed and applauded by the gene^lity of Men. Of which one reason
is, and may be the principal, because it is judged sign of an extraordinary
Ability in the Pers^ to invent and apprehend most excellent thin^ easily and
clearly, if he did premeditate. H^ that can do so much extempore (think the^
what would he do if he were allowed Time which is very often a great mistake.

There is another reason also very gener^ and that is, That Men are much
pleased wi^ Dispatch or Performance of any useful thing in a short time. And in
truth he that ^^ perform the same thing in half the time which another can do
it, is in that particular twice ^ valuable.

These things in Prayers although they naturally do and may much please the
mind^ Man; yet they may do it too much in compar^ with others which are better,
viz. the Truth and Usefulness of what is said. A Fault that is very often
committed in Sermons and Books, and other Performances, by those Persons who
observe and complain of it in Prayers. If we separate things and compare them;
without doubt it is better that one and the same excellent good thing should be
apprehended and willed by us, though never so sluggishly and dully, than that
many and a great number either of unprofitable, trifling, useless, mischievous
and bad things should be known by us, and fly about in our Imaginations, and be
violently and vigorously with strong Passions willed and pursued. The first
indeed does less good, but yet some; but this last does a great deal of hurt.
If we must lose or part with one of these, it is better to lose that of Variety
and Celerity and Copiousness of Conceit, and strength of Passion, than that of
the Certainty and Profitableness of the Objects of our Knowledge and Wills. It
is better to have no Passions at all, and consequently in this state generally
but languid and weak Inclinations, than to have them directed to wrong Objects,
or to right ones in an excessive degree. And yet men generally are incomparably
more pleased with Life and Activity, which is caused much and exerted in
Variety and Celerity of Conceit, and Greatness of Passions, than with its right
Determination and Goodness. And as Men are for the most part unduely pleased
with premeditated and even extempore Prayers upon the account of Variety and
quickness of Conceit; So there are others too who are pleased with public or
private Forms, or very well content with them, not so much upon the account of
the truth and usefulness of the things there contained, or other common
advantages ^ men thereby: as because of the slowness and dullness of their own
conceit and passions. ^ is difficult to them and consequently painful (which
all men naturally shun) to apprehend any new thing to examine the truth and
goodness thereof, and to excite their heavy ar^ sluggish affections thereto:
but they easy conceive and are affected with that whi^ they have been
accustomed to, that whi^ they have very frequently heard and to whi^ their
affections have been used to be conjoined: Contrariwise, those who are of qu^
conception and moveable affections, they apprehend new and various things with
e^ and delight, and are presently naturally ^^fected with them. It is
observable, that o^ of the most general causes of men's incli^tions, choices and
esteems of things is the own ability easily to obtain and possess the^ Hence it
may partly come to pass, that m^ advanced in years, and of staid and slo^
tempers, are usually pleased with Forms ^^ any performance, but young and hot
person with Variety. So little most commonly dot^ reason or the foresight of
the good or bad effect^ of things determine Men's Judgments concerning their
general Worth and Value. And accordingly I believe it may be remembered, that
lately those who were against all Forms were generally of an active and
passionate temper, but those who were for some Forms at least were of a more
staid and composed one.

Those Prayers in which are Variety, Celerity, and great Affections, do more
generally please Men, and are preferred before those in which there is Truth
and Usefulness, for two reasons among others.

First, Because Men are amiss and depraved in their Inclinations, and love
those qualities better than these.

Secondly, Because those of variety, quickness and affectionateness are
discerned more easily by every body in a Prayer; those other of the Truth or
Usefulness not without more difficulty and but by very few; it is a difficult
thing to examine and see them. The best is to make use of them all as there may
be just reason.

First, Be we sure that the Objects of our Knowledge and Wills be true and
good, and then let us furnish our selves with as plentiful a knowledge of them,
and have as strong Affections to them, in compare with other things, as they
deserve.

Let us be sure the Matter be true and good, and then know as much as we can,
and in proportion as it is so, be zealously affected. And here as to Affection,
I would propound this to be often remembered, viz. That we should always regard
not what does strongly affect our selves or others, what we seel to d^ so; but
what should do so. Possibly we have been or may be deceived, and be mightily in
love with, and passionately desire wha^ is of little or no worth; while we are
col^ to things which are really of much more excellent Use, Benefit and Concern
in the World.

We must have a care of measuring the Goodness of Things by our Affections: b^
contrariwise we must adjust our Affections to the goodness of things discovered
by ou^ own Reason and Observation, divine and humane Testimony. And as for this
last, let it be of the most wise, sober, virtuous, unprejudiced, honest
Persons, who are therefore the most free from Superstition.

It is certainly one of the most general and mischievous Cheats in the World,
that Men Judge things good or bad, and more or less so according to their
inclinations, which are principally caused by passions: (Though not always) and
not according to the sight of good or bad Effects, which is the principal use
of our Reason. We ought therefore, if we be not so disposed, to stir up the
greatest Affections and maintain them in our selves Affections and maintain
them in our selves, for those things which really are the greatest good things;
which are so the most Universally, the most Intensly, and most Constantly. Such
as are generally in Forms, and in the public most likely, if composed and
allowed by Judicious, wise, generously Religious and Pious Persons.

The things which do most affect Men (we may observe) are selfish, sensible and
present good things; sometimes one, or the other; or all these; such as are our
being in God's favor, our being elected, justified, pardoned, saved, when
others are reprobated, condemned, punished Eternally, sometimes Riches, Plenty,
Health, good Relations or Friends, Honor or the like; all which oft-times are
the least good things, and least to be desired compared with others: either
because they are but sensible or present or selfish good, or all of them.
Whereas things of more universal and public good Effect, Spiritual, future,
ought more to be desired, though commonly they are much less. Such as to be
perfectly inherently righteous and holy, to love God for himself, and please
him, to be universally disposed and enabled to be beneficent, or Universal
Charity and Beneficence, self-denial, Resignation to God's will, because always
for the Universal good, Humility, Spirituality of mind, Mortification of all
our Lusts or inordinate selfish appetites etc. Afterward Wisdom, nay all the
Perfections of our Knowledge. We are more to desire the most public and
Universal good, than our own, and therefore our persection more than our
Happiness, the Love of God and Charity more than our own Felicity; Again,
Spiritual good things more than sensible; future more than present. Our
Judgment finally of the Truth, and of the degrees of the utility and Excellency
of the things should direct our desires and all our Affections in our Prayers.
Which Judgment [as I said) we are to inform as well as we can by our own
Wisdom and Reason, by God's Word, and by the Testimony and Examples of wise
holy and good Men (so far as we shall have reason impartially to think them so;
and we must use the best means we can to know who are so) and lastly much by a
natural Sense and consequent Passions; God having made our minds so as to be
much affected with some things, our Consciences allowing it: he has
anticipated our Natures with such Impressions, if we can distinguish them from
others contracted by bodily temper, education, Example. This of Testimony and
Example of those whom we judge wise and good Men, is so considerable amongst
Men, and has naturally so much Influence, that few Persons are determined in
their Opinions by any other reason: and I think it one of the reasons why a
premeditated Prayer; and even a Form composed by a private Person and recited
by himself, has been generally preferred before a Form composed by the Public,
and recited by a private Person: viz. because Men generally are moved to think
and judge the things true or profitable, which are said or recited, by the
Testimony and Example of him that says and recites the Prayer: If he judge that
it is so, they are apt to judge so too, and consequently to be affected.

Now Men judge that he that recites a Prayer composed by himself, did and does
judge the things true and of great Concernment, and sees them to be so;
otherwise why should he say those things rather than others: But they, as they
think, have not the same reason to judge so of him, who is obliged to recite a
Prayer composed by another. For he is obliged to say and recite that and no
other, and therefore he does it; when it may be he attends not to, nor is
affected with the Truth and Goodness of the Things he recites, any more then a
Schoolboy is with his Lesson. Nay, though the Reciter of such a Prayer should
have as many external signs of Reverence and Affection^ as he that recites a
Prayer of his own Composition, yet his Example and Testimony is not ordinarily
so efficacious. For Men are apt to think that that Affection may come from
Custom or Compliance, or the like.

But here we should do well to do these three things:

First. To look upon such public Forms as composed by the Public, who
most-what are to be presumed wiser than private Persons, and that they did
judge the things true, and of exceeding great Profit and Benefit, or else they
might have chose other things as well as those, let the Reciter behave himself
as he will.

And then Secondly, That some and surely considerable Men, who recite them with
Afction, do it really in those things which they judge, and because they do
judge them true and exceeding profitable, not only out of Custom and
Compliance: And then it may as reasonably be suspected that the great
Affections of those who recite their own Prayers oftimes (especially in
extempore) are forced, least they should seem could, oft-times they proceed
more from their being their own, and invented by themselves, (as we see Men are
very apt to be much pleased with their own) than out of any clear sight or
Judgment of their Truth and Utility. If they do judge they are true and
profitable, that very Judgment may proceed from that Self-Love and Esteem.

Thirdly. We are therefore to excite and stir up our Affections, (which
otherwise) it may be are dull and sluggish in Proportion to such our Judgment,
though we should not have the Example of him that says or recites them. If we
think not good to follow the Judgment of the Public herein, we should have
great and clear Reason against it, and such Modesty as to be backward to
signify it.

Let all Men here, as in all Prayers, do what they can; what they see and
assent to as true and Judge it good, and so far forth as they do so, let them
join in that, and stir up and excite their hearty affections in that as much as
they can; not through Laziness or Prejudice especially from Revenge, wilfully
neg^ect or reject it. We have said, That the advantage of sincere and fervent
affections in diversity of Prayers is more usual or general, but not constant
or Universal. For sometimes on the contrary a form of Prayer may be more
affectionately used. As when persons are of a slow and staid temper, not caring
to enlarge their knowledge or their desire, but very well content with what
they have: also when they believing what they already have in their Prayers to
be very excellent or the very best, or much better then what they are likely to
meet withal in any other, purposely keep and cherish their affections for those
things upon which they have already placed them, and withhold them from others.
For then by reason of frequent and repeated Conjunction, their affections are
far more real, ready and strong to those things which are contained in their
Forms; then to any new things not before heard by them in other Prayers. As
admiration and esteem of any thing are caused by ignorance of what is better or
equal to it (as it is in new things where we have not time nor perhaps ability
to compare) so are they much more by a knowledge or belief that nothing or very
few things are so. Such a knowledge and judgment is much more the cause of
esteem and love then ignorance.

If we will try for Example in the Lord's Prayer we may find it so. If we often
say, Our Father, and have a clear apprehension of the comprehensive
signification of the Word, (viz.) that God is wisely and tenderly good to us,
has brought us forth, brought us up, does still and must always provide for
our good in all respects Spiritual, bodily, here, hereafter; and as often
endeavor to join a cordial and ardent Affection of Love to this our dear
Father, and joy in him: we shall find that by frequent usage when we pronounce
these words. We shall most readily have such a conceit and Apprehension, and
strongest affections too at the same time. And so when we pray, Forgive us our
Trespasses, etc. Have we then an Apprehension or sense of the most intense and
most Universal Charity (for whom shall we not love, when we love our Enemies)
and conjoyn we strongest and eagrest desire therewith, send the Petition
wrapped up in an inward sigh that God would grant it us; we shall find upon use
that whenever we hear or pronounce the one, we shall be the most apt and ready
to have the other too. Those who have piously and devoutly read the holy
Scriptures may have oft-times experienced, that if any sentence therein has
much affected them, the oftener they have thought thereof, the more real and
ready and great has been their Affection. There may be too much Frequency and
the Succession may be too quick: What Invervals of Forms are convenient and do
not hinder Attention and Affection, will easily be known by Experience: where
let us be assured there be no Prejudice.

As for extempore Prayer left to the extempore Memory Invention, Judgment of
the Reciter whether natural or pretended to be inspired, it has so much the
disadvantage (to compare it first) of the other two, viz. public or private
Forms, and premeditated Prayers; and the Inconveniences thereof are so many
more and greater, and the Conveniences so much fewer or less, that it is
never to be admitted where they can be had, except very rarely. As where a
Person may be of such a peculiar Temper that his extempore may be better then
his own premeditated or recited Form, and in it self too very good. Some Men
may have more considerable things suggested by a quick and sudden Excitation
and heating of themselves with exercise and by consequent bodily Passions, and
they may give better Judgment of their Truth and Utility: than if they
considered never so long, with which their Heads are dulled, Attention
confounding them. Nay even according to the constant Laws of Union between body
and Soul, or naturally, they may hereby be more generously, intellectually,
divinely disposed and inclined, (viz.) to things that are large and great, and
therefore to things that are future, Spiritual, of most Universal good Effect,
their animal Spirits being in great Plenty subtilized, and strontly but not
ungovernably agitated. Where we may observe, that governable bodily Passions
are not to be always neglected, but they may be sometimes on purpose made use
of and approved by our Prudence.

But except I say such a rare Case; only where a Form or premeditated Prayer
cannot be had, an extempore one may sometimes be used.

As where a Person has not the other two present, or has not Leisure and Time
to premeditated one; and yet it is expedient that some Prayer be recited to, as
in some sudden Danger.

Even in profitable Affections, much more in Sense and Words, the other Prayers
have the Advantage of extempore Prayer. For that Affection which is in it, is
most-what forced and strained, or excited by loud Voice and bodily Action, or
by bodily Temper in general, and is not the Effect of any preceding Judgment of
the Goodness and Truth of the Things prayed, even in those very Persons
themselves who pray, as inconsiderable as their Judgment may be, though most
Auditors are often mistaken and think it is. Or their Affections are but the
relics of some they have formerly had, it may be, with Judgment little
enough. Whence they are generally less and more superficial than especially in
premeditated Prayers, where we have with Approbation pitched upon things; it is
sure they are worse used and placed.

To speak of it absolutely, supposing a Man could use no other: sometimes it
may be worse than none at all, sometimes better than none, sometimes very good.
It is according as the Persons are, and their present Temper. according to
their Quickness of Approche^sion and Memory both of Things and Consequences,
and of Words, whether just when they are praying, or sometime before inven^ted
by themselves, or learnt from others Or as is usually expressed according to
the Quickness of their Invention, Memory an^ Judgment. Moreover, according to
the viriety, truth, profitableness of their thought accompanied with suitable
affections, or ^ uses to be said, according as their Minds ar^ well furnished
with matter both of sense are language an^ with due affections forms
judiciously, or at present by a certain gen^rous habitual Temper of Mind,
excited t^wards things sutably to their Degree or Val^^ and Excellency. I say,
according as these a^ more or less in a Person, his extempore Pray^ will be
better or worse, and he may more (...) less trust to it. But it is very rare,
that tho^ very Persons who by reason of these Qualities can perform extempore
Prayer well, cannot with some Premeditation do it far better. But as for the
most part of Persons, they are so deficient in them, that it is far better they
should themselves make a Form of their own, or use another's, or at least
premeditate; and sometimes it were better they should altogether abstain and
omit to pray at all. For slowness and faultringness of Conceit and Utterance
for want of quick Memory, Invention, Judgment; Tautologies for want of either
past Invention, or present ready ready Memory. Falsehood, Trivialness,
Unprofitableness, Mischievousness of things, and Improprieties and Unfitness of
Speech for want of past or present good Judgment, and present Memory; so also
vain and groundless Affections strained and forced by bodily Temper, Loudness
of Voice or stirring Actions only, are certainly all of them scandalous and
contemptible things to be prevented, and better to be put into their Room, if
it can be without greater Inconveniences (as sure there may) by the use of
either a public or private Form made by others or one's self, or by
Praemeditation.

Extempore Prayers especially spoken with real or seeming great and counterfeit
Passions, may be oft-times so hurtful, that there had better be none at all.
For thereby those who do not see nor understand their Defects in those things
beforementioned, get a Habit of imitating them, have their Minds (which are
capable of so much better things) furnished with, and their Affections raised
to Nonsense, that is, only Words and Sounds, or to Things extraordinarily
confusedly conceived and understood, and those mean, trash, false, trivial or
mischievous, particularly sometimes as relating to God, impious.

But for those who have Knowledge an^ Judgment enough to observe those Defect^
let them be never so candid, at least they ca^ not join with them so far as
their Prayers a^ to them such: and then they are justly offended to see so
useful an Office so much spoyle^ and ill performed, so unbecomingly trissingly
or mischievously, when it might be do^ much better. Some, and very many, l^
wise and candid, are disposed to neglect an^ despise, by too rash a Conclusion
from one ^ more Persons particular Defects and Infir^^ties, the whole Prayer,
his Person and his Religion too; and it may be oft-times if not ^ Religion, yet
all the external public Office^ thereof; and think that truly there is no goo^
to be gotten by them, that they are child^ or vulgar things not becoming Men
but ^ ordinary degree of Understanding in the V^* lue of things, and that they
may spend the^ Time elsewhere better.

I say again, so far forth as a Man has we^ considered and judged of Plenty
and Variety of Things true and profitable, whether by himself invented, or
learned from other wise and pious Men; these things also clothed with fit and
convenient Expressions, and is o^ a ready, easy, strong Memory to retain and
use them: so far as he is of a quick Invention and Judgment to discern the
Verity and Usefulness of things at present suggested or invened from their
Likeness to or Consequence from those things, which he has deliberately from
his own Reason or others Testimony judged true and useful, and has been
accordingly discreetly affected: So far is the Man more sit to use and trust to
extempore Prayers with others.

Add hereto, That Frequency of use of either a Form, or premeditated or
extempore Prayer, or all of them, and of judicious Reflection thereupon, may
make it more easy and allowable; insomuch that Variety of true, useful and
just things, will never fail speedily to present themselves to some Persons.
What comes to their Mind, and what they speak, may be but as it were Pieces of
various Forms, premeditated and composed by others or themselves, when they
were best able and in best Temper, a little altered or disposed by a present
Prudence. And therefore they may be as true, just, important, and more
seasonable and fervent, than the Things in any one or more Forms of others or
their own composing, when possibly they were not in so good a Temper;
especially if the Person is possessed habitually with holy and generous
Affections. But how few are there who are such in any considerable Degree?

As for secret Prayer, there needs no extempore Prayer at all; a Man may take
what Time he pleases to find out and judge what i^ most fit to be prayed, and
particularly wha^ he would have; he may put what Interval h^ pleases between
every Sentence, and affec^ himself with it; and therefore surely i^ would be a
very unadvised thing, for him ^ say any thing that should happen to com^ next.

As for Inspiration, that is, Invention, M^mory, Judgment, Affection excited
and furnished by God's special extraordinary Influenc^ and Action, it is a
thing by no means now ^ be trusted to in our Prayers with others. M^* are very
naturally fond of this, as a Sign^ great Favor with God Almighty; and a
pr^bable one it is indeed, but not a necessary on^ For God may inspire a bad
Man, or at lea^ worse than some not inspired, not for his ow^ but for others
sake; and a very sincerely, generously holy and righteous Man, self-denying,
pious, just, charitable, humble and spiritually minded, is a far more excellent
Persc^ than an inspired one, unless it be with a greater degree of habitual
Holiness. Nor is the absolute and ultimate affectation and Love of any such
great Privilege as Inspiration, any better than a Branch of spiritual Pride,
which it is likely was much the Fault of the Church of Corinth, and the first
Christians, when God was pleased for the Honor and Propagation of Christian
Religion, to grant it often and liberally to all sorts of Christians. St. Paul
exhorts them to covet earnestly the best Gifts, such as Prophesying, Tongues,
etc. (all which are but the Perfections of our natural Faculties, wrought by
God's special immediate Action) but yet tells them, he would show them a more
excellent way, and that was Charity. He says also of himself, though he had
all those Gifts (and that in the greatest degree) of Eloquence, Prophesying,
understanding of the obscurest and deepest Mysteries, universal Knowledge, Power
of working Miracles, etc. yet if he had not Charity to his Brethren, expressing
it self in all those lovely Effects mentioned by him, it all profited nothing,
he was a sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, a thing that made a great
noise, was much admired, but vainly, it did no good, nay it may be harm. Those
three Chapters of St. Paul's first Epistle to the Corinth, (viz.) 12, 13, and
14. would do well to be often read by those who are apt to pretend too
huffingly to, and value themselves too much by the Gifts of the Spirit. That
generous and sincerely holy Man deserves more to be honored for his Wisdom,
Spirit and Temper expressed in that and such like Places, than for all the
Mysteries he taught, and all the Parts and Gifts he had, and all the Miracles
he wrought; and it is to me a much surer Sign than they are, of his
Inspiration, and the divine Superintendency and Care over him in all the rest
he wrote.

I know no sufficient reason to deny that God by his immediate special
Influence may assist or help our Invention, Memory, Judgment and Affection in
Prayer: but then ^ add, who knows when and how much it may please him so to do?
That I think it i^ principally to the diligent, in Conjunction with our Care,
Endeavor, Use of Means, which is none in extempore Prayer: but in a
premeditated Prayer a Man does or should se^ himself to invent what is most
useful and needful; to examine what is true, or to take heed that nothing false
is said by him; to cause himself to attend to what is true an^ important; to
awake and inflame Affections thereto, by proposing or urging the reasonableness
of them; by upbraiding his Infirmity, Dullness, Ignorance, Mistake, Slavery in
his Senselesness of the best things. I think too that this Assistance is
principally in holy Affections, that is, such as are rightly directed and
moderated to the most excellent Objects, and in their due Degree, more than in
Sense and Words; also principally upon some extraordinary Occasion either for
the great need of its being well performed just at such a time, or the
necessary want of Time* and it may be of natural Ability of the Person if
innocent and humble, and therefore always especially to the innocent, and
particularly the humble and modest; not to the lazy, negligent, weak yet
vainly conceited, presumptuous and proud Person. I rather think that they have
most of this Assistance who least pretend to it, who least therefore wilfully
neglecting their own endeavors trust to it; but only modestly think it may be
sometimes in some things; and whether it be so, or be not so, do attribute all
they are or do or can perform ultimately to God, whether it be by natural
Parts, or habitual Gists or present Influence; who acknowledge that all holy
Desires, all good Counsels, all just Works do proceed from him, and thank God
that he is pleased to do any good to others by them; though they should be very
well pleased too if it were done by others, so it were done.

If it pleased God to afford a greater degree of this Assistance to do good
this way, there is no good Man I suppose but would be very glad thereof, and
willingly receive it, and thank God for it: And for ought I know it may be
afforded to the World in greater degree, First, in respect of good and holy
Inclinations and sense of Soul called Graces, and then in those Perfections of
our understanings which are called Gifts, before the whole design of
Christianity, and consequently the present condition of Mankind here on Earth
has and End; but then we must certainly know it to be so when it is. The
Badness, the Pride and Vanity of many Persons, their self-conceit, swelling
with a false opinion that they are so highly favored of God, Contempt of
others because inferior to them in this respect, want of Humility, Modesty,
Charity, also Falsehood, Uncertainty, Unintelligibleness to other Persons wise
and Pious, in the Reciter's Nonsense, or great Confusion, Trivialness and
Uselessness of things, and consequently the Pedantry or Childishness of the
Persons, sometimes also the mischievousnes^ of things are sufficient signs in
their degree^ Non-inspiration, and therefore of the Madness and
Contemptibleness of such pretenses. They are signs even of want of ordinary
consider^tion, Reason, Judgment, of Ignorance, Du^ness, Confusion, Error, and
yet Rashness an^ Confidence.

And where Prayers and Persons are bett^^ and the clean contrary, yet surely
full easil^ may all that we now see, be, by the Goodness^ the natural Parts
before mentioned, and by h^bitua^ Gifts, that is, those Faculties endowe^ with
some Perfection belonging to them by God's special Influences some time or
time^ in our Lives, without the special Influence ^^ the Spirit just then. And
we find extemp^r^ Performances in other matters to be performed as well, as in
those divine Offices; as in Orations, in common discourse especially when
warmed with Talking and Passions* and yet these are attributed only to natural
Parts, which in some Men are very quick and lasting, of great Variety,
conversant about more than ordinary things, and may not unfitly be termed
natural Enthusiasm. Of which the bodily cause (according to the Laws of union
of Body and Soul which God has fixed) is Subtilty, Solidity, Copiousness of
Spirits, a well constituted Brain, Organs of Speech, and the Nervous passages
of the Brain thereto, etc.

I would try any Man who should pretend to be even a Prpohet, and did even work
Miracles by such Signs as I have now mentioned, and they may reasonably in some
degree overweigh the greatest appearing Miracles themselves. For I may have
more certainty and evidence that some things are unworthy of God, or that they
cannot be done by, o^ proceed from such a Nature as Gods is; then that any
effect is caused by God's immediate action or influence, for the Confirmation
of any thing taught or affirmed, and not by some natural and second causes.

And we see accordingly the Jews were admonished by Moses, that even if one
should rise up who should foretell things to come, and yet teach that Jehova^
was not the true God, but should draw them to other Gods (and there is the like
reason in all Truths as clearly manifested by Revelation or Reason) he was not
to be believed that God had sent him, but to be rejected and put to death.
Deuteronomy. 13. v. 1.

As for those poor deluded or Hypocritical Men; who sit in deep silence a great
while, and of a sudden break out with abundance (as is said) of Non-sensical
stuff, or Prophetical Phrases cluttered together, and then think themselves
inspired by the Spirit, most probably their silence was at first affected; or
if not, their bodily Temper was only dull, and after some time their Brains
were agitated with thoughts, and their Hearts with Passions; or their Temper
was fortuitously changed, (as most Men are apt to be silent and talkative once
in two or three Hours) or at least the Examples of others make them begin to
talk too, and to show the Spirit comes upon them. They may do well also to have
a care there be no^ something a worse cause, when Men so proudly and wilfully
expose themselves to such miserable sottish Delusions.

These few things I have at present upon the mentioning these Sorts or kinds of
Prayer only briefly suggested.

If one had a mind accurately and particularly to determine in this matter a
Form, premeditated and extempore Prayer would be considered, first absolutely,
with each ones conveniences and Inconveniences, good or bad Effects; in which
again are to be observed the degrees of their Extension as to Subjects, that is
Persons; of their Intension, of their Duration or their Frequency: in three
words their degrees of greatness, as to Extension, and Intension, and of
Lastingness. And then again they would be considered comparatively, which had
most or least Conveniences or Inconveniences (for all things have some of
both;) and whether the using of one of them or a mixture of all of them would
be best to obtain the greatest Conveniences or good Effects with the least bad
ones.

A Method which is to be observed in the Determination of the goodness,
absolute or comparative of all things. To do which, to any good Effect, Men
must be impartial and indifferent to any thing but the Truth out of Charity to
Mankind, (as in all other Cases of Controversy and Debate it is perpetually to
be admonished) and dispose themselves by that and other Means to find out and
look at both the Conveniences and Inconveniences, the good or bad Effects of
any of them; not to observe and regard only the Conveniences of one, but not
its Inconveniences, and so cry it up; and contrariwise the Inconveniecies of
auother but not its Conveniences, and so make a great cry against it,
accordingly as they chance to be affected. They ought also w^ll to inform
themselves in the true Goodn^ss of Things and their Degrees from the dis^inct
sight of the Natures of things, or of ^^eir Effects; in which last they are to
be especially careful they fall not into the most common Error of Judging some
things which are only consequent upon or concomitant w^^h others, to be
entirely their Effects; when as they are not so at all, or but in part, and are
to be attributed to other things altogether or principally. From whence it is
easy to see that it is not for every conceited hotheaded rash person to
determine the Constitution of it, not so much as in a private Assembly, much
less in a National Church; but they should be upright, virtuous, godly, pious,
spiritual, considerative, attentive, of good knowledge and experience in humane
Nature especially, both in themselves and others; or in two words, they ought
to be the most wise and good. To Men of clear, truly informed and comprehensive
Minds there appears sometimes much less and sometimes much more difference
between things than to the Vulgar and the Generality, who withal remember how
short their comprehension is. And sometimes it is the unhappy Lot of those who
see but little difference between things that are fiercely contended for, and
by the prejudice of great blind Passions judged great, to be thought or to be
pretended to be thought cunning, selfish and unconsciencious Men: Their
calmness and almost indifferency being judged to be the effect of
self-interest, compliance, desire of quiet or ease, etc. when it is truly one
of their wisdom and charity; And they are not ignorant that self-interest is as
well if not better generally advanced in the World by activity and fierceness,
though ill-governed. For this sort of men are counted at least notable
Instruments by those who discern more but are cunningly selfish. Though there
are men too of those sly Principles, who may mix themselves with truly wise,
and sincerely honest persons for shelter and defense. And this for the Third
Distinction.

SECT. IV.
IV. A Fourth is commonly into Public, Private and Secret Prayer, which may
better be thus, (viz.) into that alone, and that with others.

That with others may either be with some select smaller Company, as that with
Families (the oftener the better, daily at least) or Friends, especially sick
Persons, or in any Distress and Affliction, which is called Private; or with an
unlimited Assembly or Company, as many as can conveniently hear the Voice of
him who must recite the Prayer in which they are all to join; (such as our
Parochial Congregations) which is called the Public Prayer, or a Common Prayer
that is common to all of that Congregation, or to many C^ngregations.

Secre^ Prayer, or that which is alone in ones Cl^^et or Chamber or any retired
Place, is usually most profitable to each particular Person; because a Man may
there more particularize his Wants, his Sins or Faults, which h^ begs the
favor of God to supply to mend in him, to prevent, to pardon: Also because he
may take more time to meditate upon and consider any of the Ingredients in a
Prayer before mentioned, any thing he prays, and so more affect himself: Also
because he need not be so solicitous about Words and Expressions, Order, and
Coherence; and so may more firmly intend his Mind to the Sense and holy
Affections of Soul in his Prayer, and that to one or as few things as he will:
Though it may be advisable for him especially whose Office it is to pray with
others, or to treat of those things, to use himself to cloth his Sense and
Affection with Words and Expressions. For these I say, and other reasons,
secret Prayer may be most profitable to any one particular Person.

But then Public Prayer is most extensively so. That is, to most Persons, and
that at a time. For every one's behaving themselves reverently and attentively,
and with those fit and proper Signs of their sincere and serious inward Worship
of Almighty God, is a Testimony and Example to every one concerning the Worship
we owe and ought to have to that all-perfect Being; and does so encourage Men
to worship God, that they are so far from being ashamed thereof, that they are
ashamed not to do it, having for certain no better reason why they should not.
They see it the general Opinion and Practice of all Men. This does maintain a
general Sense of God in the World, and ofttimes does much good, and the World
would be much worse (as bad as it is) if it were not for those public
Acknowledgments and Worship in Prayer and other Offices performed to him.
Besides the sight of so many Persons, even as many as can assemble together,
worshipping God at the same time, puts us in Mind, as being the most natural as
well as commanded sign (more than any words) that God is absolutely Supreme to
all, above all, that he knows all is relatively good to all, the common Parent,
Sustainer, Benefactour, Friend to all. This makes us the more to attend to the
Greatness of God's Perfections, and to have a more magnificent Opinion of him,
more to admire him, love him, fear him, obey him, or in one Word to worship
him. The Public Worship therefore is a thing most suitable to and required b^
God's Greatness and Excellent Majesty, the is, it is the best sign of our
Opinions of Al^ and Obedience to him for his infinite Per^^ctions. It is an
Augustness and Magnificen^ he ^s worthy of, nay it is infinitely below hi^ but
it is all we can do.

If all the Creatures in Heaven and Ea^ could ^eet together at the same time in
son part of this material World, his Temple, t^ fall down before him and
worship him, t^ pray to him, to praise him, to hear his Will profess Obedience
to him, it would be (...) more agreeable to the infinite Excellency his Nature.
And that this may be the E^fect of our Public Worship, we are all ^ us to
bring our Hearts well disposed and a^fected with Reverence, Honor, Love an^
Praise, Trust in him, Obedience to him, wit^ all the Parts of inward Worship
before mentioned, and to express and signify those b^ some or other of the
most natural signs e^ Speech and Gesture, such as are compose^ Looks, Eyes
lifted up or fixed, lifted-up Hands, erected Bodies, bended Knees, o^ which
there are infinite. Natural, I say not affected. These Signs are the external
Worship of God. And for to see a company of serious and discreet People with
such Carriages and Demeanor, is a very pleasing Sight, and draws easily to
Imitation.

Long and fierce has been the Contention and Strife amongst us concerning this
external Worship, but too certain a Sign and Cause of the Decay and Neglect of
the internal Worship before mentioned. For those whose Minds are seriously and
really taken up with so noble and high an Employment as the Contemplation,
Admiration of God's infinite Perfections, a sincere and ardent Love,
obediential Resolutions, Trust, Joy, Acquiescence in God, are very little
solicitous concerning any the external Signs thereof, or seldom take any Notice
of them but when and so far as they observe them to be any Hindrances or Helps
in themselves or others to the internal things signified, which oft-times is
very little and uncertain. Nevertheless no Men have more and more proper
natural Signs of inward Worship or Devotion than they; no Men's Carriages and
Demeanors more show it than theirs. And as it is a Sign (I speak of fierce
Contention about, not the Use of external Signs) so it is a Cause of the
Neglect of the internal Worship of God. For it calls all Men's Thoughts and
Affections from it, so that they hardly ever mind it neither in Public nor
Private. You shall rarely hear those Persons who are of this Temper spend one
Minute or two in any serious and affectionate Discourse concerning the Nature
of God or his Actions, his Attributes and infinite Perfections, and his
displaying of them in hi^ Creation, Preservation, Providence or Government of
the Universe, and consequently what Opinions and Affections become hi^
Creatures that are capable toward him: (...) concerning the reasonableness of
any Virtu^ or Grace he has commanded from its excellent uses in the World; in
these things they are very ignorant and cold; and rarely, I say shall you hear
from them these things, but for a Minute or two: But Disputes of many hours
with fiery Eyes, and foaming Mouth* concerning Times and Places, and Garbs and
Postures, the Signs and external Circumstances of internal Worship of God.
Moreover this habituates Men's Minds to little and sensible things, and makes
them inept for those truly great and spiritual, unfit to apprehend and be
affected with them: Whence they are filled with Superstition, that is, a great
Zeal and Esteem for and consequently an Opinion of the Acceptableness of those
small things to God, and little or none for those spiritual things which are
vastly greater. This is the Temper generally of the Vulgar even in all other
Matters through Ignorance and Sensuality whereby they are affected with only
personal, sensible and persent good things.

The Controversy is not whether there ought to be any external Signs, and
other not necessary or changeable Circumstances in public Divine Worship: (for
all among all Sects acknowledge and practice it, and cannot but do so) but
whether there ought to be any instituted and commanded by any particular Church
which are not commanded in Scripture by Christ or his Apostles. The Affirmative
of which Question is undoubtedly true. And it is somewhat the more strange it
should be doubted or denied by any Society of Christians (if some may be so
called) when they themselves find it plainly necessary to practice accordingly.
For I do not think there is any one of the wildest of them who do not by
consent and agreement, (contrary to which they will not permit any one of their
Society to act) use external Signs of inward Worship and other not absolutely
necessary Circumstances which never were commanded or used by Christ or his
Apostles. Which usage and practice, though it have not some Circumstances of a
Law or Command: yet it has the Power and Force thereof, and as much restrains
Liberty. For Example, Some of those Persons who are of that Persuasion, and
therefore say a Church has not Power to command him who Officiates in the
Church to wear a white Garment: yet they will not permit him to wear any other
than a black as a sign of Gravity (though Linschot. Itineran.
it is said in Japan they use white for a sign of Mourning, and therefore I
should think of Gravity too and black for a sign of joy) or at least any other
light or gaudy color: they will not permit him the Garb of a Tradesman or a
Soldier; none of which things are particularly any where forbidden or
commanded against by Christ or his Apostles: Nay it is more likely that in
their Preaching they used the Habits of Men of their Profession or Quality in
their Country. So most of those Persons (for some I have heard affirm the
contrary) who will not for the same reason permit any Church to enjoin kneeling
at the Lord's Supper: yet they themselves will not permit any Man to take it in
our Table or Meal Posture and therefore with his Hat on, which is not commanded
against by Christ or his Apostles: Nay it is most likely it is contrary to the
Example of Christ with his Disciples. For it is not much to be doubted but that
they took it in the Manner they used to discumb to eat, ( viz.) with their
Heads covered according to the then Custom of that Age and Country. The like
may be said of the Time, ( viz.) Evening, and of many other Usages.

The Jewish Church had always this Liberty and Privilege, of instituting and
commanding things in the external Worship of God, so they were not contrary to
any thing that God had commanded; and accordingly it was made use of in
abundance of Instances, as has been most evidently proved by some late learned
Men: To which many more might be added, if this were a Place to discourse the
thing so largely. The whole Synagogical Worship is one comprehensive Instance
thereof, or else the Records we have of Moses's Law and the succeeding Ages of
the J^wes Affairs are very deficient. There are many parts thereof which have
positive Testimony of their Institution by the Governors of the Jewish Church;
as the reading of their Haphtaroth or their Sections of the Proph^ts in their
Synagogues every Sabbath day, which was commanded upon the Occasion of
Antiochus Epiphanes's prohibiting them the reading of their Law, and was
continu^d ever after with their reading the Sections of their Law when they had
Liberty to do that. And yet the Jews were a small People, and it was
infinitely more easy to determine every Circumstance in the external Worship
of God for them, than for all the Christian World which is to comprehend all
Mankind of infinite Variety of natural Tempers, Customs, and Constitutions.
For which reason (to give one Example only) what is amongst us a universal
Sign, Natural or by Custom (which most-what has foundation in some natural
Temper) of Honor and Reverence, or the Absence of which is a sign of
Irreverence and want of Honor to God in his public Worship; this is no^ so
among other Nations, but it may be o^ Contempt or some ill Quality. For Men t^
uncover their Head amongst us is a sign o^ Honor, and not to uncover it, is a
sign o^ Irreverence or want of Honor to any Person with whom we converse, or
from who^ we desire any thing, and therefore to God but it is not so among the
Eastern People, the Chinese and Turks. Wherefore the covering of the head in
Prayer is not except in some rare Circumstances to be permitted among us, but
it may amongst them, as it is And consequently neither of them could have been
universally commanded by Christ or his Apostles.

It is true this Power of the Church man be also ill used, and Constitutions in
the external Worship of God may be such and so many as to hinder and not help
his internal Worship; and so may the Legislative and Ex^cutive Power of every
Government in many things be ill applied: but the Inconveniences or Mischiefs
of taking this Power quite away are infinitely greater than those of the ill
use of it, according to Reason and the Experience of all Ages; or else there
had been no Government in the World before this. For usually, what has been
always the general Practice of the World has been found by Experience to be
better than its Omission, al^ Circumstances considered. It is possible too that
Constitutions may be so mischievous as to be sufficient Causes of Separation
from any particular Church. And then only they are so when there are greater
Mischiefs and evil Consequences of them than there are of Separation, and great
indeed must they then be. Which can only be determined by Rev^lation, God
prohibiting them, or by our own Prudence. The Ignorance or the necessary or
wilful Prejudices of some Men are strangely great, who easily make every
Constitution, of little or no Inconveni^nce and sometimes even useful and
convenient ones, a sufficient Cause of Separation. Which Persuasion or Temper
tends most certainly and speedily to an utter Dissolution of every Christian
Society or Church; a truly great Instrument or Means of the Reformation and
Happiness of Mankind. For there will hardly ever be any Constitution which will
long have the Approbation of all. But enough of this in this Place.

I shall only moreover very briefly mention some few general things concerning
these Constitutions in external public Worship with all due Deference and
Submission.

As first and principally that they be such as may have more good Consequences
than bad, more Conveniences than Inconveniences; I mean universally in
respect of Subject, Degree, and Time, or of Extension* Intension, and Duration.
I know this is a Consideration of vast and unlimited Extent, but I am well
assured that there is no other absolutely universal Rule of all our Actions.
And there are but two Ways to know what is so, (viz.) Testimony divine and
humane, and Reason. Or but one, (viz.) our Reason informed by Testimony and
Prudence: that is, by others or our own perception and sight of things. If God
has universally by undoubted Revelation to others or our selves commanded or
forbidden us any Action, we may be sure that always to do or abstain from it
has most Conveniences, and is the best, though possibly to our Prudence there
may appear sometimes the contrary. But if there be nothing in Revelation, our
own Reason must comprehend as well as it can all good and bad Effects or
Consequences of any Action or Omission of any Action, making all just and
prudent Use herein of humane Testimony, and direct us to choose that which has
the most good and the fewest evil ones. There is no Action whatsoever, except
the Will of the last End, viz. the Universal good, in which alone formal Virtue
and Rectitude is to be found, which has not both. And therefore we are not
presently to throw away a Constitution or Law because we observe some one or
more Inconveniences in it to some Persons at one Time, nor to receive it
because we take notice of some few Conveniences: but we are to comprehend all
of both as far as we can, as to Persons, Degree and Time, and accordingly
determine.

But Secondly, One very general Sign or Instance (yet possibly not without its
Exception, as sometimes in case of many good men's very zealous and sierce
opposition through ignorance, or bad men's through perverseness, and of
compliance with other Churches) that a constitution in the external Worship of
God is of more good Effect than if it were omitted, or than another in its
Place, is it is Tendency the most in those present Circumstances to beget and
increase both in us that use it, and in others that see it, the internal
Worship of God: (viz.) the most perfect or best Knowledge, Apprehensions and
Opinions concerning God, his Nature, Will and Actions, the greatest Admiration,
Honor and Reverence, Love, Gratitude, Desire, Trust, Joy, Obedience and
Imitation of God, and consequently the most perfect inward Holiness,
Righteousness, Virtue of Soul in all particular Branches and Instances: in four
Words, the most sincere, universal, vigorous, and constant Holiness. And this
is that which is or should be principally meant by their being for Edification.
And as for the precise notion of decent or decorous, It is nothing but a
Thing's being a Sign of some useful or commendable Quality in us; as
contrariwise an indecent thing is that which is a Sign of some imperfection
within us either natural or moral, as imprudence, rudeness, irreligion: but
more ordinarily of that which is natural, o^ that which is rather only
contemptible than hateful. And it is principally in order to edification by
good Example.

Some of the most considerable Ways or Means how we may come to know what
external Signs or any other Circumstances do most tend to this Effect of
Edification, are;

First, A most sincere and generous Love ^ this internal Worship of God in the
Constituters themselves, and a hearty and fervent Desire to beget and propagate
it in Men al^ they can, and consequently to aim at it and propose it to
themselves in all their Constitutions, and that the most immediately they can
and the shortest way. I say, the most immediately and the shortest way: For it
seem^ to have been a frequent mistake or non-attendance in some who have really
desired and intended the promotion of this internal Worship of God which may be
called Piety; tha^ they have applied themselves to those mean^ which are so
indeed but in small degree and very remote, and therefore uncertain, and take
up a great deal of time and pains which might have been elsewhere better
employed for the same purpose. They require so much time and constancy to drive
them through a long train of successive causes to their end, that men seldom
have the patience or list to pursue them so far, but sit down and rest
themselves and are well pleased with the means themselves, forgetting or
neglecting the end of them. We are not to take presently and make use of every
real means which may effect our proposed end: but only those which will the
most speedily and fully do it, and even of those, the sewest we possibly can.
It is also certainly one of the best Ways to obtain an End by any certain
Means, to have it perpetually and only in our Mind and Intention when we are
using that Means. Like as it is a most probable Means to hit the Mark to have
it steadily in our Eye, or to come to a certain Place to have it as frequently
in our Thoughts as needs, whither we are going. And in truth the neglect of
this seems to be one of the most frequent Causes why in many particular
Churches, as the Church of Rome, they have so many Constitutions and Rites
either perfectly useless to this great End of the inward Worship of God, and
universal Holiness of Soul; or so little and remotely subservient thereto that
either they have seldom attained it, or it is not worth the trouble of the
Governor and Governed to constitute and observe them; or finally they are
contrary thereto, and more Obstructions and Hindrances thereof. Other meaner
and more puerile or vulgar Ends and Designs, as Beauty, Ornament and Pomp; or
sometimes wicked and selfish ones, as Honor, Power and Wealth have interposed
and quite intercepted the End above mentioned. Not but that I think they all of
them may honestly and prudently be adhibited in some degree in order to that
End: but we are to scorn that such mean things should terminate our View, and
be the ultimate end of our Constitutions.

Secondly, A second means to know what external Worship constituted tends to
the promoting of the internal Worship of God is the most exact Knowledge of
humane Nature we can get: to know what external Signs or other Circumstances of
the internal Actions or Operations of our Minds do most naturally cause them in
us: which are exceeding various according to the Variety of Tempers, Usages and
Constitutions of single Persons or whole Nations, some there are which may be
general and well near universal. And here we must use principally our own
Reason, Experience and Observation both in our selves and others. We may also
make use of others Observation and Experience, and consequently their Usages
and Constitutions, as it follows in the next Particular. For what may be
further observed in this, I refer the Reader to what he will find in the latter
end of this Treatise, (viz.) concerning the due Qualifications of the external
Signs both of Sense and Operations of Soul in Prayer.

Thirdly, A third Means is all Testimony both divine and humane, whether we
have it from express Words and Injunctions as in Scripture Commands or Canons
of Councils, etc. or from Examples and Practice. Which Testimony is so much
more valuable as the Persons are more sincere in the End before mentioned, and
more prudent and discreet to know and observe the Means which will best attain
it. Moreover it is carefully to be observed whether their Testimony be
concerning the same thing to be constituted, i. e. the same or rather the like
in all Circumstances which may alter the case. Whether that the Circumstances
be not so different, as that that external Worship which was then and there for
Edification or promoting of the internal Worship of God, or universally of more
good Consequence than bad, be not so now amongst those who are to make use of
their Testimony. Particular respect must be had to the Extent of the
Constitution, whether it were to all Christians of all Places and Times, or
directed only to a particular Church and for a certain time. And here in the
first place comes in divine Testimony, any Consti^utions to all Christians made
by God himself, which are undoubtedly to be perpetually observed as tending to
the true end thereof before mentioned. These, if there be any besides the
general one of Decency and Order, are to be sought for in the New Testament.
Next may be taken notice of all the particulars of the external Worship of the
Jews appointed by God himself also in the Old Testament: where all
Circumstances are to be considered before they are imitated, and whether there
were not some peculiar ones which made them necessary then, or very subservient
to the internal Worship of God or other good Effects, the which now being
wanting may render them useless or of more bad than good Effect. It is certain,
most of their Constitutions in their external Worship were of this kind; as all
their Sacrifices, their distinction of Meats, their legal Uncleanness, their
Festivals, etc. It is as certain that some of them were such as may be well
imitated by most Christian Churches now, in order to the aforesaid Ends. As a
settled Maintenance for the Officers of Religious Worship, and perhaps their Age
when they should be admitted to minister in those holy Offices and their
number, and abundance more. A great many of them have been by way of imitation
introduced into very ancient Christian Churches some sooner some later, as much
of the Situation, Division, Form of our Churches and Churchyards in Imitation
of their Temple; The Habits of those who officiate in Religious Assemblies,
Caps, Hoods, Surplices, Cassocks, Girdles seem to have been in Imitation of the
Priests Bonnet ((...)) of the Ephod or half-Coat ((...)) of the Robe as our
Translation calls it, ((...)) of the long Coat ((...)) of the Belt or Girdle
(...). The Canon for all persons communicating three times in the year at least
seems likewise an imitation of the Jewish Law, that all Males should appear
three times in the year before the Lord in Jerusalem. There are others yet
which might be named of somewhat more consequence. The Church of Rome have had
some Rites possibly with no bad intent at first from the Heathens among whom
the Christians for many hundreds of years lived promiscuously; as their
sprinkling Things and Persons with their holy Water. Villas, Domos, Templa,
totasque Urbes aspergine circumlatae aquae expiant passim, says Tertullian
Tertull. de baptis.
of the Heathens.

Lastly, may be observed the Constitution of external Worship in all particular
Christian Churches from the beginning to the time: and more especially the most
ancient, an^ therefore in those which were founded an^ governed by the
Apostles. Where again (...) Circumstances are, as is before said, to be
considered with Reason and Prudence before u^proceed to Imitation. We are not
to thi^^ presently that every Constitution or Practi^^ we meet with in every
Urban or Provinci^^ Church, nay in many or most, is to be imitted in ours. Many
might there be very la^dable, and which then might the most obtain the Ends so
often mentioned, which (...) our Circumstances may not, but be usele^^ or may
hinder, or in general may be of ve^^ much more ill consequence than good (...)
particularly, their Quantity or Quality (...) Fasting, Plunging in Baptism,
etc. in which things there is great Difference to be mad^ merely upon the
account of the Climate lived in. The indiscreet and promiscuous Retention and
Introduction of Constitution may well be one cause of their too great Multitude
and Un^difyingness.

And I do not see why a Bishop of London with his Clergy, or an English Synod
man not be as well instructed in the means jus^ now suggested and all others,
to know what Constitutions a^e of best Effect, and most for Edification to
their own Church in their Circumstances, as a Bishop of Hippo or
Constantinople, or a Carthaginian Synod to their Church in theirs: but much
better sure may they constitute for their own Church than these can do. And
particularly, I hope, it is not impossible, but that in Conjunction with their
use of these and other Means, especially the first of sincere Intention, they
may also have some special Influence of God to direct them: I am sure it is but
too much their own fault if they be not as capable of it as other Christian
Churches have been.

Thirdly, It seems of most good Effect, and particularly most conducible to the
Promotion of the internal Worship of God, that there should be some external
Signs thereof, or some other (besides those that are absolutely necessary, as
Time and Place) Circumstances constituted; but not many. The good Use of some
to be constituted is a constant standing sensible Testimony of the public
Opinion of wise and good Men concerning the internal Worship of God; what
Honor, Love, Obedience, etc. we ought to have toward him, and how we ought to
show and express it by the most sit and proper Signs; not only in those few
that are constituted, but also by all other which our own Prudence shall
determine. Those few are but for an Example of our inward Affection and
external Behavior, and for a Directi^ to our general Practice. Further, The
fe^ external things that are constituted may ^^ somewhat helpful really to
introduce and ^^ up in us the due inward Operations of o^ Souls to God, as has
been before observe^ Further, It will prevent at least some perfo^ appearing to
others to be utterly neglige^ and careless thereof, to be senseless or ec^
temptuous of them, and consequently ^^ offending our Brethren, both grieving
an^ displeasing the more pious, and drawing t^ more weak and indifferent in
Piety to ^^ Imitation of the like Irreligion and Prophan^ ness. And however Men
for a few ye^ may be so serious in the Worship of God ^ not to need this Help;
yet in a Nation^ Church after some time of settlement the^ will be found to be
need enough, as the^ seems to be in this very profane Age. ^ the mean time it
can do little or no Hurt ^ them who may think they do not, or man not really
want it. If none of these external Circumstances of Worship be instituted then
they must all be left to the Desire an^ Advice only of the Public, or of each
particular Governor of any Religious Assembly, and consequently to the
Judgment and Choice of every particular Member, though never so ignorant and
bad. But I believe it does now by Experience appear (and whether it will ever
be otherwise in larger Churches, especially God knows, when in Liberty and
Peace) that a very great number of Persons are not yet so inwardly Religious as
to abstain from many indecent things, and some which are Signs of sottish
Irreligion, contemptuous Profaneness and Pride; or to follow the Advices and
Entreaties and Examples of their Superiors, especially Ecclesiastical though
of acknowledged Prudence and Piety. Nay I think at this time in this Nation
Persons are generally disposed rather to do clean contrary even in things
manifestly enough of good use, and which it would become Prudence, Piety and
Charity to appoint. Which Humor seems still to be of the growing side, and is
just the contrary Extreme to the receiving all Institutions, though manifestly
hurtful or useless, with Veneration. Which one consideration may afford a
sufficient reason for some diversity of external circumstances in the
Celebration of the Lords Supper even from the practice of our Lord himself and
his Apostles. Jesus himself is not now present to distribute it. Nor are the
Communicants, Apostles, to receive it. There was no need of commanding any
external rite to help their seriousness, attention and affection, or to secure
them from neglect or contempt.

But as it seems to be of very good Consequence to constitute some things in
external Worship, so it seems best to constitute bu^ few, (how few Governors
must determine especially if they be such as do in themselves strongly affect
the Sense, or excite much the Passions of Admiration, Love or Delight, or take
up much Time and Pains: that s^ Men's Attention be not taken off from the
internal Worship of God. It is certain the^ may be so many, so garish, so
operose and so long as to take up all a Man's Attention, pleasing the Vulgar
especially in the same manner as some things in a Comedy do. As if ^^ Man
should be obliged to cross himself at every Verse of Scripture read, or to say,
Lord have mercy upon us, just thirty times, and Hallelujah ten times, as I
think it is reported of the Russians of the Greek Church. Nor seems it less
advisable, that the few things which are constituted be of great and manifest
good use, and particularly for Edification, that so those who enjoin, teach or
use them, may the more easily justify them and not spend too much time in
dispute about them, and those who are enjoined them, being without scruple, may
the more cheerfully observe them. This will also prevent their too great
multiplication, of which there is danger in some tract of time. For if any be
admitted for the reason of some small though real convenience, it will make way
for all those (and they are none knows how many) which can allege as much.

Fourthly, It is undoubtedly best that the Persons who constitute and appoint
should be not the People, who are generally so ignorant and selfish: but the
Governors of each Church, who are generally more wise and generous, of more
public Spirits. The larger the Church also the better, for by that means the
Constitutions are of greater Authority, and more freely observed; generally
also they are both wiser and fewer, as being made by a greater Number of wiser
and honester Persons, and those of different Apprehensions and Tempers, and
then as being to fit a greater Number of Persons. The same may be said of
Articles of Belief.

The Conditions of Communion both in Doctrine and Discipline are likely in
equal Time to be far more numerous and of less consequence in lesser Churches,
such as some amongst us affect and contend for, than in larger* such as
Diocesan, Provincial, National, and if it were possible, one Universal Church;
and consequently there will be less of Liberty in them. It is true, the wisest
and best men are not the greatest number: But yet it is more probable that more
of them should be found in a greater number of men than in a less. Nor is it
unworthy our observation, that among many other inconveniences which may be
mentioned, there seem^ ^ar greater danger of a greater and speedie^ corruption
of the Christian Doctrine in ^ vast number of little Independent Societies
whereof some, if not most would consist ^ very ignorant and weak persons; than
in ^ smaller number of large ones.

It is notoriously true indeed, that the Church of Rome has monstrously
swelled the bulk of Articles of Doctrine and Rite^ of Discipline into hundreds,
whereof a gre^^ number are false or doubtful, useless or mi^chievous; but it is
to be considered that the^ have been breeding and multiplying man^ hundreds of
years. But so much for this n^^ altog^ther a Digression.

Moreover, it may be observed that thi^ Public Prayer, though made by many
together, yet may be for one private Person. (...) is not necessary that what
is here praye^ should be the Wants of all, but they may al^ join in their
Prayers for one. And therefore it may here be advised, that if in any Praye^
something happen to be said which does no^ concern us, yet supposing it to be
true and just, we may join in the Prayer for them wh^ do want it, be they who
they will in the Congregation. Though we do not know the particular Person, God
does. And so may it be in an Acknowledgment and Confession of Sins. A Man may
use it thus: ( viz.) though he himself should be guiltless, yet he may
acknowledge that those are Sins, and are to be acknowledged and confessed by
those that are guilty whosoever they be in the Congregation. The like is to be
done in Thanksgiving, and in singing of Psalms which usually contain these and
other parts of a Prayer before mentioned. The Psalms also are always to be
recited as a history of the thoughts and affections and condition of some holy
and devout person though one should not have or be in the like himself.

SECT. V.
V. A Fifth Distinction of Prayers is usually taken from the Persons concerned.
And so a Prayer, at least many of the Ingredients in it, may be either for ones
self, or for other Persons, whether the Prayer be Public, Private or Secret.
Thus our Petitions and Thanksgivings and Acknowledgments may be for the whole
Creation, for all the Inhabitants of this Earth all Mankind; we may petition
and thank God for his Goodness to us and to all Men, to the Church or Christian
Society, to the Nation of which we are Members, to the Parish or Place of our
Habitation, to the Family in which we live, to any Society to which we any way
belong to, our selves, or any other part or parcel of God's Creation capable of
receiving any thing from God, and acknowledging him for it according as their
Wants and Capacities are. And the greater the Number of these is on whose
behalf we pray or give thanks, the more comprehensive and extended, the more
fervent and enlarged should we be therein. And so it should be in our Prayers
for those upon whose good the good of others much depends, and whose good is a
more comprehensive and diffused good, such as Governors of all sorts Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and any Persons who have Riches, Power, Wisdom, and Knowledge,
or any ability to do good, that they may have an answerable Goodness. This kind
of Prayer is especially fit for Public Prayer.

Thus I have dispatched the Second general Head, ( viz.) some of the sorts of
Prayer.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
III. WE proceed to the Matter or Contents of Prayer, or Petition, not of a
Prayer, which as we have said consists of Petition, and many other Parts, as
express Acknowledgment of the Divine Perfections, etc. which we have mentioned.

There are in General but two Qualifications of our Petitions or the things we
ask.

First, That they be just and righteous, or that it is just and fit they should
be given us; that is, procurative of or at least consistent with the greatest
Good of the whole Universe.

Secondly, That we want them. If the things be not just we ought not to ask
them, and if we have them already we need not, though the continuance of them
we may.

Now the things which it may be most just for God to give, and which we may at
some time or other want, may be such as these. The principal thing to be asked
and the greatest good that we can ask, or God give, is our greatest Perfection,
( viz.) Holiness, Righteousness, Goodness, sincere Conscientiousness, a good
honest Mind and Heart, Virtue, Grace, as it is usually called. All which
signify the same general thing with some small Differences, ( viz.) a Will
habitually inclined to a Man's Duty, to what is right, what his sincere
Conscience or Judgment of Right or Wrong directs him to, and commands him. We
are to ask and beg of God most earnestly as the greatest Boon he can give, that
he would beget or ingenerate in us Grace in some considerable degree, (for all
Men have, it is likely, some faint and little one already; the worst of Men
has hardly quite extinguished this Tendency or Appetite after Righteousness)
that he would increase and augment make it more vigorous and strong in us, and
at least to be so strong, as to be prevalent over all our other Appetites and
Inclinations, That we may habitually more desire, will and love Holiness than
Riches, Honors, all sensual Pleasures and Delights, finally, than all things
the Heart of Man can desire besides: Nay, that we may love it in such manner
and its great Instance Universal Love with its Object the greatest good of the
whole Universe, as to love it only, and in all other things; or all other
things for its sake; that they may make us more holy, universally charitable
humble, etc. or help us to obtain the Ends thereof, that they may make us more
to be good, or to do good. Further, that God would make us more univer^ally and
more constantly so in all things and to our Lives End: That God would quite
extinguish and mortify in us the Inordinacy and Immoderacy of all our
Appetites and Affections, that is, our Lusts: That our Affections may never be
to any other Object whatsoever ultimately and for it self, and never beyond its
due Measure; but habitually always for the End, and in such Measure as that we
may do the most good, save our own Souls, (that is, bring them to a State of
the greatest Perfection and Happiness) and please God. That our Affections
inordinate and immoderate may cease so to be, and be turned ultimately to and
in the highest degree placed upon Holiness and the things so often mentioned,
to which we were before but too dead and cold; that is, that we may be
converted and renewed. That God would give us to reflect seriously upon the
Badness and Sinfulness of our past and present Tempers and Actions, to be sorry
heartily for it, to hate and detest it inwardly between God and our Consciences
in the highest degree, and resolve to break off such courses, praying to God
importunately for his help so to do, and that we may be forgiven for Christ's
sake all that is past; that is in one word, that God would give us Repentance.

Some of these things thus understood and such like may be expressed in
Sentences of Scripture, thus*

That God would grant unto us and help us, to present our selves a living
Sacrifice holy acceptable to God, our most reasonable Service, and that we may
not be conformed to this World, (to the wicked Manners thereof) but be
transformed by the renewing of our Mind, that we may prove what is the
acceptable and perfect Will of God. (Romans 12. Verse 1.) That God would quicken
us when dead in Trespasses and Sins, and walking according to the Course of
this World. ( Ephesians. 2. Verse 1.) That we may put off concerning the former
Conversation, the old Man which is corrupt according to the de^eitful Lusts,
and be renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and put on the new Man, created
after God in Righteousness and true Holiness* (Ephesians. 4. Verse 22.) That we may
deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live righteously, soberly and godly
in this present World: We especially to whom the saving Grace and Favor of God
by Christ has appeared and been made manifest, ( Titus 2. Verse 11.) That we
may cast off the Works of Darkness and put on the Armor of Light. All Virtues
commended to us by Christianity, which gives us so large and clear a Knowledge
thereof. And walk honestly as in the Day, not in rioting and drunkenness, etc.
but put on the Lord Jesus Christ (that is, his Temper and Spirit which he was
of and which he taught, a Temper and Life according to the Doctrine and Example
of Christ) and make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.
(Romans 13. Verse 12.) That as Christ's or as Christians we may crucify the
Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. (Gal. 5. Verse 24.) In this and such like
manner we may conceive, express and signify our hearty unfeigned eager
Desires, that God would make us in general holy, righteous, good,
conscientious, honest, virtuous, regenerate, converted, renewed, penitent, and
keep us so, and make us more and more so to our Lives end.

But this in general may most often not suffice: but we may proceed further to
the general Instance or Subject of Righteousness, ( viz.) Universal Charity or
Benevolence to all the Universe, God and all his Creation; and then to
particular Virtues, which are but so many Instances or Instruments of Universal
Charity.

As Love to God for himself, as a Being infinitely perfect, and most capable of
Happiness, and therefore rejoicing that his Perfection and Happiness is so
great as to receive no Addition. Further, to love him without any reference to
our selves, separately, but as a Being infinitely good and benign, and using
all his other Perfections of Power and Knowledge to do good with to all his
Creation, of which we have a share, even all that we have that is good, being
the Effect thereof; nay all evil things (absolutely in themselves considered)
to any particular Creature are permitted and disposed by him for the good of
his whole Creation, and therefore all things that are come from his Goodness.
And this is that very Perfection of Righteousness and Holiness and its only
Instance Universal Love and Benevolence in God, which we before were to desire
for our selves; and when we pray to God that we may love him, if we have but a
tolerable distinct conceit of him, it is principally that we may love
Righteousness and Holiness, Universal Beneficence and Love it self. For these
are the principal Attributes of his Nature; God is Love, and he that dwells
in Love therefore dwells in God. Pray we therefore to God that he would work
in us a sincere strong habitual Love to himself, that we might love him with
all our Hearts and Minds, and Might and Strength and Understanding. (Matt. 22.
Verse 37.) And that he would direct our Hearts into the love of himself. 2 Thessalonians. 3. Verse 5.

Next to this may follow Charity: which more precisely signifies Love and Good
Will to all Creatures. To do which to each particular with the limitation of
its desert; i. e. so as is most consistent with our Universal Love to all, and
as far as we see effective of the greatest good of the whole, is the true
notion of Justice, or giving to every one his due. I say to all Creatures
within our Cognizance, according to our Knowledge of them, to the holy Angels,
holy Souls departed hence, all Mankind, to all Christians, our own Country,
Town, Family, Relations. We are to apply our general Will and Power of doing
good to the whole by doing good to each particular, as we are best able and can
best reach; and this all the ways we can; which being the various kinds
(distinguished by Means or Parts or other Logical Respects) of doing good, or
of Charity (as is before said) are so many Graces or Virtues. Pray we,
therefore, that God would make us just, merciful, compassionate, chatable in
Almsgiving, candid, covering of faults, most ready to take notice of and
commend what is good, to pass by and conceal what is bad in men, patient,
forbearing, forgiving, liberal, hospitable, ready to visit, relieve and comfort
the Sick, those in Want, the languishing in Anguish, Pain and Grief, to
contribute what we can to, and rejoice in the good of any one, particular in
others Plenty of the good things of the World, so long as they would use them
we^ But especially to instruct, exhort, encourag^ give them good Example, wish
they mig^ use all good things well, and not be ^ unworthy and undeserving of
them the neither God, nor good Men may think it ^ they should have them; to
adventure our o^ Credit and good Opinion among others, an^ our Ease, if it be
necessary, for the Disco^ragement and Suppression of Vice.

Some of those things we may express i^ the Words of Scripture. That we may
s^fer long, be kind, envy not, vaunt not ^^ selves, not be puffed up, etc. (1
Cor. 13. Verse ^ Further, that we may be inspired with the most self-denying
Temper, refusing our se^^ Pleasure ultimately and absolutely; consequen^ly that
our Corruptions or Lusts, that is, a^ our selfish and immoderate Appetites and
I^clinations, which are corrupt, might be clea^sed and mortified, such as
Malice, Hatred, Revenge, Anger, Wrath, Pride, Ambition Vainglory, false
self-Conceit, Covetousness Affectation of Superiority in any thing, ^ Equality,
Liberty, Desire to be feared, su^^ unto, Contemptuousness, Obstinacy, Self*
Will, Peevishness, Envy, Slander and Detraction, Intemperance, Luxury,
Lasciviousness, Chambering and Wantonness, Immoderate and Inordinate Love of
Games, bodily ^r mental Exercises and Actions, etc.

In words of Scripture, That we might not ^lfil these Lusts of the Flesh, (
viz.) Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Ha^ed, Variance,
Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Se^tions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drun^enness,
Revelling and such like; which things whosoever do shall not inherit the
Kingdom of ^od. But that we be filled with all the Fruits of the Spirit, Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffer^^g, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance,
Galat. 5. Verse 16. etc. That all ^itterness, Wrath, Anger, Clamor,
Evilspeaking and Malice may be put away far from us, and that we may be kind
one to another, ten^er hearte^, forgiving one another even as God for Christ'^
sake has forgiven us. Ephesians. 4. Verse 31. That we may add to our Faith Virtue,
Knowledge, Temperance; Patience; Godliness, Brotherly-kindness, Charity, that
these things may be in us and abound; that as Christians we may not be
unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Pet. ^. 1. Verse 5.

Further still, In order to all these pray we for other excellent instrumental
Graces or Virtues, as that God would cause us to ad^ire his most excellent
Nature and Perfections, to imitate him in what we are capable and ought, to
resemble him, to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect, but especiall^
Holiness and Universal Beneficence, that ^ may be holy as he which has called
us is ^ That he would grant us to obey him sinc^ly, resolvedly, universally,
that he w^ give us an obedient Heart, and consque^ be universally holy,
righteous and go^ and practice all manner of Virtue, and e^cially in the
hardest Lessons; when i^ his Will we should undergo any Evils or ^flictions,
then presently to comply wit^ ^ Will, and to submit ours to it, nay perfe^
acquiesce in it, nay out of choice to make ^ Will to be ours. That also God
would g^ unto us to trust in him, have Faith in ^^ and Dependence upon him; to
believe w^ soever he teaches us; willingly to ^^ our Applications to him as
our best F^ upon all Occasions; to acknowledge ^stantly that whatever inherent
Strength ^ Ability in any kind we have, we ha^^ from him; to be heartily
thankful to ^^ for all good things; to rejoice in his F^^ which cannot be had
without Holi^ which when we have, we have all we^ wish or desire in Effect, and
we need as ^^ trouble our selves about any thing but ^^ing our selves in all
dutiful Demeanor ^ Temper toward him, as the innocent and ^dient Child of a
loving Father.

Further still, In order to the obtai^^ and practicing these and all other
Virtues and ^races, we may put into our Prayers that ^od would bestow upon us
both natural ^arts and supervenient Gifts; That he would ^ake us knowing and
wise, furnish our under^andings with the Knowledge of many and ^f the most
excellent things, especially spiri^ual; and more especially that he would
di^ect us to the Knowledge of the Truth, and ^rue Goodness of things; That we
might ^ot be foolishly led away with things that ^re false, erroneous, vain,
trifling, swelling and puffing up, and much pleasing sometimes ^or the present,
but of little Profit to our Selves or the World, which make us little ^ruitful
in good Works to others, and con^equently the least acceptable to God. Pray ^e
that God would illuminate our Minds and make us clearly to discern things,
especially spiritual things, such as are Truth and ^ Goodness, the excellent
and invaluable effi^cacy of Holiness and all Virtue to make our Selves and the
World happy, the Mischievousness and consequently Unreasonableness of Sin, and
the real Contemptibleness of all other Qualities in compare with Holiness, and
that we might be affected accordingly; that is, that God would spiritualize our
Understandings and Affections. Particularly that he would give us to apprehend
and understand and consider, there is the greatest sincerest constantest
Pleasure and Satisfacti^ in a holy, virtuous, wise, and consequent^ godly Life
and Temper (that is, in Imitati^ of and Obedience to God:) much naturall^
especially after much use, and we know ^^ how much by the Influence of the
Spirit ^ God; that this will give us great Con^dence and Comfort in the Day of
Death^ Boldness, Joy and Triumph in the Day ^ Judgment, when shall be seen so
many trembling Knees and amazed Countenances of the haughtiest Sinners, and
finally, that it certainly fits us for and leads to a most perfec^ and happy
Condition or State of Life hereafter. That God would give us, I say, often to
think of, consider, apprehend, be affected with and feel these and any other
Motives to ^ holy Life.

Add we further, That God would bestow^ upon us a sober, considerative,
advised, cal^^ Mind, as a great preparation for Wisdom an^ Virtue. Pray we,
That God would instil^ into us the most generally useful and instrumental
Graces of a most ingenuous impartial^ sincere Love of the Truth, and more
particularly a sincere Love to Christianity, as ^ Systeme of the most certain
and useful Doctrines. That we might believe most firmly and with a sense of
their Excellency, Sublimity, Nobleness, Delightfulness and Usefulness, all the
things that are therein taught and delivered; and most especially those
concerning our Tempers, Lives and Actions; that we may be hearty not
superficial Believers. And in order to this that we may the more mind and love
these things, Pray we that we may have a very great Admiration of and Love to
the excellent Qualities of our Savior Jesus Christ, his mighty miraculous
Power and high Favor with God, ^ay his being united so intimately to God or
the Divine Nature, his great Wisdom, his ^ncomparable Holiness and Goodness and
Virtue in the highest degree; particularly that of his Charity, (and so of all
other particular Virtues) to us and all Mankind, his being so great a
Benefactor to us as he has been in revealing and confirming so many excellent,
sublime, noble and useful Truths and Doctrines to us; in going through the most
calamitous Life and Death, to give us an Example of the most perfect Virtue and
Holiness, and thereby meriting and procuring for us the Remission and free
Pardon of all our Sins, or our Justification in case of true Repentance and
Amendment; in his procuring for us Grace and Assistance to repent, amend and be
converted, which is in some measure afforded to the worst and the most
negligent; Finally, in being the Author of Eternal Life to us by thus bringing
us by his Grace and Merits to be good and to be pardoned, and consequenntly not
to be unmeet to enter into a State of great Perfection and Happiness after
Death and the final Judgment of all Flesh, of which he shall be the Judge and
the Distributer.

After these may follow the things, which for the most part are useful and
subservient while we are in this Life (and some of them proper thereto) to make
and keep us good or make us better, or any way enable us to do more good, to
execute our Goodness more immediately or remotely. Such as are long Life,
especially till we come to be good, to be converted, to repent; that we may
have the Experience of our own Sincerity and Strength in Goodness, be
profitable to the World by our good Example, as we have been but too
mischievous and hurtful, it may be, by our bad one, have the Joy and Comfort of
this both in Life and Death, as also from a reasonable and just confidence and
assurance of God's Love and Favor both here and hereafter.

Again, Health, Freedom from Sickness, Diseases, Distempers, especially those
which may indispose and disable us from being wise and good (as many do) and
which may incline us to what is weak, imperfect, bad, either immediately, or by
the Use of Means for their removal.

Further, Peace, a State of good will of all Men toward us and toward one
another, a good Government, good Laws, good Magistrates, good Neighbors, Power
and Magistracy our selves, according to our Integrity and Ability to use it as
well or better than others, which sometimes our but allowable Modesty and just
Opinion of our selves, and especially our well disposedness to use it well, for
the good of others, may permit us to desire and oblige us not to refuse. Add
hereto Liberty, Honor, Good-Name or Reputation, to be beloved, Friends,
Relations, Riches, and all the Conveniences of Diet Clothing, Habitation,
Servants, Assistants, Attendants, Freedom from hurtful Care and Solicitude and
Temptation about worldly things, just and sober Recreations, which these Riches
can and do use to procure. These general things and many more numberless
particulars may be the Matter and Contents of our Prayer to God that he would
give and grant them us, and most what in this order; but let us be sure that
all be for the Ends and with those Considerations expressed or presumed that I
have mentioned.

Behold then here a short Scheme of the general Heads of most, at least of
those things which we may have need of either at all times or some time or
other; and which therefore may be the Matter of our Petitions and Desires, when
we pray or address our selves to God either ordinarily or extraordinarily.

And here it may be observed first, That all these things some or other of them
may be put into our Petitions, for any other Persons when we pray for them. For
Example, We ought to pray for all the Universe, that God would make it perfect
and happy, we may and ought particularly to pray as heartily for other Men as
for our selves, that God would so dispose the Affairs of Mankind as to make Men
more sincerely, generously, and constantly holy and good; That Men may more
love and obey God their own and all the World's Maker and Benefactour, and
imitate him more in the Universal Love of all, and right use of any Power or
Ability they have derived from him. That Men may be more wise to understand and
know the greatest good they can do for themselves and others, and the Ways how,
and all things whatever which may enable them or help them thereto; That Men
may more universally obtain all the Perfection and Happiness their Nature is
capable of, be more knowing, wise, prudent, holy, good, and in all instances
virtuous; and in order hereto, that more Men may be Christians, and Men which
are so may be more so; That they may better understand the Doctrine and
Contents of the Christian Religion and their respective Goodness and
Usefulness, and attend to and be affected accordingly therewith, and therefore
principally with its ultimate end and design, which is to make men holy and
happy. That they may be free from Ignorance, Error, Superstition (a most
mischievous sort thereof) Formality, Hypocrisy, Pride, Tyranny, Affectation of
Equality and Superiority, Contention, Strife, finally from all ultimate
selfishness. That Christians might be preserved from being deluded or drawn or
driven by foolish, ignorant, erroneous, proud, tyrannical, envious,
vainglorious, conceited, and self-seeking men. Many good things there are also
which may be proper to others, to their Conditions, or Circumstances; as to all
sorts of Governors and Governed (that the one may rule well, and the other
obey) to Magistrates and Subjects, Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives,
Masters and Servants. So also for whole Communities or Societies, some good
things may be desired which are proper to them, as Unity.

It is to be observed farther, That the matter of our Prayer or Petition may
sometimes be all or more forenamed particulars briefly mentioned only, and
sometimes, and that most commonly, but some of them enlarged. Those particular
things which we most want, which are most reasonable, of whose goodness we are
most sensible; these, I say, may be more enlarged with variety of expressi^^
both of sense and affection to detain our a^tention longer and to raise our
affections We may also take notice of the incentives ^ motives to our desire,
such as the goodne^ of God, his promises, the great goodness ^ the thing we
desire in many instances, (...) necessity, and yet the difficulty of it by
reas^ of many hindrances: Insomuch that one or very few particulars may be the
matter of very long Prayer.

Lastly, We may observe, That the Pe^tion for holiness, and righteousness, a
virt^ous and good mind is always expressly tol^ made before all others, or else
it is to be p^^sumed, that we already have it in such degree, that we may use
the thing well we a^ for, if it be a thing may be used ill. For^ only have we
no reason to hope that our desires shall be granted, but also we have reas^^ to
fear that we shall be punished if we a^ otherwise: it being either impudent
bol^ness, or too wilful carelessness or ignorance^ the nature of God so to do;
as if he cared ^ what and to whom he gave good thing When Men ask amiss that
they may consu^ it upon their lusts, no wonder that they a^ and receive not:
Jam. 4. 3. The sacrifice^ the wicked is abomination, how much more wh^ he
brings it with a wicked mind? Prove. 21. ^ Nay, it may be here added, that so
far a^ man is wicked, though he should pray for some things with a good mind,
intending to use them well, so much less is the probability of his success, or
that God should grant any thing at his request. For he that turns away his
ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayers shall be an abomination. Prove. 28.
9. i. e. so far forth and in such proportion as a man is disobedient to God and
wicked, it is probable, God will reject and refuse his Petitions.

But this hinders not (to remove an ordinary scruple) but that he that has
more badness than goodness in him, and therefore in general may be called a bad
man, may pray and desire somethings from God. For first he may in somethings at
sometimes, be well-minded, be a good man, and particularly in some of his
Petitions, and therefore has proportionable hopes of speeding: But Secondly,
there are other reasons of praying to God besides hopes of success. There may
be other, and so many good effects of our praying* that though we should have
little probability of receiving what we ask, yet it may be not only lawful but
our duty to do it, rather than omit it: as the Acknowledgment of God, of our
dependency upon him, the sense of our wants, humility, the exercise of our
charity, if our Prayers be for others, and the good example of all these to
others, etc.

It is not surely unlawful for one that is more and much more generally bad
than good, and therefore may be termed a wicked or bad man, to have good
desires, to pray to God to give him his grace to repent and be better (which he
may be so well-disposed at at some particular time as to do) and then his
pardon for Christ's sake, to pray for relief in his distress, deliverance from
evils, competency of the good things of this World, God's blessing upon his
endeavors, and all this that he may serve God comfortably, and do good: to
pray for his Family or Children out of sense of his duty and natural affection:
to bestow his blessing out of good nature, compassion, charity, gratitude upon
the afflicted, his friends, his benefactors. Surely, I say, this is not
unlawful, nay it is his duty: though at the time he does thus he may in general
be a bad man (yet in these his Prayers good) and so far it should be probable
that at least some of these Petitions should be rejected or not granted.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I.
THe Fourth general Head of our Discourse concerning Prayer, is the excellent
effects, the advantages or benefits thereof. I mean of praying or a Prayer, not
only of that one part of it called Petition. These all are to be so many
reasons why we ought, and so many Motives to us to pray: for from the good
effects of any action, are all the reasons and motives for its performance to
be taken.

These Benefits may be of two general sorts, viz. (1.) To others, (2.) To our
selves.

1. By our Prayers we may do good to others. For it may oft-times seem
reasonable and just to God to bestow upon others what we ask and desire as we
ought for them, upon the condition of our Prayers: so that if we had not
prayed, God might not have given it. For this his hearing our Prayers for
others may as reasonably be an Instance of God's Goodness and Benevolence to us
as any other good thing, and it may be as great an Engagement to us to love and
thank God; and as a Reward it may engage us more to acknowledge and depend upon
himself (which are such excellent Means of making us good) and to proceed to
love others, and to rejoice in others good. Besides, if we be generally very
good Men, this instance of God's Favor to us in hearing our Prayers for
others, will very much engage and encourage others to an Imitation of us, and
to be good likewise, that they may have the same Favor and Honor from God
too. For a great Honor sure it is, and a great sign of our being acceptable to
him, when he is pleased to grant our Petitions, not only for our selves, but
for others likewise, for whom, out of Love, Charity and Compassion we heartily
pray.

It is true, God bestows upon us the great Favor of granting our Petitions, or
hearing our Prayers for our selves, for Jesus Christ's sake: but it is upon the
Condition of our being holy and good. Upon this same Condition, for Jesus
Christ's sake, he may and does do us that particular Favor of hearing our
Prayers for others likewise; that he may show and declare how acceptable to him
Holiness and Goodness is. And it was our Savior's constant spotless and
perfect Holiness, that merited from God the Pardon of all our Sins, in case of
Repentance, for his sake, and consequently all his Favors, and particularly
the hearing of all our Prayers both for our selves and others. By which we may
easily understand how God may hear our Prayers for one another, and that for
Christ's sake.

We have store of Examples and Commands in Scripture for all Men, especially
good Men, to pray for others: we have also there promises that they shall be
heard, and performances too, that is, the success recorded.

God commands Job's Friends to go to Job to pray for them, with their burnt
Offerings, that God would forgive their rash and unadvised Speech concerning
himself, out of Envy, Contempt or Ill Will against Job, it is likely: and tells
them, that he would accept his Servant Job. Here God even forgives some sins of
some few Friends, or rather omits some Punishment for them, upon Condition of
Job's Prayer, and for his sake; Job 42. Verse 7, 8, 9.

A great part of the Punishment of the Children of Israel for their sottish
Idolatry in worshipping the golden Calf so soon after their coming out of
Egypt, seems to have been forgiven upon Moses his Intercession and Prayer. For
it is said, that God threatened to consume them, and to make of Moses a great
Nation: but upon Moses's beseeching the Lord, that he repented him of the Evil
that he thought to do unto his People. I say, God forgave a great part of their
Punishment, not all: he did not utterly destory ^ consume them: though he did
plague the People too, because they made the Calf. An^ this after he had prayed
to God to forgi^^ them their Sin, or to blot him out of h^ Book; that is, not
to mind him, nor be favorable unto him, nor to show any kindness to him, as
Men use to do to those who^ they have once written down, to remember to do them
some good as occasion shall offer* but afterward blot them out again. W^ may
read these things, Exodus 32. from Verse the 10th, to the 15th, and from Verse
30 t^ the end of the Chapter. And so again upon Moses's Prayer to pardon the
Iniquity of the Israelites when they murmured against him, were seditious and
conspiring to choose a Captain, under whose Conduct they might return to Egypt
again, God says, that he had pardoned according to his Word, that is, his
Prayer which he had made. Numb. 14. Ver. 20. See what great good things it may
seem just and reasonable to God to bestow and give upon the Prayer of one
eminently holy and righteous Man (and how much greater for the sake of one who
was perfectly so) even saving the Lives of thousands, of whole Nations, and all
the Blessings consequent. And therefore it has not been untruly, however
vainly and conceitedly it might have been said by some, that in this res^ect as
well as others, the World fares much the better for holy and good Men, and even
those who are their Enemies, who malign or hate them; to whom they can and do
often do good thus against their Wills, when bad Men would not be beholden to
good Men. yet they pray for good things to them, and wish them well. They often
pray to God to make them good, to amend them, and even while they are bad to
forbear them, and not to punish them, either by laying evil things, or taking
away good things from them, whilst bad Men out of a malicious or revengeful
Spirit, wish and rejoice in the mischief of good Men their greatest Benefactors
and of one another.

Finally, Good Men (so far as such) always wish and pray in general for good
things to all Men, even their Enemies and bad Men, and to every particular
person all particular good things, until they see it is inconsistent with a
greater good in the World somewhere else.

They always wish heartily every man to be better, and then Knowledge, Health,
Riches, Good-Name, Friends, what you will, until they manifestly see they are
so foolish or bad, as to do more hurt than good therewith, both to themselves
and others; and then their universal Charity to the World obliges them to
refrain from their good Wishes and Prayers for them; they are not then c^pable
of them, and yet they retain still s^ much Good Will and Charity to them in
particular, as that they would always be gla^ to see them capable, so as they
might pra^ for and endeavor their good in all things Thus for example, a good
Man cannot pra^ for another to be rich, when he manifestl^ sees he will and
does use what he has ^ Intemperance, Luxury, Wantonness, Prid^ Oppression,
Mischievousness, and thereby ^ corrupt, vex or make miserable the Plac^ where
he lives, or the Persons he can reach ^ but yet he with all his Heart prays,
that h^ might become so sober, advised, pious, an^ charitable, that all these
things may be h^ Portion too, though the former be better tha^ them all.

And, I say, many a time upon the sincerely charitable and fervent Prayer of a
goo^ Man, do other Men both good and bad, receive both spiritual and bodily
Blessings and it may be especially in a place where the Prayer and the answer
of it may be more remarkable or observable, as in a Town or F^mily; and this to
show how acceptable t^ God is sincere and unaffected Holiness, an^ particularly
a hearty praying for others ou^ of Charity; and consequently to encourage both
the good Man himself to Perseverance, and others to Imitation. Although the
good Man is far from making the Satisfaction he has in his Goodness and his
consequent Favor with God, his only or last End* but principally at the same
time he regards too his pleasing God and good done to others, for which God is
pleased to make him an Instrument.

And here let us be sure we are good and sincerely holy Men, if we will have
this Privilege with God and Favor from him; not only presume and fancy our
selves to be so, and vindicate our selves for such, merely for some things
which may be done by really bad Men and secret Hypocrites. Then we are such and
so far forth as we do things out of a sincere Conscience, that is, out of a
sincere Judgment and Desire to do the thing that is right, and therefore with a
cautious and modest Desire of knowing the Truth concerning what is right, our
Duty or what we ought to do; and when the Principles of our Consciences, or
that with which they are informed, or that which influenceth our Judgments
concerning our Duty (for they may be corrupted) are a sincere Love to God that
we might please him, and a universal Charity, such as I have just now
mentioned; when we desire to know our Duty that we may please God, and more
certainly be directed to do more good. We are far from this temper of sincere
Holiness when we are puffed up, conceited and hugely pleased ultimately with
our selves, that we are the People so highly in the Favor of God, and have so
great a Privilege and Power with him, as to call down Blessings presently, not
only for our selves, but for others, and Curses too perhaps, if we please. A
good Man is not thus affected at all, but despises and hates any such Temper of
Mind when he finds himself tempted to it.

Further, If we modestly take notice at any time, that God has been pleased to
grant us such a Privilege because truly good, we are to be advised to call to
Mind, who it is that has made us so: To attribute and ascribe humbly all the
Goodness we have, and the Favor of honoring and rewarding it so, to his own
free though eternal and immutable Goodness and Benignity of Nature: That we and
all we can do, and do do, are mediately or immediately from him, and depend
upon him as the Cause: that without him we neither are nor can do any thing.
For whatsoever Ability, Strength, Liberty we can truly pretend to, it is from*
him, and dependent upon him, and could never have been nor now be without him.
Thus ought we modestly and truly to think of our selves (and so far as we do
not it is from Pride, and we are bad Men.) And consequently to be accordingly
affected with Contempt, or undervaluing of our selves utterly in compare with
God in this respect, when God is pleased so highly to favor us, and to grant
us so noble a Privilege as to make us holy and good, and then to be as it were
the effectual and successful Mediators and Procurers of Blessings and good
things for others: not to arrogate and assume falsely to our selves the being in
the least the ultimate or principal Cause thereof, with a Forgetfulness and
Neglect of God, and consequently without all reason, strutting and being pussed
up and big with our selves; being pleased ultimately in the Possession of such
a Power and Privilege, as if it were really from our selves; in which, if we
were humbly and not proudly disposed, we should not be so carelessly ignorant or
mistaken. Nay, let me say, if it were possible (as it is not) to have any such
Privilege or Power from any thing in our selves independent upon God (as
suppose the good use of our liberty,) yet if we pleased our selves only in the
Possession, Use or Effect of it to our selves, and not in the good and benefit
of others procured thereby; we are so far forth not good Men. And therefore
whatever we may fancy our selves, we are not the Persons, unless we be
somewhere better, whose Prayers are so acceptable and successful with God, nor
have we so much Power with him. Nay, if we be thus proudly and vainly affected,
though we pray, we take a most likely Cours^ to have our Prayers denied, and
when we think best of ourselves, but falsely and proudly, we do the least. It is
a great Honor an^ Privilege, and therefore Men but of pretended and ordinary
Sanctity are apt to cate^ at it, and arrogate to themselves a great degree of
sincere Goodness, that they may see^ with Reason so to do.

This Honor and Privilege of righteous holy Men is expressly affirmed by St.
James and proved by an Example, and upon it i^ founded an Exhortation or
Command for sick Persons to apply themselves to the Elders of the Church, that
is, the Governor or Governors of each particular Church t^ pray for them, and
they should be saved o^ healed, the Lord should raise them up: and if they had
committed sins, they should be forgiven them. That is most likely that
Punishment of their sins; viz. their sickness which* might be inflicted, and
justly continued too* should be removed and taken away. James 5. Verse 14. Is
any sick amongst you? let him c^l for the Elders of the Church, and let them
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the Name of the Lord. That is not
improbably, let the Elders using the natural Means for his Recovery: also add
their fervent Prayers to God. For anointing with Oil was a most ordinary and
usual Medicine in those Times and Countries for curing many Infirmities and
Diseases, as appears by the Jewish Writings. And therefore it may be instanced
in by St. James, and put Syneedochically for any other natural Means or
Medicine whatsoever applied for Help and Cure. To this also the Jews added
Enchantments, to which the Apostle probably opposes Prayer, as the Disciples
used the Invocation of the Name of Jesus and God, as a learned Man has
observed. And then the Apostle proceeds, the Prayer of Faith, that is, of a
Believer, or of a true and hearty holy Christian (such as the Elders were
generally and reasonably then supposed to be) shall save the sick; that is,
shall save him from his sickness, or deliver him, and the Lord shall raise him
up. And if he have committed sins, that is, any sins which might particularly
have deserved such a Punishment as Sickness; yet by the Prayers of these
Elders, righteous Men, they shall be forgiven him, that is, this Punishment
shall not be further inflicted upon him. And then follows, confess your Faults
one to another, and pray one for another, for the effectual fervent Prayer of
the righteous Man avails much: it is very prevalent with God to procure such
and other Favors and Blessings, yea, and sometimes Curses and Evil things;
even as Elias, who being but a Man as we are, by his Prayers procured and
obtained from God both Drought and Rain.

There may be also other Benefits to others by our Prayers, if they be duly
performed: they may be Examples to others, excite and draw them to a due
Acknowledgment of of God and his Perfections, to love him, thank him, desire of
him, have Faith, Confidence and Trust in him, obey and please him, and to
obtain all the consequent good Effects which we our selves shall by our own
Prayers; all which good things, had it not been for our Example, they would
never have thought of or minded, or not so much*

SECT. 1.
BUt Secondly, There are many and great Benefits to our selves by Prayer, which
again may be comprehended under three Heads.

(1) Our Goodness or Holiness. (2) Our Comfort, Joy, Satisfaction, Pleasure and
Delight of Soul. (3) Some things that may be the common Causes or Means of
both.
(1) Prayers do confirm and increase our Goodnoss. They tend much to preserve
us therein, and to make us better, and that these several ways amongst others.

First, By the actual Exercise and Use of it, or of the immediate Means thereof.

Secondly, By suggestion or bringing to mind our Duty, or what helps to
practice it.

Thirdly, By being an Occasion of Imitation of God.

Fourthly, By putting us in mind particularly of the Condition of our receiving
all other good things besides Goodness, nay of our receiving a further degree
of Goodness it self.

Fifthly, By way of Remuneration or Reward. All which I shall a little more
explicate.

(1) By being an Occasion of the actual Exercise and Use of Goodness, or of
those things which immediately are the most frequent and effectual Means
thereof. And this is easily understood by running over all the Parts of a
Prayer we have formerly mentioned: As,

First, The Confession of our Sins, that is, an express Judgment concerning our
selves directed to God, that we have been guilty formerly, or are still of such
and such sins, and a hearty Disapprobation, Dislike, Disalallowance thereof, a
Contempt or Hatred of them, and of our selves too so far as we have been
guilty, a hearty sorrow that we have ever been so imperfect, wicked or unhappy,
and a cheerful, free and firm Resolution to do so no more, but to be good, and
to do our Duty, to do what we have been faulty in omitting, and to abstain from
and abandon what we have been guilty of in doing; to mortify and extinguish
all the Inordinacy and Immoderacy of any or all our Appetites, that is, all our
Lusts or the Corruption of our Appetitos, and to excite and quicken our Desire
and Love to our Duty, and to Obedience to God, whose Commands are the Rule of
it.

Now Confession of our Sins thus explicated, and in this sense is an actual
Exercise or Exertion of the Habit of Goodness and Holiness or of Grace in us,
as it is usually called; so often as we thus pray we stir up and excite and put
forth into Action our habitual inclination of Goodness and Holiness: But every
Action and Exercise confirms the Habit to which it belongs, strengthens and
increases it. All Habits may be thus gotten, and however gotten (though
immediately by God's Influence, which is called Infusion) yet they are thus
maintained, strengthened and increased. The most ordinary Person may understand
this by Experience. The more often we actually hate or are grieved for or at
any thing or Person, the more we are inclined so to do; insomuch that at last
we may not endure the very sight or mentioning of them. And so it is in Love:
what things we have accustomed our selves and used often to love, we contract a
most ready, firm and constant Inclination so to do; insomuch that sometimes we
cannot be for any time without them. In the very like manner it is when we
actually often abominate Sin in general, or any one in particular, when we
hate, contemn, are grieved for it; when we heartily love our Duty, and with the
whole strength of our Souls desire and will we may be universally or in any
particular innocent or good: we shall at last arrive to that habitual Temper of
Love of Goodness and our Duty, and hatred of Sin, which will be easy, strong,
vigorous and constant, and shall not endure the Sight or Suspicion of any Sin
in our selves, nor be able to live comfortably without the constant
consciousness to our selves of as great a degree Innocence and Virtue as we can
by any Means attain to.

Profession of our future Obedience (which was another Ingredient in Prayer) as
I have explicated Confession, is included in it, and is nothing but an express
Action or Resolution of Will excited by the Soul, and directed to God to be
obedient to him in general or in any particular where she has been faulty; and
that now by his Assistance and Strength which she humbly implores, she will
observe to do her Duty, the Rules of which are his Will made known by Reason or
Revelation. Which express Action of hers, or actual Resolution (and the more
frequent the better) must needs preserve and increase her habitual Temper or
Inclination. Prayer therefore thus performed by a rightly informed discrect and
knowing Soul according to its Fervency and Frequency has a most natutural
Influence to preserve and strengthen us, to make us grow in all Goodness; And
the neglect of it may reasonably very often (not always, because there are
other Means) be the Cause of Persons declining and growing more cold and
indifferent in all their Duty.

I do not say that all Prayer is a necessary Means of Men's growth in Goodness;
not are we presently to expect such mighty difference between all those who
pray and those who do not. And then upon any disappointment, by the
miscarriages of some who use it, gladly take occasion to reproach or despise
the Duty, as a useless but troublesome thing, as some naughty men are apt to
do. For men may perform it very erroneously, idly and carelessly. And then they
may so engage their Affections with that Concern and Constancy to other Objects
in the World after they have done their Prayer, that they may quite forget it,
or drown and overcome the good Sense and Affections they had therein. Whence
their Prayers are but little effectual.

From all these Causes it often comes to pass that you may see those that are
not negligent in this Duty or Performance, but frequent and constant and long
too, so bad in their Tempers, Lives and Actions all the Day, that you can see
little Difference between them and those who do not pray at all. Little I say,
for I am apt to think there is some general good, usually by the meanest
performance of it, and Men who are bad would otherwise generally be much worse;
and therefore though Men seem to be very little the better for their Prayers, I
would not have them to leave them quite off for all that.

As for Acknowledgment of God's excellent Perfections, his infinite Power,
Wisdom, Universal Goodness, his Bounty, Mercy, Justice, etc. which is another
Ingredient in a Prayer. It is manifest, That the oftener we do this the more
Spiritual our Minds are; and we see that by Exercise and Use we apprehend and
conceive these spiritual things more strongly and clearly, and our Affections
too of Honor, Admiration, Reverence, Fair, Faith, Hope, Joy in God, and Love
to him grow more substantial and real, more strong and vigorous, not so faint
and languid; so that we feel them in our Breasts as really and as powerfully as
to any other Object; we come to have a real Understanding, Perception, Sense
and Affection for those things when they are named; we know and feel them in
our Minds and Hearts; we know what it is, and have it as really in our selves
to honor, fear and love God for his infinite Perfections, though invisible as
a Prince attended with all his Ensigns of Majesty and Greatness, and whom we
know to be as wise and good as great.

By our frequent Converse thus of our Minds with God, he becomes readily a very
real thing to us, is really perceived by us, and has real Influence upon our
Affections: whereas before we thus begun to use our selves, the Name of God and
of all his Attributes and Perfections was an insignificant thing to us, we
understood little or nothing by it, and no more affected with it most times
than our Statues of Wood or Stone would be. We might hear much talk, and read
much of God indeed, or his excellent Nature and Attributes, but little know
what they meant. We apprehended better and more, were much more affected with
some little particular kindness of any honest or good Neighbor, than with the
infinite Boun^y and Goodness of God, who is the constant Cause and Author to
us, and to all things of all the good things we all have and enjoy.

Moreover in some Prayers, as secret Prayers, where we may have time to apply
our Thoughts to what we please, we do not only transiently (which if frequent
will do a great deal) but also fixedly and for a longer time attend sometimes
to one or more of these infinite Perfections of God when we acknowledge them;
whence a more particular discovery and clear apprehension of the Greatness
thereof; insomuch that the Soul may break forth into Raptures of suitable
Passions, that is, great and sudden Violences thereof. As for Example, If a Man
contemplating the Power of God should attend to the Greatness and Vastness,
Excellency and Nobleness, and Strangeness of the Nature of things he has made,
were it but only of the indefinitely extended material World, much more of the
intellectual or the World of Spirits. Or contemplating his Wisdom should attend
to this, that all things that we and all the rational Creatures in Heaven and
Earth know by little Parcels, and successively to Eternity it self, are all
present at once to that infinite Understanding; or contemplating his Goodness,
should take notice of the Freedom of it, he being infinitely powerful, the
Immutability of it, the Universality, an^ that all the greatest Evils that so
seem to u^ are permitted or appointed out of Goodnes^ and the least of things,
and most mi^u^ disposed by the same Goodness the best wa^ that can be; or
should take notice of some one or more excellent Instances thereof, ^ his free
and ready pardoning upon Repentance the fottish Heedlesness, and sometime the
malicious Rebellion and insolent Contempt of his own pitiful Creatures again^
him: I say a Man contemplating these Perfections thus and attending to some
such things therein, will more strongly apprehend them and sometimes be
affected and seized wi^ the greatest Violence and Raptures of sutab^ Passions.
Such as we often meet withal i^ the Psalms, when David in his Acknowledgement
of God glanced at and discovered or ^^^ more steadily and clearly his Wisdom,
Power Mercy, Goodness, Righteousness in some Instances or Effects. As in Psalm
36. Verse. 5. Thy Mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens, and thy Faithfulness
reaches unto the Clouds; (That is thy Mercy and Goodness, particularly
expressing it self in thy faithful performing thy Promises, is every where, and
in all thy Creation manifests it self) thy Righteousness ^ like the great
Mountains; (That is again, thy Universal Goodness is vast as to Extension, and
unmovable and unchangeable as to Dura^ion; For so are the Mountains, as far as
we observe, compared with other things) thy ^udgments are a great Deep; (The
infinite Decrees and Resolutions of thy Will few of them known, and all done
with an incomprehensible Wisdom and Knowledge.) O Lord thou preservest Man and
Beast; (All Creatures are maintained by thee.) Then upon this Contemplation and
Reflection, he breaks forth in the next Verse; O how excellent and ^recious is
thy Loving Kindness! therefore the Children of Men shall put their trust in the
shadow of thy wings.

Now the real, clear, strong and vigorous Apprehension of, and Affections
toward these divine Attributes, or this excellent Nature of God, do more
powerfully dispose our Minds to Imitation of and Obedience to God, and
consequently to Universal Righteousness and Holiness.

And so likewise be it observed of thanking God, or actually loving him for his
Benefits received already, either in general or in particular, which is also
one Ingredient in Prayer, without doubt the oftener we do it, the more really
and heartily, the more vigorously and strongly we shall do it: But the Love of
God for his Benefits does dispose us certainly to please him, and consequently
to imitate and obey him (we knowing that pleases him) and consequently to be
unive^sally holy, righteous and good, which he and commands. Nay, we all
naturally kn^ that Holiness pleases him, besides what perpetually sounded in
our Ears, who ^ Christians from our Cradles, that without li^liness it is
impossible to please God. And so ^ see it by Experience, that bad Men care ^^
for thanking of God, or if they do, it is ^ry superficially and coldly and very
seldom^ and contrariwise, those that do it oftener a^ more heartily are
generally better. D^^ very frequently in the Psalms joins both ^ Thankfulness
to God for his Mercies and B^nefits received and his Desire and Prayers ^^ God
to bestow them; with his Resoluti^ to be obedient to God and to keep his
Co^mandments. In the 119. Psalm often, The art good and do good, teach me
thy Statute^ Verse 68. And hold thou me up and I shall ^ safe, and I will have
respect unto thy Comm^^ments continually. Verse 117. And deliver ^ from the
Oppression of Man, so will I keep ^^ Precepts. Verse 134. I cried unto thee,
save m^ and I shall keep thy Testimonies. Verse 146.

In Petition too another Ingredient of Prayer, the oftener we do it, the readier
we sha^ be thereto, and our Desires will be more rea^* sincere, strong and
vigorous: but if we truly and heartily, not in Words only, desire any thing of
God, we must have some hope ^e ^ill do it* and if so, we must certainly judge
^m to be good, which will engage us to love ^im, and consequently (as even now
argu^d) dispose us to please him by imitating and ^eying him.

I have said before, that Prayers are not ^ecessary Means for making us better.
For ^rst, there are other Means besides, as Read^g, Hearing, Meditating, in
which are many ^f the same Employments of Mind, as there ^re in Prayer.

And then again, A Man's Opinion of Per^ection and the several Degrees thereof,
and consequently of God, whom all men judge to be all Perfection, of the
Goodness and Bad^ess of Things and their several Degrees, may be so false and
mischievous, that his Acknowledgments, Honor, Reverence, Love ^o God, his
Confessions of his Sins, his Thanksgivings, and Petitions in his Prayers may be
very pernicious things, and instead of making him more truly holy and virtuous,
charitable, self-denying, humble, spiritual, may make him very wicked and bad,
selfish, tyrannical, proud and sensual; and this it may be sometimes when he
thinks clean contrary, and is very highly conceited of himself through
Insincerity, his Conscience being prejudiced and defiled, by some habitual Lust
wilfully or lazily indulged* It is not pure and sincere, inclined to judge by
no other Appetite but what is right and ought t^ be done. Thus a Man may have
in his Acknowledgments of God many false and b^ Conceits and Opinions of him:
as that he i^ arbitrary, does all things out of mere sel^ love, only to please
himself, and therefore no matter whether in Eternal Torment o^ Happiness of
Creatures; that he is partial that he connives at and is indulgent to some
particular ones in Sin, only because he will, and they are dear to him, and he
has set hi^ affections upon them, and that he will forgive some for Christ's
sake, and pardon them, but not others, though one be not better tha^ the other.
Men may go so far in this blind Devotion, through their own Carelessness,
Rashness, or Lusts, as to Worship more a^ Idol of their own, or the Devil, than
God: That is, the Object of their Worship in their Minds may have more of what
they imagine to be Perfection, and consequently to belong to the Nature of God,
than of what truly and really is so: It may have more of Imperfection, and
sometimes of the worst sort, than of what is true Perfection. And thus it is in
those who conceive God selfish, partial, malicious, tyrannical, revengeful,
corporeal; who assuredly are a greater number than are commonly thought, and
some esteemed very devout.

Men may also pray for some things out of ^eer Self-Love, nay with a Mixture of
Vainglory, Hatred, Envy, Revenge, Worldly-Mindedness, Sensuality, Pride and
Wrath against others. A Mixture, I say, for the most part, for they may also
propose to themselves the Justice of their Desires, and what pleases God, and
is for his Honor. Though this Apprehension or Conceit too may ofttimes proceed
from ultimate Self-Love, and they are willing to think a Thing just, and that
it pleases God, only because they would have it so. For such Prayers as these,
as there may be something in them which may have some Tendency to make Men good
(as merely acknowledging of God's Attributes and our Dependence upon him) so
there is much more in them which will make Men bad and wicked.

Again, A Man may be erroneous and mistaken in many Parts of his Prayer through
Pride and Conceitedness or Superstition. So he may acknowledge God's goodness,
and thank him for his being made by him very holy and good in general, when he
is not so; nay, sometimes not even in those particulars he mentions; and that
which he takes for Holiness may be done out of Pride, Vainglory, or some other
base End. As the Pharisee thanked God he was not an Extortioner and unjust,
when he was, though not in the same Instances with the Publican, in exacting
Custom, and taking perhaps some what to abate and conceal it; or when, i^ he
was not an Extortioner, Unjust, Adulterer in the external Actions, or internal
either; yet it might be only to save his Credit or Reputation, or that he might
appear more holy than the Publican, and not be as the Common People of the
Earth, but be superior to them: In all which there was n^ Holiness at all, but
only Wickedness: Or finally, if he were truly so much better than the Publican
in these things; yet he might be as bad or worse in as many or more things such
as were Pride, Vainglory, Envy, etc. and that therefore he looked upon himself
much more holy in general, than he was, and thanked God for it too.

And so also a Man might be erroneous in his Confession of his Sins, and
through indulged Weakness, Ignorance, Superstition, or some Passions, judge
those Sins, which are not so, or greater than they are, For which Reasons how
necessary is it for us to be wise, discreet, to know our Selves to be in the
Truth before we suffer any Affections to be engaged. Some even Religious and
highly useful affections when guided by reason and truth, may when they are
blind or not directed thereby, lead us into sometimes hurtful errors and
mistakes, and dispose our Judgments to Judge falsely. A very great hatred,
contempt and grief at our selves for sin in general, or some more notorious sin
in particular may make us judge worse of our selves than in truth we deserve:
as we but too often do by others, when we are possessed with the passions of
Hatred, Anger, Revenge against them. And because it is very rare but that
through self-love and flattery we err on the other hand, therefore this is the
less suspected. So sometimes some very great passion of admiration, honor,
love, etc. for some one attribute in God, and a desire to magnify it, may make
men judge that to be in God which is inconsistent with some other attribute or
perfection in him, and ascribe to him not only bare falsities, but mysterious
contradictions. So, for Example, a man's desire to advance the unlimitedness of
God's power may lead him to judge, that he may justly, if he will, make all his
Creatures to be miserable. And so some piously, but unwarily, to magnify the
mercy of God in our Redemption, have spoken, and seemed to think, that God or
the Divine Nature it self did really even lessen and abate it self when for the
recovery of miserable Mankind, it did extraordinarily and Hypostatically unite
it self to an humane nature. But this is a little Digression.

Again, A Man may pray Words only, and have no sense hardly of what he says;
and yet this is used to be called Prayer, though according to our Definition it
is not. A Man may also pray and understand what he says, but yet have no
Affection stirring, no Admiration, Honor, Reverence, Love, Thankfulness to
God, no Desires for the things which he mentions with his Lips or conceives
with his Mind, no Trust or Faith in God, not one jot of inward Sorrow and true
Grief for his Sins, as Sins, or Resolution to do so no more, but to abstain
from them and to forsake them, and to be obedient to God for the future: I say
a Man may say Words and understand Sense, and both very excellent too; and yet
have none of these Passions and Affections excited, he may not be touched
therewith, but be perfectly cold. And yet these are usually called Prayers;
which as it is true they have some Tendency and Preparation to do some good
(even the very imprinting such Words and Senses in our Memory;) so they may
sometimes do as much or more harm; and so either not make us any whit the
better, or make us the worse. For they may by use make us formal, that is to
say Words without either Sense or Understanding, or with them, but without any
Affection at all; more to disjoyn those things which otherwise would be more
naturally conjoined, and to be well content herewith too, and think we have
done well enough, and make us look no further. If we have but after any manner
said our Prayers, though never so ignorantly and coldly, we have done our Duty,
we are well satisfied. And the oftener we use our selves to be thus content and
to satisfy our Conscience, the easi^ler we shall do it still; whereas we ought
all of us when we pray to heed, understand, and comprehend to the utmost of our
Power and Ability what it is we say; and especially its Truth and Goodness, and
then to stir up and strengthen our suitable Affections; and if we find our
selves dull, languid, inapprehensive, to send up to God a hearty Ejaculation,
that he would by his Spirit illuminate our Understandings, quicken, enliven and
strengthen our Affections and Resolutions.

Again, as I have formerly said, Though we pray daily, and it may be
indifferently well, with Understanding and Affection; yet we may so constantly
both inordinately and immoderately engage our Affections all the day after
about other Objects besides our Duty, and those things which dispose us to the
Practice thereof, without any Reference of them to their due End, and without
any Government or Moderation, that the Effect of our Prayer may be sometimes
quite prevented or extinguished, and our Affections be upon other things, and
our Inclinations to them as unduely as ever they were. Indeed generally and for
the most part, I think that our Prayers being performed with understanding and
affection, have some tendency in them to make us better, or keep us from being
worse. We should generally be worle, (though now not good) if such our Prayers
should be altogether neglected.

Finally, It is possible sometimes for our Prayers to be so performed, as that
they may many other ways besides that which was a little before mentioned, do
us more harm than good, and render us worse than if we prayed not at all. As if
we be so vainly conceited of our Prayers, and of our selves for them, as to
think our selves very good and acceptable to God, let our Lives and Actions be
all the day after what they will; and that our Prayers make satisfaction for
our Sins; and particularly, that it is attainment enough whiningly to confess
them in general or particular Terms, and to acknowledge our Weakness and
Badness of our Hearts, and so to be very well content to be always weak and
sinful too; and think it far better to pray and not to live well and
conscientiously in the most considerable and frequent Actions of Life, than to
live conscientiously, righteously and honestly, and that with respect to God
too, as pleasing him; but not to pray, though very erroneously, and
indiscreetly, nay, insincerely and hypocritically (as is before said) and
therefore wickedly; Whereas this last is a Means to the former, and in it does
its chief and principal, though not only Use and Benefit consist, as we shall
hereafter mention.

But yet, by no Means would I, because of this or such like ineffectual Use or
Abuses which may be of Prayer, have Men think of neglecting or throwing it
quite away; but rather to betake themselves seriously to use and perform it as
they ought, and to have a Care of all Formality, Conceitedness, false Opinion
of Prayers, and to be careful to follow them with their constant Care,
Diligence, Watchfulness, endeavor to live according to them, or according to
all good Conscience all the day after, in all their Actions; finally, to
perform them according to the Directions hereafter.

This for the first way how our Prayers tend to make us better, and to preserve
us still in what Goodness we have obtained, that we do not go backward and
relapse, but go forward and make progress in Goodness; ( viz.) by being an
occasion of the actual Exercise thereof, or of those things which are very
proper Means for that End.

SECT. III.
II. OUr Praying will preserve us in goodness, and make us better by
Suggestion. That is, by bringing to our Minds either our Duty in general, or
any particular Duties to God, our Neighbor, or our Selves, or those things
which are Means to dispose and engage us thereto. Such as are the infinite
Wisdom of God, his all-seeing and comprehending Knowledge, that he is the
searcher of Hearts, and knows perfectly and better than our selves the best and
worst of our Thoughts, Counsels, Designs, Tendencies, Inclinations, Choices,
and Delights of our Hearts: He knows both our Honesty, Simplicity and
Sincerity, and also our Partiality, Hypocrisy and secret Badness not known or
perceived by others at all, nor by our selves, perhaps, till we be of an
advised, calm, humble, modest and sincere Temper: such are further the
Universal Goodness of God, his particular Mercy or Bounty, his Justice and
Severity, our Dependence upon God and our absolute Need of him, that we cannot
be nor hope for any good thing with any Reason but from him. Such is his
infinite uncontrollable Power, that he can turn us out of Being, or into Misery
here and hereafter; take from us our Lives, Strengths, Healths, Riches,
Reputation, Parts or Gifts, which we may use lewdly, wickedly proudly, when he
pleases; make us sneaking, sickly, poor, contemptible, Sots or D^nces in this
Life, and hereafter turn us into everlasting Punishment, without Repentance and
Amendment.

Such again are when we confess our Sins, our Sins themselves, what they are,
their Vileness, Iniquity, Folly, Shamefulness; But the Peace and Satisfaction
of Conscience arising from a free and hearty Confession of Sin, and Sense of an
internal, sincere, unconstrained Hatred and Contempt of it, and a firm and
generous Resolution of being good for the future: I say, our praying frequently
will bring such things as these are into our Minds, bring them to our
Observation and Memory, and be a cause too of their coming to our Minds upon
any Occasion of themselves without our Direction. Whereas otherwise we should
have never, it may be, once had thought of some of those things, and of others
of them very rarely and slightly. And so we see by Experience, that generally
those who most neglect this Duty of Prayer, public, private, secret, set and
fixed, or at least occasional and ejaculatory, perpetually only employ
themselves about other matters; and more rarely think of these things, and such
like. Some never have them come into their Thoughts all their Lives time;
others think not of them not in a Day, a Week, a longer time; and when they do,
it is very transiently and slightly, and these excellent things are soon turned
out, because not liked. God, and their Duty, and their Happiness, and things
that belong hereto are not in all their Thoughts sometimes; especially this is
seen in those who if they should not have Time, or Ability, or Opportunity to
pray in private or secret (which is an ordinary Excuse hereafter to be
answered;) yet surely want not the Opportunity of the Public, where Prayers
are provided for them, and something else: But yet sottishly and carelessly they
sit and loll at Home, and it may be do worse, or idly ramble abroad. We see
that these are generally Persons void of the most ordinary Degree of Goodness,
even of Humanity it self, who care for neither God nor Man; wretched Brutes!
who when God out of his unspeakable Goodness has so highly honored them with
a capacity of knowing and worshipping, honoring, loving and obeying him, of
conversation and communion with himself, yet will not make use thereof; but
impudently by this their Carriage in Particular, dare proclaim to the World,
that they care not for him, and will have nothing to do with him, and wilfully
descend so far to be like the Beasts. But God will have to do with them, and
Time will come, when neither God nor Man will pity their intolerable Torment,
and they shall howl under the just Wrath of that God whom they would not love
or honor. And all honest and but tolerably well minded Men, that have but any
respect for their Creator (much more Christians) and have not cast away all
Sense of him, ought after neighbourly Advice and Admonition, if they will not
amend, to have an Abhorrency of such Persons as such, as well as Pity for them,
as capable of better things.

But now to proceed, The oftener our Duty in general, or our particular Duties
come to our Thoughts, the more likely it is we shall practice them; The oftener
our Faults come to our Minds, and we remember them, the more likely we shall
avoid and mend them; The oftener we think of God but in general, much more in
particular of his Power, allseeing Knowledge, his Goodness, his Mercy, Justice,
consequently Heaven, Hell, the more surely shall we be disposed to do our Duty,
and have a Care of and abstain from all Sin. Our Prayers therefore being the
Occasion of bringing such things as these are into our Thoughts, and of
furnishing our Memory therewith, and of their often actually appearing and
occurring to us, will be also one Means ^^ preserving us in any degree of
Goodne^ we have, and continually mending us, a^ making us better. And so much
the more by how much they are the more freque^ the more time we spend therein,
and we c^ spare from the necessary Occasions of Life which we ought not to
neglect or omit. ^ we observe, we shall find that men's thought^ affections and
inclinations are generally mo^ real and vigorous to those things about wh^^
they are most frequently employed. T^^ reason of which is most easy and nature
Nor is it to be hoped that men should be of ^ more intellectual and virtuous,
spiritual an^ religious temper, till they employ more tim^ about such matters,
And hence it comes t^ pass, that the public Worship of God, an^ private too,
though constantly at appointe^ times used, do so little good (yet some) an^ are
so little influential upon men's temper an^ actions. Where they have one thought
o^ affection about their duty or those things which may dispose them to
practice it* they have thousands about other objects. N^^ wonder that their
advantage of frequency maintains the prevalence of their influence And because
our Ability or Opportunity may be less for set times, ejaculatory Prayers are
fittest and easiest to be frequently used, which may be done by sober and
honest Minds upon all Occasions. One even at his Plow-handle ^or in his Shop,
surely may upon any Occa^ion often acknowledge God's Blessing, his Power,
Wisdom, Goodness in preparing things for the Use of Man in his poor Life, and
particularly in giving good Seasons, good Trading, Honesty, Reputation,
competent Gain; or he may acknowledge his Power and Justice, and his own or
other Men's Faults, whereby he provokes God, when he observes ill-natured or
barren Ground, or unseasonable Weather, or Commodities spoiled, or Trade fail,
or other evil things, and may pray to God to continue the forementioned good
Blessings, and to give men thankful and obedient Hearts and Lives for them, or
to prevent and remove those evil things which they fear or feel; and in order
thereto, that they may see what is amiss in themselves, and mend that; as
perhaps Neglect of God, and to serve him.

I say, any one at his Plow or Harrow, or in his Shop may surely upon these
Occasions do thus as easily, if they had mind, as Swear and Curse at their
Cattle, or Fellow Servants, or Masters, or Chapmen, or Customers.

It is a very good and laudable Custom which Men generally have, when they
mention any considerable Benefit or good thing received, to say, God be
thanked; when any Fault of their own, to say, God forgive the^ when any
Calamity or Evil which they f^^ or fear, to say, God have Mercy on them. A^
these are ejaculatory Prayers. But then, ^^ they are Customary so they should
be Hea^^ and Men should have a care to live as they S^ These and many other
Ejaculatory Praye^ may be oftener used in our Thoughts tha^ spoken, for fear of
seeming Affectation, whi^ may offend.

SECT. IV.
III. A Third Way how Praying keeps ^ good and makes us better, is ^^ being an
Occasion of Imitation ^ God. And this by the Means of Suggestio^ and bringing
God and his excellent Perfect^ons and Attributes to our Minds, and by t^^
Exercise of our Admiration, Honor, Reverence of him as one powerful, wise,
holy and righteous, of our Love to him as o^ good to us, good to all his
Creatures, Goodness it self. For all these Affections in us t^ any Person,
dispose us effectually to Imitation of all we can in him in general, but
especially to that which we more particularly admire and love. The serious and
frequent admiring therefore and loving particularly in God his Holiness and
Righteousness, will dispose us to an imitation of him therein. The reason why
we do not see Men's Prayers do them this way any great good (though, I think,
they rarely perform them so badly, but they would be worse if they did not
perform them at all) is because they perform their Prayers so seldom, or so
superficially, coldly or heartlesly. Sometimes they pray only with their Lips,
when their Hearts are far from what they do; they are cold and dull, not at all
warmed or touched. The very loving God for his Benefits only in particular to
us, will dispose us to Imitation, if we do but attend to or remember, that to
imitate him will certainly please him, which Love disposes us unto. And that
our Love and Thankfulness to God for his Benefits in our Prayers may more
certainly have this excellent Effect of Imitation of him, and consequently
being holy; it will be very good when we have acknowledged God's Favors, to
ask our selves seriously, what we shall return him again, how we shall please
him: and then to answer our selves, by being like himself in all manner of
Righteousness and Holiness, and hating all manner of Sin and Iniquity.

We see also by Experience, that we imitate those with whom we much and
frequently converse, and have a great Opinion of; we do as they do, we
entertain our selves with the same Thoughts, Affections, Actions. And so it is
with Minds; who frequently and heartily converse with God, that is, have him
the Object of their Thoughts and Affections in Prayer, and have an honorable
Opinion of him (as who has not?) they generally are more like him; I am sure
at least are much disposed thereto. Experience also teaches us, that Men who
think of God, are much according to their Notions of him, as they think of him
and apprehend him, And therefore if they look upon God as a powerful,
arbitrary, angerful Being, so he be not so to themselves, and they be but
secure; they themselves are apt to be so too, and oft-times actually are so.
They contrariwise who worship God principally for and take notice of his
Universal Goodness and Love, as his principal and only absolute Perfection, and
dearly love and admire him as Omniscient and Omnipotent Love, who, though he
can do what he list, does always what is best: These, I say, are apt to be of a
universally, generously benign Temper to all, not arbitrary, partial, but good
to every one, as is best for the general good, or for the Public.

Again, Our Prayers by Converse with spiritual and great Objects,
spiritualizing and widening our Minds, do make us more capable of apprehending
and imitating of God's Perfections, especially his Holiness or Universal
Righteousness.

SECT. V.
IV. A Fourth Way how our Prayers do make us good and better, and preserve us
in Goodness, is more particularly by bringing to our Minds the Condition of our
Petitions being granted. We cannot pray for or desire any thing of God with any
Hopes of Success, but upon the Condition of our being good; the degrees of our
Faith and Hope, are to answer the degrees of our Goodness. And this way is
proper to that part of Prayer called Petition. We all of us naturally know and
believe that God is holy and just, and that he governs all the World for its
greatest good, and that it is for its greatest good, and therefore one of his
Laws or Rules, to reward the good, and to punish the bad, and that one proper
way of Punishment which God may use, is to take away the good things that
wicked Men have already, or to cross their desires, that they should not
prosper or succeed in what they would have; and if we believe this, we can have
no Hopes of Success, or that our Petitions should be granted so far as we know
our selves to be wicked; and if we have no Hopes to speed without repentance
and reformation, either we shall never give ou^selves the trouble to ask at
all; or if o^ necessity or choice put us upon Asking, o^ Consciences will also
put us upon Reformation of what we have known to be ami^ in our selves, and
sometimes (if we be i^ a great fright) of what we never knew ^ suspected
before. Hence it comes to pass that wicked men whose Consciences fly i^ their
Faces, or are apt to whisper something which they would not hear of or amend
when they want any thing, though they know not how to come by it without Gods
immediate Help, (as Health, Strength, Freedom from Poverty, Prison, Pain,
Sickness Death,) yet are so loath to betake themselves to their Prayers: They
will use any Means, though never so improbable and difficult, and run and shift
from one thing to another, and employ and busy their Invention or Endeavor,
and hope this and the other thing will effect what they would have, rather than
apply themselves to God; when that hearty Prayers is so facile and likely a way
to obtain what they would have, and is a Means which being used with all other
will make them more successful.

I know sometimes Conscience may be very forgetful, dull, partial, erroneous
through want of Sincerity and Strength in Goodness, and Men may be very
consident in their Petitions too, when really they are at the same time very
bad, and that even in their very Prayers they are performing; and therefore
that the Prayers of such persons do neither suppose, nor make them good: but
yet for the most part it is otherwise. Especially when men's sins are more plain
and manifest, and the evil which they lie under, or fear, is very great, and
seems no other way remediable but by God's help: then their Consciences will be
awakened to a suspicion of themselves, to reflection, examination and
confession, and to some kind of promise or resolution of amendment before they
will have the confidence to address any desire to God. They are ashamed and
afraid without something at least of repentance and begging of God's pardon to
request any thing from him, whose most just Laws they have negligently or
contemptuously violated, and whom they know to be so just as no more to approve
and acquit the guilty without repentance, then to neglect or condemn the
innocent and righteous. Of the first sort of men were the Pharisees, who were
generally very bad men, but probably did not always know their own badness and
hypocrisy. These made frequent and long Prayers in places where it might be
observed; they used some of them to stand fixed in Contemplation a^ hour that
they might dispose their Hearts to Prayer, as is mentioned by the antien^
Jewish Authors: and yet under pretense o^ color hereof (though they might not
a^tend to their Insincerity at that time) devou^red Widows Houses, and were
ambitious covetous, proud, vainglorious, fraud^lent, oppressive, envious, as
we read, Matt. 2^ It appears also from our Savior's Parable ^ the Pharisee and
Publican, who went up into the Temple to pray, that some M^ may pray with a
great deal of Confidence who are bad enough; but yet are wondrously conceited
of themselves for their own Sanctity: and that for this very reason namely,
because they pray and fast, which are but fallible Signs. Luke 18. Verse 10 The
Pharisee indeed did not there Petition but thanked God for his great degree of
H^liness: but without doubt he that thought s^ well of himself, would have
asked too wi^ Considence enough.

Moreover, we that are Christians not only know by natural Light that we have
n^ Reason to hope, that God will grant us o^^ Petitions and Desires so far as
we are wicked Persons, and that Obedience is a Condition of Acceptance: but we
are expressly informed as much also by the Scripture. G^ hears not Sinners,
(said the blind Man is the Gospel) but if any Man be a Worshipper of him, and
does his Will, him he hears: John 9. Verse 31. And we do not see what he said
reproved. Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most high;
that is; worship, love, and obey God (and then) Call upon me in the day of
Trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. But unto the
Wicked, God says, what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant into thy Mouth, (of which one part sure on God's
side, was to be a God and Father, and to give all good things) seeing thou
hate Instruction and castest my Words behind thee. Psalm 50. Verse 14. Whosoever
osfereth Praise, glorisieth me, and to him that orders his Conversation
aright, will I show the Salvation of God. Verse 23. So Psalm 5. Verse 3. etc.
My Voice shall thou hear (or hear thou) in the Morning, O Lord in the Morning
will I direct my Prayer (or my Soul) unto thee, and will look up. And then
follows, For thou art not a God that have Pleasure in Wickedness, etc. that is,
indeed thou art not a God who do approve Wickedness and hear such Persons who
are wicked; but contrariwise thou hate such and wilt destroy them. But I will
come into thy House in the Multitude of thy Mercy, etc. I am a Person who
worship and fear thee, and therefore I pray unto thee to hear me. Offer the
Sacrifices of Rightcousness; that is, the Sacrifices which are lawful and
right, commanded by God; or be righteous, obey God, keep his Commandments,
which is the best Sacrifice, or ofter Sacrifices from a righteous and holy
Mind, and then put your Trust in the Lord. Psalm 4. Verse 5. And so Verse 3.
The Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself, the Lord will hear when
I shall call upon him. Take notice, O ye Sons of Men, that God especially
favors godly Men, and will hear their Prayers. Psalm 66. Verse 18. If I regard
Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. We have many places too in the
Prophets to this purpose and effect, as in Isaiah 1. Where, when God by the
Prophet had affectionately complained of the Universal and exceeding great
Wickedness of the Nation of the Jews, to whom he had been so good a Father; he
takes notice, Verse 11. that notwithstanding that their Wickedness they brought
their Sacrifices, (which were joined with Acknowledgments, Petitions and
Praises it is likely expressed with Words; however they were Signs of them, (
viz.) of Thanks of the Acknowledgments of the Divine Perfections, of Desire of
Pardon, or other good things) I say, they brought their Sacrifices punctually
enough. Though he utterly rejected them, and required them not at their Hands,
persisting in their wicked Practices. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices, etc. Verse 11. and Verse 12. When you come to appear before me, who
has required this at your Hands, to tread my Courts? And bring no more vain
Oblations, etc. to the 15. Verse. Where he plainly tells them, When they stread
forth their Hands, he would hide his Eyes, and when they made many Prayers, he
would not hear, so long as their Hands were full of Blood; and so of other
Sins, as appears by what follows. But if they hoped to be pardoned, to have his
Favor, and consequently to be heard, they must repent, put away the evil of
their doings, cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Come now let us reason
together, says the Lord. Verse 16. etc. Now he would permit them to converse
with him, to Sacrifice and Pray to him, etc.

Likewise in Isaiah 58. Though the People of Israel were generally guilty of
many and notorious Transgressions of God's Laws, such as were Oppression,
Contention, Cruelty one to another, Tyranny, Hard-Heartedness,
Uncharitableness, Fraud and Lying, Profanation of their Sabbath, or converting
that Day which was appointed and commanded by God unto them expressly for his
public Worship, and for the Ease of Servants and Cattle to the Use of their
ordinary Labors, and doing what they pleased, neglecting the Divine Worship,
and the Use appointed: Though, I say, the People of Israel were generally
guilty of these great Transgressions against God's Laws, as appears by the
whole Chapter: yet they sought God daily, Verse 2. and delighted to know his
Ways, that is, appeared so to do, or really did delight and were well pleased
in some of the external Part of God's Worship, Sacrifices, Prayers, Fastings,
and afflicting their Soul, like as a Nation that did Righteousness, (were every
where good) and forsook not the Ordinances of God, etc. and they were so
confident of their Desert from God, as to challenge him with Injustice for
neglecting them. But God tells them plainly, that the external Parts of his
Worship, of Praying, Weeping, Fasting, Looking sorrowfully and sordidly were
not the things that he had chosen to procure them any Favor from him: but it
was reforming themselves, and leaving all the abovenamed Iniquities, being in
all Instances and Expressions Universally Charitable to their Neighbor, not
oppressing or tyrannizing, being tenderhearted, compassionate, etc. It was
these and such like should cause their Light to break forth as the Morning, and
their Health spring forth speedily; that is, should make them a joyous and
happy People. And Verse 9. expressly, Then shall thou call and the Lord shall
answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. If thou take away from the
midst of thee the Yoke, that is, Oppression, the putting forth of the Finger,
that is, Derision and Contempt, it may be, of thy poor unhappy Neighbor, and
speaking Vanity, that is, Lying or Fraud; (For by Vanity the Hebrew ordinarily
expresses Falsehood, etc) If thou reform and mend thy wicked Ways, then may
thou hope for and expect according to God's own Promise (when it shall seem fit
to him, and that it will often d^) that thy Prayers shall be heard, otherwi^e
thy Prayers and Confidence too are but Presumption and Impudence.

It is true, these last places of the Prophet Isaiah and such like prove that
which I have before mentioned, ( viz.) That Men's Consciences may sometimes so
forget themselves, be so partial and erroneous, that they may pray boldly and
confidently, when they may rather expect the Taunt there, and their Prayers to
be thrown into their Faces; that is their Prayers to be hated and contemned by
God, and themselves to be punished for their Hypocrisy, and that therefore all
Prayers do not always in all things necessarily suppose or make Men good.

But then they inform Men too (which is the End why I have brought them) that
if Men hope to be heard by God, and to have their Prayers granted, they must be
good, and not live in the practice of known Sin, or through Hypocrisy, or
Insincerity, Laziness or Prevalency of some Lust above their Duty, wilfully be
ignorant whether they live in any Sin or no, or slatter themselves in general
they do not. And those Men who know thus much by natural Conscience, Reason,
the Scriptures, and often attend to it, (which are most Men in some Degree or
other, though not all) if they betake themselves to pray to God for the removal
of any Evil, or the granting of them any good, will first be apt to reslect
upon their Lives and Actions, and promise unto God Amendment and Reformation of
what they know to be bad in themselves, and to beg his Pardon, that they may
with Hopes of Success pray to him and effectually obtain their Desires: and to
do this often and constantly, surely will be an excellent Means for the
preserving Men from all Sin, nay, to make them more sincerely, vigorously,
constantly and universally better.

SECT. VI.
THe Fifth Way how our Praying may V.
make us better and preserve us in Goodness is by Remuneration or Reward; that
is, God Almighty may immediately or mediately reward our Prayers, even in
general, being such as they should be. God may reward our dutiful
Acknowledgment of his infinite Perfections, and our being affected with them
accordingly, our Admiration, Honor, Love, Thankfulness, Address to him, humble
Dependence upon him exercised in our Prayers, with the greatest Blessings he
can bestow upon us; and that is with Increase, Growth, Strength in Holiness and
Goodness. When we pray unto him, depend upon him humbly, and in Resolution of
Obedience and well-doing (which also are Signs of our Acknowledgments of his
Perfections) even for any other good things besides Goodness, as for Wisdom,
Instruction, Deliverance from bodily Dangers, Plenty, good Success in worldly
Affairs, a peaceable and comfortable Life, etc. Then it may seem good to God
sometimes to reward this Exercise of our Goodness, or of those things which are
such proper Means thereof, with better things than what we ask; and with them
too, eve^ this principal one of all, of preserving a^ strengthening our Souls in
Holiness in gen^ral, and in particular Virtues and Graces.

But much more still have we reason t^ think that God will bestow this
incomp^rable Blessing upon us when we humbl^ sincerely and importunately
beseech it ^ his hands above all other things. Wh^ we pray to him with our
whole Hearts, the he would but make us sincerely and generously good, holy
Lovers of himself and ^ all Persons, to do all things out of an Un^versal
Charity and Love, never to gratif^ any inordinate or immoderate Appetite; an^
as for other things we plainly are indiffere^ to them, but only so far forth as
they man be Instruments hereof, of our being or doing good. This is a Petition
that argue^ and acts a Temper of Mind than which nothing in Heaven and Earth is
so acceptable unto God, and therefore to encourage i^ and our Desires and
Endeavors after it (especially if they be frequent and long) it is the most
likely thing that God will heat our Prayers, grant our Desires, make out
Endeavors (in some Measure, and Time or other) successful. We have heard
before the blind Man's Opinion, and the common Opinion of Mankind, That if any
Man be a Worshipper of God, God hears him, and in this surely rather than any
other thing.

Our Savior to encourage our Addresses to God, such as they ought to be, has
ex^resly promised Success when it seems sit to God (and it does so sometimes,
or else there is no (...) at all:) (...) and it shall be given ^^ seek and you
shall (...) knock and it shall ^e opened unto you for every one that asks ^s
he ought rece^^eth, (when it seems fit to God, and that is very often) and he
that ^eketh finds and to him that knocks it shall ^e opened. Which our
Savior illustrateth ^y a Similitude of earthly Parents, who ^ive to their
Children upon their asking ^ecessary or convenient things: how much more will
God who is infinitely wiser and ^etter to us, and loves us all more with a Love
of Benevolence than our earthly Parents can do, give them unto us. What Man is
there, etc. Matt. 7. to Verse 12. The ^ame we have in St. Luke, Chap. 11. Verse
13. Where it is, How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit
to them that ask him? In David's Psalms are many places to this purpose, Psalm
145. Verse 18, 19. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him in Truth.
He will fulfill the Desires of them that fear him, he also will hear their Cry
and will save them. Nothing more ordinary than for the Apostles in their
Epistles to pray for their Disciples and Believers the were their Charge, that
they might incre^ and be strengthened in Holiness and G^ness, in all Graces and
good Works. A^ surely they would not have prayed so, ^ less they had had hopes
that God wo^ some time or other and in some measure he^ them. Thus only for
Example, St. Pa^ Thessal. 1. 3. 12. The Lord make you to increase and abound in
love one to another, an^ all men, even as we do toward you, to the e^ he may
establish your hearts unblamable in hol^ness before God even our Father at the
comi^ of the Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saint. And Thessal. 2. 2. 16. Now
our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved us and
given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort yo^
hearts and stablish you in every good word a^ work. And if God would hear their
a^ consequently our Prayers for others to make and keep them good and make them
better then surely there is reason to think he wi^ hear us for our selves; nay
there is much more reason; for it is a sign that we have a real and prevalent
Love to Goodness, when we desire it for our selves: but the desiring it for
others may not so much signify it. We may often wish others to be good (as bad
Parents do their Children sometimes) and yet not our selves. Because others
being good ^s not inconsistent perhaps with any beloved ^ust of our own, but
our own being good ^s. Whence it may be observed that a real Love of the Saints
or of holy Men which ^ath by some been laid down as a certain Character of a
Saint (that is of a Person who is habitually and prevalently holy and who shall
be saved) is not truly so. It is a sign indeed of some Degree of Holiness, but
not of a prevalent degree thereof.

And thus much for the first general Benefit to our selves of Praying, ( viz.)
it is a likely Means duly performed, to preserve ^s in Goodness and to make us
better, to increase and strengthen in us Holiness and Goodness, and all the
particular Instances hereof, and that by these several Ways I have mentioned.

SECT. VII.
I. A Second general Benefit to our selves by Prayer, is that of Comfort, Joy,
Delight of Soul, Satisfaction, Acquiescence, Ease of Spirit, and that these
four ways among others.

1. Great pleasure and delight of Soul arises immediately from the Operations
or Actions of our Souls terminated upon God in Prayer very naturally, that is
witho^ the special immediate influence of God up^ our minds. For Example, In
our acknowledgment of the Divine Perfections and A^tributes, so often
mentioned, we take n^tice of (or contemplate, if we be more a^ and have more
time, in secret especially God's infinite Perfections and Excellencie^ his
All-mighty Power, his All-comprehending Knowledge, his Universal and Infin^
Goodness to all his Creatures, and therefo^ sometimes his tender Mercy
forbearing, for* giving, bestowing, promising, rewarding otherwhile his as
wholesome Justice in co^trouling, chastising and punishing wickedness; and that
God is eternally, immutably infinitely all this: I say, we in our Prayer more
or less take notice of or attend t^ such things as these, the very thoughts o^
which so vast objects are vastly pleasing and delightful to the Soul. To cast
but some glances at them touches the soul with ^ great and smart pleasure and
delight, as i^ is in our most set, Customary, Public o^ Private Prayers, where
we can have tim^ only more transiently to look at these things* But in our
secret and retired Devotions* where we may take as much time as we w^ to fix
our thoughts upon them, to admire them, and then think of them again (if our
souls be but fitted for this Employment by ^ sober and refined temper of body
by frequent use and God's influence) the delight and pleasure may be to a
ravishing degree. And the more particular, distinct and comprehensive our
Knowledge is, the greater our Admiration and the more intense our pleasure
still; which it is certain some souls have experienced to such a degree, that
they would not change with the best furnished sensualist or worldling, nor
hearken to the motion without the highest contempt.

But then much more still is this pleasure increased by the passions and
actions of Love, Desire, Joy, Trust and Hope, Resolutions of Obedience and
Imitation, which the view and apprehension of the Divine Perfections produce in
us so far forth as we are fitted therefore by spirituality to apprehend them,
and by an habitual goodness and generosity of temper to be affected with them.
The very passion of Love it self is an extraordinary, agreeable, pleasant and
sweet thing to our minds, and who is there, except very unfortunate natured
persons, who does not experience it in some thing or other? But what may or can
be beloved with a more ardent and intense degree of it than God? 'Than God, I
say, when we conceive him to be infinite love it self (for God is Love) to be
universally good to all things which he has made, eternally, immutably, and in
infinite degree; insomuch that there never can be any one thing in the World
that is not the Effect of his love and goodness to the whole World, even his
permission and punishment of Sin it self: than God, I say, who is
uncontrollable and infinite in Power too, and can do what he pleases, upon
whom all things depend, and from whom they have all, and that no longer than
pleases him, and yet is infinite Love and Goodness; What can or may be more
beloved than such a Being as he is? I say, what may be loved by us more
ardently than God? not, what is so? Our minds may be very sensual and dull in
their apprehensions, very much corrupted, degenerate and debased in their
affections, so that we may not apprehend these spiritual Excellencies, nor have
any or but very little inclinations to them or affections for them in any other.

We may our selves be so ill-natured as not much to be taken or pleased with
all the expressions of others kindness and good nature, unless it be to our
selves; nor then neither, unless they be able as well as kind, and can do
something for us, as well as will it: which is a sign, that it is the persons
power more than his goodness that we love or esteem, and his power too only to
do us good. I say, a man may be of this dull, selfish, brutish Nature, and be
pleased principally with power and other things, not at all or little with
loving or good nature. This man indeed in his Prayers will have little love for
the Universal Goodness and loving Kindness of God, and consequently have little
pleasure or delight in his Prayers upon that account. But I do affirm, That
there are Souls who have the greatest ardency and pangs of love and affection
to God, and dearly embrace him, and unite themselves to him thus considered;
and that these therefore find in their Prayers where they put forth this their
affection, the most ravishing Joy and Pleasure. Nay, I affirm, That even the
worst of men that are the most sensual, carnal, dull and ill-natured have Souls
capable of being more spiritual and refined in their understandings and
affections: and of being infinitely in love with the boundless goodness and
love of God, and more than with any other thing, and consequently of a
proportionable pleasure and satisfaction.

The same is to be said concerning Joy in God, who is thus infinite in love and
goodness to all his Creatures, and hope or confident persuasion, and consequent
acquiescence and repose of Soul in God for the Universal good of all. When the
Soul upon the assurance and evidence that all things in the World are the best
that can or ever shall be, by reason of the immutable goodness and benignity of
God, is not solicitous or (...) self, but acquiesceth and even re(...) in all
events to it self or to others, (...) and full appro(...) Thy will be done, O
^ll mighty and All wise goodness and Love both in Heaven and Earth. I say,
these very Pas(...) Affections are sweet and delicious to the Soul; and
therefore being excited and exerted in Prayer, and that in prepared Souls to
the highest degree are Prayers so acceptable and delightful duties.

Further, In Prayer we do not only make acknowledgment of God, admire, honor,
love, rejoice, hope in him for his Perfections in reference to all his
Creatures in general: but also in reference to our selves. We admire his great
goodness, particularly to our selves, and love him for it, and rejoice in the
present possession, and in good hopes of the future (perhaps eternal) enjoyment
of it. Which passions generally are in most men more piercing and strong than
upon the account of God's infinite Perfections (and especially his goodness)
referred to all his Creatures; but indeed should not be so. Nevertheless it is
good for us to be deeply affected with Admiration, Love, Joy, Hope of God's
Goodness to our selves in any kind expressed; not in opposition to others good,
but as one single Instance and Example of God's Universal Goodness to all,
which we most clearly apprehend. For, is God so good to us in particular? he is
the same to all and every of his Creatures as much as is consistent with the
common good of all, to some more to some less than our selves. In Prayer we, I
say, thus take notice of and stir up our love to God for his love to us, or
thankfulness to God for all his past benefits, among which are his promises of
future good things; we rejoice in him for the present, and we hope and repose
our selves on him for the future.

Now these very Passions and Affections themselves in our Souls are the most
agreeable and pleasing to them, as is the very thinking and contemplation of
the Infinite Power, Wisdom, and especially Goodness of God. All these
Operations and Employments of our Souls are very grateful and acceptable to
them. Even in this respect it is good for them to be here, to be thus employed;
It is good for them to draw near unto God, that is, to direct their Actions and
Operations to God.

SECT. VIII.
2. BUt a Second more particular Way how Prayer is for our comfort an^ delight,
so far forth as we are good is by the Exercise of Faith and Hope an^ Repose in
God, as to all our concerns whatsoever.

Any good man when he prays to Go^ habitually believes these two things.

1. That God will always bestow upon him what is just and fit to be bestowed
And,

2. That the particular things he humbl^ beseeches God to grant, may be justly
bestowed by God upon him; that is, that it (...) consistent with or rather
effective of the greatest good of the whole World, as ha^^ been often said: and
this latter he may sometimes believe certainly, sometimes probably whence
arises either assurance and expectation of the thing, or only Hope strict^^ so
called. As for Example, When he pray to God for the pardon of his sins, and hi^
consequent favor to his person for Christ* sake, upon the condition of his
true and unfeigned repentance, amendment an^ change of Soul; when he cries with
the poor Publican, God be merciful to me a sinne^ (which most men are so
careless, proud, self-conceited and presumptuous as seldom to do) so far as he
is conscious to himself of the sincerity of his amendment, so far he may be
confident God will grant this his Prayer. For besides that even by reason it
self without express promise of the Gospel it might be very probable; by the
express promise of the Gospel it is most undoubted and certain. Even Reason it
self would judge it more probable, if it were informed that it is done for so
excellent a person's sake as Jesus Christ was: But then moreover, I say it is
the most express promise of the Gospel, and one indeed of the principal things
it came to acquaint men withal, (viz.) That God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself, and that by repentance and faith in Christ's Name, that is,
by doing all our duty for the future as commanded from God by Christ; men might
have remission of sins. And so again, if any man desires and prays from the
bottom of his soul for God's grace in general to repent, and that he may
forsake at last all sin, and become a new man, giving up himself to obey God,
being afraid or weary of a sinful wicked life, as a thing unaccountable,
unreasonable; or in particular, if he prays for strength to mortify any lust,
to leave any sin, to obtain any grace or virtue, he may be confident he shall
be heard in some degree or other, some time or other. Perhaps God might not
hear us presently, but excite us and strengthen us to continue our Prayers more
earnestly, whereby we gain dependence upon God, humility, nay a greater thirst
after the thing we ask, and consequently indeed a greater degree of it. I say,
for pardon and grace if unfeignedly and heartily asked and humbly begged of
God, we may be confident we shall be heard; both because it seems reasonable,
and because God has more expressly promised them in the Scripture. But as for
other even spiritual good things, as natural parts or gifts of understanding,
memory, utterance or the like, these it is but probable that it is the best God
should bestow them upon us in some degree. And as for external good things,
such as health, strength, beauty, riches, honor or good name, plenty or
competency, deliverance, etc. we have less probability still, although so much
as to encourage us sufficiently to propound our desires to God too. And
therefore here our hope will be more or less strong, unless God has expressly
by certain revelation promised any of them to us, as it was in David's case,
when he was persecuted by Saul and by other Enemies, and his life sought after.
God had certainly by his Prophets, and probably to himself by Inspiration
promised he should be King and succeed Saul.

Now see how this faith effectually produces in the soul of a good man Ease,
Satisfaction, Repose, and Acquiescence which are the most pleasurable and
delicious things. Whenever he wants any thing he proposes his desires to
God, and first believes that if it be just for God to give, and him to receive
it, he shall have it; and this is all he desires, nor would he ask any thing
upon other terms; wherefore he knows his desire is fully granted, he has what
he would have always; which surely must needs be followed with the greatest
satisfaction of spirit. He is not any of those self-willed, proud, peevish
persons who will not be content but are impatient, if God does not give them
every particular good thing they propound or think of, whether he in wisdom
sees it fit and just to be bestowed upon them or no: As he is not one of those
careless ones who never ask any thing from God at all, but muddle on in their
own contrivances and endeavors, being infinitely solicitous they should and
fretting themselves when they do not succeed. He is none of those who never
make any reflection upon the Infinite Wisdom, the Universal Goodness and
Righteousness of God, and consequently the perfect Justice and Reasonableness
of all the Divine Appointments, be they what they will: But in all his Prayers
especially he constantly minds, he firmly believes, he perfectly acquiesceth
and rejoices in them, whereby he not only prevents all anguish and vexation to
which solicitude and frustration expose the proud and negligent of God, but
puts also his mind into a constant state of repose, satisfaction and joy.

But then further for some things which he wants, he does but with that
sincerity, fervency and assiduity that he ought or as the things deserve,
beseech them from God, and he is firmly and confidently persuaded (not rashly,
but) from Reason and Divine Revelation, that he shall have them. Such are they
which I have before mentioned of pardon for Christ's sake, either in general or
for any particular sin he may have been overtaken with, upon his sincere
disallowance thereof, his contempt and hatred of himself for it; and of God's
grace and strength to subdue any lust or corruption, or in general to mend and
reform himself in some degree or other. That he shall receive these things if
he ask them as he ought he is confident and fully persuaded. And whatever men
that are wicked, sensual, worldly, may think of these things he desires, the
holy and divine as well as wise soul accounts them so great, that as for all
other matters before mentioned, such as are Parts and Gifts, Riches, Plenty,
Honor, Health, Strength, Sensual Pleasures, etc. he is very indifferent for
his part to them, so he may but obtain the former, of which he is so firmly
assured, if he but ask them as he ought. Nay, he knows or may consider and
attend that they indeed so far as he should and would desire them even for his
own good are comprehended in or consequent upon the former. For if our sins be
pardoned, we in God's favor, which we are so far as we are good, what may we
not expect from God and be confidently assured of, if it be good for us? It is
just, we know, with God by reason, and God has said it by Revelation, that God
should dispose of such portions of all good things whatsoever to good men, as
may be most even for their good. God does take the care of them that upon the
performing their duty they shall have from him what is for their proper good;
and sure it is their wisest way to leave him to be judge. Now how full of
Repose, Acquiescence, Peace, Ease and Satisfaction of Spirit does this Faith
and Belief make the Soul? If a man sincerely, fervently, assiduously begs of
God he may be good and do his duty, he shall certainly have strength so to be,
and so to do; and then so far as he is good he shall have whatever is for his
good. What would a man desire more? And if a man has all he desires or can
desire, and believes and hopes, nay knows so much (all which a good man may
exercise and act in Prayer) wh^^ perfect joy, delight, satisfaction and ease^^
mind, must he so often as he does this b^ under.

If at any time the good man wants an^ of the inferior good things to Virtue
an^ Grace, as Gifts or Parts, Health, Liberty Competency, Plenty, Peace,
Good-name or Freedom and Deliverance from any of the contrary Evils which he
may be in dange^ of and see likely to come upon him, be i^ Poverty, Sickness,
Solitariness, Reproach Oppression, Contention and Strife wit^ others, loss of
Goods and Damages, nay Death or Torment it self; he humbly makes known his
case, and desires to God, he makes known his requests to God by Prayer an^
Supplication; he begs of him to hear hi^ and grant them to him, he uses his
ow^ prudence and industry, as much as the concern of the thing is, as much as
he thinks an^ judges he ought to do; he examines himself, sets himself to find
and mend whatever he knows amiss in himself, and to be accurately good to the
utmost of his ability, th^^ so there may be no hindrance that he can remove;
and then he lays himself down in peace and sleep ( Psalm 4. Verse 8.) with
great ease, satisfaction, acquiescence of Soul upon one or all of these
accounts; ( viz.) because he hopes and judges it more probable that God may
grant and give unto him the very particular good thing that he asks, and
sometimes he may have reason to be pretty confident of it; or he is certainly
persuaded and firmly believes that whether he have or have not what he desires,
it is really for his good; and that God as he is better to him than himself, so
he is much wiser. Finally, he is perfectly assured that if God do not grant him
his desire, it is most just (or for the Universal good which he loves and
rejoices in above all things) he should not, and that not by any fault of his
in his power to mend that he can see; and that if he himself were in God's
place he would not grant the thing desired; and that this his behavior and
temper renders him the most capable of all personal favors: he very well knows
that the surest way to be in the best condition, is for a man to be content
with and rejoice in any condition which God shall appoint, because he is
certain God's will is always for the Universal good: he very well knows that
God is so wise and good in the government of the world as sometimes or other to
put most power and happiness into the hands of those who are of such a truly
generous and public Spirit. Lord! what a sweet and delicious life does the man
live that constantly thus believes and practices? no future fears, cares and
solicitudes distract, nor present and incumbent evils bow down and oppress this
happy soul. With upright and cheerly countenance, with solid joy and
satisfaction in his thoughts he steadily and generously walks through all the
variety of conditions of life and being the Divine Wisdom may dispose him into.
Who would not be a good man that he may thus pray? and who would not pray that
he may enjoy so great a happiness? who would be so weak and foolish as for the
indulgence and gratification of some pitiful mean and base appetite, for the
present enjoyment of some vile and unreasonable lust or sin, forego and quit
all his faith, confidence and hope in God and the consequent delight,
acquiescence, case, peace and joy of soul upon all occasions, being ashamed
ever to think of God, much more to address himself to him or ask any thing at
his hand though he should be in never so great distress? Who would lose the
benefit and comfort of so good a Friend for what can never make the least part
of recompense? Yes, Let Atheists and Worldlings live without any minding of or
addressing themselves to God if they please, the good man knows too well the
sweetness, the profit and the pleasure thereof to do likewise.

David was a truly excellent Example of this usefulness and benefit of Prayer.
It seems to have been his most usual Cordial which he often took to support his
fainting and tired soul, to quell and compose his vexations, fears,
disturbances, to alleviate and remove his grief and sadness. We Will give an
instance or two. Psalm 42. First he mentions his present sad and miserable
condition in many respects, as his being banished out of his Country (it is
likely, by Saul) and principally from the Public Worship of his God for which
he panted and thirsted, Oh when shall I come and appear before God? Verse 1, 2,
4, 6. Then his Enemies contempt and insulting over him, and especially their
not believing that he was so great a Favorite of God's, but rather that God
had rejected him or minded him not, Verse 3, 10. But to comfort and cheer
himself, he prays to God, and is very confident God will hear him (as he had
reason) and cheerlily chides himself, Ver. 8, 9, 11. Yet the Lord will command
his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night his Song shall be with
me, and my Prayer to the God of my life; that is, yet I will pray to my God,
and I trust and know he will give me cause to rejoice and praise him by his
hearing of me at all times. I will say unto God my Rock, why have thou forsaken
me, why go I mourning because of the oppression of the Enemy? And Verse 11. Why
art thou cast down O my Soul, why art thou so disquieted within me? hope thou
in God, for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my Countenance and my
God.

Again, The very next Psalm (viz.) 43. he prays very passionately to God for
deliverance from his Enemies, who were unmerciful, deceitful, unjust; and that
God would bring him back again to enjoy his Public Worship in his Temple, from
which he seems now banished; Oh send out (says he) thy light and thy truth
(that is, perhaps, thy enlightening or rejoicing truth in performing of thy
Promises thou have made to me) let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy
holy hill Sion (the place where the Temple was built) and to thy Tabernacles,
that is, the Temple built instead of the Tabernacle, where God especially
manifested himself, or where were very special effects of his Power and
Presence. Then he Vows unto God that with exceeding joy and thankfulness he
would make use of and improve that favor, Verse 4. Then will I go unto the
Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy, etc. and then Verse the last, he is
full of good hope and firm confidence that God who was the health of his
countenance (that is, the cause of all his joy and of his content which uses
to be showed by ones healthful aspect and countenance) and who was his God,
would hear his Petition at last, ( viz.) that he should praise him therefore,
and that publicly in the Temple.

Again, in Psalm 55. he describes the miserable plight that he was in, because
of the constant Machinations and plots of his Enemies, deceitful and bloody
men, (as it is v. 23.) nay of those who had been his Friends and Confidents, who
had forsaken him in his disgrace and adversity (as it is usual) and contemned
him, Verse 12. his Enemies contrived even to take away his Life, they oppressed
him with Accusations and Reproaches, and wrathfully hated him, whence he was
full of Complaints and Mourning, in so much that there was likelihood of his
death thereby; which (though another sense may be too) he expresses in Verse
4, 5, by his heart being pained and the terrors of death fallen upon him, and
fearfulness and trembling coming upon him, and horror overwhelming him. But
then the course he takes is to pray to God with hope and trust in him. By these
he reseues himself from this sadness and grief of Soul, and eases, comforts and
satisfies it, Verse 16. As for me I will call upon God, and the Lord shall save
me. Verse 17. Evening and Morning and at Noonday (that is very frequently) he
would pray and cry aloud, and God should hear his voice. And Verse 22. Cast thy
burden, that is what grieves thee, upon the Lord and he shall sustain thee. He
shall never suffer the righteous to be moved; that is, himself to be frustrated
of his hope.

SECT. IX.
A Third Way how Prayer is for our III.
ease, comfort and satisfaction of mind, is by reflection upon our having
performed our most just and reasonable duty to God, and upon some more than
ordinary good qualities in our selves that may upon this occasion appear; as in
general upon our ability for and our good will to this duty or performance;
that we are able and disposed for such excellent things as are in Prayer: more
particularly that our minds are so able to converse with spiritual things and
future, yea eternal, and to be affected with them; such as God, his Nature and
Actions; our own Souls, their Actions and Inclinations, the State after Death,
the Affairs of the Life hereafter; That we can take notice of God's
Perfections, acknowledge them, really honor him, love and resolve to obey him,
to put our trust in him and depend upon him; that we can take notice of and
grieve sincerely and heartily for the irregularities of our Actions, and our
bad and sinful Temper and Inclinations; be pleased with, desire, pray for
Virtue and Grace; that we can think of, attend to and be frequently and much
affected with things of future reward and misery, Heaven and Hell; that we are
not sensual, dull, worldly, earthly-minded persons, who can mind nothing but
sensible, present and worldly matters for this short life.

All men are naturally inclined to believe and confusedly see that such
spiritual and future things as we have mentioned, are more excellent, more
perfect (that is, of more good effect) than sensible and present worldly
things; and consequently that it is a greater perfection and excellency in a
man to know, contemplate, be affected with those former than these latter, to
have his mind conversant with and employed about them: which is one reason why
the persons who profess and really live or seem to live such a life are
generally honored and reverenced.

Further, A man after such a performance as a discreet and affectionate Prayer
may reflect not only upon his ability and sufficiency for such excellent
things, but also upon his love to them and good will to them, his esteem for
them, that he actually is so affected, and at that particular time.

Particularly after an understanding and affectionate Prayer, it is very
acceptable to make reflection that he has at that time performed so noble and
excellent a part of his duty, and that which more immediately respects God;
that he is not altogether careless of God, lives without him, forgets him days
without number; but that he has honored him by his express acknowledgments of
his Infinite Perfections; by humbly petitioning him for what he wants and what
is good and just for him; by rendering him hearty thanks and actually loving him
for his manifold favors, even for all he has or ever had, for any degree of
Holiness, for Knowledge and Wisdom, Parts, Gifts, Riches or Competency,
Reputation, Friends, Security from Enemies, Health, Strength, Power,
Opportunity or Advantage to do Good, Peace, Joy, Satisfaction, Happiness here,
Hopes and Assurance of greater Perfection and Happiness after Death and parting
with all here; and for all his boundless Goodness and benignity of his Nature
to all his Creatures: that he has honored him by an assured but just Trust
and Confidence in him, by a free submission of his Will to his Will in all
things, and conforming of it cheerfully thereunto, to do all he commands him,
and to be in any condition he appoints or disposes: that he has honored him
by a ready and free confession of, and piercing hearty grief for, and inward
detestation of all his unreasonable Violations of his Just and Holy Laws made
known either by Reason or Revelation, by Natural Conscience or God's Word, and
consequently of the Eternal Laws of Righteousness: that he has honored him by
asking from him as the only supreme, just, and yet propitious Judge of the
World, pardon and forgiveness for Christ's sake that he would not punish him,
but most of all by importunately begging his supervenient Grace, Strength and
Influence, his Assistance one way or other that he might not Offend or do
contrary to his Duty any more in any kind. I say, when a man has performed so
noble and excellent a part of his Duty toward God which tends so much to make
him Divine and Perfect, it will not soon out of his mind, he will be
rereflecting upon it, and that cannot be without a high degree of joy and
satisfaction of Spirit, and he will humbly give unfeigned Thanks to God for
making him capable of such a noble and excellent Employment, so ravishing and
delicious to himself, but especially which will render him so benign, useful
and profitable to the World, and pleasing to God; for giving him the means of
and effectually bringing him to the knowledge and use of such an excellent
Life; and he will wish all men may be so happy as to know and partake thereof.

There are Two things among other which make a man very sensible of the
excellency of this part of his Duty, and consequently to perceive from thence
more satisfaction and pleasure.

The first is its compare with other parts of our Duty respecting our
Neighbor. It seems more excellent than that to love ones Neighbor, that is,
any rational Creature capable of any good from us. To wish well heartily to
him, to be charitable, just, grateful, compassionate, or to show any other
Instance of Love to him, though it be excellent, yet seems as much inferior to
that of our absolute love to God (not as only good to one, but to all the
Universe) as our Neighbor, nay all the World are inferior to God. To wish
well to or desire any good thing for God we may not, because it supposes some
good thing absent or possible to be absent from him; an absent good is the
proper object of desire: but we may will and rejoice in his infinite happiness
and perfection which he actually possesses; we may will a present good. And
this ought to be so much more esteemed (if we compare them) than the love of
our Neighbor, as God is capable of more happiness and felicity than all his
Creatures, which is infinitely. All the World is a little thing, a Nothing to
him; and his Being and Happiness consequently is infinitely to be preferred
before that of all his Creatures, if they could be opposed.

Besides, it is part of the Nature of God to be infinitely good to all his
Creatures; he therefore that loves God as such, must needs love all that he
has made too. God's Being and Happiness infer's that of his Creatures
necessarily, and is the cause thereof, but not on the contrary: wherefore the
love of God as having infinitely more excellent Effects is to be preferred
before the love of all the Creation, if we consider them distinct, and if they
could be inconsistent one with another; (which they never can be) but much more
before the love of any person or persons. And although we are said not only to
will but to do good to our Neighbor, and not to God; yet in truth our proper
action is to will it; the outward Effect consequent upon our will is only by
God's Power and Action, and we can will it (as has been just now said) equally
to both.

Man having naturally a great sense of the infinite Excellency and Perfection
of God above all must needs have the persuasion that he ought to love him above
all, and that to love him is a greater Perfection than the love of all the
World besides. And the truth of it is next to the perfection of the love of all
the Universe, i. e. God and all that he has made together, is the Love of God
distinctly considered.

As for the other parts of our Duty to God, ( viz.) Honor, Admiration,
Dependence, Obedience, etc. they are but Instrumental Duties to cause us to
practice Universal Righteousness, and the great Instance Universal Love, Love
to God and to every Creature, etc. but they are much more excellent ones than
many other, and ingenerate in us more immediately a greater and higher degree
of Holiness (as might be particularly showed) and consequently of Universal
Love, in which it consists. Some of those persons who magnify and commend
those Duties which respect our Neighbor, especially such as Beneficence,
justice and honesty in Dealings and Conversation, Peaceableness Obedience, etc.
may do well to be advised whether it proceeds not from some secret inclination
to diminish and abate the esteem of Piety, or of our Duties toward God,
because they themselves do not understand the ineffable pleasure and profit
thereof when duly performed, or are less sufficient and apt for them by
spirituality of mind. They may reflect also and observe whether it comes not
from selfishness, and that in mean and small instances of the good things of
this worldly Life. It is possible for men highly to commend the abovenamed
Virtues, only that the happiness of their present worldly Life might not be
disturbed, that they themselves might attain and enjoy peace, quiet, some
plentiful or honorable condition of Life. When it is thus, although the
Virtues they praise are truly excellent and abundantly deserve it; yet there is
no Virtue at all in them, nor any thing more than a mean and little Spirit,
viz. selfish and worldly.

The Second thing that makes us more sensible of the Excellency of this part of
our Duty which is toward God is the unusualness of it, that it is not so
ordinary a thing. We see men oft-times charitable, good-natured, well disposed,
compassionate, candid, just, veracious, and in many Instances humble and
temperate, and that from a plain and honest Conscience and general Sense of
their Duty, who notwithstanding more rarely think of God or perform any part of
the forenamed Duties to him. The principal Reason of which is because most
men's minds are dull and gross, by reason of their bodily temper and want of
Education, and cannot without difficulty perceive any thing of God, or other
Spiritual matters, which notwithstanding by exercise and usage they may much
help, God also assisting their endeavors.

These, I suppose, may have been those who have been called by some mere moral
persons: who, notwithstanding, are far from being contemptible. For their
defect is not in their will, they loving and desiring to do their Duty
universally to God and their Neighbor, which consists in loving them: but in
their understanding and memory, they not being so sufficient and fitted to
apprehend or retain such purely spiritual natures as God is, and any reasoning
concerning things belonging to him. They are often much better persons than
those who are more apt to apprehend, remember and talk all day of Points in
Divinity or any Religious Matters, and therefore ready to despise them.

The greatest part of men far (nay few are otherwise) are either bad or very
inept for more spiritual Objects, and therefore usually much neglect particular
Duties toward God. Wherefore when we see men generally so negligent of their
Duties to God, especially in Prayer, and many living as if there were none: but
take notice that we for our parts are not guilty thereof, but are careful and
greatly delight to observe our Duty toward him, we are the more sensible of
the excellency of it. What Is rare we think it hard to be obtained, and are apt
to think it Excellent.

But here we shall do well to have a care of Pride and a mischievous mistake.
We must have a care we please not our selves in our superiority to others, as
the Pharisee did to the Publican. We may, if we have not a care, not so much
please our selves in having done our just and reasonable Duty, as in having
done that which so few others do, which others for the most part do not, and
therefore in our superiority to others: whereas as we should please our selves
and be well satisfied in the discharge of so excellent a Duty, so we should
heartily wish all others may be able and willing to do the like; not insult
over others as the Pharisee, who thanked God he was not as the Publican, for he
fasted twice a Week, etc. he was more pleased that he was better than other
men, than that he was good. Others falling short of their Duty by neglect may
make us more sensible of our happiness in performing ours, because a thing is
best apprehended when compared with its contrary, but by no means should it
make us please our selves in being superior to them and consequently in their
being bad or negligent.

Further, We must have a care of conceiting our selves presently so dear and
acceptable to God that he must needs grant us in particular what we will have,
that he must do for us what we shall desire, be always of our side. We must
have a care we do not behave our selves as if we had obliged God, we for our
parts worshipping, acknowledging, honoring and loving of him, when others
quite forget and neglect him.

Moreover, It is not all kind of Prayers that is so excellent a part of our
Duty, but such as I have formerly described; and yet men are apt for any
performance of this Duty (when there is little good in it, and if somewhat good
yet somewhat and much more bad) to think highly of and to be greatly pleased
with themselves, and that they are very dear and acceptable to God. There is
nothing or no great matter in Prayer when a man prays words without
understanding and sense, or sense without affection and inclination of Soul. or
affectionately without sense, not moved by the truth and excellency (conceived
so at least by him) of the matter he prays, but merely or principally by
certain Words and Phrases, with their circumstances of vehemence or lowdness
and softness, gravity and acuteness, or the mutual mixtures of these which is
called Accent or Tone, or by other external bodily signs of corporeal passions.
There is no great matter when men pray in a formal, verbal, heartless,
senseless Prayer; and yet men are apt to be very well satisfied with
themselves, and to have a very good opinion of themselves for the performance.
Or suppose there be in our Prayers great passions to things false or unjust, or
that there is vain and false self-conceit for a man's own holiness, and God's
peculiar love to him, and he thanks God for that which is not, or which ^s bad;
suppose that there be Pride, Envy, Revenge or other Instances of Self-love in
our Prayers, and much more of them than of any thing that is good, such as
acknowledgment of God's Attributes, and particularly of our dependence upon him
by praying to him and thanking him (which are in all Prayers that are not mere
words.) I say, Suppose our Prayers to be such, (As I doubt has been and is but
too frequent) and then they are so far from being any part of our Duty, that
they are, generally taken, sins wicked and abominable things. And yet men
merely for some few general good things in them, not taking notice of what is
bad; or if they do, yet confessing the iniquity of their holy things, and
thinking all that is done away and pardoned in Christ, the good only remaining,
though they have the same temper still from whence these bad things sprung, may
conceit themselves to have performed a most excellent part of their Duty. And
this principally, because it is extraordinary, few men do so much, most men
quite neglect God, take little notice of him, make any acknowledgment of him.
And hence further may they believe themselves in general very extraordinary
excellent persons, and that without doubt they are highly in God's favor, most
precious and acceptable to him, his praying people, and consequently that he
will do any thing for them and for their sakes.

These Abuses and Mistakes I have mentioned that they might be prevented. Be it
sure, that when a man reflects upon his having prayed to God, and is very well
satisfied and pleased therewith, it be nothing but what is really good that
pleases him. Not, for Example, his singularity or superiority to other men:
but the spirituality of his mind, and the well-disposedness of his Soul, his
true love to Goodness Universally, Hatred of Sin, Love and Thankfulness to God,
Honor, Reverence, Obedience, Faith, Dependence and Trust in Him, the actual
Exercise of these, and ^ temper of mind from whence they proceed and to which
they tend. Let him be sure also that these things were in his praying to God,
not in general highly pleasing himself in having prayed when there was little
of them: but indeed much more of such worthless or wicked things I have above
mentioned. The being thus well assured of the goodness of our Prayers as it
will in good men's minds raise up great delight and satisfaction, so also it
ought, that we may be encouraged still to go on in the performance of so
excellent a Duty whereby we shall still be rendered better, more able and
disposed by being good to serve and please God, and to do good in the World.
And we ought to give hearty thanks to God that our Souls are so well tempered,
as to be pleased and delighted with such things.

SECT. X.
IV. PRaying procures Delight, Joy and Satisfaction of Mind by God's special
immediate Influence. God may no doubt in our praying to him some ways perfect
all the Operations of our Souls. He may bring things either unknown or known
before to our minds; that is, reveal or suggest; he may cause us to attend to
perceive and understand things more clearly and strongly, that is, illuminate
our minds; he may also excite and strengthen our Love to our Duty, Sorrow for
Sin, Love to any particular Duty, Love to himself, Honor, Reverence, Humble
Address and Dependence, Faith, submissive and obediential Resolution. So
likewise surely he may excite and diffuse through our Souls, Joy, Delight,
Satisfaction from the Exercise of all these immediately, more than would
otherwise be without this his especial immediate Action or Influence. And that
God does do thus, the Scripture plainly affirms, and Reason it self (insomuch
that Philosophers have taught it) would conclude it probable Xenoph. Sen.
Cicero.
as well for other reasons, as particularly to draw and encourage us to the
more frequent and vivid Exercise of these excellent Operations of our Souls, of
these Graces in us. And it is this which makes that which is called Communion,
or rather Union with God in Prayer complete. For to have God the Object of the
Operations of our Souls, to direct our Souls to God; and then for God again to
make our Souls the Object of his Action or Influence (and the more of it, as
there is in the more especial and immediate influence of God, the more the
Communion) is or may very properly be called Unio^ or Conversation of our Souls
with God, and is a thing easily understood by all, but more felt by some men
who are truly called godly and holy men. The Union between two spiritual
substances cannot be understood to be any other than by the mutual intercourse
of operations, and is much more really so than that which is between two bodies.

And here we may easily understand that this Conversation with God is not only
confined to Prayer, but may be referred to all our Lives, in any part of which
we may direct the Operations of our Souls to him (as when we do any thing in
obedience to his Commands) and he may again have immediate influence upon us
(as to suggest and strengthen us in our Obedience) any the ways before
mentioned. And the frequenter and more vigorous these things are in man's Life,
the more he may be said to have Communion or Union with God in his Life, or to
Converse with God. And thus much for the Second sort of Benefits of Praying.

SECT. XI.
III. THe Third sort of general good Effects or Benefits of Praying, are those
which are Helps and Means both of our Goodness and Comfort, of which I shall at
present name but Two, viz. Spirituality and Enlargedness of Soul.

1. Spirituality. By which I mean such a temper of Soul whereby a man is apt to
apprehend and be affected with Intellectual or Spiritual Objects, whether
Absolute as the Nature and Properties of all Spiritual Beings, such as our own
Souls, Angels, God himself; Or Relative, as all the Relations and Habitudes of
things one to another, such as Cause and Effect, Contrariety, Similitude,
Connection and Repugnancy, etc. the successive apprehension of which two last is
called Reasoning. It is manifest, That the Objects about which our minds are
conversant in Prayer, are chiefly those of the first sort, God and his
Attributes, our Souls and their several Perfections and Imperfections, as
Ignorance and Knowledge, Error and Truth, Vices and Virtues, or Sins and
Graces, etc. Now by frequent Exercise and Usage of our selves to Prayer, these
Objects become familiar to us, and such as we readily and clearly conceive and
apprehend, and which really and strongly affect us: whereas those men who never
Pray or otherwise use their minds to them are only sensual and corporeal, or
carnally minded, that is, such who can only conceive and are affected with
sensible things, and somewhat of reasoning sometimes dully enough too about
them: but strangely inept to spiritual things, blind and senseless in them.

But further, This Spirituality of Mind is manifestly a great preparation of
Soul for Virtue and Goodness, because they are spiritual things. It fits our
Souls to apprehend their Nature, to see their Beauty and Excellency, the
natural necessary Efficiency or Causality that is in them of the Happiness of
the World, which can be discovered in no other thing: and consequently really
to approve, honor, admire and love them. Moreover the very same temper of
Soul, whether from the subtilty and calmness of the Spirits, or any other
cause, which disposes to Spirituality disposes also to Benignity or Love,
which when it is universal and impartial is the only Instance and Subject of
Virtue and Goodness. Finally, The Pleasure and Joy which the Soul perceives
from her Conversation with Spiritual Objects is far more profound and piercing,
more lasting and more frequent, being more in our own power than that from
sensible and corporeal ones is; that which besides Revelation, the Experience
not only of virtuous and holy Souls, but even of Contemplative persons, who
have made trial of both with equal advantages, has always confirmed, and
sincerely declared to the rest of the sensual World. The first of which do very
heartily complain of and groan under the unhappy circumstances of this fleshly
Life which so much hinders them from the enjoyment of those nobler and sweeter
delights, and for that Reason (among others greater) full often breath out
their thanks to God for the discovery and assurance of the heavenly Life
hereafter, and their secret welcomes of the approaching time thereof; whither
steals from them many a privy glance, where is fixed many a yearning look.

II. The Second good Effect or Benefit of this last sort from Prayer, is an
Enlargedness or Greatness of Soul. By which I mean that temper of Soul whereby
it is sufficient and fitted to apprehend and be affected with great Objects; to
understand, contemplate, will, desire, love, be pleased with, pursue and
endeavor after them; or in one word, to converse with them. By the greatness
of Objects, I mean their having great good Effects, or a capacity and
sufficiency, or some causality for such: all which good Effects indeed are
either immediately or mediately nothing but happiness: they are either that in
the end immediately, or the same in the means mediately. All goodness is either
the goodness of the end, which is pleasurable good, or the good of the means to
obtain that end, which is profitable good; and indeed this last is nothing but
the first in the means to obtain it. So that all Good is nothing but Happiness.
But to leave this small but very important digression; The greatness of the
goodness of Objects, or the happiness of which they are the cause, is measured
only by three things, viz. its Intention, Extention and Duration. Those Objects
therefore are the greatest which are or are most the cause of the most intense,
the most universal or extended as to subjects, and the most during happiness,
of which there are infinite degrees; The highest of which is that being
infinite in all perfection and happiness which we call God, who formally or
causally contains all things. According to the several degrees of this good
which each man minds, pursues and converseth withal, is his Greatness,
Nobleness, Excellency (or what words are usual among men to express the
confused notion hereof) to be judged and esteemed. He is the noblest and
greatest soul of all who minds and pursues perpetually the greatest good of the
whole Universe in these three Respects, of Intention, Extention, Duration: that
in all other things; or all other things as parts, or more generally means
thereof, and therefore spiritual good as much as may be, being the greatest in
respect of its intention; universal good, or that of the whole, as the greatest
in respect of extension, and the most public indeed; eternal good lastly, as
the greatest in respect of duration. On the contrary, he is the meanest and
basest soul who minds and pursues only personal, sensible and present good.

It is manifest that in Prayer, as it is before described, the objects with
which the Soul converseth are of the greatest and noblest sort, and that by
frequent usage of her self to such conversation she gets a habit thereof, so
that she does with ease and delight so employ her self: and if this fleshly
Life would permit her, she would soon make it her constant and perpetual
entertainment.

Further, It is alike plain and evident how this greatness of Soul is the cause
of Virtue or Goodness, and of Comfort or Joy. For Goodness, Righteousness,
Holiness, Virtue (all signify the same principal thing with some small
difference) in its greatest degree is nothing but the sincerest, strongest,
constantest, habitual inclination and bent of will to the rectitude of our
wills or actions, which is only to be found in having the greatest good of the
whole Universe, taking in God himself for the ultimate object or end of our
wills, and renouncing and quitting that of any part, and therefore of our
selves. It is therefore nothing but a preference of the most Public and
Universal Good before that of any part, and therefore before our own. And
contrariwise, Vice and Sin is the preference of the good of any part, and
almost always our own personal good before that of the whole, which is the most
Universal and Public. It is the having that the ultimate object and end of all
our wills, and neglecting or refusing this. Holiness and Virtue therefore are
great and noble and excellent things, which tend to an infinite good: and if
compared they are as much greater than Sin or Vice, as infinite Extension (if
there can be any such thing) is bigger than a single Atome. The soul
consequently which is inclined to and aspires after the greatest and most noble
objects must needs be so far prepared to have the highest honor, the ardentest
love, the keenest desire, the most intense and ravishing joy and delight in the
most sincere, generous and constant Virtue; and must perfectly both contemn and
hate all Vice and Sin, as the most mean, base and sordid thing. The same
greatness or largeness of Soul disposes us infinitely to prefer one sort of
our own personal good, viz. the favor of God, as our most comprehensive good,
and particularly Eternal happiness, which he has promised as the Reward of
Holiness and Virtue, before another sort thereof, viz. the Temptations to Sin
and Vice, at longest the momentany pleasures of this present Life, and utterly
to despise them in compare with the other, and consequently to endeavor and
pursue after Virtue, and to slight and scorn all Vice. It is certain, That it
is nothing but Ignorance or a pityable and contemptible littleness and
stinginess of Soul in the greatest Huffs of the Age, whatever they may pretend
to generosity, which exposes them to Vice and Wickedness, and makes them so
easily to neglect or despise all the Laws and Rewards of Virtue and true
Religion; either they are not able to conceive things beyond the Mud-walls of
their own Cottage, or they are so stuffed and dried with its Reeks and Smoaks
as never to desire them. Nay, when no less than Eternal Felicity is proposed
and proffered to them, they are no more moved with it than a Bedlam-Sot is with
the offer of a Kingdom; or sometimes they laugh at it, like one of those poor
merry Fools and prefer their own nasty Cell before it. One would think the
dullest Soul should hardly forbear to enquire after it, and be willing it
should be true, or at least without any prejudice against it, endeavor to be
satisfied whether it be so or no.

Lastly, Nothing is more manifest than that the greater and nobler the objects
are with which our mind converseth, the fuller and mightier is our joy and
pleasure. Surely we cannot think that Boys have as great pleasure in Conquering
at Cob-Nutt, as a great Captain has in subduing a Kingdom; or which is better,
That a fond Child has as great a joy and delight in saving the Life of its
little Animal Play-fellow, as Abraham would have had in prevailing with God for
the saving of Sodom and Gomorrah from a miserable Destruction, if there had
been found therein but Ten Righteous Persons. There is infinite more difference
between the things that men ordinarily entertain their thoughts and pursuits
withal, and those which the Soul converseth withal in such Prayers as have been
before described.

And so I have given an account of some of the general Heads of the good
Effects or Benefits of Praying to God, which I have hitherto proved by Reason
and Testimony and Experience of all good men.

And now I desire men would prove it one way more, and that is, by their own
experience, or else disprove it. Make we trial of it our selves, and that for
some time together; for the Effects may not presently follow: take we some
time, begin now to do it, to pray to God discreetly and affectionately with a
holy, pure and innocent heart, in public, private, secret; see whether we do
not grow better upon it. Pray to him heartily and assiduously in secret for
strength to mortify any Lust, thy Pride, thy Revenge, thy Envy, thy Wrath, thy
Injustice, thy Covetousness, thy Vainglory, thy Uncleanness or Lasciviousness,
thy Intemperance, and a Thousand other Lusts which may be troublesome and
importunate to us so far as we are good, or to the Divine and Regenerate Nature
within us. Pray to him for Universal Holiness, Love to himself, Charity,
Humility; Purity and Spirituality of Mind; for his forbearance, for his Pardon.
Make thy report after some time, I fear nothing more than a Temptation to boast
too much of thy Success. And as for the pleasure of it, step ^^metimes into thy
Closet, or any retired place, desire of God first to dispose thy Mind that the
Meditation and Action of thy Soul may be such as may be acceptable to him, set
thy self to make Acknowledgments of his infinite Excellencies and Perfections,
and the Instances thereof to all his Creation, and in particular to thy self,
in making, preserving, providing for thee, and bestowing upon thee the good
things of thy Soul and Body; such as Knowledge, especially of himself and thy
self, of thy present and future States and Conditions, any Goodness or Virtue,
that thou art not the most villainous and wicked person, devoid of all sense of
thy Duty, given up to all Sin and Wickedness, the means afforded still of being
yet wiser and better, God's forbearance, forgiveness in case of Repentance,
present Peace, Comfort, Joy in well-doing, the provision of Heaven and Eternal
Life hereafter when thy Eyes are closed and thou art no more an Inhabitant of
this World, thy Health, Strength plenty of Food, Raiment, Habitation, all
Conveniences of this Life in order to a good and happy Life here and
hereafter. And not only make bare acknowledgments of these things: but heartily
love and thank God for them, honor and admire him with all thy might and
understanding, firmly believe him to have been, to be now, and that he always
will be thy best Friend, if thou be not thine own hindrance; Ask heartily God's
Pardon for offending him and sinning against the Eternal Laws of Righteousness,
drop an unfeigned Tear, breath out an unconstrained Sigh, chide thy self,
beseech God's Grace more than thy Life never to do so any more, resolve to use
all the inherent strength thou have; come then and tell what thou find, how
thou likest.

Once more, When thou would have any thing, make thy Case known, propound it
to God, beseech him to give it thee so far as it is just only, leave thy self
and thy request with God, because he is wise and just, examine and amend what
is amiss in thy self, that thou might not be the cause why it is not just
for God to give it thee, let us know how this relisheth and what follows. Say
sometimes such things as these with the devout and holy Psalmist, I love the
Lord because he has heard my Voice and my Supplication, or because he has
delivered my Soul from death, (that is, he has saved my Life in such a danger,
or sickness suppose) mine eyes from tears, (that is, he has removed from me or
prevented those Evils which would have sore grieved me) and my feet from
falling, (that is, he has kept my mind upright and cheerful from dejectedness
and despondency, or he has kept me in that good condition of Life from which I
was in danger of having fallen or of being deprived of it) the Lord has dealt
bountifully with me, what shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? I will take the Cup of Salvation (the usual part of the Sacrifice
of Thanksgiving) I will show my self publicly thankful, and call upon the Name
of the Lord, or Worship him. O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant.
Psalm. 116.

Say further sometimes, Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, and his
greatness is unsearchable: The Lord is gracious and full of compassion, slow to
anger and of great Mercy. The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works. All thy works shall praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints
shall bless thee. Oh happy is he who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose
hope is in Jehovah the Lord his God, who made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all
that therein is; He who tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all
by their Names, who is of great Power and his Understanding is infinite. Psalms
145, 146, 147. Make we trial, I say, our selves, see we things with our own
eyes, confirm or confute all by our own experience. Let us not think it a thing
not worthy our trouble to be satisfied in, for it is worthy of our greatest
pains. Either we believe all that has been said concerning these Excellent
Uses of Praying, or we do not: if we do not, as I said, try we our selves
whether our Nature is not capable thereof, and God will not assist us; for this
is the best way of proof. If we do believe it without trying, then do we
accordingly. If we do believe this to be true, and yet do not practice, it must
needs be a sign we are both bad and foolish, that we have no mind to be made
good or better, no nor lift through laziness or slavery to be made happier; or
because we cannot have the comfort and pleasure of Praying without the profit
of being engaged to be good, we will part with that rather than be good and leave
our bad Courses or any Sin we love; in which as we are wicked, so we are such
Fools for our selves as if when we have a decrepit and infirm Body we should be
afraid it should be made more sound and strong whereby we might be more useful
to the World, and have the constant pleasure of a clear Health. And so I have
perfected this Fourth Head, namely the great Benefits and Excellent Uses and
Effects of Praying to God.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I.
V. THe Fifth general Head is Directions for Praying; these shall be of two
sorts.

1. To inform or remember our selves of the due qualifications of a Prayer,
what they are.

2. To suggest some means to obtain these said qualifications.

Again, The first sort, or the due qualifications are of two sorts likewise.

1. Those concerning the things contained in a Prayer.

2. Those concerning the signs of those things.

Those qualifications again concerning the things contained in a Prayer are
only likewise of two sorts.

1. Those that appertain to the objects or sense of a Prayer.

2. Those which appertain to the Actions or (to use the most fit general Term I
know) any Affections (by which I mean not only the passions) of Soul used in a
Prayer, such as I have before reckoned up and largely discoursed of: and which
(briefly, only to rehearse them) are,

1. Acknowledgment of God's excellent Attributes, his infinite Perfections,
together with the affections of Soul consequent, such as Admiration, Honor,
Reverence, Fear, Love, Faith, Hope or Confidence, Obediential Resolution, etc.

2. Confession of our Sins.

3. Profession of our future Obedience, in which two are included many more
particular Actions, as Reflection, Comparing our Actions with our Duty,
Acknowledgment or Confession strictly so called, Accusation, Condemnation,
Grief and Sorrow for Sin, Watchfulness against it, Resolution to do so no more.

4. Thankfulness or Love to God for his Benefits to us.

5. A Proposal, Recital, Explication of our Wants, their number, their
greatness. As also of the reasons and grounds of our desires, of their
importunateness, i. e. of their earnestness and frequency.

And then (6.) Our express Petitions and Desires.

Again, and lastly, The due qualifications of the signs used in so Praying,
both of the Objects and Actions, or Operations of our Souls are,

1. Those of Words or Speech, which are always used as signs of our immediate
conceptions and actions of Soul, when we pray with others in their name, and so
as they may join with us. They may also be used in secret Prayer for the more
strong and express excitation in our selves both of sense and of the operations
of our Souls, Perceptions, Affections, Resolutions. I say, they may where there
is no worse consequence than that is a good one (as seeming to be or a
temptation to be vainglorious) be used by us in our secret or retired Prayers.
But even when we do not in our secret Prayers pronounce them with our Lips, yet
they are in our Imagination, and we near always signify by them unto our
selves our conceit of things, or Ideas at least, if not our affections.

Further, These Words or Speech are sometimes the signs only of things or sense
or Ideas in our minds, and not of any other operations of our Souls, as in
Mathematics, (so may it be in any other part of knowledge) where men write and
speak purely to teach and inform. Sometimes again, especially with some
properties belonging to them (as their Gravity, Acuteness, Lowdness, Lowness,
Swiftness, Slowness, Equality, Inequality, Position and Site) they only
signify other operations or affections of our Souls, especially our Passions,
and not our Ideas or conceits. But for the most part (both when written and
pronounced) they signify both together. It is very rare but that they indicate
and signify together with the sense some quality or action of mind in the
writer or speaker: and especially the Passions, as in sentences of Admiration,
yea and of Trust and Confidence and Desire, etc. frequent in the Psalms, nor
indeed is any discourse acceptable to the generality of men without them. For
example, Where are thy loving kindnesses of old? Have thou forgotten to be
gracious? Have thou cast us off for ever? Great desires are here signified as
well as sense. Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion. Psalm 14.
Verse 7. Ardent and earnest desire is here signified by words and their order
and position. Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end. Psalm 7.
Verse 9. And oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness. Psalm 107.
Verse 8. are the same. Oh how I love thy Law! Psalm 119. Verse 97. signifies
Admiration at the greatness of his Love, as well as the sense or thing, that he
did love God's Law. Repetition of words signifies not only the sense of such
words, but also some passion or some great degree thereof. As Psalm 116. Verse
16. O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant the Son of thy Handmaid,
etc. signifies not only the sense, that the Psalmist was God's Servant, but
also the Passion of Joy that he was so, and of Hope because he was so. And save
now I beseech thee O Lord, O Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity. (Psalm
118. Verse 25.) Earnestness and greatness of Desire is here signified. So again
for Example, When a man confesses that he has been or is the greatest of
Sinners, or the least es^ Saints, or the like; these words do not o^ ought not
to signify the superlative degree as other words may sometimes do; but only
that they have been once great sinners, and are but little good in the positive
degree: And moreover, the great Passion of Grie^ and Hatred for and of Sin, and
of undervaluing and contempt of themselves for being so very bad or little
good. Many other Expressions in Prayers and other performances when men are hot
and affectionated may truly be so interpreted, though oft-times the persons
themselves do not observe it, but will defend the precise meaning and sense of
the words when spoken without passion to be always true. But,

2. These signs either of Sense or Object^ or of Operations or Affections of
our Souls are other postures or gestures of some parts of the body: such as are
those of the head, as shaking it, which is a sign of desire or sadness; of the
whole Countenance as the parts thereof being composed and steady, i. e. which
usually signifies Attention, etc. Of the eyes particularly, whose lifting up
usually signifies desire, thankfulness, approbation, admiration, etc. Of the
whole body, as standing up, which may signify approbation, more usually
attention. The signs which signify Approbation and Attention usually signify
too Respect, Esteem, Reverence. The lifting up the hands ordinarily signifies
desire. Kneeling usually signifies Reverence, Respect, Submission. Some certain
postures of the Countenance signify Grief and Sadness, some Joy, some Trust
and Confidence, etc. for there are infinite variety. Postures and Gestures may
be also the signs of sense too or of our meaning, as we see it is in dumb
persons, but those to whom God has granted the use of words and speech very
rarely use them for that purpose.

We begin at the first, viz. the due Qualifications of the Sense or Objects, or
the things about which our minds are conversant in Prayer. Some of which are
these:

1. The First is the truth of them. We are to take care that that which is
capable thereof be true. All things that are the sense or matter of our
Prayers, besides that which is the proper matter of Petition or Desire may be
false or true. The matter or objects of our desire indeed cannot, because they
are all of them, as so considered, simple not complex things in such manner as
Propositions are, in which only there is that truth I now mean. For Example, In
acknowledgment of the Divine Perfections, we must have a care that what we
acknowledge to be in God, be really a pure perfection, and implies necessarily
no imperfection or defect in the least, and therefore that it is really in him.
Thus when we make an acknowledgment of God's absolute Power and Sovereignty of
doing whatsoever he wills and pleases, we must have a care of thinking he
can by his own intrinsic Power, or that it is in his Nature to determine
himself contrary to the Laws of Righteousness, or Universal Goodness, which is
all one. As for Instance, That he can, or that there is any capacity in his
most perfect Nature to will all his Creatures to be miserable, and to make them
for that purpose; nay, or to will any number of them; nay, any one of them
absolutely and ultimately to be so; nay, or the least evil to any of them
without any further respect to any other good, but only that he pleases
himself therein; this is contrary to Reason and express Revelation. It is true,
there is no superior cause to God's Will or his active Power that makes him to
be good, or restrains him from making any of his Creatures unhappy or
miserable; (we should be mistaken again if we thought so) but we neither ought
nor can conceive, if we attend to the Nature of God and Perfection, that it is
possible ever for him to will absolutely and ultimately the least evil or
misery of his Creatures; his Will can never be so disposed, it is not in his
Nature, to will so cannot please him. That which I conceive the best disposed
men mean confusedly and are not offended with when they acknowledge God's
Sovereignty so unlimitedly, as that he can do what he will with his innocent
Creatures, and either immediately though such, or mediately, first contriving a
necessity of sinning, throw them into Hell if he pleases, is, that there is no
superior cause to his own Will why he does not so; which is true: not that it
is possible for him ever so to will or to be pleased therewith: That even the
due Relations of our Actions to their Objects or their Justice or Righteousness
is something, and therefore made by God or dependent upon his Will; for all
things must have his Will or active Power to be the Cause: But then we cannot
conceive his Nature such as ever to have willed contrary, or not to have willed
these Relations, not to have willed that which is just and right. There have
been both of the most profane and of the greatest Religionists but mistaken
who have, I think, entertained these false and most mischievous Opinions
concerning God.

So on another hand, in the acknowledgment of the Divine Goodness, men may have
a conceit and acknowledge that God is so good that he will make all men happy,
and therefore pass over all their sins though never so great and heinous,
numerous and many; that he will not punish them neither here nor hereafter; and
this though they do not repent, and their minds and natures are not changed at
all, or very slightly. They say they are sinners, but God, they hope, will
forgive them, for God is merciful, as they use to express it. This is a very
mischievous falsehood, and implies him even not to be Universally good to all
his Creation, not to do the greatest good to it: for he cannot be so, unless he
restrain sometimes wickedness and sinful mischievous Purposes and Resolutions
of Will, and put a difference, as to Happiness, between the Righteous and the
Wicked sometime and in some measure or other, according as seems best to his
infinite Wisdom. This also is contrary to Reason and the express revealed Will
of God.

So again, Those who may acknowledge the Divine Tenderness and peculiar Love to
them and to some certain others, that he will not see any sin in them, and will
not punish them in the least for it, but that they are peculiarly destined to
an unconceivable Glory and Felicity in another World notwithstanding they live
in their Sins, and are no better than others, and are very well content so to
do and be: who say further, that God has provided and found out a way to
excuse them from actual obedience to his Laws, and from punishment in case of
constant failure without any amendment: that they indeed have very corrupt
hearts, but God for Christ's sake will pardon all. These persons make God and
Christ the worst Patrons of sin, the most unrighteous, the most partial, to
bear with and pardon it in a few whom he pleases, but to punish it in all the
rest with the greatest severity. Nothing more repugnant to Reason and Scripture
in Romans 2.

In Confession in like manner we must have the like care, and as near as we can
say nothing but what we know to be certainly true. Wherefore we must have a
care that we do not confess that we deserve punishment in such things which are
not sins, nor that we are guilty in those things which really are sins, when we
are not. Nor on the contrary perhaps excuse our selves, or think our selves
innocent or good when we are bad, think those things no sins, nay, very good
actions which are bad ones. That which may often be in those which are done
with pretended or some little real zeal confusedly for the glory of God mixed
with much more or other undue* selfish ends and unlawful appetites. Nor must we
acquit, slatter, connive at our selves, and think our selves not guilty of any
sins, and it may be thank God for it too, when we are; being either ignorant
and forgetful of our selves, or wilfully vainly conceited. The greatest part of
the World are very presumptuous and conceited generally of their own innocence
(though they may sometimes in words only or very slightly say they are sinners)
insomuch that if you should enquire of them what they have been or how they
have lived, they will tell you that no man can say any harm by them, and they know
nothing amiss they thank God by themselves, they hardly know one sin by
themselves or one bad action to confess, or they must study upon it or be put
in mind of something or other; whence they conclude themselves very innocent,
and take it for granted and act accordingly as if it really were so, and God
knew as little by them as they do by themselves; when perhaps they have rarely
done any good action, and they have little good in them. If they should be
remembered of their Wrath, Revenge, Pride, Envy, Conceit and Disobedience,
Fraud, Deceit, Injustice, Violence, Sacrilege, Lust and Intemperance, their
neglect of God and their Duty toward him, nay their aversation from, hatred or
contempt of Pious Performances they will either deny or excuse or justify
themselves therein. These are the far greatest number.

But we may find some too on the other hand, who are so melancholy, fearful,
and timorous, or angry and discontented with themselves, that they are very apt
to think those things sins in themselves and to accuse and condemn themselves
for them, which are not, but only defects of knowledge or prudence; when their
principles were very right and innocent, and they used as much or more care
sometimes to do what they intended then they ought. Nay, some there may be who
may think those things sins which are their material duty, or they ought in
prudence and wisdom to have done. As when any person notwithstanding the
stirring or tumultuating of any Lusts resisted, disapproved, comes to the
Sacrament, desirous heartily to be better and stronger against them, and yet
thinks he has done amiss in coming before his heart was better, when this was
his duty. These same ^^morous and discontented persons also are apt to think
themselves guilty of some fa^lts when they are not, or more then they are, and
to take notice of what is bad and not what is good in themselves. They take
notice of the frequent assaults of their excessive and immoderate Appetites and
Lusts, and sometimes of their being overcome, and not at all of their
disapprobation, dislike, resistance, repelling and overcoming them; the latter
of which is as effectual a means of encouraging, preserving and strengthening
us in goodness as the former.

So also men may mistake in their Confession concerning Original Sin, if not
rightly informed, as that we are guilty of Adam's personal Sin, and so deserve
Eternal Damnation therefore: whereas the utmost that seems to be taught us by
Scripture, Reason and Experience (which indeed is a great and a sad deal) is,
that it may seem just to God, (or for the Universal Good) to constitute such
Laws of Nature, that Children by the Mediation of their Bodies from their
Parents may be born with inordinate and immoderate appetites or inclinations,
or with inclinations to some objects absolutely for themselves and stronger
than that to holiness or righteousness; in which is the nature of Sin. These
inordinate and immoderate appetites or inclinations being by Laws of Nature
from certain temper or disposition of our bodies which is communicated from our
Parents, may very well be called Original, or Birth-Sin, as it is in our
Church-Articles. But all this though it be a very great Calamity to Children,
yet cannot be said to be their Punishment, because no sin in them is supposed
to have preceded; but it is the Punishment of their Parents and of their
First-Parents who have sinned, to whom they are so related as to be looked upon
by them and others as part of themselves, and whom their Evil or Calamity seen
or foreseen really does affect. Nay further, These inordinate and immoderate
Appetites or habitual Lusts or evil Concupiscences do certainly make it just
for God to place such Souls in whom they are in some suitable state of
imperfection and unhappiness sometime or in some degree or other best known to
his infinite Wisdom, if they be not removed or taken away, as some think they
are in Infants by Baptism. But all this still is no Punishment to Children
either for Adam's or any other's personal Transgression.

The neglect of a Judaical observation of the Lord's day has been, and, I
suppose, is still amongst some even very good person; one of the most
frequently or zealously confessed sins: That they have spoke their own words
and thought their own thoughts any time within the four and twenty hours; that
is, as they interpet it, any words or thoughts concerning any worldly Affair
(though it be hard to fix the bounds of worldly and religious) which in it self
might be hightly useful to ones self and to others, and therefore lawful, nay
commanded on another day: and this because they look upon the Jewish Sabbath
only translated to another day by our Lord or his Apostles with the addition of
the Commemoration of our Lord's Resurrection. The Command concerning the
Observation of which Jewish Sabbath they esteem Moral (by which they mean that
it is of perpetual obligation) except where God himself has altered it, as
they think he has in respect of the day. In all which I think there are many
mistakes, As,

1. That the Jews themselves were forbidden for the entire space of twenty four
hours of their Sabbath all thoughts and words, nay actions themselves which
were not the immediate worship of God internal or external, or very nearly
relating thereunto. As for Actions it is not to be doubted but that first those
which might be necessary to make them spend a greater part of that time in the
immediate worship of God with more vigor and fervency were never forbidden;
and therefore those which were for the best refreshment of the body with food,
and those which were for diversion sometimes; which to some persons might
necessarily take up a good part of their time: such as walking and talking
about innocent or useful affairs of Life, and interposing these so much as
might make them fitter for the commanded Worship of God, and that which their
own prudence might add in public, private or secret. Nor,

2. Is it more to be doubted that those actions were never forbidden which were
of greater good effect just at that time and in those circumstances (and many
such there may be which must be left to men's sincere prudence) than the
immediate Worship of God. As for Example, A Man's pulling his Neighbor's, or
his own Ox or Ass or Sheep out of a Ditch, where they would certainly perish:
(It is our Savior's own Instance.) How much more to ride many miles Post, more
than many of their Sabbath days Journey, to save a Man's Life ready to perish
by some Disease, or by violent assault of wicked Murderers? And as for words
and thoughts they had in this respect still more liberty. For abundance of
actions and otherwise very useful and good would be inconsistent with and
indispose a man to the immediate Worship of God, the words or thoughts
concerning which for a small time may not; but clean contrary conveniently and
fitly divert or refresh a man and be the cause of his better performance
thereof. The place in Isaiah, the 58. which has been usually quoted to this
purpose is* If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath from doing thy pleasure
on my holy day, an^ call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord
honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways nor finding thine
own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words. Where fir^^ the words from doing
thy pleasure on my holy day signify and mean ^^ general their doing every
thing they listed and pleased, not only upon the day now ordinarily called
their Sabbath but also upon other their holy days And that they made the rule
of their actions on those days only their own will and pleasure, not God's.
This they neglected and had no regard to; and therefore they neglected and
slighted those things that God had on those days commanded them. Those words
cannot mean their doing some things which might please themselves: for eve^
what God commanded might and ought to please them, and they were to delight
themselves in them. Again, The sense of the words shall honor him not doing
thine own ways, etc. is no other but that they should in general honor God by
keeping his Commandments, and preferring his Will before their own will and
ways when inconsistent with or opposed thereto, and particularly by keeping his
Commands whatsoever they were concerning the observation of the Sabbath, that
by the Phrase of their own ways is meant their sinful ways in opposition to
God's Will and Commands is manifest from Isa. 66. Verse 3, and 4.

Another mistake is, That supposing the Jews were commanded by God for the 24
hours of the Sabbath to abstain from all words and thoughts which were not
nearly at least relating to the immediate Worship of God, that this Command
obliges all Christians. For on the contrary it is most certain, that no
Commands given to the Jews by Moses oblige any Christians as given by him. They
were particularly directed to that particular people and no other. If there be
any of those Commands that are enjoined from God by Christ, who was the great
Prophet and Messenger of God to all Mankind, or by Reason, and Natural Light,
so that they appear in all circumstances to have more good effects than bad
ones, then indeed they oblige all men. Now the Judaical Observation of the
Lord's day to all men (howsoever particular that of their Sabbath was) is not
commanded neither by Christ, nor by Reason. There is not one word of it in the
Scripture. And for Reason, it is not imaginable that it is possible for all
Persons of all tempers in all Climates and places, as the affairs of humane
nature now are, to observe it as the Jews did; nor is it of more good effect,
that it should be so observed. And as for the translation of the Jewish
Sabbath Day from the Seventh to the First Day of the Week by Christ or his
Apostles, it is without any ground from any Testimony that I remember to have
heard. Nor is the Reason usually given more considerable, viz. the Redemption
of the World by Christ being a greater Mercy than the Creation: For the
Creation was of Millions more, and that of ever blissful and happy and most
perfect Creatures, than the Redemption was. And indeed if the minute
circumstances with which the Jews observed their Sabbath be Moral, and
therefore not changed by Christ and his Apostles, much more should the precise
day be so. Finally, it is to be affirmed, That only all those Precepts in the
Mosaical Law are obligatory to all men at all times, which concern the end of
all our wills and actions; namely the Universal Good, consisting of pleasing
God, the greatest good of others and our own Salvation or most completely
perfect and happy state; and consequently the suppression of all selfish and
immoderate Appetites or Lusts in us; And moreover those few general Precepts of
Prudence which perpetually to observe does most obtain this our one ultimate
end; such as the material part of the Commands against Idolatry, Profaneness,
Irreligion, Murder, Adultery False-witness, etc. how many and which these are
our own Reason and Prudence, if we have them not repeated in our Christian
Religion must only determine by the same ways they use in other matters.

In all that I have said concerning the Judaical Observation of the Lord's day,
I would not be thought as if I intended or desired in the least to undervalue
and discourage the employment of our minds about spiritual things, and
consequently spirituality of Soul; that is, such a temper whereby a man is apt
to apprehend and be affected with spiritual matters. No, I would have it
introduced into the World as much as humane nature is capable of. For although
I do not think this employment and temper of Soul to be our absolute and
greatest Perfection (which I doubt is a mistake among some of the highest
Religionists of all sorts and parties) yet I know it to be a most excellent
Instrument thereof, viz. of Universal Love and Goodness, in opposition to
Selfishness. It allays and calms all our bodily Passions and consequent bad
Impressions and Inclinations, it clears our Reason and Perception of all
Perfection, of the Nature of God, of the Truth of Things, and consequently of
the Nature and Excellency of Virtue, and its only instance Universal Charity
and Goodness, yea, and causes us to be deeply affected with it, to admire and
love it. It immediately disposes the Soul to a sweet and easy benignity and
goodness, etc. Wherefore, I say, I would endeavor to introduce it as much
still as humane nature shall be observed to be capable of; that is, so much as
will be the cause of most good among men as their natures or affairs are
necessarily constituted. For it is certain, The employment of a man's mind
about spiritual matters may be too much, so that it may wast or dull ones
spirits and consequently render one less sufficient to apprehend well and be
affected with either spiritual or sensible things; it may weaken, flatten and
darken our apprehension and conception, diminish and impair much all our
natural parts; it may render us fearful, flattering, of too mean an opinion of
our selves compared with others, superstitious, pievish, morose by too great an
expense, or contracting some certain ill Crasis of the Spirits; in fine, very
little and mean minded persons, dull, afraid of, and angry with every small
thing beyond measure: whereas a free and discreet use of bodily pleasures and
converse with ordinary affairs may secure us from those Infirmities. But thus
much I think the Condition of men will very well generally bear.

1. That there be some time set apart for the public Worship of God to which
all men, except very rarely, may resort, which time may be once in the Week at
least or oftener.

2. Particularly to commemorate his Creation, Preservation and Administration
of the whole Universe, and therein with all suitable affections to acknowledge
his infinite Perfections displaied: and more particularly to commemorate that
part of his providence or administration or direction and government of the
affairs of Mankind, viz. Jesus's coming amongst us from him for our Redemption
from a State of great Imperfection, Wickedness, Misery, by his Doctrine, Life,
gracious Influence, procurement of Pardon, etc. all this also with agreeable
affections of Soul, for which the day of his Resurrection by his own Power and
Virtue, being the most wonderful thing and peculiar to him, and therefore the
great confirmation of his mission is well chosen. To which might be added by
Christians, for ought I see, the weekly celebration of the day of his
Ascension, if the affairs of Mankind could bear it, which was also a most
magnificent and strange thing though happenning to two others before, and
necessarily inferrs his resurrection.

3. Upon the same day to Worship God in secret too more or less according as
our bodily temper and necessary affairs will permit, which every ones sincere
prudence must determine. Particularly to entertain ones self with such actions
and thoughts before the public Worship as will prepare a man to perform it
better, more to apprehend and be affected with the spiritual things that do
occur therein, and to abstain from those things which may indispose and unfit a
man for that performance: And so afterward to take some time to impress upon
our memory, examine, inculcate upon our affections what might have occurred:
and moreover to think of, contemplate, and affect our selves with any other
spiritual things, as the Existence, Nature, Actions of God; of our own Souls,
what we were, are, should be, shall be: our imperfections, perfections, etc.
for all which we are fitter by freedom from bodily action and calmness. This
very day is also a very fit season for instructing of Families, and performing
Offices and Duties of Religion with them, also for all acts of Charity both
Spiritual and Corporal to our Neighbor. The Church of England has in one of
her Canons very piously described how she would have holy days to be observed:
which were it carefully obeyed would be a very grave Ornament to her. Nor can
it therefore be expedient for such an end to encourage Plays, Pastimes,
Recreations, worldly Affairs, but barely to tolerate some lesser matters which
prudence might not think sit to exact rigidly, but to leave to every ones
liberty. And as for times of necessary Diversion or Recreation which usually is
accompanied with some folly and debauchery, others are a great deal fitter for
such a purpose.

And now if the Lord's day and other holy days were thus observed, there would
be far more of spiritual employment of our minds, and more effectual for the
great end of making us better than there was ever among the Jews in their
strictest observation of their Sabbath; a great part of which was taken up in
the bare external Worship of God, or in the external signs of Honor, as in the
care of their best Apparel, and well provided Tables, their Gate, their Voice,
and other such unprofitable and trivial matters, as R D Kimchi observes upon
the place in Isaiah before quoted. What a ridiculous Observation of their
Sabbath was the abstaining from twisting ones Whiskers, or running a Needle
twice through a Clout, or writing two Letters, because these were (...) or
Works? Of this enough every where in their Authors, and particularly in the
Talmudical Tract of the Sabbath: most of which were only an ignorant and
superstitious application of God's general Command, as it seems, of which some
Christians have been or may be soon too much guilty. It may be here advised
that there is great difference as to persons; and that there may be some whose
constant employment or leisure may give them such advantages of spending much
time upon other days about spiritual things, that it may not be so needful nor
convenient for them to spend so much time on these; and that ofttimes the
principal reason especially of their public observation is the giving a good
Example to those who else would take too much liberty. But to the generality of
men, if these fixed and set times be not made use of for the spiritual
employment of their minds, it will be quite neglected.

But so much for this digression, which I intended no other than only in
general to suggest many things to be considered concerning this matter, not
particularly to discuss them; and therefore have taken no notice of what others
of other persuasions had said, or might have objected.

In like manner are they mistaken who confess, That the best actions the best
men do are sins, and even deserve eternal punishment (but pardoned in Christ)
from that place in the Prophet misunderstood, viz. All our Righteousness are as
filthy rags, spoken of the generality of the Nation of the Jews, who were very
bad, Isaiah 64. Verse 6. When the truth of the Case is, that many and many a
good man have done many and many an Action in which there was no sin, and which
deserves no punishment. For he who has in any Action with the greatest vigor
of his Soul he then had, propounded, intended and willed his duty, right, just,
and that consisting in the most universal good, the greatest good he can know,
viz. in pleasing of God and doing the greatest good to the World he at that
time was capable of, and most perfecting and making happy himself in so being
and doing; I say, this person seems to me to have done some action in which
there is no sin nor desert of punishment, and I do not doubt that there has
been many such an action done. It is true, Righteousness and the good of the
whole World, God, our Neighbor, our selves, and God alone deserve to be loved
with a greater degree of Intenseness than we are capable of, even with the
infinite one of God himself: but this is but a necessary Imperfection of all
created Natures, even of the highest Angel, and would have been in the state of
Innocence.

In giving thanks likewise we must use the same care. For as men may confess
sins when they are no sins, and when they are not guilty of them; so also they
may thank God that they have received certain favors and benefits from his
hands, when either they are no benefits nor instances of his favor, or if they
be they have not received them. So men may thank God that they are led into
some great truth, as they think, that they are of this or the other persuasion or
party, and in the right way, and now sure to be saved; when their truth is some
trifling or hurtful error, and 'twere better for them and the World, that they
were of another mind, or another way, and even of that from which it may be
they may thank God they are delivered.

Thus men may also thank God, and be highly ravished with the distinguishing
love of God to them in electing, justifying, sealing, glorifying and saving
them, and securing them certainly from Eternal Misery or Hell; when all this
may be only an Imagination of their own caused by self-love and self-flattery,
and nothing of truth in it, and really they are very bad persons, having many
and great Lusts unmortified, known even to themselves (but yet, as they think,
to be over-looked by God, because they are and will be sure they are his Elect
Children) and more yet unknown, unregarded, and not taken notice of by
themselves, being, alas, oft-times very ignorant, inept, careless or partial
examiners of themselves.

Men may thank God that they are not guilty of some sins, when they are, not
knowing their own hearts, which is a very difficult thing; and that they have
some graces, as sincere Zeal, Humility, etc. when they have not, but instead
thereof, or at least mixed therewith Wrath, Pride, Vainglory: or in general,
that they have greater degrees of holiness than they truly have, as the
Pharisee did. They may thank God for owning their Cause by Success in War or
Law, when he does not, but only chastises it may be or corrects another.
They may also apply general or particular Promises made to other good men to
themselves, and thank God for them that he has made such Promises to them,
when they do not appertain to them. And lastly, In the particular deduction and
recital of our Cases or Conditions, or the reasons and grounds of our Hopes we
must observe the same still, not aggravate nor extenuate more than is true. As
a man may propose to God in his Prayers the great machination and malice of his
Enemies, their insulting over him, the dishonor of God himself by them, if he
be not delivered by him; when little of this may be true, most of it being only
conceited so out of Pride, to render himself more considerable, or to show that
he can or will deal with them all, or out of Wrath; or it is more feared than
real: many other Instances of these Particulars might be given.

SECT. II.
II. THe Second due Qualification of the Sense of our Prayers is, that the
things be Just. And this respects only that part of Prayer called Petition.
When we desire that God should give or grant any positive or privative good
thing to us, let us be as sure as we can that it is just he should grant it to
us. Justice is a property of an action, and that which we immediately desire in
Prayer, is God's granting any thing to us. And here we are especially to use
Divine Revelation or God's Word rightly interpreted, and our own best Reason to
know what is Just. Thus for Example we must not pray to God that he would grant
us any thing which may gratify our Revenge, Envy, Ambition, Covetousness,
Wrath, Vainglory, or any other Lust: as sometimes the ruin or destruction or
hurt of our Enemies, indeed because ours; Prosperity for our selves and ours,
and success in an unjust or wicked Undertaking, great Riches, Relations,
Employments, Parts, and Gifts, without taking any notice of serving God or
doing good therewith; but only that we might be superior to others, or acquire
Name or Reputation, or be able to advance and propagate certain Opinions and
Usages, because ours, and abolish or remove others, because contrary to ours:
in which case our Request is not that God would grant these things to be done,
because good for the World and pleasing therefore to himself, but indeed to
gratify us only, and that in hurtful mischievous and therefore unlawful
desires. This oft-times lies at the bottom, and is the only cause. And though
we may sometimes slightly or it may be confidently judge the things beneficial
to the World, to others as well as our selves, and acceptable to God, yet it is
the gratification of those unlawful desires may make us to judge so. Sometimes
indeed and most ordinarily perhaps there is a mixture. St. James tells his
fellow Christians that some of them asked and received not because they asked
amiss to consume it upon their lusts or pleasures, those ( viz.) of pride and
sensuality, James 4. Verse 3. The Sacrifice of the wicked is abomination, how
much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? Prove. 21. Verse 27.

We shall often hear of Fastings and Prayers of contrary and diverse Parties
for Victory and Success in any Affairs and Thanksgivings too, when both cannot
be just. In such Cases it is a very good Petition that God would favor or
prosper the just Cause. And yet this may not always seem good to God neither;
but we ought to refer it to him as all other Petitions. Thus Sects and Parties
in Religion pray with a great earnestness and confidence for the Conversion or
Extirpation of each other, when it is sure but one of those Prayers can be just.

If when we Petition God for any thing we be careless and negligent whether it
be just or no, and yet perhaps very confident and bold too in asking, we
greatly dishonor God. For hereby we beget an Opinion in our selves and others
and such a suitable behavior, that God is more fond of us and our concerns
than of what is just and right, that is in effect, that he loves us in
particular better than all the World besides, as if he must needs do what we
desire him, whether it be right or wrong. But if we do attend to and examine
with as much care as we ought before we pray whether what we pray be just and
fit for God to give, and do without any prejudice from self-love conclude it
may be so, and yet should be mistaken; this is only a defect of our knowledge,
the ill consequence of which is soon amended by referring all our Petitions to
the unerring Wisdom of God, of which hereafter.

But we may through undue self-love so flatter our selves and think our selves
so acceptable and dear to God that we may conceit it cannot but be just for him
to do what especially we with great earnestness and zeal (as if he were the
inspirer of it and put it into our hearts, when it is it may be our own Pride
or other self-love) Petition him to do. More modesty better becomes us, whereby
we may have a true and due judgment of our selves. And when we have that and do
with good reason think our selves so far good only as we really are, and
consequently in the favor of God; yet we are to be so modest too as to
remember that we can but very rarely certainly tell in particulars with all
their circumstances what is absolutely best for the World, and consequently
what is just for him to do. He who is All-comprehending in his knowledge always
certainly knows, and to him therefore we refer the Justice, and consequently
the granting of our desires. The confidence of some persons in their Prayers
proceeding from Ignorance and Pride when their tempers have been heated
especially, how blameable, how hateful and contemptible?

The wiser sort of Heathens had so good an opinion of their Deities, and
consequently of their Duty toward them that they would be sure to ask nothing
from them but what was just. (...). Pindar. Py. Od. 3.
We Mortals ought to desire from the Gods those things which are fitting and
just, minding the present of what condition we no^ are.

SECT. III.
III. THe Third due Qualification of the Sense of our Prayers is, That they be
in the first place and mostly of the greatest importance and concernment. Not
but that there may be some time or other too in which we may mention in our
Prayers many lesser things. Things of greatest concernment and use must in
proportion to their concernment compared with those of less be more and more
frequent in our Prayers. And this concerns all the parts or Ingredients of a
Prayer. As in Acknowledgment let us be careful to be well instructed in the
greatest, the most comprehensive and general, the most useful and beneficial
Perfections i^ God, that we make our Acknowledgments of those principally and
chiefly; as that of his infinite and general goodness to all more than his
particular goodness to us. And so when we make an Acknowledgment of the
Instances of his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Justice, let us take those
chiefly which are the greatest and largest, and endeavor to be affected with
them; such as are God's Creation of all things, Preservation, Providence
throughout the whole Universe, that toward Mankind, and especially the making
of us Re^sonable Creatures and giving us such Faculties, Aid, Sufficiency,
Opportunities, Helps to improve our Reason and Understanding: also the
Revelation of such excellent Doctrines and Truths to the World by especial
Messengers the Prophets of old, and lastly by Jesus Christ his beloved Son.

In Confession let us take notice of and bewail most our greatest Sins, that
have most of Iniquity in them, where there is the greatest degree of the
depravedness Inordinacy of our Wills included, the greatest Aversation from
Righteousness, the greatest degree of unreasonable and mischievous Self-love;
in a usual Phrase, our most aggravated Sins. Consequently let us confess our
dearest, most pleasing and delightful sins: for our greater degree of delight
in any thing more than in our Duty, argues a degree of the inordinacy and
depravedness of our wills as to Intenseness: those also which are most frequent.

Contrariwise let us not confess little sins much, and neglect great ones, or
more than those; confess those which we can more easily forsake, and neglect
those which are most sweet, pass over them or slightly only take notice of
them; confess those which we commit rarely, and neglect those which we do
frequently. When this fault is in our Confession purely through ignorance,
through want of understanding of the degrees of sin, and there is no fault in
the will, which I scarce believe, it begets in us a great deal of superstition,
that is, an opinion that some actions are more or less displeasing to God than
indeed they are compared with others; and consequently being more afraid of
doing some of them and of God's anger or punishment for them than we should be,
and in others again less: which is a very bad effect and does much deprave and
corrupt the Inclinations of the will as to the Instances of our duty, and
renders us less capable of any happy condition till we are better instructed in
them, though we should be truly conscientious and love that which we judge
right and our duty: which possibly may be. But I am apt to think that most
ignorant superstition proceeds from unconscientiousness. But when this fault
proceeds out of a desire to indulge our selves in some sin, both the Cause and
the Effect is extremely bad.

If we have occasion to confess National Sins or those which are most practiced
frequently by the generality of a Nation, have we a care to confess those
principally and most which are indeed the greatest both as to the Principle and
the Effect; those that argue and include the greatest degree and neglect of,
and aversation from our duty, and the great instance thereof compared with
other objects; or the greatest degree of ultimate self-love compared with or
opposed to the common good, and those which are the most mischievous or do the
greatest hurt in the World. Such as are some the more colorable and
undiscerned sins of Malice, Pride, Envy, Ambition, Affectation of Superiority,
Equality, Liberty: add Tyranny, Disobedience, Revenge, Oppression,
Covetousness, Fraud, Hypocrisei or want of Integrity; and others more
notorious, of Profaneness, Irreligion, Atheism, Unbelief, Disbelief of
Christian Religion, Sensuality, Lasciviousness, Intemperance, etc. Those Sins
also which are the most frequent and continual in several or the same persons
are to be principally confessed.

In thankfulness likewise it is much to be attended to, and we ought to give
thanks in the first place, and most frequently and most ardently for the
greatest favors, those that are most public diffused and general, those that
are spiritual or intellectual, those that appertain more immediately to the
Soul, those among spiritual ones which concern our wills or inclinations, and
in order thereto our affections, called generally by the names of
Sancti^ication or Regeneration, purifying and renewing of the heart, or in one
word usually by the name of Grace; then afterward for the good things that
appertain to our Knowledge or Understandings, as quick and plentiful
Suggestion, Revelation, Illumination in Truths of the greatest Excellency, Use
and good Effect; for ability to signify, convey or propagate these, such as
ready Invention, Memory, Utterance, etc. all which have been known by the name
of Gifts; Then for the good things appertaining to the Body or in it as the
subject, as Strength, Health, Comeliness, plenty of such things (as Food and
Diet, Raiment, Habitations with their Ornaments, etc.) which gratify our
Senses, and secure us from Corporeal Pain which the most necessarily affects
us, and consequently from necessary care and solicitude to prevent it, etc.
Then for the External good things without us, of Riches, Reputation, Liberty,
Magistracy, Friends, Relations, etc. The Reason of all this is, because to
thank God more for personal than public benefits, as it does usually proceed
from, so it will increase a particular and selfish spirit. To thank him more
for bodily or external sensible good things than for spiritual is both a sign
and cause of sensuality in us, i. e. it does proceed from and confirm our
excessive love to corporeal and sensible good in compare with spiritual, as
well as keep us in some respect to God. It is that which may be ordinarily
observed, viz. that men are usually much more sensible of and grateful to God
for bodily good and the things of this life, than for spirtual or intellectual.

And so likewise to thank God more for Gifts than Graces, though both spiritual
things, confirms one in too great an esteem and love for Gifts compared with
Graces, which notwithstanding are incomparably inferior to them. Gifts
sometimes may be ^ill used, be mischievous and hurtful, which sincere Virtue
and Grace can never in the least be. Knowledge puffs up without Charity, and
is contentious, affecting, contemptuous: but Charity edifieth, says the
Apostle. Charity even without Knowledge can do no harm, but in its own nature
necessarily tends to do good. Now although this be better than not to be
thankful to God at all, than to thank him neither for bodily nor mental
favors; yet it is at least of far less good effect than to be thankful for
better things more and first, as they deserve. We are to thank God for every
thing as near as we can, according to its proportion of goodness, viz. in such
proportion as it is a part of or means to the last end, the Universal
Happiness. And because, for Example, all spiritual good things are generally
much more so than bodily, we must be oftener and more sensibe of them, more
frequently and fervently thank God for them.

What has been said about thankfulness may be advised concerning Petition,
that we desire in the first place, principally, most frequently and most
ardently the most universal or public and spiritual good things, such as
Graces and Virtues, and then all the rest or any of them according unto their
true degree of goodness too.

We see men generally faulty in this particular, and they will pray infinitely
more heartily for fair Weather or Rain when it is much wanted than for the most
excellent and highest degree of any Graces or Virtues. Nay, if they dared, they
would (and they really have more mind to it) pray against those that they might
not be disturbed by them. They would sooner pray for the Food and Pamper of
their Bodies than for that which might increase Graces and Gifts in their Souls;
more that they might have earthly Friends, who might love and honor them, than
the friendship or favor of God; more that any man who can possibly punish them
for any misdemeanour would forgive them, than that God would; more that they
may be rich, than honest or just or charitable, or make good use of riches,
like faithful Servants and Stewards of our great Master God. From which same
temper it comes that all spiritual benefits and favors of good Instruction,
Exhortation, Example, and the persons who are the Authors and Instruments
thereof are generally less prized and esteemed than a small piece of Bre^d or
Money, than the least good appertaining to the Body or Estate, and their reward
would be answerable if it were not for Laws or the Sentiments of a few of the
wisest and best.

So, Lastly, our Explication of our Case may be too tedious, we may too
operosely aggravate our Case, more comparatively with other matters we even
then want than we ought.

This of Petition is according to our Savior's own Advice in that excellent
Sermon; after he had warned them against distrust, solicitude and over-eager
care concerning worldly goods of meat and drink and clothing, he adds, But
seek ye first the Kingdom of God and its righteousness (that is, probably,
God's Kingdom by Christ, to be the Subjects thereof, or to be true Christians)
and all these things shall be added unto you. Some spiritual good things, viz.
Goodness and Virtue render us capable of all other, and fit us for the
enjoyment and use of them; but not on the contrary. Matt. 6. Verse 33.

This is a thing so obivous, that it is commended and advised by some of the
Heathens in their Addresses to their Gods. Their praying for long Life, Glory,
Beauty, Marriage, Posterity, and other things which the Vulgar used to ask of
their Gods the Satyrist derides as folly; because they were hardly to be
accounted in the number of good things, as having as much evil and mischief
attending them: But he advises they should rather pray for a good mind,
courageous, fearless of death, nay, desirous of it, patient, Master of
Passions, despiser of selfish sensual Pleasures, etc. These were the things
principally to be sacrificed for.

Fortem posce animum and mortis terrore carentem
Qui spatium vitae extremum inter munera ponat
Naturae; qui far queat quoseunque labores,
Nesciat Irasci, cupiat nihil, and po^iores
Herculis aerumnas credat saevosque dolores
Et Venere and plumis and caenis Sardanapali.
Juven. Sat. 10.
To this Sense:

Ask a great mind that fears not death,
Welcomes the time of it is last breath,
That firmly bears the greatest pains,
Slavery of passions that disdains,
That takes stout Virtue pressed with Misery
Before soft Pleasures of base Luxury.
SECT. IV.
IV. A Fourth due Qualification of the Sense of our Prayers or of the Objects,
is that it be as extensive as may be. This also appertains to all the parts of
a Prayer.

That our Acknowledgments, for Example,

1. Be as comprehensive as may be and general, so as to comprehend all God's
Perfections which are useful to Petition, and such are his always infinite (as
to Intension, Extension and Duration,) Power, Wisdom and Goodness: for these
certainly comprehend all.

2. That they be in some Prayers more particular, which particulars are to be
(for all cannot be) either those that are of greatest concern or Importance, or
which we best apprehend, or are most affected with, or which are most proper to
any Petitions we may make. As for Example, Sometimes we may make our
acknowledgment not only of God's goodness in general, but also of some
particular instances of it, such as his forbearance of us so long
notwithstanding our careless or contemptuous violations of any of his most
righteous and holy Laws, his forgiveness of this or that particular sin, of all
our Sin, upon our sincere repentance; his promising to us, and bestowing upon
us any particular good things, as such a good advantage of Condition for
Instruction or Virtue, such an Assistance for the obtainment and performance of
any particular Virtue and Duty, or against any Temptations, the means of Grace,
as is usually expressed; such a Deliverance from such a spiritual or corporeal
Evil, etc. The same which is to be done in our Thankfulness and expressly loving
God for his Benefits.

So our Petitions, ( 1st.) Let them be as general as may be and comprehensive.
It is convenient in Prayer always at least to premise such general Petitions
before particular ones, and sometimes for want of Time or Knowledge, etc. they
may be only used. For Example, That God would bestow upon us all good things
that he thinks sit and just. As it is said of Socrates, that he used when he
prayed to pray only (if he always did so he might have done better sometimes to
have propounded and desired things more particularly and as well referred them
to God) that the Gods who knew best what was good would give him good things.
(...), Xenoph. in memor. Lib. 1.
as Xenophon reports. And somewhat more particularly that he would provide for
us all good things of our Souls, Bodies, Estates, which compr^hend all as to
their subjects; or all here and hereafter, which comprehend all as to time; or
to descend further, Knowledge and Goodness, Gifts and Graces, which comprehend
all as belonging to our Souls; more particular yet, that he would give us to
live godlily, righteously and soberly, which comprehends all Grace or Virtues,
all our Dutys toward God, our Neighbor and our Selves. Such also are the
Petitions in the Lord's Prayer.

But then ( 2ly.) after these general Petitions, as often as we have opportunity,
let there be others as particular as may be, especially in things of the
greatest Importance and sometimes in lesser Matters, according to the degree of
their Importance to us, and of our apprehending them, and being affected with
them. For the most part we better apprehend and are more affected with
particular things than with generals. Thus let us pray sometimes for particular
Virtues or Graces, Parts or Gifts, bodily or external good things: sometimes
for many and a great number together. At one time we may longer insist upon
some one or a few only, at another time upon others, much according to our Need
and Wants, and consequently also the Importance of the thing to us, according
to our apprehending our want thereof, and being affected therewith. And in
order hereunto Men should make reflection upon their spiritual and corporal
Condition, see what they want and what they have, and accordingly direct their
Endeavors and their Prayers. They should observe whether they want any Grace
or Virtue, or strength against any Sin or Lust, or any other especially more
useful thing, and remember the next time to propound it, and beseech it of God
more earnestly and solemnly, as they may then and at other times with frequent
ejaculatory Prayers. Men are commonly here more careless of their Relation to
God than they might or should be. Every thing which they ought to take any care
to obtain, they ought also to ask God's Favor in it. For whatsoever we our
selves can already do, our whole power and ability, both to will and to do, is
from God and perpetually dependent upon his will and pleasure: which he can
increase in us as much as he pleases, as he can do all things for us without
making any use of us.

St. Paul commands it, Philip. 4. Verse 6. saying, in every thing by Prayer and
Supplication with Thanksgiving, let your Request be made known unto God. And
the Heathens themselves in any considerable affair of Life, nay, the Vulgar in
the small and trifling used to invoke, or by some Rite to apply themselves to
some of their greater or lesser Deitys.

Again, Let our Petitions be as extensive as may be in respect of Persons too;
even to all who want any thing that we can and ought to desire for them; we are
not to ^onsine our Prayers and Petitions to our ^elves.

For Confessions let them be at least most^hat very comprehensive, and
sometimes as ^ften as is meet (which our Prudence must ^etermine) more or less
particular, especially of frequent sins, of sins we are most in danger of for
the future.

We may add our Profession of Obedience to be also the most universal in the
most general Terms, and sometimes more or less particularly.

And these are some Directions concerning the Sense of our Prayers, or the
Objects of the various Operations of our Souls in them.

SECT. V.
II. SOme Directions concerning the Actions or Operations of our Souls i^
Prayer. The principal of which (very briefly to recite them once more) are
attention to and acknowledgment of the Divine Perfections, consequent
Affections, an^ motions of our Will, such as are fear of h^ Power and Justice
if we do offend and pers^ so to do; trust in his Power and Mer^^ (one Branch of
his Goodness to the Worl^ as Justice strictly so called is the other) ^^ far as
we are innocent or repent; Admiration, Honor and Reverence to him for a^ his
Perfections together, or for any in particular, unreserved Obedience and
Submi^sion to him upon the account of his Infinit^ Wisdom and Righteousness or
Univers^ Goodness, desire of him, and dependence upon him, and trust in him for
all things fit and just to be given to us upon the account of his Infinite
Power, Wisdom and Universal Goodness, Love to him for his Universal Goodness,
Thankfulness for his Instances of Bounty to all and to us in particular, which
is also a distinct particular Ingredient of Prayer. Add to these the other
Ingredients of Prayer before mentioned: Confession of our Sins, Profession of
^ur Obedience, Thanksgiving, Recital of ^ur Cases or Conditions, unfeigned
Desires ^r Petitions. These, I say, are the principal Actions or Operations of
Soul in Prayer; concerning which I propound these follow^ng Directions.

(1.) That they be all sincere; by which I mean two things:

1. That they be not pretended only but ^eally in thy Soul, and in that degree
of which thou usest the fit and proper Signs: that there be not only the
External or other ^igns, but also the things signified: That ^here be not only
Words with their loudness ^r lowness, quickness or flowness, and va^ous order
and position of these, and so ^ther gestures of the parts of the Body be^re
named; when there is wanting sense and understanding of some thing and at^^tion
thereto, and all other those inward Motions and Actions of Soul so often
mentioned, or the degrees thereof which are properly signified by them. When
thou conceivest or utterest words, know what thou say, Attend to what is or
may be best signified thereby, as much as thou can. Talk not like a Parrot,
or rather like young Children at School, when they say their Lessons. When thy
Voice is vehement or loud, let it not be merely customary, or because thou
affectest it only for some undue end; for some undue end, I say, nor, it may
be, to quicken thy Invention or Memory, or clear thy Conception, or because
being assured of the goodness of any thing, thou on purpose excitest and usest
the help of thy corporeal Passions to affect or determine thy Soul; all which
sometimes are and may appear to others with approbation to be no unfit reasons.
Let thy affection in thy own heart, and a great desire to convey it and to
excite it more in others or thy self, or thy great Admiration of the Excellency
of the thing, or whatever passion or operation of Soul in any degree is
properly and fitly signified by thy vehemence of Voice, go before it, and be
really inherent in thy Soul, and be the cause from whence it proceeds. If thou
composest thy countenance, or take thy senses from other objects, let there
really be great and serious attention. If thou liftest up thy eyes or hands,
let it proceed from inward desire, Address to God, and Approbation. If thou
bendest thy Knee or Body, or erectest it by standing up, let there be truly and
really these things in thy Soul. Although I know too that many of these Signs
are not so necessarily proper to these ^ffections and actions of Soul, but that
they may also be done from, and sometimes signify no more in some
circumstances than unwillingness to give a needless offense, and a certain
Christian Humanity and Civility. Nay not only words and gestures of Body are to
be true Signs of inward Operations of Soul, but also some Actions or Operations
of Soul truly signified are much signs again of others. Thus great Affections
and Passions for things in men especially who study, and are supposed to
consider and examine, whose business it much is or should be, are signs to the
generality of people of their clear understanding of the certain truth and
excellent usefulness of them. And this together with a pretended or real great
love to the Souls of men (which is indeed a truly generous and divine temper)
have been some of the causes that some men have had so many followers and
admirers, and whatsoever has been said by them has been believed to be as
true and excellent as the Word of God it self, without any scruple. When
therefore our Affections are great and strong, let there be also preceding an
understanding and conviction of the truth and usefulness of things, either from
our own sight and perception, if we can, or from Divine Testimony, or (which is
most common, easy and much safe) from the most general Testimony of the wisest
and best men. Let not our great Passions be only an affected bussle to make
people believe we are in earnest for some great matters which we have
discovered.

2. By sincerity in these Actions in Prayer, I mean, that they all or thy whole
Prayer have their due Ultimate end unmixed with any other. Let thy Ultimate End
in general be sincerely to do thy Duty, that which thou judge thou ought,
and to be more disposed to be universally, constantly, courageously good and
virtuous, to love and please God, to be the most beneficial to the World, and
to perfect and make happy thy self by possessing thy Soul with the Graces of a
most universal, constant and generous Charity, and that in the best Instances,
viz. in spiritual things as much as thou can, and in all others when they may
be fittest or the only Instances thou can then perhaps be charitable in; of
self-denial, humility, spirituality, by the mortification of all inordinacy and
immoderacy of thy Appetites, of all Lusts; by being sober; advised, discreet,
and wise, and by the use of all other good things we are capable of receiving,
possessing, enjoying from God: Let these things, I say, be purely and sincerely
thy Ultimate End. If thou acknowledgest God's Infinite Perfections, let it be
to produce in thee some way or other (as it will) Obedience and Imitation and
consequently Universal Righteousness, Holiness and all the Instances thereof
now mentioned.

If thou confessest thy Sins, let it be to excite and stir up, whet and sharpen
thy hatred against all Sin; and when thou professest thy obediential
Resolution, let it be to confirm, strengthen and invigorate thy love and
liking, resolution and bent of Soul to all Obedience, and to thy Duty
universally.

When thou thankest God ingenuously for his great kindness and love, for his
benefits to thee, let it be sincerely to engage thee to love him again;
consequently to imitate, obey, please him, and consequently to be universally
holy and righteous. When thou propoundest or recitest thy Case or Condition, or
that of any others for whom thou prayest, let it be sincerely to cause thy self
some way to be better, by causing thee more to attend to thy dependence upon
God and to be more sensible thereof, and consequently to behave thy self so as
to please him.

And lastly, When thou desire or petitionest any thing, let thy Ultimate end
be still the same; quicken thy acknowledgment and sense of thy entire
dependence upon God by which thou may be engaged to love and please him,
which cannot be without holiness Universal. Most expressly Petition God for his
Grace and Assistance to make thee the most perfectly holy and righteous thou
art capable of, in such manner and instances as is aforesaid, trusting in God
he will grant those thy Petitions (then which none are more acceptable to him)
and using the utmost of thy endeavors in compliance with his supervenient
help. Finally, When thou beseechest God for all or any other good things, let
it be that thou may be disposed and enabled thereby to serve him and the
world, to live profitably and comfortably here, and at last to obtain an
immortal and everlasting reward. These things, I say again, are to be purely,
sincerely and unmixedly the Ultimate end of thy Praying in general, and of all
the parts thereof. Let no other thing come in the place hereof or mix and blend
therewith. Let not, for Example, mere dull Custom be the end; that is, mere
pleasing a man's self with so doing, and especially the external or bodily
part, because a man has used so to do, he will so do. Not the mere Action or
Usage so much as the good effect of it is to please, such as the name of our
Duty includes and supposes. We must not pray as aged men in part use old
fashions, or some other little actions, as walking, eating, drinking at certain
times, viz. principally because they have been used so to do; it is easy, it
is delightful merely to do so, and it would be painful and troublesome to them
to abstain or to live after any other manner. Let not again the procuring a
great Opinion of us for Sanctity, for Consciensciousness, Honesty,
Spirituality, for great Parts or Gifts, for Readiness, Copiousness, variety of
Invention, Memory, Judgment both in Things and Words, Sense and Phrase, for the
usefulness and general goodness also of both, that we can Pray much, or are
well furnished with Matter, that we can Pray long and often, or are very
frequent in Prayer, that we are good Churchmen, that we never miss Prayers,
that we can Pray with an acceptable and pleasing Delivery or Voice; let not
this vain glory of Praying long and frequently in every place, in Synagogues,
corners of Streets, reproved by Christ in the Hypocrites of his Age, Matt. 6. I
say, let not this be the End. Again, more Universally, Let not the
Gratification of any Lust, as Sensuality, Luxury, Ease and Sloth, Malice,
Ill Will, Pride, Affectation of Superiority, Equality or Liberty, Revenge,
Envy, Ambition, Vainglory, Covetousness; not the Procurement of some Advantage
for Employment, Preserment, Rule, Gain, Trade, or the like, in the least peep
in and mix with the noble end before mentioned. Let not, lastly, even the
pleasure, satisfaction and delight we may find in all the Operations of our
Souls in Prayer, such as clear perception and understanding of God, his
Attributes, of things spiritual, future, sublime, and of great concernment,
especially our being affected with them; not the pleasure of our both great and
good Passions, as Admiration, and Honor, Love, Joy, Faith and Truth, etc.
though rightly and duly excited according to the true goodness of things
understood, usually signified by the names of Transports, Ravishments,
Ecstasies, I say, let not even this be our Ultimate end; but rather one
exceeding little, and very inconsiderable part thereof; the other of being bent
and resolved to please God by doing all good, being infinitely more valuable,
as tending to an infinitely greater good. Notwithstanding let us maintain and
cherish this our pleasure and satisfaction all we can possibly in a thing so
rightly directed, and so truly useful to please God and serve the World, and
thank God we are so tempered as to receive so much therefrom. And these
therefore being but personal and proper Goods must not either in this nor any
other action be placed in the room of our Ultimate end so often named, nor be
admitted to any mixture or co-ordinacy with it, but as Instruments or little
parts thereof. The pleasing God and doing the greatest good to all others, and
our own Salvation (that is, our own greatest Perfection and Happiness)
considered all together as one good thing is absolutely the noblest and most
perfect end of our Actions we can have, and is the same which God himself
always has. But any other end besides this (which almost always is some
personal good where the other is not) is comparatively mean, ignoble, sordid,
contemptible.

All the Psalms are Instances and Examples of this sincerity as well as
fervency and other qualifications to follow as much as can be conjectured by
Words written (and feignedness and hypocrisy and bie, and bad respects would
somewhat betray themselves) as Psalm 17. Verse 1. Hear the right, O Lord,
attend unto my cry, give ear unto my Prayer that goes not out of feigned lips;
or as in the Margin, without lips of deceit. The most likely sense is, that
David had no other end in his Prayer to God, but that God should favor that
which was right, that he should bestow that which was just upon him. And Psalm
66. Verse 18. If I regard Iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. It a
man have an habitual love to, and approbation of any wickedness, it is the most
likely way to, and most generally it would, hinder the granting his Prayer; nor
can a man see any sufficient reason to expect any such thing, if he be
conscious to himself of regarding any Iniquity with allowance. But much less
sure could David think his Prayer should be heard, if he were conscious to
himself that he was guilty of insincerity or that particular Iniquity of having
any unlawful end even in his Prayer it self, as to gratify Revenge, Pride,
etc. It is true, It might seem in some places as if some of his Prayers
proceeded from Revenge, as especially Psalm 69. Verse 22. After he had
complained of the cruelty of his Enemies, he prays that their table might
become asnare before them, and as for their good things, or their peaces (...)
(for the Hebrews signified all good by the word (...) or peace) let them be a
trap, that is, let even their good things mischieve them, or prove evil to
them. Let their eyes be darkened that they see not, etc. But surely first David
supposes them to be villainous and wicked, unjust, proud, cruel men, etc. and
that they were all other milder ways incorrigible. And then certainly it is
equally lawful to pray for their punishment, or to wish it, as to inflict it;
which a man might and ought, if he had lawful Power. And this a man might do
even in his own Case, not out of Revenge in the least, but out of hearty love
to the public good, by encouraging, res^uing and defending Innocence and
Virtue, and by restraining and supressing Wickedness and Injustice. I do not
think but that David would willingly have had his Enemies changed their minds
and repented, not merely because his Enemies, but because unjust and
consequently Enemies to God and Men, or hurtful to the World. But if it
appeared they would not do that after long forbearance, there might be reason
to judge it most just, and consequently pray to God, that they might be
punished. David also is found somewhere praying for his Enemies (it may be till
they were incorrigible but by punishment) Ps. 35. Verse. 13. They rewarded me
evil for good; but ^s for me, when they were sick, my clothing was
sackcloth, etc.

SECT. VI.
II. THe Second due Qualification of our Actions or Operations of Soul in
Prayer, is, That they be intense and servent in such proportion as they ought,
especially considered comparatively with the same Operations about other
Objects. Thus in acknowledgment of the Divine Perfections and Attributes, let
us apply our minds thereto and be attentive. And so likewise in our Confession,
Profession, Thankfulness, Explication, Petition; cause we our minds to attend
to the objects thereof with all the vigor and strength they ought, so as that
they might not be too easily drawn off by other Objects that may either present
themselves to our Senses, or make an attempt upon our Imagination; our Thoughts
are not to be too slight, wavering, wandering, uncertain, unconstant, so as to
be sometimes more smartly upon other matters of more trisling concerment, our
ordinary, daily and small Affairs, or, it may be, upon our Sins and Lusts when
we are performing this Duty, we casting only a short and weak glance upon the
things we are about. Our hearts and minds ought to be much, and as much as it
is possible, upon such excellent and useful things as are or should be in our
Prayers. We see with what application and attention of mind we do all other
things of far less concernment; and in particular, if we are to make any
address to any person of Dignity and Authority and real worth, either to thank
him for, or desire from him any one and no great favor.

So for our Admiration, Honor, Reverence, Fear, Love, Faith, Hope, Joy,
Delight, Resolution of Obedience, be they in that measure and proportion of
Life, Vigor and Strength they ought, and certainly that cannot be too much;
for the Objects of all those in God are infinite. In Confession, let our grief
for Sin in general or Sins in particular, and hatred of them be inward,
piercing, great, lasting according to the mischievousness of Sin above other
Evils, which is almost without compare, and according to the degree of Iniquity
and pravity in every Sin. Our Resolution in the Profession of our Obedience let
it be firm and strong. Our Thankfulness and Love to God for his particular
Goodness and Benefits toward us, or to any other for the Instances of his
general Goodness to all; as also our Petitions and Desires let them be hearty,
strong, vigorous, according to the goodness and value of the things received or
desired.

It really is an unreasonable and unjustifiable thing that men should have all
these Passions and Actions, all these Operations o^ Soul in the fircest and
intensest degree about other small inconsiderable, trifling objects in other
affairs of Life, and yet here to be almost mere Hypocrites, to have little of
inward Action and Life; which sometimes betrays it self even by bodily dullness,
sluggishness, sleepiness, Oscitancy not caused by length or any meanness of the
performance, but when it is done short enough and well, and by men's own selves
too: Or if they be a little busy in external and bodily actions with their
mouths or other parts of their body; yet the internal actions of their Souls,
such as I have above mentioned, are very slight, weak and slender. Persons
approach to God with their Lips and their Bodies when their Hearts are far from
him, and, it may be, after their Covetousness, or any other Lusts. Or they are
there with him and conversant about him and other matter of their Prayers, as
men use to be in the company of those persons, and in doing those things they
do not much care for, or have no great value for. It is really a thing of which
men are to be ashamed, that they are conversant about lesser matters with great
attention and affection, and about infinitely greater such as are in this part
of the Worship of God with little or none: it is certainly a sign of their
pitiful ignorance and error, degeneracy, baseness and meanness; that they are
like Children and Schoolboys who are attentive and eager about their Sports
and Pastimes, but not at all concerned in the Cares of their Parents for them
and the rest of their Families. Is it not a shame to see men honor and admire
mortal men, a potent Prince, a profound Statesman of great capacity for
business, one that administers Affairs with much prudence and dispatch, or a
great Scholar, one of large Revenues, splendid Train and Attendants, and
perhaps sometimes, but more rarely, a virtuous, just, pious, holy and very
spiritual minded person, I say, to honor some of these with the Titles of
Incomparable, Prodigious, and other significations of astonishment: and yet to
have very little of these in their Souls to God, from whom all these and the
Subjects of them came, and who is the Author of all these, and all other never
so great and never so little things in the World; to whose Infinite Perfection
all those and all other compared are not so much as one Atome to the content of
the starry Heaven, and whose is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever
and ever: and this even when they make their most solemn Addresses and pretend
to Worship him? And so likewise it is a sign of pitiable ignorance or folly in
men to be more confident and secure, to put their trust more in the savor and
power of an ordinary Relation, or Friend, possibly in a man's self, in his own
Power, Wit, Prudence, Riches, Strength, than in the All-mighty, All-wise and
All-good God, for which indeed sometimes there may be reason if their designs
or hopes be unjust. Who would not be moved to contempt or pity to hear men
protest with the greatest zeal and earnestness to one some very little their
superior, how much they are their servants, and with all the gestures that may
be, signify it? but when they profess their Universal Obedience to God, the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the only Potentate, the Supreme Monarch of
Heaven and Earth, in saying, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done in Earth as it
is in Heaven, or in any other words, to do it so remissly, coldly, and
indifferently that if they should do in like manner to any one little their
betters, they would think themselves so unjustly neglected as to bid them, or
to be content they should keep their service to themselves. Who could like to
see men with great reality and submission to confess their Offenses against
those they fear can punish them? but to confess to God their Offenses against
his Laws, as if they were afraid they should do so again, and were very loath
and unwilling to prevent it. To see men with a great deal of earnestness and
humility, and mouthful of blessing render thanks to their Brother for a
satisfying meals meat when hungry, or a refreshing draught when thirsty, or a
scrap of silver to buy them necessaries when destitute; but to thank God both
in their public and private Devotion for his innumerable Benefits, even all
good things that ever we have had in our lives, and especially for spiritual
ones, as if it were a mere Compliment or Ceremony, and they would gladly have
done with it, as soon as may be. And lastly, How great a senselesness and
sottisness is it in men to beg with so much importunity of those in whose power
it is to punishness them a little in temporary good things, forgiveness and
pardon, or of others their favor, countenance, assistance, direction, counsel,
their Alms or Charity; or in poor Prisoners guilty and ready to be condemned to
mulcts, banishment or corporal pain or death, to Cry out with the most pitiful
Voice for Mercy or Pardon: but to ask of God Grace to Repent, strength to be
better, and then pardon for innumerable lesser and many greater and more
heinous Sins, That God who can make them miserable here and hereafter, who can
throw both Body and Soul into Hell, would forgive us our Trespasses, as we
forgive those that trespass against us; to ask of him to take care of them and
provide for them, to counsel and direct them: I say, to ask these and all other
things of God, as if they were unwilling he should grant them, or very
indifferent and little concerned whether he did or no, or as if God were
obliged to them that they would ask and receive any thing from him: What can be
more absurd, more unreasonable, more shameful than this? This is not
Superstition, but Truth and Reason. And this slackness, streightness,
perfunctoriness in the Worship of God comes from Sensuality or Immorality or
both; Either men are dull and carnal and cannot take notice of, and be affected
much with God who is a spirit, or they are unwilling to do it, they care not
how little, because they know they do such things, and live in such courses as
do not please him, and which he does not allow of. Of this their Duty they may
do a little, it may be, to appease some remainder of the natural appetite that
all men have to Worship God, and for Credit or Reputation sake, and that is
enough. Contray to the excellent Examples and Precepts which we have in the
Holy Scriptures. There can hardly be given any more certain signs of the
greatest strength and fervor of all those Operations of the Soul in Prayer
than what we meet withal in the Psalms every where.

Read for an Example of the most sensible acknowledgment, the 145 Psalm in
Verse 1. is a general acknowledgment and admiration, I will extol thee my God,
O King, and I will bless thy Name for ever and ever, etc. And Verse 3. to Verse
6. is a magnificent acknowledgment of God's Power. Great is the Lord and
greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable, etc. and Verse 11,
12, 13. again in Verse 8, 9, 10, 15, 16. is an acknowledgment of the general
Divine Goodness; and Verse 17. of his Holiness; and Verse 14, 18, 19, 20. of
his mercy or goodness to persons in misery and distress, especially who perform
their Duty to him, where also his Justice or punitive Goodness; and the
Psalmist concludes with as general an acknowledgment by his mouth, speaking the
praises of the Lord, and let all flesh bless his holy Name for ever and ever.

Read also a magnificent particular acknowledgment of God's Power, Goodness and
Wisdom in Psalm 104. which begins, bless the Lord, O my Soul, O Lord, my God,
thou art very great, thou art clothed with Honor and Majesty, who coverest
thy self with light as with a garment, who stretchest out the heavens like a
curtain; and then ends, O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou
made them all, the Earth is full of thy riches; that is, of plenty and
abundance of good things. For reasonable trust in God we meet with the most
significant Expressions every where of the greatest and boldest degree thereof
both as to particular favors of Peace, Plenty, good Name and Honor, etc. and
also in general. Psalm 37. Verse 3, 4, 5, 6. and so on throughout the whole
Psalm. Trust in the Lord and do good, (behave thy self as thou ought and do
thy Duty) so shall th^^ dwell in the Land and verily thou shall be fed. Delight
thy self also in the Lord and he shall give thee thine hearts desire: Commit
thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass, etc.
Psalm 146. Verse 3. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of man in
whom there is no help. And Verse 5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for
his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, who made Heaven and Earth, etc.
And how often does the Psalmist seem to be exalted above himself, and triumph
in his trust, confidence and firm hope in God?

For Confession and Grief for Sin, see the reality and seriousness of it in the
38 Psalm, Verse 3. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger,
nor any rest in my bones, because of my sin. And Verse 18. I will declare mine
Iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. The 51 Psalm is a known Example both of
David's hearty confession of, and piercing grief and bitterness of Soul for his
sins, as also of the vehemencies of his desire and petition to God for purging
and pardon, to cleanse and rectify his Soul, and to forgive him, and then to
grant him Joy, Comfort and Peace. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy
loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies blot out my
Transgressions, etc. We may read the whole Psalm, than which there cannot be
any thing more pathetical. O Lord open my mouth, and my lips shall show forth
thy praise; that is, give me an occasion and a cause of acknowledging and
praising thee in this thy particular favor of granting me Purification,
Pardon, Peace, and enable me to do it, and then I resolve also to declare and
make known how much thou deservest to be praised, thanked, loved, admired by me
and all men.

As for Profession of Obedience there are not many Verses in the 119 Psalm, in
which we have not some Emphatical signification of the firmness and
unmovableness of his resolution; the very frequency is a great sign thereof.
Verse 97. Oh how I love thy Law! Verse 103. How sweet are thy words unto my
taste! sweeter than honey to my mouth! Verse 106. I have sworn, and I will
perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. Ver. 111. Thy Testimonies
have I taken as an heritage ^^r ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart.
Ver. 127. I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea above sine Gold. Ver 131. I
opened my mouth and panted; for I longed for thy Commandments, etc. Are these
the Words and Expressions of a cold, indifferent, or of a lukewarm man in his
love to, resolution for Righteousness and consequently for the Commands of God?

For the Psalmist's Thankfulness and Love to God for his Benefits to him in
particular, the passages and places are as numerous, Psalm 86. Verse 12. I will
praise thee O Lord, my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify thy Name for
evermore: for great is thy Mercy toward me, thou have delivered my Soul from
the lowest Hell; (...) or from the deep Grave, or the Grave underneath; that
is, from Death, which had overtaken me, and seized upon me, had it not been for
thy special ear.

A very pathetical and emphatical Expression of his Love and Thankfulness to
God both for his personal Favors toward himself, and those toward his own
Nation, the People of the Jews, nay toward all his Works in all places is the
103 Psalm, all which Read we heedfully and imitate. Verse 1. Bless the Lord, O
my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my
Soul, and forget not all his Benefits, who forgiveth all thine Iniquity and
heals all thy Diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns
thee with loving kindness and tender mercies, etc.

And lastly, his Petitions and Desires are with the greatest fervency and
importunity signified and expressed, and that principally in the things of
greatest concernment, especially considering his case, sometimes fain to fly to
Idolatrous People for shelter; as particularly for to be admitted and restored
to the external public Worship of the true God, as it was by himself
instituted in order, to his internal Worship, which, as I have above said
contains all Religion, nay all Duty. Psalm 42. Verse 1. As the Heart pants
after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts
for God, even for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God?
Psalm 63. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee. My Soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is,
to see thy Power and thy Glory so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary, because
thy loving kindness is better than life; my lips shall praise thee. The
Psalmist (Asaph) very passionately expresses his Joy, repo^e and ^^quiescence
in God, in that of the 73 Psalm, Verse 25. Whom have I in Heaven and I have
delighted in nothing on Earth in compare with thee; or with thee at all, that
is, besides thee, as our Translation has it. That is, I put my Trust and place
my Delight neither in any God (the Heathen Gods) nor man in compare with thee,
or together with thee: Thou art my Ultimate Trust, my chiefest Delight. My
flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion
for ever. The like earnestness and fervency may be observed when the Psalmist
prays for deliverance from his so great and malicious Enemies, that they sought
utterly to ruin him, to defame and reproach him by malicious and mischievous
slanders, and so banish him perpetually, or take away his life; or when he
prays for deliverance of the Jewish Nation the people of God from their
Enemies; all of them things of great concernment, especially considering God's
Honor concerned too (and consequently also the good of men) sometimes in
vindication of his greatness in opposition to false Gods, because the Heathen
would think their Gods the mightier, if they should prevail; sometimes in
vindication of his Providence, both his Justice to punish very wicked persons,
his most unjust Enemies, and his Mercy in being kind and rewarding the
righteous and true lovers of himself, such as he was and some with him,
according to his promise. I have before instanced in the 51 Psalm. where David
so vehemently and earnestly begs for Purification, Pardon, Peace. Indeed his
Sins were great and heinous, and much aggravated; and so we must have a care
that we imitate him when the things we desire are of as great concernment, our
degrees of Earnestness and Affection must be proportioned always to the
importance or good effects of the action, most what depending upon the goodness
of the objects thereof: but I doubt it is but too ordinary for Christians to be
guilty of more, and more heinous sins than David's were, and yet not to use the
least part of the Importunity that David here does for forgiveness, if they do
desire it at all, and make not a sport at it. And so of other good things they
betake not themselves to God. St. James tells us, that the effectual fervent
Prayer of a righteous man avails much, or the active Prayer, that in which
there is much of activity and life [(...).] That earnestness or fervor is
principally meant there by those words seems from what follows of Elias's
praying earnestly that it might not Rain, etc. [(...),] an ordinary Hebraism to
express earnestness. James 1. 16. 17. Our Savior after he had given his
Disciples an Example of Prayer, he adds an advisement of great importunity in
Petitions (sometimes and for some things when necessary, and of great
importance) and intimates that sometime it may be a condition of our receiving
what we ask. Luke 11. Verse 5. And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a
friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me
three loaves; for a friend of mine in his Journey is come to me, and I have
nothing to set before him, etc. And Verse 8. I say unto you that though he will
not rise and give him because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity,
[(...)] because of his Impudence properly (that is, Importunity so great as it
might seem near to that, or as men impudent use to do, who without the
restraint of fear or shame do things and with the greatest vigor and
ferventness) he will rise and give him as many as he needs. And verily it may
sometimes be very reasonable for God to withold any benefit asked, especially
if a great one, on purpose to heighten the eagerness and fervency of our
desires, that we might be more sensible of our dependence upon him, and
obligation to him, and be more thankful when we do receive after such long
importunity. And it might reasonably seem good to God net to give the thing at
first, or with only cold and lukewarm wishes and desires; nay, never to give
it, if we will not take the pains to continue and invigorate, inliven our
Supplications and Entreaties. And this may often actually be one reason why, as
St. James says, we ask and receive not, namely, because we ask so rarely and
seldom, so weakly, languidly, and remissly, and consequently so unbecommingly
to the great and good God so infinitely superior to us, and to the things
themselves; the least being too good to be given to such idle and heartless
Petitioners. Indeed a man may reasonably think that rather than such Prayers
should be the condition of receiving, they should oftener be a cause of denial,
or should even as little be the condition of receiving as none at all, if not
less. God may give us benefits indeed, but not on condition of such Prayers; as
he often does, when we do not pray at all, ungrateful Creatures!

SECT. VII.
III. A Third due Qualification of our Operation of Soul in Prayer, or rather
of Prayer in general, is that it be as frequent as ought to be, and this our
Prudence must determine. For Ejaculatory Prayers they may be at all times, in
all places, all companies, upon all occasions. And we are always to keep our
mind in such temper, and so truly innocent, as that we may in the beginning,
especially of any considerable action, send up to God a smart desire for
Wisdom, Discretion and Prudence, sincerity and uprightness in our Intension and
Design; to do that which is in those circumstances best, for the greatest good,
and most pleasing to God; for courage and strength and constancy, or vigor and
perseverance; that we might do nothing we might have reason to repent of; for
success or deliverance. He also who much addicteth himself to, and frequently
uses this sort of Prayer, may pray much more in the sum, and most-what does
pray more fervently and more seasonably than he that prays many long
continued Prayers; his Acknowledgments, Confessions, Professions,
Thanksgivings, Petitions being when he is under a stronger and distincter
apprehension and greater sense of the things he conceives in his short Prayer.
As for public Prayers they are determined by the Public, and I do not see but
that most men generally might, if they pleased, be there as often as they are
appointed: many more than there are surely. But especially those whose affairs
are not so much abroad, whose time and garb and other circumstances might be
more easily fitted thereto, whose affairs are more regular as to time, and more
at their own dispose. And if all those were but present who stand still looking
about, or who purposely find themselves very little business as well to be done
at another time, all those who are either idle or do business of far less if of
any concernment to be done just at that time, the number I do not doubt would
be very considerably increased. And as for private and secret Prayers, surely
most persons may have opportunity to perform them once or twice a day in some
length or other, or some part of the day or other. I confine them not to time
nor length, though it may be best for men who can to fix some time, and to use
to order their affairs so, as not to interrupt them, and that they may not be
hindered by them, as possibly before them all, and after they be all dispatched.
Better too they be short than none at all; If it be but some short and pithy
comprehensive form with the Lord's Prayer, of which some learned, judicious,
pious and devout men have been so deserving of the Public as to give great
variety, which men need not be ignorant of, if they have a mind to know. It is
as a thing of great consequence to be advised here, That those who educate and
look after Children, especially Mothers (than which they cannot do a more
tender Office of Love and Care) do cause their Children after rising and before
going to bed to utter some short Sentences of Petition and the Lord's Prayer,
and 'twould do well to add the Paraphrase upon it in the Public Catechism; and
to learn them betimes to acknowledge and worship their Maker. And cannot then
they do at least so much, and it is like somewhat more themselves? And might
not all others find as much time as that will come to, if they had a mind to
it? But this especially, as I above said, may they do whose affairs are known
to be at certain times, whose affairs are more in their disposal, and less
indispose them, and such especially may they be whose affairs are most within
doors and domestic, who are not wearied and tired with bodily labor; though
persons often do this too more than they need, and when they need not. What
should hinder most persons every day as soon as they rise from retiring a
little by themselves, and also with their Families, so many as their affairs
will spare (and let them not be spared without considerable necessity) praying
to God to keep them from all sin and danger that day and all their lives, to
give them grace and peace, the good things of the Soul and of the Body, the
good things of this Life and that which is to come, that they may live well,
discreetly, innocently, beneficiently, profitably to their Neighbor,
pleasingly to God, comfortably to themselves here, with peace and wellgrounded
repose and joy, being prepared for a more perfect and happy Life in Heaven.
Further, that they may have their Sins pardoned, true repentance for them
instilled, obedience and holy resolution excited and confirmed in them; that
they might love God, be grateful to their Friends, forbear and forgive, and do
good to their Enemies, even to all, encourage Virtue and Goodness, check and
restrain Vice and ill-doing prudently in their place and calling, and with all
sincerity for the good of the World. That they might not that day be malicious,
uncharitable, selfish, proud, ambitious, envious, revengeful, vainglorious,
wrathful, sensual, lascivious, intemperate, drunken, profane by lewd swearing,
irreverent toward God, or commit any other sin they know themselves to be most
particularly in danger of. That they might be prospered in worldly affairs, and
delivered from the evils of Body, Name, Estate, as shall seem most fit to God.
And so in like manner to give thanks for any of the good things they have
received. I say, what should hinder most men generally in some length or other
from doing this in the morning, and so likewise again at night, if they had a
mind to it? Why may we not apply our minds to these things in a morning first
(except upon an extraordinary occasion) as well as to lascivious objects or
worldly affairs, or the contrivance, it may be, of some sin, some evil action
or other? My voice shall thou hear (or hear thou) in the morning, O Lord, in
the morning will I direct my Prayer (or my self) unto thee, etc. And Evening
and Morning and at Noon will I pray and cry aloud. Psalm 5. 3. and Psalm 55.
Verse 17. says David. These places indeed do not prove he did this always, or
constantly used these stated times: but the first of them proves plainly at
least that he did it in the morning sometimes, and the second more probably.
Evening, Morning and Noon may be also a synechdochical Expression for praying
to God very frequently and at all times when he had occasion. And so when it is
said seven times a day I will praise thee, may be meant only very often; and
that it is likely by Ejaculatory Praises too, or that upon some days he might
solemnly perform it just so many times. And so that in the Thessalonians, is it.
Epist. 5 Chap. 17 Verse. Pray without ceasing (...) is either meant of Praying
for every kind of thing, as it follows in the next Verse [in every thing give
thanks.] And Philip. 4. Verse 6. In every thing, etc. or praying very
frequently, especially Ejaculatory Prayers; or praying to the end of our Lives;
it is a Duty which will never here be needless, or to be left off. To do thus
constantly and frequently would much keep men sober, discreet, conscientious,
upright the following day, and consequently also fit them for God's Blessing in
all their other affairs, and consequently make them be joyous and cheerful, and
benignly disposed: whereas popping in now and then a Prayer, especially before
a Sacrament, or on a Lord's day (times which none that are so much engaged in
worldly affairs should omit by any means) will do much less good, and the
Influence soon wear out and be forgot, and then most of the Interval they are
as bad as ever, and never the better. Finally, We may all take this advisement
and remember it, that whatever our affairs are, and how much-soever they
necessarily hinder our thus worshipping of God and this our Duty toward him;
yet we are to take care this be not with our consent, that we are not content
there with, so as not to watch for an opportunity otherwise to dispose them,
and not to look upon it as an unhappiness; let it not be want of good will in
us by no means; but let us be so disposed that we would do it withal our heart,
and much oftener, if we could, we believing it manifestly our perfection to be
more immediately employed in spiritual things, and to converse with God. And I
little doubt but that he that is so disposed will soon find sometimes or other,
to perform this his reasonable Duty to God.

We are to do this too as often as other affairs which are not of greater
concernment may permit. And in this bodily Life in which we are, supposing it
ought to be maintained, many called little affairs considered without their
consequences, considered with them are great matters. As due times and
qualities and quantities of meat, drink, habitation, sleep, etc. for without
these no living; our bodies will not be upheld, nor sit for Prayer, nor any
thing either spiritual or corporal to do it to any good purpose. And we may
contract by ill use of these or want of these many evil dispositions of mind,
as morosity, d^^content, too much serupulosity, superstition, suspicion of our
selves and others, a belief that every thing that is in us is bad, never
looking at any thing that is good in us, or thinking it is not so, fearfulness,
unactiveness, peevishness; so that it may be and full often is of greater
concernment to mind these ordinary affairs, necessities or conveniences of
this bodily life, than directly to pray. And if we do all these things with
discretion, and that we may be more fitted to serve and please God by doing
this way as we think the most good to the World we can, we do an act of
Obedience and consequently of Worship to God.

But, alas! this extreme of Praying more than the necessity of other affairs
will permit, is but rare in compare with the other of seldom or never praying,
especially in this irreligious and profane Generation. How many are there who
have hardly ever vouchsafed that they can remember One, O God, or so much as a
Lord bless me seriously, except profanely or customarily? much less do they
ever allot a minute or two some-^^times to say with any understanding and
affection any short Prayer. And as for the Public either they come thither not
at all, but like Brute Beasts lie sotting and swilling or sleeping at home: or
when they come they possibly pray sometimes as little as those that are at
home, or as the seats they sit upon, or very gravely and imperiously they
contemn it as below their wisdom or their great mind; contrary to the practice
of all even the most barbarous and ignorant Heathens of all ages, who all of
them ever have had some things which they called God's (except some late
Relations should be true) which they thought could do them good or harm, to
Worship; acknowledging, praising, thanking and praying to them. A sign that the
thing is so evidently useful and consequently reasonable to all who want any
good thing they are capable of, and yet cannot give it themselves, and know any
other being who can; that the most stupid of Mankind are not ignorant, or
negligent of it.

SECT. VIII.
IV. THe Fourth Qualification is, that our Prayers be seasonable, both the
performance of the Duty of Prayer in general containing all the parts before
mentioned, and also all the several parts thereof. And by seasonable I mean,
that both the whole and such parts thereof be then used, when they do the most
good; when they will do more good than to omit them, or to do another thing, or
to use another part of Prayer in their place. The season or opportunity of
every action is when it will do more good than the omission thereof, or another
action in its place and time; and the best season is when it will do most good,
more than the omission thereof.

And (1.) That the whole action or performance (of set Prayer which requires
any set time or place I speak principally) be seasonable. For while we are in
this fleshly life, supposing it our duty to maintain our selves in it, or
rather to do all the good we can (which is God's service in this fleshly life)
and as long as we can, there are a multitude of things in their times of more
good effect than praying at the same time would be, as I have before said. Such
are our food, sleep, exercise, and that in such certain quantity or quality:
For without these we either cannot at all subsist in this life, or very
untowardly with distempers, pains, dullness, indisposedness to the best actions
of Soul, and consequently even these in Prayer. In general we must and ought to
take so much care of, and allow so much attendence and time to our bodies that
they may be the fittest instruments for our souls, that they may the least
hinder, and the most permit or help or dispose them to the most perfect actions
they are capable of; and consequently whereby while we are in this body we may
do the most good. And this is as various and diverse as there are persons. For
some persons tempers and constitutions may be so happy as that a little
attendence to their body serves turn, and the rest of their time they may spend
in more im^ediately momentous actions. Others again may be of so unhappy and
weakly a one, that most of their time must necessarily be employed about their
bodies, that they may have some and but a small time for the more useful and
excellent actions of life, such as Prayer contains; and if they did not spend
so much time about their bodies they should be able to spend yet less or none
at all about their souls. And yet even these persons if they do but ultimately
propose to themselves sincerely to do all the good they are able for, and to
please God thereby, so far as they do so are very innocent and sinless. And if
they mightily desire and earnestly wish they were able to do the greatest good
as much as the most knowing, strong or powerful, or are in sincerity strongly
resolved and bent if they had never so much power they would use it all to
serve and please God by doing good with it; I say, if they be thus affected
(which is but rare for want of use in persons who cannot employ their minds
much and often and attentively about Moral and Divine things) they are most
excellently virtuous and good; and, it may be, more than those which can spend
more time in set Prayer, and sincerely and fervently performed too. Some of
these very weakly persons being often indifferent and little concerned for
worldly things by using themselves to the proposal of this end and most
frequently attending to it even in their small actions of life, and by God's
immediate influence may arrive to as great or a greater degree of Virtue than
those who can spend more time even in set Prayers duly performed; much more
still if there want the due end thereof or sincerity, and fervency.

It is not seasonable for persons to set themselves to pray premeditated,
extempore or any other long Prayers when they want strength through past bodily
or intellectual toil and labor, or sickness and infirmity; for men will then
do little good by their Prayers, and also, it may be, indispose themselves to
do twenty times more afterward both by their Prayers and otherwise, whilst
they contract more Distempers and Infirmities of Body, or in general more
ineptness to do any good. Mere dullness indeed may be overcome by Resolution,
and it may be good sometimes so to do, but weakness cannot.

Nor is it seasonable when a man's mind is filled with other thoughts of lawful
or necessary business and in pursuit thereof to use a long premeditated or
extempore Prayer* The most seasonable Prayers then would be some Form and
frequent Ejaculations. There are also a multitude of other actions whereby at
certain times we may do more good, of which in the sum there will be greater
good effect than if we prayed at those times* as Reading, Meditation, Study or
Conversation any ways to inform our selves with the most useful knowledge of
God, his Nature and Providence, of the Revelation of his Will by Christ or our
Christian Religion, of our selves, of Humane Nature, what men are, what they
should be, how they come to be so bad or ignorant or erroneous, how they might
come to be better or wiser. One good effect of which knowledge is to make us
more able and fit to pray as we ought, and according to those very directions
that I have and shall give, that we may pray things just, true, important, the
most general good things, and the greatest variety of particular ones; that our
minds may be well furnished with these things; that we may pray sincerely,
fervently, as frequently as we can, and seasonably; that we may well express
and convey both our sense and affections to others with whom we pray. And
indeed one Reason why this Duty has been of late so ill, so uselesly,
offensively and mischievously performed, and so may likewise hereafter again
is, because some men have been perpetually praying, and spent so much time in
the performance of this Duty, but little or none in the reflection upon it, or
examination of it, according to such Rules as I now propose; and much less in
the study and consideration of those things and others just now mentioned.

There are times likewise of doing more good by relieving the indigent and
deserving persons with what they most want, of visiting the sick, of
instructing, reproving, exhorting, reconciling and determining of differences,
of any ways helping or assisting another in any of his affairs. A Thousand
other ways there are of doing good which have also their times, that is, they
are then in such circumstances the best we can do, or we can do the most good
thereby. Now if when we should be doing these things we should betake our
selves to praying it would be unseasonable. Moreover, in order to the getting
or preserving or increasing our power or ability to do good either to our
selves or others, and consequently to serve God; more particularly in order to
the obtaining preserving or augmenting the good things of Food, Raiment,
Habitation, Rest, and consequently Health and Strength, Liberty, (not being a
Servant to others by Debts, Engagements) Good-name, Authority, opportunity and
leisure of gaining Instruction and Knowledge and Virtue by Reading, Meditation,
Conference, finally Riches, by which all these things are wholly obtained, or
in part; I say, in order to this, every person has some Calling, some Action
of Life or other to which he mostwhat applies himself, and the former good
things are the reward or some way the effect of his diligence and honesty
therein. In this it is the greatest part of men's lives are taken up. How much
of a man's life is to be spent therein, and when it will do most good to employ
himself there and when elsewhere, every man's own sincere prudence (as it must
in all the other actions before recited) governed by reason, experience, advice
of the most sober, discreet, wise and virtuous men must only determine. This in
general is certain, that it is not of best effect for men to fill up all their
Lives with the affairs of their Calling, and to leave no room for the
Worshipping of God by praying to him, and then either think really or pretend
there is no season at all: and yet we may also be too mindless of them. For
Example, It would be unseasonable to set apart a day of praying, and it may be
for a good Harvest among other things, when we should be reaping; to be
standing still and praying for deliverance from a danger when we should be
flying from it. We are not to be praying with let and long Prayers (Ejaculatory
may always be used) for any good thing, or prevention or removal of any evil,
when we should be endeavoring, not desiring when we should be doing. We are
not to be like the man, who seeing a house falling upon his head falls upon his
knees and cries out God help him and deliver him, but will not stir out of the
place. There is indeed but little danger hereof in temporal and sensible good
things, but in spiritual, I doubt, it is frequent, where men perhaps pray much
and often to God to be sanctified, to be secured from God's wrath or the
effects of his anger, but take no care and use no endeavor at any time to
obtain the one or prevent the other. Some of that very time, possibly, may be
better and more seasonably spent in meditating, considering, watching,
resolving, informing, inculcating things upon themselves. Most commonly this
absence of all endeavors is a sign of formality, or of want of sincerity, or
at least of fervency in our Prayers. Sometimes indeed in persons of a more
movable and changable temper there may be in their Prayers some real flashes of
strong affections without any consequent endeavor; the next minute almost
those thoughts and affections being forgotten and they being as much taken up
and affected with the variety of any other objects which succeed.

2. Our Prayers are to be seasonable as to the parts or several Ingredients.
Sometimes a greater part of a Prayer may be spent in acknowledgments; as when
our minds are dull and insensible of the Perfections and Excellencies of God,
of our entire dependence upon him, of our being perfectly at his dispose, of
our own insufficiency to be or do any the least thing for our selves without
him: then, I say, we may more particularly and largely take notice of and
acknowledge the Divine Perfections and our own Imperfections. Sometimes
Confessions of Sins and Petition for strength to amend and for forgiveness may
be most seasonably enlarged; as upon such times as prudently are appointed for
a public and solemn Repentance as it were of any number and company together.
The same may be done seasonably by persons in secret and retiredly by
themselves. Sometimes Thanksgiving may be most seasonably insisted upon, an
enumerating of the many favors and blessings of God with correspondent
affections of thanks and love therefore, producing the effects of Obedience,
Resolutions and Endeavors to please God. It may sometimes be the best to spend
most of the time in Petition, to do it very particularly, yet in things of
concernment, and which we most want.

3. Our Prayers are to be seasonable as to the particular Instances of these
parts or Ingredients. Thus sometimes it may be seasonable in acknowledgment
most to insist upon God's Power or Wisdom or Goodness, or some single Instances
of any of these his Attributes: to mention others may be impertinent or
unseasonable, it may exclude those things which would do more good. Of this we
cannot want Instances in the several occasions of addresses to God both in
public forms and private usages of our lives, where notwithstanding they are
often too generally or improperly used. To give thanks and petition very
particularly and copiously for many things, when the occasion is special for
one thing (as at meat) is most-what unseasonable: but to do i^ for the benefit
then received is seasonable. To confess some Sins with those who are not guilty
of them is unseasonable; or if they be, to do it too particularly, and when it
would be interpreted to proceed from Pride or Envy, then to mention such things
would be unseasonable. To confess those Sins which the person and company have
been truly most guilty of, which are ^he most frequently committed, and yet it
may be the most unobserved by them, and they are the most insensible of them
may be seasonable. To pray for what we do not want is unseasonable. As to pray
to God to deliver us from our great Enemies, and save us, when we have none we
know to invade us, and therefore to imitate those which have. To pray for those
things which we cannot use well now if we had them, and to neglect those things
which we do most want, and which in our circumstances we could best use would
be unseasonable: but contrariwise in the place of such Petitions always to pray
for those things we want and can then best use is to petition seasonably. In
general it is certain some things are to be prayed for at one time, and some at
another, some in one company private or public, and some in another. The
variety is infinite, every man's prudence must determine. He will be better
provided so to do if he do but attend to and remember, that he is to do every
thing when it may do most good, and more than any other thing he could at that
time do in its place.

4. Let our Prayers be seasonable as to some Adjuncts of Prayer, such as
vehemence or intenseness and length, etc. As for Example, Let not our desires
(and so any other Ingredient of our Prayers) be so vehement and intense in
things of small importance and use as in great, for so we shall make no
difference. In length let us not be long when other Actions and Company are
designed, and expect us after a very little time, of which it is easy to give
instances.

Finally, This seasonableness in all these respects and many more, is left to
the prudence of every particular person to be directed by his own reason,
experience and observation, the example and advice of discreet and good
persons. In this and all other actions if a man does as he judges he ought to
do, and his end be always sincerely to do the best he understands, and he
desires to do the most good and be the most serviceable to God, he never sins:
and such a person is always ready to be advised and informed for the best. It
is manifest too, what need there is of Prudence as in all our Actions, so in
this more especially of Prayer, that it in all the respects mentioned may be
seasonably performed; and that sometimes it may not be so unseasonably, as to
do more hurt than good by excluding something better out of its place.

5. We Christians who know and believe what Jesus Christ is and has taught
must always make our Petitions in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that is, for his
sake, to honor him, and consequently the eminent and illustrious merits of his
exact obedience to God and of his spotless and generous Virtue and Holiness for
our encouragement to our imitation. That seems to be part of the sense of those
Expressions of our Savior, John 14. 13. 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
Name, that I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son: If ye ask
any thing in my Name I will do it. And indeed it is highly reasonable, that
since we have all been more or less sinners, the punishment for our sins (which
is at least the deprivation of God's favor) upon our true repentance should be
remitted, and consequently all the positive instances of God's favor and
good will (of which the granting our Petitions is a very comprehensive one)
should be afforded us for the sake and honor of such a perfectly holy and
virtuous person as Jesus was. That which easily might be made appear more
distinctly if it were here necessary or proper. And so much may suffice at
present for the due Qualifications of our Actions or Operations of Soul in
Prayer.

SECT. IX.
I Proceed to the due Qualifications of the Signs to be used in our Prayers,
the Signs both of the Sense or Objects in our Prayers, and of the Actions or
Operations of our Souls conversant about them. These as has been before said
are either Speech or Gestures. Among Gestures are to be reckoned all other
qualities of our Speech besides the articulateness of it, called Words, by
which our Conceptions or Thoughts are signified: such as are acuteness and
gravity, intensness and remissness or loudness and lowness, swiftness and
slowness, equality and inequality, etc.

To observe some Directions concerning these, especially concerning Speech, may
not be altogether useless to those who compose Prayers whether written or
pronounced for others. But because it concerns many such who may be better able
to direct themselves, I shall be very brief in them. Those which I shall
mention at present shall be these Eight.

(1.) The first and most general one, is that the signs both of our Sense and
Operations of Soul, of what we say and what we do in Prayer may the best convey
the things designed to be signified to the Auditors, or Readers if they be
written: that they may cause them the most perfectly to conceive and understand
our thoughts, passions, and other operations of our minds. This is the only use
of Signs, and all their goodness consists in this.

SECT. X.
(2.) ANd more particularly as a means to this general End, let these Signs,
viz. Speech and Gesture be such as do not take off the mind either of him who
recites or composes the Prayer, or of others who join with him from the things
signified. Which they may do two ways. (1.) By too much pleasing absolutely in
themselves, or by some other qualities in them besides their aptness to
signify, as by their novelty, modishness, variety, etc. these full often may
make greater impressions upon us than the things signified. Such oft-times are
words and phrases of the newest fashion, and used by persons whose acquaintance
or converse is esteemed honorable; such are styles with a very careful
justness of number, sound, position of syllables and words in each sentence or
period; such are many figurative speeches: where partly the things themselves
from whence they are taken, as that they are sublime, vast, unwonted, strange,
difficult; partly the qualities in the composer of which they are signs, as of
good invention, perception and judgment, having read the best Authors, etc. may
so much affect men with admiration, esteem or delight as to intercept and
detain their attention from the thing first designed to be signified and to
cause them to be little or nothing regarded. And accordingly it may be often
observed, that in a Sermon or Prayer the Language and Expression is remembered
and commended; when the Sense or Matter, especially if it be practical, is
quite forgotten as a thing not worthy to be taken notice of. It is true, all
the acceptable qualities and ornaments of Speech are laudable in a performance
where it is designed to entertain and please men with them. For it argues a
good Judgment of the fitness of the means for the end, as in Poetry Orations
and feigned Histories: but they are very sparingly at least to be used in those
Exercises whose end is quite another thing, viz. the conveyance of Divine
Thoughts and Affections. This fault is committed commonly by persons who are
either imprudent or vain, either those who are not advised of the end of such
religious Dutys as Prayer, or if they be they cannot restrain themselves from
using whatsoever they esteem themselves for, and think they shall please others
with.

But (2.) on the other hand these Signs may take off our minds from the things
signified by offending and displeasing. Such are in general all such as
signify together with the thing to be conveyed some considerable imperfection
in him that conveys, which also are called indecent. More particularly, such
are affected Words and Gestures, too vulgar and slovenly Similitudes from Shops
and Trades and Childrens Affairs, Words used ill by the ruder and meaner sort
of people, some sorts of Tones and Flexions of Voice. These things signify
vanity and ostentation, a meanness of mind, one much conversant about and
affected with mean things and yet not discerning it, rudeness, incivility,
sometimes something bordering upon sensuality, pusillanimity, superstition, or
too great fear of little things, want of wisdom and generosity. All which and
such like displease, offend, raise contempt or pity in the Auditors of most
understanding. If at any time our prudence should judge it necessary to use
something like such Expressions to some persons, it should be so done as to
signify withal our condescension, and our prudential choice of them by reason
of the imperfection of the persons who occasion it.

SECT. XI.
(3.) LEt the signs of our Conceptions, Affections, etc. viz. Speech and
Gesture be such as may rather somewhat please and invite the mind to attend to
them and consequently much more to the things signified. Such are Words and
Phrases which are the most proper, that is, which are used to signify any one
thing and no other: such also are Metaphors or Similitudes where the terms are
very like, and which are very well known and understood. By these men conceive
distinctly, clearly, easily what we would convey to them: all which please the
mind and consequently cause it longer to employ it self thus, and more to
attend. Such, lastly, is that commonly called plain speech; that is, that which
very perfectly conveys and signifies the things to be signified, which is the
principal and substantial use of speech, without any or with very few and those
the most ordinary ornaments thereof; such therefore which has nothing which
does offend or is unacceptable, but yet has very little besides the
substantial and chief use of speech to please or delight. This language is
commonly used by plain men, that is, those who use Language as they do Clothes
principally for warmth and convenience, following the fashion and using the
modish Ornaments thereof only so far as not to offend or to render* their
company acceptable, but rather to be somewhat agreeable. All which is a sign of
discretion and good government, that one knows what is of great and what is of
some though but of little good effect, and accordingly prizes and esteems it.
Which very thing again begets a good opinion of the speaker or composer and
consequently much disposes to attend to and approve what he shall deliver.

In the number of pleasing and acceptable signs in a Prayer pronounced, are
good deportment and gesture: amongst which may be truly reckoned all properties
of speech besides its articulation, as is before said: such as vehemence and
softness or elevation and depression, quickness and slowness, equality and
inequality, the positions or sites of these called accent and tone. All which
if they seem to be natural and not affected or counterfeited may be signs of
some worthy and useful quality in us, such as seriousness, gravity, sincere and
earnest desire to do good, of some degree of wisdom or goodness, etc. These are
to be used at the same time with our speech or signs of our conceptions, and to
accompany them to cause persons to attend thereto in such manner as is
aforesaid.

SECT. XII.
IV. THe signs of the conceptions and operations of our Souls, viz. Speech and
gesture ought to be the most universal: that is to all our Auditors and Readers
as much as may be. Let them be such therefore as are used by the generality of
them and most frequently. It is best to use the most common and received words
among them to signify our meaning by: And if we can find none, (as often we
shall not when our conceptions are and ought to be more distinct) we must come
the nearest we can and take those which are most related to some other that are
used. If an Auditory be mixed (as all are more or less and much more the number
of Readers) and one kind of words may signify better to some persons, and
others again better to others, the^ varriety of them more or less is most
convenient to be used. There are also other prudent reasons of variety of
expressions sometimes: As because one and the same person may not understand
another entire sense by any one phrase but only one part of it; but by more he
may understand the whole. So also one may understand another entire sense by
one phrase but obscurely; but by another added thereto more clearly.
Accordingly we see men practice in ordinary conversation, that where they have
a mind to have themselves well understood, and suspect one or more persons do
not understand them they use variety of speech and gesture too.

Another reason of variety may be its usefulness for attention and memory and
affection. A man oftener and longer attends to the same thing signified by two
or three expressions than by one: and then more attention makes a greater
impression, and the thing is better remembered. A thing expressed by one word or
phrase only, another immediarely succeeding, is oft-times quite missed or so
slightly attended to that it is not at all remembered. Whence most of the things
so delivered do but little good. This is also a reason of repetition of the
same words or phrases.

Against this rule do they offend who choose words and phrases unknown to all or
the greatest part of an Auditory when there are other well known to them which
might have been taken. Such are words newly made out of a Foreign Language when
there are as good in our own; or those which are indeed in our own Language,
but are not used at all by our present Auditors, but by another sort of persons
only as Scholars or Courtiers suppose.

The like may be in gestures or signs of our affections, etc. we may use those
in a mechanic or rustic Auditory which only signify to those of scholastic
or gentile conversation.

Calmness and equableness of speech and gesture (for Example) would signify to
these last sort of persons serious and long attention to, steady and constant
affection for what one says; but men of more active tempers, which are far the
greatest number, will hardly believe him that uses it to be at all in earnest,
to mind and be affected much with what he says they will think him dull;
because always when they themselves or those with whom they have generally
conversed have been seriously and much concerned for any thing, they have
accustomed themselves to be loud and unequal in their speech, and quick,
fierce, multifarious in their gestures. In such case it may be advisable to use
in part only those gestures which those men do and that with some marks of
condescension, whereby a man may convey his sense and affections to them, and
ye^ not confirm them in their bad usage, but rather admonish them of their
imperfection. For indeed they are not only signs but causes too of strong and
ungovernable passions most commonly for little things, and consequently of rash
and blind actions. Rude and vulgar speech and carriage are commonly the causes
of rude and vulgar manners.

But there is no greater breach of this direction than to make Prayers in a
Foreign Tongue. For here the words are so far from being signs of conceptions
to all the Auditory, that they are signs to none at all, perhaps. And this is
the foul fault of that Church which pretends to so much wisdom and care in all
her Constitutions, when hardly any thing can argue a greater folly and tyranny.

Of this they have heard enough: though their pride and other self-interests
will never suffer them to acknowledge or amend any thing though never so
foolish and mischievous which others shall admonish and advise them of. Nay,
these men do not only appoint those who pray with others to use such a Language
which the Auditors do not understand, but also private persons to pray Pater
Noster's, Ave Maria's and Gloria Patri's (a judicious Prayer indeed, for they
use it for Petition too) when sometimes they understand not one Sentence of
what they say.

SECT. XIII.
(5.) LEt the signs of all the operations and actions of our Soul, particularly
of our affections be the most natural. Such which are conjoined in men
generally with the things signified even without their wills or endeavors,
nay, they are not disjoined without some difficulty. These signs more certainly
convey to others not only the knowledge or conception of the affections which
are in us; but also the like affections, themselves: nay, sometimes they may be
the cause of and excite, maintain or increase affections in our selves. For
which reasons as well as others all instituted and appointed signs are to be
the most natural, and as little as may be purely arbitrary. These last are very
often separated from the thing signified which is called formality.

A common instance too of the unnaturalness of the signification of our
affections, etc. is that we call over-doing, i. e. too many and too great a
vehemence of gestures and words, as it seems to most Auditors. These although
sometimes in some persons that use them they may be signs natural enough to
themselves of good affections (for there are degrees in respect of time and
persons) yet by the generality of Auditors they are judged to proceed from
ostentation or mere heat of bodily temper.

And here we may be admonished that we do not use those which are very natural
signs to the generality of an Auditory hypocritically; that we do not use them
on purpose to beget in them a good opinion of us and to judge that we have such
good affections or other worthy qualities in us when we have not, nor care,
perhaps, much whether we have them at all really, so we may but seem so. We may
be further advised that they do not proceed from or are consequent upon merely
the heat, motion, agitation, temper of body. For there are some persons in whom
sighs, tears, loudness or vehemence of speech (for Example) do not proceed from
nor are conjoined with their respective passions of sadness, grief, earnest
desire toward any certain objects apprehended evil or good: but merely from
the frame and temper, or in one word, from the mechanism of their body: they
cannot tell you what it is that so affects them. In others again they are very
easy and great from every small degree of real passion in them. We may see in
their abundance of tears, deep and frequent sighs, great vehemence and variety
of speech and gesture, whence generally we may think they are brim-full of
extraordinary passions, when in truth it is not so: and either there is none of
those passions at all, or but in very mean and slight degree.

Those that affect and endeavor these natural signs of sanctity in Prayers,
and so in Preaching and all other their Conversation, without the things
signified for reputation and good opinion or any other self-interest are
Hypocrites in intention and design: The other in whom they proceed from other
causes than those they for the most part naturally signify, but without their
will or endeavor are Hypocrites only in event and effect: They both often
deceive the World: but the first more seldom and chiefly by their own fault;
the second more frequently and by others fault, viz. by reason of their
ignorance, and thinking those signs universal which are not: and oft-times they
are discovered, especially by more observing Auditors: which, when it happens,
offends much and causes them to be a verse from and not to attend to what
shall be said by such persons.

All external signs used before there is the thing signified in us are not
hypocritical; They may be prudently used on purpose to excite or increase good
thoughts and affections in us, and to prevent the ill consequence of our bad
example. As kneeling and intention of the voice may not only be signs of
reverence and affection but also the causes; they may beget, preserve and
increase them in our selves and others by our Examples. And it may be one good
effect of a set Tone in Prayers as well as in other parts of Divine Worship to
excite and signify suitable affections.

SECT. XIV.
(6.) LEt the expressions or signs of our conceptions and thoughts convey them
the most clearly in opposition to obscurity. Obscurity and confusion of
perception of a thing are not the same. A man may see with his eye remote
objects confusedly without distinction of their parts, yet strongly and
clearly; and on the contrary near objects very distinctly, but yet darkly or
obscurely. And so it is in the minds perception of objects.

Contrary to this direction generally are Tropical Speeches, as Metaphors,
Metonymies: by which names if we respect their Etymology all sigurative
speeches might be called. i. e. when a thing is signified or expressed not by a
word proper to its essential nature; but by some one which is proper to
something related to it; as its cause, effect, part, like, contrary. The use of
this tropical speech seems to me to have been one of the greatest impediments
of good knowledge in the World. I say generally not always, etc. For sometimes
a man may better know the cause, effect, or like of a thing than its essential
nature: and then it will be better to endeavor to convey the knowledge or
conception of this essential nature by a word which properly signifies to him
its cause, effect, or like, etc. and accordingly we often see that we are sain
to describe, especially an intellectual thing by its likeness, effects, etc. to
make some persons understand and conceive it. But I am slipping too far into a
Philosophical Digression. To apply this direction more usefully. It is
particularly to be observed, That many Scripture-Words and Phrases which are
figurative though often used do not convey their sense to the generality of
Auditors or Readers so clearly as proper words now in common use among us: both
because they are figurative and also because the things from whence they are
taken and other circumstances of speech are nothing near so well known to us
now as they were then to those to whom they were first spoken or written, or as
the natures of the things themselves. There are many Metaphors, Allegorys and
other figurative speeches of the Scripture, especially of the Old Testament
used ordinarily in Prayers and Sermons which people generally do not at all ^r
very obscurely and darkly understand. ^ am sure they would far more clearly
understand the sense it self designed to be signified by them if it were
expressed by the most sit words of our own Language. Of this it were easy to
give instances.

Moreover, Many things in the Scripture might have been more clearly by proper
^peeches expressed even to those to whom they were then delivered, if God had
so pleased: but it might seem good to Divine Providence for many reasons which
we have not generally, that some things should be delivered obsurely: as to
excite men's diligence and endeavor to understand them, ^ detain men's
employment about them ^nger, to give occasion for mutual forbearance and
charity in case of dissenting. Nay, one reason might be that we might have the
satisfaction of finding out and conveying the sense more clearly to others.
Wherefore when we use Scripture-Phrases which are not clear enough of
themselves (as it may be often sit for the Authority and better memory of what
we say, This Rule as well as the rest having their exceptions) it will be most
prudent for us to paraphrase or to explicate them by the speech most proper for
the things now in use with us, of which some instances are given in a following
Direction. Hereby also many confused and erroneous conceits in the sense of
Scripture would be prevented. The Holy Scripture is the most abused piece of
writing extant that I know: and that not only by the unlearned always, and
especially of late (among us, but many times by some of the learned Fathers,
Councels, Postillers. And if men should have explicated and used the Text of
Aristotle or the Terms of any Science with as little understanding as they do
the Holy Scriptures they would have exposed themselves to shame enough. But
because the Holy Scriptures are of so mighty concernment to all sorts of
persons, it is more reasonably permitted to them to be more conversant therein
though with great defects and follys: (which notwithstanding men are to prevent
and mend all they can) that so they may have the greatest benefits and
advantages of the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures with the fewest and least
inconveniences.

SECT. XV.
(7.) LEt our words and phrases the signs of our conceptions or thoughts be
distinct in opposition to ambiguity and doubtfulness. Let them not be such as
may signify in all the circumstances with which they are spoken more things
than one. Such are very many words and phrases: and it is a principal defect of
Language. I speak not concerning the confusedness complexness of our
conceptions or thoughts (one of the chief defects of knowledge yet remaining to
be remedied as much as the World can bear) but of the signs of them. If our
thoughts be complex, confused, general, (as we may out of choice prepare only
such and not too subtle and distinct according as men are more or less capable)
our words should be those which properly and distinctly signify such. Whether
our conceptions be confused ^or distinct our words should be such as properly
signify them. But of this though but ^ little is enough in this place.

SECT. XVI.
(8.) LEt not these signs and expressions be longer than are needful for the
most perfect conveyance of Thoughts or Affections, etc. As,

(1.) Not more words when one would serve; not a Sentence (by which I mean now
not a Proposition but many words) when one word may be had, and easilier too,
which may serve; a great usage of our modern style, whereby a great deal of
paper and time is spent oft-times to little or no purpose.

(2.) Not many different words or sentences for the same thing, except for some
such reasons as have and may be mentioned: as because of the variety of
Auditors, or to detain their attention longer, or for memory, or to signify
affection, or on purpose to obscure a thing, or for any other reason which
prudence may think fit. The multitude of ideas of words and sentences confound,
divert or blunt the perception and attention of the mind to the conception of
the things signified.

(3.) Not more of the same words or sentences for the same thing, or not the
same repeated, called Tautology, when a man says the same thing in the same
words. This does in common use admit of frequent Exceptions. For it is better
to use this Tautology than not, when the thing that is to be conveyed is very
excellent, of great good use, and very necessary; for which there is and ought
to be in the conveyer very great and somewhat lasting Affections or Passions:
and consequently his Attention to the thing it self is so much and strongly
detained, that he neglects the alteration or variety of words to signify it
by, as if he had not time or leisure for that. I say in such case (which in
Prayer is and ought to be a frequent thing) Tautology or repeating the same
words for the same things is and ought to be used, and is a natural sign of
real and strong affections for excellent things, and particularly for that
thing where it was used. And thus we see it on purpose used in some set Forms.
But contrariwise, it is not allowable when it is used in mean and and smaller
things compared with others in Prayer, and to which not so great and lasting an
Affection is to be given. For the time might have been better spent in
attention to other things which might have succeeded. It is not allowable
merely to gain time or lengthen our Prayers to no better purpose than that it
might be said we prayed so long.

An Example of this Tautology is that frequent needless repetition of the same
Appellation of God or the like in Prayer commonly taken notice of: The first
fault of which is in the thoughts or conception, and proceeds from ignorance,
slowness and dullness, or carelessness, and consequently scarcity of Invention
or Memory. For want of something to succeed a man repeats the same thing till
something else do come: And then for the same want of invention in words too,
he repeats the same thing expressed by the same words. This Tautology as it
spends time needlessly, so it offends also the Auditors, and disposes them at
least not to mind or attend to any thing the speaker says; either because they
judge it probable he will say nothing considerable; or that they might as it
were punish him for, or discourage or disapprove such ignorance, dullness,
slowness or carelessness and negligence.

That advisement of our Savior's to his Disciples, that they should not in
their Prayers use vain Repetitions as the Heathens did, because they thought
they should be heard for their much speaking (Matthew. 6. Verse 7.) as it may in
general forbid all needless and unprofitable use of things or words in Prayer;
so more particularly, as one Example or Instance of that general, to use, as
the Heathens did, multitude of things and words (whether various or the same,
whether properly Tautology or not) out of an opinion that that should be the
cause of their being heard, or should procure them audience. And that either
because they thought their Gods might not presently hear them, but might be
employed about some other affair so as that they could not either know they
prayed to them, or not be at leisure to attend to them if they did: or because
they thought their Gods to be Imperious, that they would be much courted, and
long waited upon, and would give their Orators some tediousness and trouble,
being ultimately pleased in such signs of superiority above and being honored
by their worshippers: (whence also they might use many Titles or Appellations
of their Gods (conjectured by a learned man to be the [(...)] much speaking,
mentioned by Christ, by which also they conceived their Gods would think
themselves more honored) or because, lastly, they thought their Gods did not
particularly know and understand all they wanted, if they propounded it only in
general, and did not particularly explicate it unto them: And so their (...)
would be a very particular and minute petitioning. This last cause seems to be
intimated from the 8th Verse subjoined as a reason why they should not use vain
repetitions (or rather vain and useless multitudes of words and things whether
the same or not) ( viz.) because their heavenly Father knew what things they
had need of before they asked him. The Heathens did not think or know certainly
so concerning their Gods, but they believed that they might have need of their
Information at least sometimes. Our Savior therefore prohibits not all long
Prayers but only superfluity in general; nor all very particular petitioning of
God, which is often extraordinary useful, but only to use it with the belief
that by this means a man might be heard, and that otherwise God might know and
understand his condition, and what in particular he wants, as the Heathens here
probably did. This and all the former directions for our speech and gesture as
has been suggested in some of them are but (...) and for the greatest part.
Now and then our general prudence whereby we direct all our actions to their
last end of serving God and doing good may see good reason to depart from them.
But this is not only to remember us that there are few, if any, Rules that have
not their Exceptions; which most men take no notice of till an Objection
obliges them.

And thus have I dispatched the first sort of Directions concerning Prayer,
viz. to suggest some considerable due Qualifications of Prayer, 1st Of the
Things, 2dly Of the Signs. Of the Things, 1st Of the Objects or Sense, 2dly Of
the Actions or Operations of Soul in Prayer.

I know very well that there are many things in these last Directions
concerning the Signs and Expressions of our Sense and Operations of Soul in
Prayer which are not peculiar thereto: but general things of good use
particularly applied, and which one may never have the opportunity of
discoursing in their due place may be allowed to be mentioned in a particular
argument. I shall only just observe before I mention the second sort of
Directions, that these Qualifications of Prayer mentioned will direct us to
some considerable conveniences and inconveniences of Prayers, whereby we may
be prepared in some measure to determine concerning several sorts of Prayers
compared, which is to be preferred, and in what respects. For Example, whether
Prayers composed by some selected out of a National Church for a whole Nation
and for an Age or two or more, constantly or frequently to be used or Public
Forms of Prayers be best to be used in public and private; or Prayers composed
by a private person for his own constant or frequent use, or one each time he
has occasion called premeditated Prayer or Prayers left to the felicity of the
Invention, Memory, Inspiration of private persons, called Extempore Prayers. As
if it should be said that generally speaking (for all these things have
exceptions and sometimes very numerous ones) in respect of the truth, justice
and importance of the sense in Prayers, and of the best conveyance or
signification thereof Public Prayers are to be preferred: In respect of
Extensiveness in particulars and consequently variety, Premeditated Prayer: In
respect of the sincerity in the Reciter and of fervency and seasonableness,
premeditated Prayers again. A premeditated Prayer only in respect of things and
of their order, and not in respect of all the words and speech (except one word
or so as a sign to the memory for a matter which may take up many sentences to
express) which may be furnished by an habitual memory, seems to be better than
with every one premeditated word or sentence. For attending exactly to each
word and sentence and their order takes off the attention from the things, and
consequently our suitable affections even in composing the Prayer, but in
reciting it by heart much more. The care or attention to those particular
expressions that they may come to memory and in such an order, cause a man less
to attend to and be affected with the things they signify. But then this
habitual memory of Language must be gained by more or less use and excer^ise.
If this be not, for want of parts or time or diligence, it is better men should
premeditate every word, and keep themselves thereto, than hesitate, falter,
express themselves improperly, rudely, slovenly, childishly, or otherwise
unfitly. But for Extempore Prayer in any length (I mean not short Ejaculatory
Prayers) the Inconveniences in it are so much greater and the Conveniences so
much less than in Forms or Premeditated Prayers, that I do not see it is any
where to be used where the other can* as I have before said. Nor is it to be
permitted to all even when there is no opportunity of using a Form or
Premeditation* but only to persons who have been and are of great consideration
and judgment concerning such things as are to be the matter of our Prayers, and
have well exercised themselves therein, and consequently are of copious and
quick Invention, and Memory of true, just, useful things, and of convenient
Speech to signify o^ express them.

All Conveniences considered, possibly a mixture of Public and Private Forms*
and of Premeditated Prayers may be best, whereby the Inconveniences in all may
be corrected or remedied by each other, and the peculiar Conveniences of all
obtained, especially if there be some discreet and pious Superiors frequently
to take an account of, to hear and direct those who may be less sufficient when
they perform this Duty in public.

SECT. XVII.
II. I Am now to propound some of the Second sort of Directions, viz. How to
obtain these due Qualifications of Prayer of which I have been discoursing, and
they be these six or seven among others.

(1.) Read we much and understand well the Holy Scriptures that we may apply
them truly and usefully to our own Cases. The least useful to this end (though
there are many other excellent uses) are those Parts which are Controversial or
Historical, except those which deliver the Actions, but especially the Speeches
of Holy Persons, such as our Savior's Discourses, amongst which are some
Prayers, as our Savior's and of some of the Apostles. The most useful are
those which are Devotional: such as the Book of Psalms, out of which there are
many truly excellent Examples of all the Parts or Ingredients of a Prayer, the
circumstances being rightly understood, of which I have still successively made
use: Also those Parts which are Preceptive which contain Instructions for our
Duty, what our Temper and Spirit, ou^ Actions and Conversations ought to be, as
the Book of Proverbs, our Savior's Discourses, many Chapters of the Epistles.
I say, these are more useful for this end than those which are controversial,
as most part of the Epistle to the Romans, and to the Corinthians, and
Galatians, etc. though out of these too, much may be had. It were to be wished,
that with the Scripture there was always some short and plain Paraphrase to be
read with it for the better understanding of its sense, and that the Sentences
thereof which are not plain might not be used ignorantly, confusedly, falsely
and erroneously. It is very well known, we may think we pray in Scripture when
we do not, we may pray with the words of Scripture, but not with the sense. As
if praying that we might not be conformed to this World, we should mean all
other Christians of different persuasions from our selves, and not the corrupt
and sinful manners of all men whatsoever which was then and is now generally
the condition of Mankind in this World. Or Confessing our very best doings are
polluted rags, we should mean the best of the best man's actions; and
particularly his sincerest and ardentest love to God that he can at that time
exert (which surely may be in one action) were a sin: and not understand it of
a Nation generally even in their religious performances, or the best of their
actions formal, hypocritical, insincere, etc. which was the sense of those
words when spoken, and therefore in such case to be used, or such like
instances. Wherefore we should be careful rightly to understand and to have the
true sense of Scripture, and not through vain imagination, rashness,
confidence, self-conceit abuse the Language thereof: And where the sense is
doubtful, and pious, holy and wise men differ, rather to abstain therefrom. We
may find elsewhere expressions enough besides for our sense and meaning.

There are abundance of Scripture-Expressions very plain and clear in their
sense, and need no Paraphrase or other words for their better understanding.
As, that we may live soberly, righteously, godly in this present world; that we
may love the Lord our God with all our heart, and our Neighbor as our selves;
that we might do God's will here on Earth as it is in Heaven; that he would
cause us to be loving without dissimulation, merciful with cheerfulness, to
abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good, to be kindly
affectioned, in honor to prefer one another, fervent in Spirit serving the
Lord (those especially whose Office it is to instruct in the Knowledge of the
Doctrine and Design of the Lord Jesus) to be rejoicing in hope, patient in
tribulation, continuing instant in Prayer (especially when in the like
condition with the persecuted Christians) given to hospitality, to bless them
that persecute, etc. as that most deliciously honest Chapter of Romans, the
12th goes on, and Romans 13. And likewise Coloss. 3. and Gall. 5. Further, that
God would give us repentance unto life, that God would give us forgiveness of
our Sins for his Name's sake, who is the Propitiation for our sins, and for the
sins of the whole world, and scores the like. But if we use any
Scripture-Phrases obscure and doubtful it is best as short and clear as may be
at the same time to Paraphrase them, or express them in our most known and
therefore plain Language, as has been before briefly advised. Thus by using
our selves to Read much and rightly understand the Scriptures, we shall furnish
our selves with good store of true, just, useful and important matter for our
Prayers, though we ought, if we can, to judge what even Scripture* matter is
most important and useful for us in particular: for there is great difference.
Moreover, Scripture Phrase thus used is such as does invite to attend to the
sense of what is said by the authority thereof, because spoken by Authors for
whom we have worthily a great veneration, and we judge at least directed and
overseen by God himself in their sense and expression. Scripture-Phrases
likewise which are plain are like to be so much the more clear and quickly
understood, as they are more common and used; which is much more than any other.

I said just now, where Scripture-Phrases are obscure, there it will be best as
shortly and as clearly as we can to Paraphrase them in other Phrases most used
and therefore best known what they signify. As for Example, if we should pray
in Scripture Language, that we might be found in Christ, that we may be in
Christ, that we may obtain Christ, etc. we may add, that we may be sincere,
firm and constant believers or Christians who may give our selves to obey the
will of God sent by the Lord Jesus Christ, by believing all the Doctrine that
he has taught, and practicing accordingly; not that we may be in a state of
favor with God for Christ's sake; or that by his effectual procurement God
would pardon our Sins, acquit us from Punishment: which though it be very true
and to be prayed for, yet it is not the sense of those Expressions. The sense
of the Churches of Judea which were in Christ. Galat. 1. Verse 22. And salute
Andronicus and Junia, etc. which were in Christ before me. Romans 16. 7. is;
those that were Christians. So also if we pray that Christ may be in us, that
he may dwell in us, that we may put on Christ or the Lord Jesus, add we by way
of Paraphrase and more known Expressions, that we may firmly believe Jesus to
be the Holy One of God, and his Holy Doctrine to be true, that our selves may
be deeply and constantly endued with those most excellent qualities of such
Knowledge and Holiness, Wisdom and Goodness, which are the proper Effects of or
according to the Doctrine and Example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
which is the sense of Galat. 3. Verse 27. As many as have been baptized into
Christ have put on Christ, that is, at least have believed his Doctrine: And of
Romans 13. Verse 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus. Hereby also, besides the
Sentences, the true sense of those Sentences of Scripture may be conveyed at
the same time, which was mostwhat well enough known to whom it was written, but
is not yet among us, as it seems.

So also when we make our Acknowledgments of the Divine Attributes in
Scripture. Sentences in Prayer, let us choose rather such as are most plain,
and therefore most proper, or as little figurative as may be. As, Thou that
know the hearts of all men, (Acts 2.) the searcher of hearts and tryer of
reins. Thou art God which have made Heaven and Earth, etc. (Acts 4.) Great is
the Lord and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable. That the
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him. That the Lord is gracious, full of
compassion, slow to anger and of great mercy, good to all, and his tender
mercies over all his works. Psalm 145. That he is our heavenly Father, the only
true God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

When we use those Expressions that are spoken of God A (...) after the
likeness of men it may be best to add at least sometimes some proper word or
phrase for explication and prevention of mistake, especially in vulgar
apprehension. For Example, if we should say Thy Throne, O Lord, is in Heaven,
thy eyes behold, thy eyelids try the children of men. Psalm 11. Verse 4. it
may follow, In Heaven are the most excellent manifestations of thy presence, of
thy greatness and goodness: yet thou most exactly know all things here upon
Earth and whatsoever is in man. If we should say, Thou, Lord, look from
Heaven and beholdest all the sons of men, from the place of thy habitation thou
look upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth. Psalm 33. Verse 13. we may add
these or other more fit Expressions according to the Auditory; Thy Power and
Knowledge, thy Providence is extended from Heaven to Earth, that is, every
where. To thee, the effects of whose power, wisdom and goodness are the most
perfect and great in the heavenly Regions, is also perfectly known whatsoever
is here upon this Earth. When we say, God is angry with the wicked and loves
the righteous; we may add punishes the one and wills and does good to the
other. The Expressions of The Lord is full of compassion and slow to anger may
be followed with, The Lord does plentifully and frequently relieve the
miserable, distressed, afflicted, and delayeth or forbeareth to punish sinners.
It is a very true and useful Rule in Divinity, that those Expressions in
Scripture which properly signify Humane Passions applied to God they signify
only the Effects of such Passions. I do not think but that the learned and
unlearned, but especially the last often grossly enough and falsely conceive God
with Humane Passions, place and other imperfections. Besides, the frequent use
of such proper Expressions will make it more easy to conceive the true
spiritual and perfect Nature of God.

SECT. XVIII.
(2.) I Advise those who are capable thereof to Contemplation, Consideration,
Examination, that they may find out and observe particularly what may be fit
and proper matter for each of the parts of Prayer before mentioned; that they
may judge and be satisfied concerning the truth and usefulness of each thing;
when it is useful and when it is most so, or its seasonableness; that they
might also often reflect upon and observe the intention, purpose and end they
have in their Prayers, purify their hearts from all insincerity and
hypocrisy, that they may quicken and stir up in themselves those affections or
inclinations which are fit and proper according as they see the truth and
usefulness of things, upbraiding and reproaching themselves with an
unreasonable dullness and insensibleness of those things which they ought to be
and are capable of being more affected withal.

If any of us have time or ability use we it to meditate upon God, his Nature,
his Attributes, his Actions, as long and as particularly as we can, to
consider, to judge, to examine what he truly and really is and does, and
accordingly to stir up our affections and inclinations of Admiration, Honor,
Love, Desire, Fear, Faith and Hope, Obedience, Submission and Self-resignation.
In Confession, Thanksgiving and Petition, the thing is yet more easy, and in
some measure may be done by the ignorantest and weakest. For who cannot, if he
would, take some time to look back upon his life, upon what he has done in his
Youth in his riper age, when in this or that or the other place, Condition,
Calling or Employment, what was well, what was ill done by him; where he was
innocent and sincere, where not; what he has been or done the last year or
week or day? who cannot enter into account and call to mind the common
Blessings that he and others do constantly receive from God, and moreover
particularly many favors spiritual, of good Instructions, wise, pious,
wholesome Counsel and Advise, good Example from his Minister or his Friends,
Relations and Neighbors, many good suggestions and motions of Conscience that
have kept him from wickedness, or put him on to what was good; temporal ones
also of prosperity, health, deliverance, plenty or competency, or at least some
degree of Necessities of this Life? who is there that cannot reflect upon God's
goodness in forbearance, when he has reflected upon his sins, and the gracious
offers and assurances of his pardon and forgiveness for Christ's sake upon his
true repentance and inward habitual change and amendment of temper and life,
and consequently of Heaven and a happier Life after we here expire and leave
this earthly body? And so in like manner for Petition, the meanest person
surely may in a very little time learn to know much of what he would have, and
what he ought to have. If any one should give the meanest and ignorantest
person notice to let him know what he wanted and what he would have, yet
nothing but what was honest and just for him to ask, promising him withal a
full supply, I suppose one should soon have a good long Petition. And if thou
can tell a charitable and wise man what thou would have, and thou think
justly, can thou not tell God? have thou nothing to say to him or desire of
him? who cannot also somewhat consider whether what he asks of God be honest
and just, and at last refer all freely without grudging to the wisdom and
goodness of God, as humble and well conditioned Beggars should do? nay, in
spiritual things the meanest person may with some thought know much what to
ask. Is it so hard for one to take notice of what Sin or Lust he has been
guilty of the last week or day, and to what he is prone, and from what he
cannot abstain without much difficulty, or is careless whether he does or no?
Is it so hard for a person to know whether he has been guilty of or prone to
Profaneness, Neglect of God, Swearing and Forswearing, foolish, rash, false and
fraudulent Affirmations and Oaths, to Malice, Hatred, Revenge, Wrath, Pride,
Vainglory, Contention, Brawling, Reviling, Slander, Drunkenness, Lust or any
other Sensuality? When he knows it, behold matter for his Prayer. This may be
done before secret Prayer, and upon solemn occasions especially. As for others
either Sins or Wants, and consequently in Prayers with others, it is not so
easy to observe and mention them with prudence, but those who can may make use
of their Consideration here also. It is easy for any one to understand how
this Consideration and Reflection tends to the furnishing of our minds more or
less, according as we can make use of it, with matter for our Prayers, and that
very particular true, just, important; as also how it tends to make us sincere,
real and serious, more fervent, more easily frequent and seasonable in our
Prayers. And so also if we be to pray with others we may consider of our words
or speech and gesture, what are such as I have described, and what are contrary
thereto. And the more we do consider of such things, the better we are like to
use them. And the want of this is one cause why there is and has been so many
miserable defects in the due Qualifications mentioned, and in others, in the
performance of this Duty; why Prayers both alone and with others have been so
full of what is false, unjust, absurd and unreasonable for God to give, trifling
and of little use, barren and contracted, or vainly repeated, so full of
hypocrisy and insincerity, of coldness and formality, of impertinency and
unseasonableness, of ofsensive expressions and deportments, of obscurity,
superfluity and Tautology. Men have been put or have put themselves upon the
frequent performance of them by their own Invention and composing without any
consideration or other general sufficient Instruction before at any time in
their lives, much less before each particular Prayer; and some few persons who
could have performed this Duty, especially with others, pretty well themselves,
have not considered how few there have been that could do likewise. There are
two extremes in religious performances to be avoided, the one which judges
people generally to be of less ability and capacity than they are, and
accordingly allows them less liberty than ought to be: and another which
judges them to be of greater capacity, and therefore allows them too much. Of
the one the Romanists are notoriously guilty, of the second all or most of
those Sects which protest against and separate from National or more public
and large Churches: of which the reason is obvious.

SECT. XIX.
(3.) MAke use of other men's Prayers, that is, composed by them. Let us serve
our selves of others labors and pains in this kind. Do not either through
laziness, neglect, or through selfconceit, vainglory, affectation to do all
thy self, though far worse than if thou had followed or imitated another,
disdain to make use of this help and means. And this whether the Prayers thou
may make use of be pronounced only or written; whether they may be heard only
by thee, (such as are those which are recited in Public by Ministers and
Preachers, or by others whose Examples are considerable, in private;) Or they
may be read also, such as are the Public Prayers which are or may be compo^ed
by the Church, or such as are on purpose composed for Families and for Closets,
or for private and secret. These last which are to be read more especially
choose we for our use as being invented and composed with more care, attention
and choice, and therefore the more likely to have all those due Qualifications
mentioned, which written or printed things can have. Here also choose by the
advice of the most knowing persons those which are written by the most
understanding and discreet unprejudiced and impartial, pious and godly persons.
For the use of these means or helps it may be advisable to commend to most
persons these four steps according to persons abilities or leisure and time.

First, Make use altogether of some Prayers composed by others, and of variety
of them; as for Morning, for Evening, for the Lord's day before and after the
Public Worship, for the Lord's Supper before and after it, for Fasting Times,
or Times of Thanksgiving either for public or private Afflictions or Favors,
in case of Sickness or Danger, in case of Deliverance, etc. let these be thy
entire Prayers. Hereby it is most likely Persons will be far better furnished
than they can from themselves, with things that are true, just, important and
of greatest moment even to them, and with considerable variety too, with the
most general and comprehensive things: They will find here quickening and
stirring Examples of Sincerity, of Fervency: They will also be instructed with
the best Speech and Expressions both of Sense and Affections, of Things and
Operations of Soul, the most proper, usual and clear ones, and with such
profitable variety thereof as I have heretofore mentioned. Those who cannot
read (the Number of which will be every day fewer, I hope) let them get to
recite some short Prayers by Memory, first having learnt them from their
Parents or others. Such as the Lord's Prayer with the Explication of it and the
sum of the Ten Commandments in the Church-Catechism turned unto a Prayer, and
other short comprehensive Forms more or fewer according to their Ability; and
let Parents be careful to teach their Children such as these before, it may be,
they can read; and when they can read direct them to some of the best, and see
they say them. Though thou prayest thus out of a Book yet if thou prayest
because thou judge the things true, just, necessary and of great Importance
to thee, and thou prayest with a sincere Heart that thou may receive good
things from God to please and serve him withal, to do all good to others, to be
the most profitable and beneficial to the World by thy Tempor, Life and
Actions, especially in Spiritual things if thou can, to be perfect and happy
thy self here and hereafter. If thou prayest with a fervent Spirit according to
the goodness of things: thou prayest every whit as well as if thou had
invented all thy self; and possibly a hundred times better than many conceited
Persons but ignorant and vainglorious do; whose Prayers of their own composing
may be stuffed with untrue, unjust, and trifling things, and either they are
cold and formal in them or else much hypocritical or superstitious; that is,
either they have the signs of great Affections to things, when they have not
those Affections really in them at all, or not so much out of a judgment and
sense that things do deserve them, as out of vainglory. Or their great
Affections are to trifling things. Men have been apt to attempt to run and fly
too, before they could go; to attempt greater things before they could do less;
to attempt to do things before they were furnished with such Qualities, which
if they wanted they had better not do them at all, or might have done them much
better another way than that which they used. This is the first step, and may
be used for some time only, if we find our selves sufficient (and let it not be
carelessness and sluggishness that we are not) to advance further. This is no
other than what all beginners to learn do: They first read good Authors more or
less who treat concerning the Matter they would learn.

The Second Step may be for Persons to take Parts of several Prayers and to
attempt to put them together and compose them, and then commit them to Memory.
To take such things out of them which they best understand and apprehend by
Experience or otherwise; which they think most proper and useful for them for
their Temper, Employment, or Calling; which they may be most affected withal.
Thus they may begin to use and exercise their own judgment in what things are
best, and what is best for them; always with an humble and modest mind ready to
be more informed.

A Third Step may be to add and interpose something of their own Invention or
Observation, especially if there be any particular Occasion. As for Example, If
thou should find any Sin or Lust more troublesome to thee, and be more in
danger of being overcome thereby; if thou should fear any particular
approaching Evil or be under it, either thou or thy Family; If thou should be
so happy as to have overcome any Temptation, or to have received any especial
Favor; If thou should find thy self upon some special occasion very sensible
of some Attribute of God, as his Goodness, his Power, his Omniscience, his
Justice, etc. thou need not stay till thou find the Thing or the
Expression in thy Book. In order hereto therefore use thy self before thy
Prayers to reflect and consider. This which I now say principally concerns
secret Prayer, where it may be done more freely, though it be imper^ectly and
brokenly either conceived or expressed.

Fourthly and lastly, Proceed to Imitation of others as much as thou can;
that is, to consider, invent, examine, and judge the Matter or Sense of thy
Prayers thy self, what things are the most important, great, just, true, useful
for thee, and to affect thy self accordingly, and to express and signify them
well, and so to compose and make entire ones of thine own. Which may be often
varied by insisting now upon one, now upon other things, according to some
Advices I have heretofore given; that is, what things may be the most
seasonable, best apprehended, most affecting. I could heartily wish all Men's
Abilities and Employments were such, that they might do more in this kind and
imitate and exceed the best Patterns. I wish to that End they were more
spiritual in the Employment of their Thoughts and Affections, and that there
were no fault in their wills that they are not so. I wish they might make use
of what Time and Ability they have, and ought so to use. I wish they had more
of those Qualities which may fi^ them for the best Performances thereof, the
principal of which are as of all others, Charity and Humility. Finally, Would
God that all the Lord's People were Prophets, and that the Lord would put h^s
Spirit upon them.

SECT. XX.
(4.) PRay we to God sometimes, that he would help and assist us to pray as we
ought, to have more of all those due Qualifications, whereby we are fitted to
pray well. This Prayer it self supposes some already, for that once, or ^o
often as we make it, which may be often Ejaculatory. Whatever kind of Prayer we
think best and we desire to use, there may be some or other of the forenamed
Qualifications which may be prayed for. As if one should pray a Prayer composed
by another, he might pra^ that God would give him Sincerity and Fervency in
that his Prayer; that God would keep him from Vainglory, Formality, Coldness,
that he might do it in all sincerity of Heart as his Duty to God, and to make
and keep him good, and that he might be enabled and disposed both by the
Performance of the Duty it self, and by the good things he shall receive upon
his asking to serve God by doing good; That he might not only have Words in his
Tongue, and be upon his Knees or any other Posture signifying Devotion, but
that he might also well understand and mind and attend to what he says with his
Mouth, and have proportionable degrees of Affection and Motion of Soul, of
Honor, Love, Reverence, Faith, Joy, Desire, Resignation and Submission toward
Co^, of Grief for and Detestation of Sin* of Thankfulness for Benefits
received, of ardent Desires for Holiness and Virtue especially; and hearty ones
for all other good things. Nay, a man may pray for Frequency, that is, that God
would excite and dispose his Mind to pray in Secret and Private as often as he
has Opportunity, that he might not be so backward and averse therefrom, so
dull and inept thereto, and that God would give him more Opportunities, if it
should happen he should want them. I say these things a Man may pray for,
though he always prayed a Form, and he could not pray, that what he prayed
might be just, true, important, seasonable, etc. because all this was done
already, and the matter was supposed to be such or else it would not be made
use of.

But in the other Steps of Prayer if a Man finds he can or ought to ascend to
them (such as composing out of more Prayers, or out of his own Observation and
Invention) he may pray for the other Qualifications also, as that God would
excite him to use the Means forementioned of Reading, Meditating, Hearing or
otherwise to pray what was true, just, important with Sincerity, Fervency,
prudent Seasonableness, and to express and signify these things (if he be to
pray with others) most aptly and conveniently* that God would keep him from
Error and Mistake, Superstition, Dullness, Insincerity, Formality, Coldness;
That God would help his Invention, Attention, Judgment, Memory both in Things
and Words proper for Prayer; That he might more particularly know God's
Attributes, his own Sins, God's Mercies, his own Wants, etc.

When we pray for these due Qualifications of our Prayers, let us be sure that
we pray for the best of them first and most. For Example, More for the Truth,
Justice, Importance, as also for Sincerity, Fervency, and prudent
seasonableness of what we conceive in our Prayers; than for Multitude or
Variety, Celerity or Volubility. More also for Sense and Affection; than for
the signs of them, Speech and Gesture, or more for good Understanding and
Affection, than for Utterance and Eloquence. To have the aforesaid habitual
Qualifications for Prayer, is that which is called in some Men's, and in
Scripture Phrase, the Spirit of Prayer: Of which therefore we see he has the
best Part who has the best Qualifications, and he the most, who has the most.
He who prays true, just and important, solidly useful things with Sincerity,
just and due Fervency, Frequency and Seasonableness, though they are but very
few and short, has more of the Spirit of Prayer; than he that has in his
Prayers great Variety indeed of Matter and Words; but it is what is false or
uncertain, unjust, small, trivial, or with Insincerity, Vainglory formality;
or he whose Heat and Fervency is only bodily Passion raised up by Motion and
Agitation of his Body, Lungs, Organs of Speech, etc. Not to excellent useful
things because seen and perceived so, nor felt by any natural anticipatory
sense in innocent Souls, nor by the Spirit of God. Of which one certain sign is
when things are untrue, unjust, and trivial. These, I say, are signs that the
Heat, the very corporeal Affections of the Soul come not from understanding
natural Impressions or the Spirit of God, but from some other Cause and that is
usually the natural or affected Motions of the Body.

I see not but we may as well expect to have our Prayers heard in these things,
and to receive them, as in others: nay, in some of them the most of all: such
as are the Truth, Justice, Importance of our Desires, our Sincerity, and
proportionable Fervency of Spirit. We cannot make a more acceptable Prayer to
God than for such Qualifications as these; The other of Variety, Particularity
of things but especially of Words and Expressions being much less useful and
considerable, and this especially if we be private Persons and the less it is
our Office to pray with others. In the Use of these Means it is we are
principally to expect that God Almighty will by his immediate Influence, by his
Holy Spirit help us to pray well. If we set our selves to read the Scriptures
and other good Books, to consider, examine, meditate, reflect, to pray to him,
he may (though we cannot tell when or how much) suggest to and illuminate our
Understandings, and which is best of all excite holy Affections and
Inclinations. It is not likely to be just before we are going to pray, or in
Prayers, when we have been careless, but yet by either the natural Temper of
our Bodies, or by our own straining, Excitations or Endeavors, our Invention
and Memory are much better than we expected. Nor indeed seems it to be so much
matter which way God helps and assists us to pray as we ought, whether
mediately by means or immediately so it be done.

SECT. XXI.
(5.) I Add that our Prayers (for we may pray sincerely for a greater Degree or
for constancy of Sincerity it self) for all these due Qualifications may be
successful, let us be sure to be sincere hearted, desirous and ready to use all
that God shall bestow upon us to serve him by doing good: And especially in
this Case if God shall bestow upon us this Spirit and Gift of Prayer more or
less, that we be humble and modest, and that we do not think of our selves
above what we ought, not think our selves to have more than we have, nor to
neglect and take no notice of God the Giver; as if we had what we have from our
selves; That we be not vainglorious contemptuous of others, pleasing our
selves absolutely in our own Superiority to them: But that we mortify and
extinguish all such vile Appetites, Affections, and Lusts of the Flesh, or
degenerate and sinful Nature: And that we humbly acknowledge God the Author of
what we have and are, be it more or less; that we have a right and due
Estimation of it: That we remember very well like and highly approve of it,
that we and all we have is given us, not for our selves only to please our
selves; but to please God by doing good with them. These are the likely
Capacities to receive these things of God: These render us the most fit
subjects for God's Suggestions, Instructions, Illuminations, Excitation of holy
Affections for all Divine things, and indeed for all other Favors. The Meek
will he guide in Judgment, and the Meek will he teach his Way. Psalm 25. Verse
9.

SECT. XXII.
(6.) IN one word, when thou have made all thy Petitions and propounded them to
God, refer them all most freely to the Divine Will, let there be nothing that
thou have desired, but if it seem not fit to the Divine Wisdom thou retractest
it and desire it not: thou obstinately desire nothing. By this Means thou will be sure that all thy Petitions will be just. For in sum, thou desire no
more than God thinks fit, and surely all that is just. It is one of the sage
sayings in Pir. Avoth of R. Simeon, (...) make not thy Prayer fixed. I think it
will be no great harm done to the Rabbi, and agreeable enough to what there
follows, if we interpret it, that our Prayers should not be such as to fix and
prescribe certain Laws to God: but to implore his Mercy and leave all to his
wise and good Will.

SECT. XXIII.
(7.) WHich indeed should have been in the first Place being the most general,
be not content and satisfied with any Prayers. Some there are in which are many
things false, some in which are many Petitions and Desires from God very just;
and yet with a strange Boldness and Confidence, as if Men would prescribe to
God, or that they always knew certainly what he ought to do, and what he
therefore will do, in things which neither they nor any other Man can have much
certainty without Divine Revelation: nay, sometimes in things where the
contrary to what they desire seems most likely to others besides themselves to
be just, and therefore fit for God to grant. As when one Party prays for
Success in his or his Party's Cause, for Victory or Superiority; When a Man
prays that God would defend and propagate his Truth, meaning some certain
Opinion of his own which may be false and hurtful. All which generally comes
from Pride and Self-conceit. Mortals are very apt to think they oblige the
Divinity by the honor they do it by their Prayers to grant them what they
desire. The Jews at this day think and say that God cannot withstand their
Prayers. It has been said, I doubt, but too often vainly and presumptuously,
that God could not hold out against a praying People. But too well known has
been the confidence of many private persons that their Prayers should be
answered; and as well known has been their disappointment.

Many Prayers also may be stuffed with things very trivial and slight
comparatively, while the greater things are neglected: smaller sins, and other
sins may be confessed eagerly, but greater, and their own not taken notice of
or but slightly. Petitions may be made for Worldly things importunately, but
for Spiritual negligently or coldly. We may pray for Gifts or excellent
Qualities of Understanding more than for Graces or holy Dispositions of Will:
For Pardon more than for Goodness; For Privileges more than for Dutys; For
Justification more than for Sanctification: For Peace and Assurance before and
more than for Regeneration, Renewal of our Natures, Mortification of our Lusts,
Love to God for his Excellencies, Charity, Humility, Spirituality. In Prayers
also may be very much Insincerity, the things desired may be selfish, to
gratify immoderate Lusts of Revenge, Pride, Superiority, Envy, Covetousness,
Sensuality, Luxury or the like. Some Prayers (I wish I could not say most) may
be very cold, formal, mere words.

Be not, I say, very well satisfied so thou have but prayed, though it may be
very badly. Endeavor not only to pray, but pray well and as thou ought, and
therefore make use of such Means and Directions as have been prescribed.

I add here too as an useful Caution by the by, Be not content and satisfied
with thy having prayed well. If thy Prayers have been such as have proceeded
from good Qualities in thee, and tend to make thee more so too, and thou
feel thy self very much delighted with the Performance thereof, and much
disposed thereby to the Universal Practice of thy Duty; think not that thou
have been good enough at the time of thy Prayers, and may be negligent every
where else. In all thy succeeding Actions pursue thy good Disposition begun by
thy Prayers at any time, by Watchfulness and Reflection all the following day,
by frequent Checks when thou do ill, and Encouragements and Joy when thou
do well, by frequent Ejaculations and Resolutions.

And so I have done with the Fifth General Head, ( viz.) Directions concerning
Prayer.
CHAP. V.
SECT. I.
VI. THe last General Head was the Excuses or Pretenses Men usually make why
they do not Pray especially in Private or Secret, in which I shall be but
short. They are most commonly but these three: (1.) That they need not Pray.
(2.) They have not Ability to Pray. (3.) They have not Time.

The first Pretense some Men have for not praying is, that there is no need of
it, it is to no purpose, and that therefore it is a foolish thing. The Reason
of which their Opinion is either because they think there is no God at all, nor
any Being superior to themselves in Power, Wisdom and Goodness who hears them
when they do pray: or else because all future things are willed and determined
by God already, and that he is unchangeable.

As to the first of these Reasons, if it were true it would render all Prayers
and all things contained in them ridiculous indeed. But I shall return no other
Answer to these Monsters of Insolency and Dullness, but that though they hereby
call all Mankind (except one or two of themselves if there be any) Sots and
Fools in spending so considerable a part of their time: yet the World will have
better Demonstrations (and they ought to be no less against so Universal a
Testimony) than ever they have brought to prove them ^o, before they will
believe it; or before these Objectors themselves ought to believe it. Moreover,
there have been in this last Age such and so many Proofs of God's and Spirits
Existence both highly probable, and some absolutely necessary as I have upon
the longest consideration judged, that it is nothing but an obstinate Affection
of Uncontroulableness and Licentiousness in those who do or may know them, or a
pitiable dullness which must make them capable of a contrary persuasion.

As to the Second Reason, of God's predetermination of all things, It must mean
more particularly one of these two things:

First, That it is needless to set our selves to Pray, (meaning all Ingredients
of a Prayer) because it is predetermined by God whether we shall or no.

Or else, Secondly, That it is needless to Pray to God for any good thing,
(meaning by Prayer Petition only) because he has predetermined whether we
shall have the thing we pray for or no.

To the First of these it is to be answered, That there is the same reason
against all will, endeavor, action whatsoever to obtain any good thing we want:
For Example, Against the chewing and swallowing our Food that we may be
nourished. For the Argument runs thus. God has determined before we pray
whether we shall pray or not. If the first, then we shall do it without our
will or endeavor: If the second, then we shall not do it with them. In the same
manner we may argue: God has determined before we chew and swallow our Food to
nourish us, whether we shall do those actions or no. If the first, we shall do
them without our will and endeavor; if the second, we shall not though we do
will and endeavor to do them. But we do not see men in this and the like cases
abstain from their will and endeavor for such a Reason though it be suggested
to them. But they always use both, where they believe them to be the cause or
condition of their obtaining any good thing they desire.

And indeed they have the greatest reason so to do, which is a Second thing to
be answered. For (briefly and not to spend much time here in these subtilties)
since men must of necessity will and endeavor, after something or not (whether
it be or be not predetermined they shall will and endeavor or not) there being
no middle: surely it is most manifest that they are to take that part of which
there appears to them the best Effects and consequences: but it is as manifest
that there does appear better effects and consequences of willing and
endeavoring after that which is the cause or caution of any good thing, than
of omitting so to do or lying idle because God has predetermined we know not
which of the two, ( viz.) either we shall will and endeavor or not. But this is
not the ordinary sense of this Objection here, though it be in a controversy
which has filled many Volumes.

To the Second therefore, viz. That it is needless to petition God for any
thing because he has predetermined whether we shall have it or no, many things
may be replied. As,

(1.) Let it be observed, That this Objection lies only against that part of a
Prayer, which is called Petition: but not against the other, which we have
often mentioned, viz. Acknowledgment of God's Perfections with suitable
Affections, Thanksgiving, Confession, Profession and Resolution of Obedience,
Explication of our Wants. All which have many excellent uses, besides their
subserviency to Petition; as has been before particularly shown.

(2.) May be replied, That which has been just now said, viz. That the same
Argument will hold at least against the use of all means to obtain any good
which we do not see to have a necessary and inseparable connection with their
end. To repeat it very briefly. God has praedetermined, that we shall or shall
not have the thing we Petition or Pray for: If the first, we shall have it
without praying: If the second, we shall not have it with praying. In like
manner God has praedetermined we shall or shall not be nourished: If the
first, we shall be nourished without our chewing or swallowing our Food: If the
second, we shall not be nourished with them. Wherefore chewing and swallowing
our Food is a needless and superfluous thing, and consequently to be omitted.
But men neither do nor ought to infer and practice thus in this last Case, for
the reason which has been in the first sense of this Objection and for another
which shall be presently mentioned: and therefore they ought not to do it in
the first. And in very truth they are some other concealed causes which keep
men from praying when this of God's praedetermination is pretended. viz. Either
wickedness or ineptness to spiritual things, either badness or materiality of
mind, if it may be so called.

(3.) I answer, That supposing the opinion of God's absolute praedetermination
of all things and the inference too: viz. That nothing is granted us upon the
condition of our duly qualified Prayers, should seem to us more probable: yet
supposing also the contrary Opinion, viz. That God does not so predetermine all
things as not to give some good things upon the condition of our Prayers, to
appear to us of many excellent uses and effects in the World; we ought to be so
much the less averse from or more inclined to the belief of it. But supposing
both the Opinions to appear to us equally uncertain or probable, we ought, I
think, in this and every other such case to believe and accordingly practice on
that side which has apparently the best consequences or is of most good
effect. But the belief of our receiving things from God upon our due Prayers
and the consequent practice is of infinite better consequence to the World than
the belief of the contrary, and consequently the leaving quite off to pray at
all. Such are the frequent occasions of bringing God to our minds, the sense of
our entire dependence upon him; the constant remembrance of and attention to
the only condition of so great a favor from him as the granting our Petitions;
viz. Happiness, a disposed Soul to use all things to serve and please him with,
and to do all the good we can; or Piety and Charity; and therefore how dear and
acceptable to him such qualities of Soul are; whence we shall be the most
strongly engaged to adorn our Souls with them, that we may be well pleasing in
his sight and capable of all instances of his favor.

(4.) I answer, That it seems to our very short reason and imperfect
comprehension of things to be the best System of the Universe (that is, that
there is the greatest happiness as to extension, intension and duration
resulting there from) that some things should be done by God upon condition of
the certain use of our liberty or faculty of selfdetermination, and
particularly, the giving us some good things upon our applying our selves duly
to request them at his hands: and that therefore it is more probable to be so.
Of which I say no more in this place.

(5.) And lastly, To take away all cavel and satisfy all scruple and doubt to
them who believe the Holy Scripture, I answer, that it is therein expressly
affirmed, that our due Petitions are such conditions of God's giving us good
things with which sometimes at least he will, and without which he will not
give them to us. Some things he will always certainly give us upon our due
Prayers. Such as Grace and Pardon: or inward strength in some degree or other
to repent and become good, and forgiveness of our past sins when we do repent.
Other things also he will certainly give us upon the same condition of our
Prayers, though we do not know certainly (very probably we may) which nor when.
Because we cannot tell neither by Reason nor Revelation whether it be just or
consistent with the Universal Good that he should.

Nothing can be more plain than that of our Savior. Luke 11. 9, 10. I say unto
you ask and it shall be given to you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks receives, and he that
seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. And in the 8th
Verse it is taught us by similitude, that God will not sometimes give without
our importunity in asking; but with it he will. I say unto you, Though he (his
friend) will not rise and give him because he is his friend: yet because of his
importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs. St. James tells
the Christians, to whom he wrote, that they did fight and war, (i. e. probably
they used violent endeavors and that by contention and strife to obtain things)
and yet had not, because they did not ask. Nay, they asked and received not
because they asked amiss. James 4. Ver. 2, 3.

This fully answers the Objection by denying the Consequence of the Argument.
For it does not follow, that because God has praedetermined that we shall have
any thing, therefore we shall have it without our Prayer: but on the contrary
it is most certain from these and other places of the Holy Scripture, as it is
highly probable by reason; that whether God has or has not praedetermined we
shall have some things; he has determined that with our Prayer we shall, and
without our Prayer we shall not have them. It is certain, that he has
determined the connection of our having and praying whenever they are: whether
he has determined our having and our praying or not.

But we shall make use of this Answer further, to prove that it is a perfection
in us or a good use of our selves to pray or desire things from God. For if we
do at all will any action or omission of any action, to do this or that or not
to do it, whether this our willing be praedetermined or not; it is most
certainly the perfection or best use thereof (as has been before intimated) to
will that of which there appears to us the best consequences and effects: but
it is as certain from the Scripture and Reason too that there are better
consequences of willing to pray and of praying or desiring things from God,
than of omitting or neglecting it: and particularly besides those many other
excellent ones a little before mentioned, the receiving of many good things for
our selves and some the best we are capable of. Better consequences than these
I am sure the neglect or omission of petitioning God cannot so much as pretend
to. Nay, hence also it further still follows, that if we have any liberty or
faculty of self-determination it is not only our perfection to pray, but also
our obligation (such is my sense of that word.) For certainly we are bound to
will and choose that which is our perfection, if we do not see it inconsistent
with a greater good, as surely we do not see this to be. And thus much for the
First Pretense.

SECT. II.
(2.) A Second Pretense men make use of, is want of Ability to Pray. Alas! they
for their part are very ignorant of and not able to discern the truth, just^ce,
importance of the matter of their Prayers; they know very little; they are
ignorant of the Nature and Attributes of God; they know or can remember very
little of their own hearts and actions, what are and what are not sins, and of
what they have been or are guilty. And as little still are they able to know
and call to mind the particular Favors and Benefits they have received, or the
things they want or should desire, especially spiritual ones. They want
Prudence to attend to what is seasonable. Moreover, they are dull and heavy and
inept to apprehend, attend to, be affected with such things. Finally, they want
Understanding, Memory, Judgment, Affection for God, their Sins, their Mercies,
their Wants; and most of all do they want Invention and Memory for fit Words
and Speech. Alas, how should they know to express themselves well? Sometimes
they have good things in their mind but they cannot speak them. To this Effect
is their Second Excuse. To which I Answer:

(1.) All this, except that of want of Apprehension and Affection is no just
Excuse for not joining with others in Prayers either in Public or Private; it
is no Excuse for not being at Prayers and coming to them. For there, most-what
both things true, just and useful very particularly sometimes, and Words too
are invented to our Hands. And as for our apprehending, conceiving and being
affected with such things as our Prayers should contain; many things we can in
some measure apprehend and are affected withal in general, as God's Power, his
Omnipresence, his Universal Goodness, his Mercy, his Justice, our own Temporal
Wants and Mercies at least, some very gross and palpable Sins. Begin we here
and mind we these things first. And then as for other more particular and more
spiritual things, we must and may apply our Minds, excite and stir up our
Affections to them. The oftener we do this the better we shall do it, let us
begin and try and use our selves to it a while. How many who make this Excuse
of Non-Ability, are unwilling and backward so much as to join with others in
praying either in Public or Private? A sign they have no Mind or Inclination
to it, they care not for their Duty, and they are willing to be and do so
still, and indulge themselves in it. Let Persons but use themselves to come and
be present at Prayers, they will find in time some good or other of it; they will
sometime or other apprehend something, sometime or other their Affections may
be touched, and they may begin to find something which may please there.
Howsoever they will not be so averse thereform, it will not be so tedious to
them. This especially if People live pretty sober Lives, and they are not
addicted to things which they know to be materially evil and naught; but their
chief Fault has been, they have not minded their due End in their Actions so
much as they might have done.

(2.) All this Non-Ability except again that of Ineptness to apprehend and to
be affected with Spiritual things, or the Matter of our Prayers (which is to be
remedied as aforesaid) is no reasonable Excuse for our not using others Prayers
or Forms, either in the Scripture as the Lord's Prayer, or composed by
judicious and pious persons. For here again are good Matter and Words ready for
us, and cannot we read or repeat these with Understanding and hearty
Affections; or learn them and repeat them by heart, whether we can or cannot
read? The meanest and ignorantest and those who cannot read (who, I hope, will
be every day fewer) can learn some such Prayers without Book, shorter or
longer, fewer or more, such as the Lord's Prayer and other Prayers: none has
so bad a Memory as to do nothing in this kind. And that all may have the less
Excuse let Parents and those who Educate Children teach them some such Prayers
as soon as may be. That Persons may begin as soon as they are capable of
understanding things to take notice of God their Creator and Sustainer from
whom they have every thing.

(3.) I have propounded some Means already which Men are able to make use of,
and by the Use of which Men may either be present at and join with others
Prayers, or read and repeat judicious and devout Forms of Prayers with
Understanding and Affection in some degree or other; and they may still further
advance (some at least) to compose Prayers of their own out of others Prayers,
or their own Inventions and Observations, or both together. Can we not read nor
hear read the Holy Scripture and understand the plain places, and some of us
the obscure by others Explication? Can we not read other good Religious Books
or hear them read? can we not sometimes retire, meditate, reflect, think of God
and our selves what we are, what we would be, what we should be, what we shall
be? Can we not read, observe, commit to Memory the Patterns of other wise and
good Christians whether spoken or written? Can we not pray to God to help and
assist us to obtain one or more of the Qualifications of good Prayers,
especially Sincerity and Fervency? I say, cannot Persons use these Means? I
think they can: All of them some or other more or less. I know there are many
Degrees in these things, some Men can make use of more of these Means, and more
frequently; All Men have not the like Ability or Opportunity: but all have
some. And I do not think but the most busy, dull, ignorant and inept Persons
may use more Means to be better than they are. No Men that are imperfect and
bad do all they can to become better: Not so much as the Beggar who goes from
Door to Door, or sits upon the Dunghill, or waits upon Swine and Beasts. And
this is that which will be laid to their Charge be sure, whatever else will,
and which will condemn them.

SECT. III.
(3.) A Third Excuse is, that they want Time, they have not Time. If by not
having Time Men mean that they do always employ themselves in something or
other besides their Prayers, I believe it is true; for no Man can be perfectly
idle so as to do or think nothing: But if they mean they cannot have Time, this
I deny, I think there is no Man so occupied and employed, who cannot get some
Time more or less, and I confine not all Men to any certain Frequency or
Length: Nay, I think few Men but may get some Time daily without hindrance or
let to their other just Affairs; but it would rather prove a help. It is
manifest by Experience, that there are few Men's Lives in which there are not
thousands of trifling unprofitable and sinful and mischievous Actions. How much
Time passes away by Men with their Hands in their Pockets, they do not know
what to do, they are fain to cast about and invent something to spend their
Time in, or they are prepared to take what is next, and that is usually none of
the best? How many Hours are spent in unprofitable sinful Chat and Talk, in
Swearing by God and Cursing others; and yet they cannot have Time to pray to
God, and pray for themselves and others? How much Time superfluous do Men spend
in Plays, Games, and Exercises, in Drinking and turning down superfluous and
intoxicating Cups; and yet some few Minutes cannot be gotten to pray neither in
Public, Private nor Secret? For public Prayers and other parts of the Worship
of God, reading and explaining his Word and Doctrine, How many sit at Home and
sleep or do any trifling Action, or choose something to do on purpose on that
Time, which they might as well or better do at another, or wander about idly?

Besides, on the Lord's day are not all other Occupations, at least the most
unnecessary, by Law and Consent laid aside on purpose that Men might have Time?
they have it then for private and secret Devotion as well as for public; and
yet we see most Men will not take it. What reason then have we to think that
Men cannot find Time on other days, when we see they will not make use of it
when it is put into their hands? Nor do I think that Men generally are so
toiled or tired or dull with their week's Work, but that they might take some
Time on that day.

Further, If thy Employments should be more innocent, useful or p^^fitable, and
should fill up all thy Time (which I do not think but that some days at least
there is leisure) make some room for thy Prayers, get some Time. By what right
have those things all thy Time, and thy Prayers none at all? Sure I am thy
Prayers deserve it as well as most other of thy most useful Affairs, and are as
good and necessary even to thee; but why then should they alone be excluded
from some share of thy Time, and all other Things have theirs? why should they
not have so much as a few Minutes in a day? For some Sport or Game or
Divertisement even daily thou would make Time in thy most profitable and
useful Affairs: Thou would begin them sooner, or defer them longer, or end
them later, or dispatch them quicker; why not then for thy Prayers? which sure
are sometimes at least as good as thy Divertisements. Time! we cannot get Time!
can we have Time to think and talk of our Neighbor's good Qualities (and it is
well if we did it oftener) t^ instance in, to praise and magnify the worthy
Endowments and Deeds of any virtuous, discreet and beneficent Person, and how
much we and the Town or the Country or the Public is beholding to him; and yet
we cannot have Time to acknowledge God's Power, Wisdom and Goodness of which
our Lives and all the Universe are full, and every thing thou or others are or
do is in him and by him? Time! have we not Time to thank God for his numberless
and incomparable past Favors, present Blessings and future Hopes, for which we
need not stir over our Thresholds; and yet can get it to make civil Visits on
purpose to thank Persons for any considerable Instances of their Kindness?
(though Men are not apt to be over grateful here neither.) Time! why should we
have Time to enjoy and make use of all other God's Favors, and not of this,
which is the greatest of all from whence springs the most sweet satisfying
Pleasure, ( viz.) our Capacity of attending to, honoring, trusting in,
depending upon, loving God, offering, professing, resolving our Love, Service
and Obedience to him. If we be under any Affliction, and our Soul bowed down
with Grief, or in any Perplexity or difficult Affair, we can find Time to
unbosome our selves to a Friend to crave their Counsel, their Comfort, their
Assistance any other way; and we cannot forsooth have Time to do this same
thing to God the best Friend we have in the World, who would by making us good
make us capable of receiving and then most freely give us all other good things.

Oh foolish and ungrateful Creatures! all this Excuse of want of Time is but
pretended, and is indeed a sign of sottish Ignorance of our own good, and of
the badness of our own Hearts and Lives. We know not our own Happiness, and are
perfectly loath to think of God, and of such things as should be in our Prayers,
lest we should be engaged to be good, and have our Minds and Affections taken
off from worldly things to be set upon better and then pretend we have no Time.

The more plain Truth is, we Would have no Time, and are glad we can order it
so as to have none, at least we are very well content; and then we complain and
excuse it thus. But let us not endeavor to deceive others and our selves, it
is better to confess the Truth, that we have no Mind nor Will, and then we
shall be somewhat nearer mending the Fault.

And now it remains only that all persons be earnestly exhorted to the
performance of this Duty so acceptable to God, so beneficial to others, so
profitable and comfortable to our selves, which will render us wiser, better,
happier, and whereby we may obtain all good things from God. That they would
frequent public Prayers upon all just Occasions, and sometimes if not for
their own Benefit, yet for good Example to others who want it: as also hearing
the Scriptures Read, and Preaching, that is the expounding, confirming,
applying of the Scripture. That they would enter also into their Closets and
Pray in secret to God their heavenly Fath^^, especially upon solemn Occasions,
as (...) and after the public Worship of God, on Lord's days and other days,
and most especially before the Lord's Supper. That they would also Pray in
private with their Families as many as they can get together or spare, and this
either by judicious and pious Prayers composed by others, or their own if they
be able. All this as frequently and in such manner as their Ability and
Opportunity will permit: And that they would not let sluggishness or laziness,
deadness to holy things, nay, hatred and aversation from those things which
will make them better to hinder them, satisfying themselves with some Pretenses
and false Excuses, which God and their Consciences even now, much less another
day will never allow of. I leave it with Men's Consciences: out of hearty love
to God, to them and my self I have discharged mine to them. I am confident we
following this Advice, should all be soon much a better and soberer People,
live more conscientiously, piously, charitably, peaceably, comfortably both to
our selves and others, and all the Blessings of God would be multiplied upon us
all here, and we should be more fitted for Heaven hereafter.

FINIS.
Books following Sold by John Wright at the Crown on Ludgate Hill.
In Folio.
SIr Walter Rawleigh's History of the World. Heylin's Cosmography. Dr. Taylor's
Cases of Conscience. -- His Polemical Discourses. Dr. Hammond's Annotations. --
His Tracts. Speed's Mapps at Large. Hooker's Ecclesiasiastical Policy.
Pharmacopoea Londinensis, or the London Dispensatory, with Alterations and
Additions, Never before printed. Sir Thomas Herbert's Travels, with Additions
never before printed. Mr. Sanson's Geography. Judge Hales Primitive Origination
of Mankind. Britannia: Or, A Geographical Description of England, Scotland, and
Ireland: With the Maps of each County at large.
In Quarto.
Dr. Brown's Vulgar Errors. The Complete Clark, containing the best Form of
Presidents. Mr. Megie's French Dictionary. Mr. Henry Smith's Sermons. The
History of the Seven Champions. The History of Parismus and Parifmenus.
In Octavo.
Dr. Taylor's Living and Dying. Dr. Patrick's Witnesses to Christianity, both
Parts. A Thousand Notable Things. Sands Paraphrase on Job and Psalms. M. Pooles
English Parnassus. The Parsons Councellor. A Treatise of Judging one another.
Galen's Art of Physic, Translated by N. Culpeper.
In Twelves.
Dr. Fettiplace Holy Exercise of Heavenly Grace. Smith's Great Assize. --
David's Repentance. Dent's Plain-Man's Pathway to Heaven. The Doctrine of the
Bible.

