AN ABSTRACT OF THE DISCOURSE ON THE Late FUNDS of the Million-Act,
Lottery-Act, and Bank of England.

Together with PROPOSALS for the supplying their Majesty's with Money on easy
Terms, exempting the Nobility and Gentry, etc. from Taxes, enlarging their
Yearly Estates, and enriching all the Subjects in the Kingdom.

Humbly offered and submitted to the Consideration of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled.

By J. B.

London, Printed in the Year, MDCXCIV.

I Have in a larger Treatise showed, that no Place is better situated for Trade
than England; but that the great Encouragements given to such who advanced
Money on the Funds of the Million-Act, Lottery-Act and Bank of England, were
very prejudicial in that they increased the Interest of Money, which I
demonstrated to be very destructive to the Trade of the Kingdom. I proved that
for the Million raised in 1692, (had the whole been paid in upon Annuities with
Survivorship) the Nation would have paid 9314216 l. 13 s. 9 d. more than the
Principal and Interest, and Interest upon Interest, at 5 l. per Cent. per
Annum; and that for advancing a Million of Money on the Lottery-Act, the Nation
will pay 1129174 l. 5 s. 2 d. in sixteen Years time more than their Principal
and Interest, and Interest upon Interest; and that the Bank of England, if they
shall be continued for sixty Years, will be paid for the 1200000 l. advanced by
the Contributors to their Majesty's, above 14 Millions more than their
Principal and Interest, and Interest upon Interest. I have showed that these
great Encouragements to advance Money on the late Funds will ruin the Trade of
the Kingdom; that Tradesmen who trade with their own Stocks draw their Money
out of Trade to advance on these Funds; and those who lend Money to Tradesmen
wherewith to drive their Trades, call it out of their Hands, or force them, (if
they continue it with them) to give a higher Interest to their undoing, by
reason they can make a greater advantage by advancing their Money to the
Government; that this high Interest will fling the Trade of the Nation into the
Hands of Foreigners, who pay less Interest, and who can therefore under-sell us
at Foreign Markets; and that these Funds divert the Genius of the Subjects from
their Business, while our Neighbors keep close to their Trade, and take that
inestimable Jewel out of our Hands. I also proved that it is no less
destructive to the Nobility and Gentry, etc. of the Kingdom, in that it would
bring Land to 12 or 14 Years Purchase; that a Person who has 50 l. per Annum
in Land, if he sell it for 600 l. being 12 Years Purchase, he may purchase 50
l. per Annum in the Bank, free from Taxes, whereas he must pay for the Tax of 4
s. in the Pound laid on his Land, and Charge of the Militia, etc. at least 12
l. per An. And that he may have 500 l. at an hour's warning of the Bank upon
the Security of his 600 l. whereas he cannot without great Difficulty, loss of
Time, and Expense in examining Titles, Procuration, Continuation, etc. raise so
much upon the Credit of his Estate; and that the very Bank-Bills will be
preferred before Land, because a Man may have 60 l. 16 s. 8 d. per Annum
Interest for 2000 l. Bank-Bills, and have 2000 l. always lying by him; whereas
2000 l. laid out in Land will not bring him in more Profit, upon which he can
hardly raise 1000 l. without great Trouble, Charge and loss of Time. These
Considerations put me upon considering of other Methods for the Supply of their
Majesty's, and for the Ease of the Subject, which I laid down in several
Proposals, in substance as follows, viz.

PROPOSALS.
THat it be enacted, That any Person who has an Estate in Fee, may have leave
to settle his Estate upon twenty Commissioners, four to be appointed by their
Majesty's, six by the House of Lords, and ten by the House of Commons, in Trust
for a Security to make good all Bills, which shall be issued out upon the
Credit of such Estate.

That the Commissioners shall appoint twenty Counsel to examine the Titles of
all the Estates proposed to be settled; and that no Estate shall be settled,
but it shall be first entered in the particular Register to be kept in the chief
Town of the County where such Estate lies, and in the general Register to be
kept in the City of London for the space of six Months; in which time, if no
Caveat shall be entered against the Settlement of such Estate, and that three of
the Counsel shall signify it under their Hands, that it is a good Title, such
Estate shall be settled, and Bills of Credit to the value of 20 Years Purchase
of such Estate shall be issued out by the Commissioners upon the Security of
the said Estate.

That the said Bills of Credit shall be made from 5 l. to 100 l. value each,
and shall be current in Payment by Endorsement toties quoties; and any Person
who shall take any of the said Bills may renew them once every Month if they
please, without Fee or Reward.

That these Bills of Credit may be advanced to their Majesty's by Authority of
Parliament, (and not otherwise) their Majesty's paying to those upon the
Security of whose Estates the said Bills are issued out, 3 l. per Cent. per
Annum Interest for the same, out of any Parliamentary Fund settled or to be
settled for those Purposes, or upon the Payment of any of the following
Annuities out of some Parliamentary Fund in lieu of Principal and Interest, viz.

l. s. For an Annuity of 100 Years 3 10 per Cent. per An. 66 Years 8 Mon. 4 00
50 Years 4 10 40 Years 5 00 33 Years 4 Mon. 5 10 25 Years 6 10 20 Years 7 10 16
Years 8 15 13 Years 4 Mon. 10 00 10 Years 12 10

For each hundred Pounds value in Bills of Credit so advanced to their
Majesty's 2 l. 10 s. per Cent. per Annum, part of the said Annuities to be paid
by the Commissioners to the Persons who shall settle their Estates, and all the
Residue of the said Annuities to pay off and cancel every Year part of the
Bills of Credit; by which means all the Bills of Credit will be paid and
cancelled in the determined Number of Years, for which the Payment of such
Annuity was settled.

That those who advance the said Bills of Credit to their Majesty's upon any
Parliamentary Fund, shall be exempted from all Land-Taxes for so much of their
yearly Estates in proportion to the Bills of Credit advanced by them to their
Majesty's.

That any Person may have Bills of Credit for his own use upon the Security of
his Estate, paying the Commissioners, etc. 10 s. per Cent. per Annum, for the
Charges in issuing out and renewing the said Bills of Credit, or upon Payment
of any of the following Annuities in lieu of Principal and Interest; that is to
say,

l. s. For an Annuity of 50 Years 2 10 per Cent. per An. 40 Years 3 00 33 Years
4 Mon. 3 10 25 Years 4 10 20 Years 5 10 16 Years 6 15 13 Years 4 Mon. 8 00 10
Years 10 10

10 s. per Cent. per An. part of the said Annuities, to be paid to the
Commissioners, etc. for their Charges; and with the Residue of the said
Annuities the Commissioners are to pay off and cancel every Year part of the
Bills of Credit, till all the Bills of Credit shall be paid and cancelled.

That it shall be High Treason to counterfeit any of these Bills, or to offer
them in Payment, knowing the same to be counterfeited.

The Advantages of these proposed Bills of Credit will be numerous.

First; Their Majesty's will be supplied with Money on easy Terms, and the
Subject loaded with fewer Funds, and it will inseparably unite their Majesty's
and the People in each others Interest.

Secondly; These proposed Bills of Credit being a new species of Money, and to
all Intents as useful as Money; it will be (as it were) an introducing so many
fresh-monied Men into the Kingdom with several Millions more than was before,
for the Supply of their Majesty's; and each Million value in Bills of Credit
issued out upon the Security of Gentlemen's Estates, being employed in Trade,
will bring in 60000 l. per Annum Profit every Year to the Nation.

Thirdly; It will keep great Sums in the Nation that are paid to Foreigners for
Interest, and will enable those Subjects to lend, who are now forced to borrow
of others.

Fourthly; It will animate our Merchants, encourage Handicrafts and Artificers;
it will bring new Manufactures into the Kingdom that cannot now be wrought here
by reason of high Interest, and set many thousands to work who are in a
starving Condition for want of Employment: It will turn the Genius of the
Subject into the right Channel, by putting them upon the improving their Money
by Trade: It will ease all the Nobility and Gentry from Taxes, who shall
advance Bills of Credit to their Majesty's upon the Security of their Estates,
and will add 50 or 60 l. per annnm to every 100 l. per annum of their present
Estates.

Fifthly; Gentlemen will have an Opportunity of improving their Estates by
Building, Planting, draining or watering their Land, who cannot now afford to
do it, by reason of high Interest and Scarcity of Money: It will clear
Gentlemen's Estates from all Encumbrances, and will enable them to raise
Portions for their Children; and will raise the Value of Land to 40 or 50 Years
Purchase.

A Gentleman of an 100 l. per annum, if he settle his Estate, may have 2000 l.
Bills of Credit upon it; which Bills he may lend their Majesty's for 3 l. per
cent. per annum Interest; and be exempted from the Taxes of 4 s. in the Pound,
and have an 160 l. per annum, who has now but 80 l. per annum coming in.

Or if he lend their Majesty's the said 2000 l. Bills of Credit upon the
Payment of an Annuity for 20 Years, he will have 150 l. per annum coming in for
every 80 l. per annum he now has: And one twentieth part of the said 2000
Bills of Credit being paid off every Year, his Estate will be clear in 20 Years.

Or suppose the said Gentleman has four Children, and has now nothing to give
them, he may give his Children the 2000 l. Bills of Credit among them, which is
500 l. apiece, for which he must give to the Commissioners, etc. but 10 l. per
annum: So that his Children will have the present Value of his Estate divided
among them, and he will have 90 l. per annum left for himself to live on.

Or has a Gentleman an Estate of 1000 l. per annum, upon which he owes 10000
l. he now pays, at 6 l. per cent. per annum, 600 l. per annum Interest-Money;
he pays for Taxes of 4 s. in the Pound 200 l. per annum, in all 800 l. per
annum: so that reckoning nothing for Repairs, Militia-Rate, Trophy-Money, etc.
he has but 200 l. per annum coming in. If this Gentleman settles his Estate,
he may have 20000 l. value in Bills of Credit thereupon, being twenty Years
Purchase of his Estate: With this he may pay off his 10000 l. Mortgage; the
other 10000 l. he may lend their Majesty's at 3 l. per cent. per annum, and he
will have 1150 l. per annum coming in, as appears by the following Parallel.

The Gentleman's present Circumstances.
Interest of 10000 l. -- 600 per annum. Taxes of 4 s. in the Pound 200 Left for
himself -- 200 1000

His Circumstances by my proposed Method.
His Estate brings him in 1000 l. He will receive for 1000^ lent their
Majesty's 300 1300 per annum. He must pay the Commissioners, etc. for 10000 l.
Bills of Credit, being what he makes use of for himself 50 l. Paid Taxes for of
his Estate 100 l. 150 Remains clear to the Gentleman 1150 l. per annum, and his
10000 l. Mortgage paid off.

Or has the Gentleman a mind to clear his Estate upon the Payment of a small
Annuity, he may have 10000 l. for 4 l. 10 s. per cent. per annum, for 25 Years;
or for 5 l. 10 s. per cent. per annum, for 20 Years, and never pay the
Principal, who must now pay 6 l. per cent. per annum for the bare Interest only.

And as to their Majesty's, they may be supplied with 1200000 l. for 3 l. per
cent. per annum, which is 36000 l. per annum, for which they now pay 100000 l.
per annum, which would be 64000 l. per annum saved of what their Majesty's now
pay for 1200000 l. only.

Or their Majesty's might have had 1600000 l. upon the Payment of 140000 l. per
annum, for sixteen Years, which is 600000 l. more than was raised on the
Lottery-Act. In fine, their Majesty's might have Money for paying 6 l. 10 s.
per cent. per annum, for twenty five Years, who now pay above 8 l. per cent.
per annum perpetual Interest. So that by this Means the Nation is not only
served on much easier Terms, but Gentlemen will be eased from Taxes, will have
their yearly Estates augmented, may clear their Estates from all Encumbrances,
and may with Eafe raise Portions for their Children, and may very much improve
their Estates. And I may add, that those who are now forced for the raising
Money to cut down their Timber, long before it is come to its full Growth,
being enabled to supply themselves with Money on such easy Terms, will not be
under those pinching Necessities to do that which is so very detrimental not
only to their own Estates, but to the Kingdom, by the destruction of young
thriving Timber.

I shall now briefly answer an Objection or two I have met with since my
writing the said Treatise: but first I shall add somewhat further by way of an
Answer to an Objection which I have already answered, viz.

Object. That we shall have too many of these Bills of Credit.

Answ. The Parliament, if they shall be pleased with the Modus of settling
Estates, and issuing out Bills of Credit upon them by these Methods, may, if
they think fit, limit the Settlements; though I confess I am not of opinion
there will be any need for their so doing, for the Money of this Nation is
computed to be about eight, or at most ten Millions Sterling* And a small
Treatise lately published by some of the Bank, entitled, Some Observations
upon the Bank of England, tells us, page 9. That the Bank of Amsterdam has had
above 30 Millions Sterling at once, and no small Sums employed in the Lumbard:
To which if we add all the Money in private Hands, we cannot well suppose that
there is less, if so little as 50 Millions Sterling in Holland. The same Author
tells us also in page 5. That about an hundred Years ago the King of Spain paid
the Bank of Genoua more than twenty Millions of Crowns (which is almost as much
Money as we have in England) for one Year's Interest. And page 10. he says,
That Money may be had at Genoua for 2 l. per cent. per annum. Now if the King
of Spain paid but 2 l. per cent. per annum for what he borrowed, the Bank must
have lent him above two hundred and fifty Millions, which is as much as all the
Land in England is worth at twenty Years Purchase. But suppose the King of
Spain paid as much per cent. per annum for Interest of Money as their Majesty's
pay the Bank of England, he must have borrowed of them above sixty Millions
Sterling. So that it is plain we are most miserably cramped in our Trade; and
the Gentlemen of England also, as well as the trading part of the Kingdom, are
great Sufferers for want of Money: And why the Kingdom of England, which is as
well situated for Trade as any place in the World, should have less Money to
trade with than Holland or Genoua, I confess I cannot assign a Reason for. I am
sure we have almost quite lost our Greenland-Fishery, our Russia-Trade, and
several other Trades I could mention; and we are in danger of losing the rest,
because we are not able to manage our Trade with that Advantage as our
Neighbors do, for want of sufficient Stock, and because our Merchants must pay
three times the Interest for Money that others pay: and yet some Gentlemen are
afraid of our having too much Money; whereas I should be glad to see it once
come to that: for we had better have Money to spare than to want it; which if
we had a greater Plenty of, our Fishery might be revived, and our almost-lost
Trades regained: and the Parliament can check any Exuberancy or Superabundance
of these proposed Bills whenever they shall find them inconvenient to the
Nation.

Object. But you propose six Months time before an Estate can be settled, and
Bills of Credit issued out thereupon; so that these Proposals cannot be useful
to supply their Majesty's with Money timely enough this Year.

Answ. If it be not timely enough for the Supply of their Majesty's this Year
to begin at the sitting down of the Parliament, how can it be time enough next
Year, unless the Parliament pass it this Sessions? And if it should not be of
use this Year for the Public, (as I can demonstrate it may) such of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Freeholders, and the trading Part of the Nation, who are
under any pinching Straits and Exigencies, may be relieved by passing it this
Sessions.

Object. But it is uncertain whether Gentlemen will settle their Estates, and
advance the Bills of Credit to their Majesty's, or no: and the Government must
not be at this time under any Uncertainties.

Answ. What Certainty had the Parliament that the Subjects would advance their
Money on any of the late Funds upon Survivorship, or upon the Lottery-Act, or
Bank of England? there was only a Probability, that Men who had Money would
accept of such advantageous Offers; and there is much more Reason to believe
that Gentlemen will settle their Estates on these proposed Advantages.

Object. But where must a Man go for his Money that has any of these Bills of
Credit?

Answ. To what use is Money but to pass and repass in Payment, or else to melt
it down into Ingots? For the first, these Bills will be as passable as Money,
and are in truth better than Money, conveying an intrinsic Value along with
them, which Money does not; and for that Reason our Money is as unfit for the
latter Use, viz. to be melted down.

The Bank of England do not propose to keep Money by them to answer all their
Bills; if they did, to what use would the Bank be? but only so much as is
needful, to answer the Demands of such whose Occasions require Money in specie;
and for such Persons the proposed Commissioners will have always Money to
answer such Demands: For suppose their Majesty's borrow two Millions for 7 l.
10 s. per Cent. per Annum Annuity, for 20 Years, in lieu of Principal and
Interest; if the Parliament direct that the Annuity shall be paid in Money,
there will be 150000 l. per Annum, coming in to answer all such Demands.

Object. But what must those Gentlemen do who are but Tenants for Life? they
cannot reap any Advantage by this Act.

Answ. Yes, they may; for the Parliament if they please may give them leave to
settle such their Estates for Bills of Credit, to be issued out to their
Majesty's upon the Payment of an Annuity for 20 Years, and not longer; in which
case the Tenant for Life may be excused from the Land Tax of 4 s. in the Pound,
which will be Advantage enough for him; and the Commissioners may keep in their
Hands the Profits accruing by the Loan of such Bills of Credit for the Benefit
of him who has the Fee or Remainder, by which means his Estate will be
increasing every Year more and more, till he comes into the Possession of it.
For admit A be Tenant for Life of an Estate of 1000 l. per Annum, the Remainder
to B: Suppose A settles the said Estate, and 20000 l. Bills of Credit are
issued out thereupon, and lent their Majesty's upon the Payment of 7 l. 10 s.
per Cent. per Annum, out of any Parliamentary Fund for 20 Years; A shall be
exempted from Taxes, which is 200 l. per Annum saved to him: The Commissioners
who are to receive 1500 l. per Annum Annuity for 20 Years, for the said 20000
l. Bills of Credit, will pay off every Year 1000 l. per Annum in Discharge of
the Principal, and the other 500 l. per Annum they may reserve in their Hands
for B; so that if A lives 20 Years, B will have 10000 l. due to him from the
Commissioners, which is half the Value of his Estate, and his Estate clear: and
tho some may think it unreasonable, that a Tenant for Life should settle the
Estate of him who has the Fee, yet for the Advantage and Benefit of such
Person who has the Remainder, the Parliament may as well give leave to settle
such Estates, as they did empower Trustees and Guardians to advance the Money
of such whose Estates they had in Trust upon the late Funds, for Benefit of
such Minors, etc. And if the Parliament think fit, Gentlemen who have Estates
in Land, may easily, and that in a few Years, raise a Bank without any Money,
other than by their accruing Profits out of the said Annuities, which Bank will
have both plenty of Money, and the Freehold Estates of the Kingdom for a Fund;
which will be the greatest, most famous, and most glorious Bank that is or ever
was in the whole World: nor will any Nation in the Universe be ever able to
cope with us, or be capable to erect the like.

I think it not amiss also to acquaint the Parliament with a Method I showed to
an Honorable Member of the Honorable House of Commons, about six Months ago,
which I laid aside, as not being near so desirable as this my proposed Method;
which because some Persons seemed then to have an Opinion of, I shall also
acquaint this Honorable House with the same, viz.

I proposed that a Gentleman of 150 l. per annum Estate in Land, supposed to be
worth 3000 l. might settle his Estate, and that 3000 l. Value in Bills of
Credit should be issued out thereupon; that their Majesty's should have 1000 l.
Value of the said Bills, and that the Person who settled his Estate should have
2000 l. Bills; and for the discharging the 3000 l. Bills of Credit he should be
obliged to pay 100 l. per annum for 30 Years. This indeed would have cleared
all mortgaged Estates; the Bills of Credit issued out would not have exceeded
the Fund settled for Security of them; and a Gentleman would have sold a
Rentcharge of 100 l. per annum for 30 Years, for as much as he can sell the
Fee of 100 l. per annum. Several other Advantages I proposed by the said
Method; but all things considered, I found it so far short of what Advantages
their Majesty's and the Nation might reap by the present proposed Method, that
I totally declined it.

I fear being too tedious, and to transgress the Limits of an Abstract: But
such of the Members of the Lords or Commons who will honor my Treatise with
their Perusal, wherein what I have herein barely hinted at is more fully
handled, shall be presented with the same by,

Their Honors most humble, and most obedient Servant, JOHN BRISCOE.


