AN ESSAY IN Morality.

Written by G. B. to his Friend H. P. Esquire.

In which the Nature of Virtue and Vice is distinctly stated, Their respective
Reasonableness and Unreasonableness demonstrated, And several useful
Conclusions inferred.

LONDON: Printed for John Wright at the Crown on Ludgate hill. 1682.

The CONTENTS.
Artic. 1. WHatever is in the Soul^ of Man reduced to two Heads, viz. Action
and Passion. 2. Action in the Soul of two sorts, (1.) Assent or Judgment. (2.)
Volition. 3. In Volition, Four things only to be considered. (1.) The Faculty.
(2.) The Action. (3.) An Actual Inclination. (4.) An habitual Inclination. 4.
Of the three last, the Perfection and Defect may be considered. 5. The Object
of Volition at the same time but one. 6. The Object of Volition is only good of
two sorts, viz. that of the end, or delectable good; and that of the means, or
profitable good. 7. The goodness of the Means, is the goodness of the End. 8.
The (...), a sort of profitable good. 9. Delectable good has indefinite
degrees in Extension, Intension, and Duration. 10. The greatest delectable good
absolutely, is the Eternal Happiness of the whole Universe. 11. The first
perfectionof Volition is to be directed to this absolutely greatest good. 12.
That this is a perfection. 13. That it is possible, desirable, may be in the
highest degree delightful. 14. To have a less good than absolutely the
greatest, for the Object of our Volition, is a defect. 15. This (...), or
relation of Volition to its Object, is Moral good and evil. 16. This Moral good
is a kind of bonum utile. 17. Sin privately an infinite evil. 18. And it may be
so positively. 19. A second perfection of Volition is strength, force, zeal.
20. A third, Constancy. 21. The just moderation of it seems a fourth. 22. Moral
good and evil depend not upon any Beings's will. 23. Nor upon the freedom of
Will. 24. Possible to will the rectitude of an action, and yet to sin. 25. A
man to be estimated good or bad, according to his Habitual Inclination. 26. A
general distribution of Virtues called inherent. 27. Another from the parts of
the Universal good. 28. These to be all taken together, and considered as one.
29. Instrumental or eventual Virtues. 30. When it may be true, that Virtus
consistit in medio. 31. The nature and degrees of this sort of Virtues. 32. It
is not true, that Virtutes sunt connexae. 33. How to determine which Virtues
and Vices are the greatest. 34. Actual inclinations and propensions may be
sinful. 35. The reason for the manner of writing, and the Style of this Essay.
To his Honored Friend H. P. Esquire.
Dear Sir,
I Perceive your very inquisitive and searching Genius has not permitted you
to rest satisfied with what has been commonly taught and received in many
Questions which you think of the greatest concernment to be truly and clearly
resolved: at least of much more than most of those which ordinarily now adays
employ the busy thoughts and pens of Men. And as they have given you some
trouble and care, so I understand by you, that they are likely to give me some
too. For you are pleased to believe, that I may have been not altogether a
stranger to thoughts about such matters; and that peradventure I may have
fallen upon something either as to Matter or Method, or both, which might a
little contribute to your light and ease: though I scarcely know any man who
stands in less need of it than your self. Perhaps our free and frequent mutual
Entertainments with Discourses of such nature (the most delightful and
profitable use of friendship) have given occasion to your kind opinion, and put
you upon making further trial.

Sir! I must own it to be my Persuasion also, that the Questions you proposed
are all of them of importance, and some of them of absolutely the greatest; and
that they ought to be determined with more clearness, certainty, and (which is
hugely considerable to short-lived Mortals) with more brevity than hitherto for
all't I know they have been. But I cannot own myself to be the person in Parts,
Health, or Leisure, so happy, as to promise you the performance of any great
matter at present, whereby I might be serviceable to you, and answer either
your desire or expectation. Nevertheless, upon your Request and Command, which
go a great way with me, backed I acknowledge with some suspicion and
presumption that something might be done, I have attempted one of them, which I
have been the most impatient to be satisfied in my self, as appearing to me of
the vastest consequence, and yet delivered, as I thought (such was my unquiet
curiosity if you please) with but too much mistake, confusion, and defect in
the best Writers, and of greatest name: and therefore long and often before I
received your command, it had been in my thoughts. The question is, what should
be the perfection of our Active power or Will, of its Actions or Volitions, of
its actual and habitual Inclinations, or in one word, of our Manners; and not
only of ours, but of any intelligent being existent, and therefore even of the
Divine Nature it self; I mean of its Volitions and Decrees, not of any
inclinations, which including some imperfection, belong not thereunto. Many in
my judgment have been the mistakes and errors in Divinity and Natural
Philosophy, but especially in Morality and Politics, for want of a right
understanding in this Question; some of which I am sure, upon perusal of this,
will not escape your Observation.

I have delivered what I had to say, in almost Mathematical Method, beginning
at the most simple Notions, which are the most plain and undoubted, and then
proceeding to what is more compounded; so that that which follows, generally
depends upon and supposes the knowledge of what is before. I have also
endeavored that my style be simple, short and clear, without any ornament or
finery of words, which may darken the Sense, or divert the Attention; though it
be not so common, and sometimes perhaps uncouth, for a reason which you will meet
withal at the end of the Essay. But I did not think it this time expedient to
go any further, than to point out the way of composing a System of Ethics from
these Principles; which I know at your leisure you can easily do your self. As
for what is done, I must request the favor of you to read over the whole,
which is but short, before you pass judgment of any part, for the prevention
of needless dissatisfaction and scruple.

After all, I must crave leave to remember ourselves of that which we have
often agreed in; namely, how little the clearest and most certain knowledge of
these things will signify, without the practice; and that a generously honest
man, whose Soul is animated and imbued with Virtue, acting according to these
principles from a public and universalized spirit, though they lie not so
neatly and orderly in his head, is infinitely to be preferred before a mere
subtle, though most successful Speculator, which talks as high as Heaven, whose
Law is such love, as is hereafter described, but lives as low as earth, where
according to the Jewish Adage (...) All friendship is governed by
self-interest, or rather, nothing is beloved but Self, and what ministers to
its pleasure or advantage.

Though it is not to be denied neither, that naked discourse and true reasoning
is of very great use here too. For there are some men who believe all the
various inclinations, affections, and tempers of Mankind, to be the effect only
of diverse bodily tempers and examples, not at all of Reason and Understanding;
and that those to Vice (so called) as they are more general, so they are more
necessary, natural, and reasonable too, than that to what we term Virtue;
which, say they, is against Nature, and so far from being reasonable, that it
is impossible. Now these men are to be convinced, if they be capable of it, or
at least silenced and confuted.

Others again there are, and that of the best sort of Men, who are great lovers
of truth where they can discern it; who are strangely affected and transported
with distinct and clear understanding; who desire to see why they should be
more carried to one thing than another; who do not care to be born away blindly
with great and swelling passions, without the guidance of calm Reason, seem
they never so natural, and even Divinely inspired or impressed; who finally are
very uneasy, slow, and dissatisfied, while they act ignorantly and blindly. In
such persons, their approbation of and consent to Virtue will be more sincere
and hearty, their bent and tendency to it more uniform, firm and constant,
their love more deeply rooted and embowelled, when they shall see its nature
and practice demonstrated and deduced from the most plain and evident truths.

Nor are we finally to think that the principle or end of all our actions, the
Universal Good so much insisted on in the following Essay, is such a high-flown
wide notion, and so much out of the view of the generality of men, as to be of
no use or application in humane life amongst them. For contrariwise, every one
may, and we see that plain honest men of all ranks and sorts do propound and
pursue it in their little sphere of action and comprehension, as God himself
does in the immense revolution of his providence. He that knows no more than a
Neighbors Cottage or two, may have the same general end, namely, the greatest
good he understands, with him who is able to comprehend the interest of a whole
Nation, or of the whole World if it were possible. The poorest Vicar may
understand as well as the pretended Pastor of the Universal Church, and perhaps
better practice accordingly, that the only end of his Function and all his
Actions, is not his own personal interest only, but the honor of God, the
Salvation of Souls, or the good of his Church, (and how easy is it to extend
his Notion to the whole world?) the faithful discharge of his duty and his
reward altogether: and so the meanest Mechanique or dullest Plowman may be
easily taught to desire by all his life, and particularly in his honest
Calling, to please and serve God, to support himself and Family, to supply and
benefit his Neighbors, in hopes of Gods general blessing upon himself here,
both in Soul and Body, and of his reward hereafter. Set but a man entirely free
from himself, and he will have no other bounds than the most comprehensive good
he can reach. Nor indeed is there any thing which lies nearer the Mind of Man,
and which he has a more natural inclination to believe, than that a public
good is to be preferred before a personal, supposing them both equal in respect
of intension or degree; and why not then the most public of all, viz. the good
of the whole Universe, as it were one Corporation or Society? But I am going to
prevent my self, and forget the bounds and design of a Prefatory Epistle.

For the rest of your Questions (you were pleased to make out a score, and I
doubt you may have more in your Budget) I must entreat you to stay your stomach
a while with this Morsel, and to respite an answer to them. If what I now send
you be acceptable to such a diligent, I had almost said troublesome enquirer,
whom as I have observed nothing less will satisfy, than the utmost a man can
know and say, you may hereafter command the like Essay upon some one or more of
them; which I know your friendship and goodness will permit me to obey, when I
find my self best able to serve you.

1. FIrst then be pleased to observe, That all that is in the Soul of Man, may
be reduced, according to Descartes, to two general things. (1.) Passion. (2.)
Action. The first contains all sorts of Perceptions, viz. Sense, Memory,
Imagination, Intellection, Passions, or Affections; although there seems to be
somewhat of Action too in the Souls Perceptions.

2. And as for Action, there has seemed to be of it in the Soul, these four
kinds. (1.) Dubitation. (2.) Suspension. (3.) Assent. (4.) Volition. But I
rather now think only two. (1.) Assent. (2.) Volition. For as for Dubitation,
it seems to be nothing but Suspension; and Suspension seems only an act of
Volition not to assent; and Nolition is but Volition of the absence of a thing.

3. To say nothing at this time of Assent; in Volition may be considered four
things. (1.) The faculty of Volition, usually called Appetite; which is but one
in Man, distinguished by its several Objects; as when it has for its Object
sensible and corporeal good, or certain agreeable motions of the Body which
cause the perception of pleasure in the Soul, it is called the Sensitive
Appetite: But when it has for its Object that which can be apprehended only by
the rational faculty of the Soul, or that faculty whereby the Soul perceives
Spiritual Objects (which are but of two sorts; either absolute, as Spiritual
Substances and their Attributes, such as Perception and Volition, Knowledge,
and Power, and Goodness; or Relative, as the (...) habitudes, and relations of
things, such as Means and End, Likeness and Difference, and consequently
Equality and Inequality) I say, then it may be called the Rational Appetite.
Though indeed that only has been used to be so termed, which has for its
object, Bonum honestum, the honesty, probity, rectitude of a man's actions, the
(...), that which ought to be done, or is according to true reason.

The second thing to be observed in Volition, is the Action; the third, An
actual Inclination or Propension in the Soul; and the fourth, An Habitual
Inclination. Of the first and second none doubts; and for the third, experience
teaches, that there is often this which I call an Actual Inclination of the
Soul to a certain object; others a Propension, Velleity hankering, before there
be any express Volition; that which is usually signified by such phrases; I
could find in my heart to do such a thing; and that of Foelix to St. Paul, Thou
have almost persuaded me to be a Christian. And for the fourth, this one thing
evinces it, viz. That there is a great difference between men in the facility,
readiness, and strength to their actual inclinations, and Volitions, before
they actually exist. Of this facility in one man, which is not in another,
there must be some present cause in one man which is not in another; and this I
call an Habitual Inclination or Volition. It is most certain, there is
something in two men accustomed to two things with delight, when they have no
actual Inclination and Volition in them; which upon the proposal of those two
different objects, does produce two different or contrary actual Inclinations
and Volitions, and this not only in the Mechanisms of their Bodies, by which
those objects excite corporeal passions of love or delight; but in the Soul
too, and most often contracted by the frequent actual inclinations impressed
upon the Soul by these passions, and sometimes without them. But it is enough,
that it is agreed by all men, that there is an actual difference inherent and
present in the Soul, between a Drunkard and an Ambitious man, even when they
are asleep, or their Volition and actual inclination are employed about other
things; which then appears, when the proper objects of their respective
appetites and habitual inclinations are proposed to them.

As for all other humane Actions, which have been called imperate, or Actions
commanded by, and consequent upon Volition, except Volition itself, (for one
Volition may have for its object another Volition) such as are Attention,
Consideration, Judgment, motion of the parts of the Body, or Bodily Action, in
which is Speech or Words; I meddle not at present with them, only suggest, that
there is nothing of Moral good or evil, of inherent Virtue or Vice in them:
they are indeed mostwhat (though they may be dissembled) signs thereof, and of
its degrees; nor are they so much as what in the Twenty ninth Article or
Paragraph we term instrumental or eventual Virtues or Vices, any further than
they include Volition. For example, there is neither Virtue nor Vice in
attention or judgment, which are actions of the Mind; nor in Speech, Gesture,
Motion, which are actions of the body; but only in the Volition or act of the
Will, which commands or effects them.

4. Now of these three last, viz. Actual Volition, Actual and Habitual
Inclination, the perfection and defect may be considered: which perfection and
defect (of Volition for example, and so of the rest) can be only in two
respects, viz. (1.) Of the Object. (2.) Of the Action.

5. And first, concerning the Object of Volition, it is to be noted, that at
the same time it can be but one, though that one may consist of several parts
which may be successively regarded. For example, a man cannot will and regard
at the same precise time his Neighbors good and his own Reputation, as two
distinct separate coordinate things; but he may will them both together, as
making up, or composing one entire Object; like as the Eye can see but one
Object at the same time painted at the bottom thereof, consisting of many
parts; the whole it may see together confusedly, and but one point distinctly.

6. Moreover, that the only Object of Volition, and so of the rest, is bonity
or good only, not evil, is manifest from universal experience. All which
goodness, or what is convenient, congruous, eligible, desirable, (for by all
these may bonity or good be described) is of two kinds. (1.) That of the End,
(2.) That of the Means. That of the End has been usually called jucundum,
delectable or pleasant good or pleasure, delight: although this very pleasure
has some further use, and is likewise a means to excite, encourage, and
fortify the Operations of the Mind, which again mediately and immediately may
produce new pleasure. That of the means is called bonum utile, or profitable
good to obtain the end of delectable good, of which the kinds are numerous.

7. The goodness of the means is nothing but its Conducibility to, or Causality
of the end; which indeed is the goodness of the end in the means; it is the
same: there is nothing eligible in the means to obtain any end, but the
goodness of the end it self. Of this profitable good, bonum honestum, or honest
good, is one sort or kind, as we shall presently understand.

8. And to add this for the present, the (...), or pulchritude and beauty of
Virtue, in whatsoever it consists, talked of so much by Platonists, is another
sort; and is only therefore good, because it is so congruous or delectable an
object to the Mind, or some way or other has in it some causality of pleasure
or delight.

9. As for delectable good, which is, as has been said, the only object of
Volition, it is better understood by every man's experience, than by all the
descriptions that can be given of it: such as Aristotle's perfection of the
Minds Operation; and Eudoxus's perfect and grateful assension and acquiescence;
Plato's passion, affection, and diffusion of the mind, and the repose of the
Will in some convenient good; and many others, some of which are contrary each
to other: as when some say it is Motion, and some say it is the Rest and Repose
of the Mind. It is more to our purpose to observe, that it has indefinite
degrees, and that in three respects only and no more; viz. (1.) In Extension as
to Subjects. (2.) Intension. (3.) Duration. Of which (to take the extremes
only) the lowest degree in the first respect is the good of one single Soul;
the highest, that of all Spiritual Beings existant, usually comprehended under
God, our Neighbor, and our selves: where by Neighbor, we understand all
Rational Creatures at least. We actually indeed know a most inconsiderable part
of Mankind, only our own Family, Town, or Country; to whose greatest good
notwithstanding if we direct our Volition, it is a sign we implicitly will
that good which is absolutely the greatest; and that if any greater good were
within our view and comprehension, we should will that expressly and actually.
In the second respect, we want both conceits and words for the lowest and
highest degree. In the third respect, the lowest degree is that good which is
momentany, the highest Eternal.

10. Wherefore the greatest delectable good absolutely, is that which is so in
extension, intension, duration; or the Eternal happiness of the whole Universe
considered as one thing, and as Carts considered Motion in the Material world.

11. After which it is easy to observe, that the greatest and first perfection
of Volition in respect of the Object, is to be directed to this absolutely
greatest good, or to have it for its Object: and contrariwise, the greatest
defect thereof is to be directed to the least part thereof, in respect again of
Extension, Intension, and Duration; for example, to the smallest momentany
pleasure of any one single being, which is usually, if not always, ones self.

12. Nor is it less manifest, that this is a perfection, as it is the common
sense of all men: for otherwise, to illustrate rather than to prove it, God
would have been equally perfect if he had not, as if he had determined to make
the Universe, and that in such a degree happy as it is: nay, if his nature had
been such as to have been the most delighted with the eternal misery of all his
Creatures, it would have been equally his perfection to have effected it for
his own pleasure, as to have made it happy. Again, the Devil, or the most
malicious, proud, revengeful, finally the most wicked of all Natures, is
therefore the most imperfect, because he is the most pleased with others evil.

13. It has indeed been taught by some of those who have deduced all our
Offices and duties from selflove and interest, that this perfection is not
competible to any being whatsoever; at least not to men: that every nature is
necessarily carried to its own proper good only; that it cannot be in the least
moved with the good of another. But I contrariwise affirm in the first place,
that this perfection is a thing possible to a reasonable Nature. Next, that
there is in all men, among other innate appetites, this also of Universal
Beneficence. And finally, that there is a Capacity in our Souls of being more
pleased and delighted therewith, than any single Object in the world, and
consequently it is improveable to a higher degree of strength and force (which
may be called generosity) than any other appetite whatsoever. All which,
because it is of greatest consequence, is thus proved. (1.) That it is a thing
possible; if it be not, it is either because we cannot will another good, or
we cannot apprehend it. Not the first of these: for the Object of Volition is
precisely good or bonum, not propriety; so that if we separate them two, we
shall find propriety to have nothing of Eligibility in it; if there were, then
there would be something of Eligibility too in our proper and personal evil as
well as good. Nor is the second true, that we cannot apprehend another good.
For it is most plain, that we can in our conception conjoyn pain or pleasure,
good or evil, with any other Soul or Mind, as well as our own; or we can
suppose the same evil we suffer in another person. Who is there who has
himself felt the torment of the Stone, that does not well understand the same
in another, and pity him too when he hears him making grievous outcries, or
giving other such signs as he did himself, when he was under the same pain?
Nay, though he was never in the same condition, yet he understands him to be
affected with some great evil. It is true, ordinarily we do not apprehend one
another evil so clearly as our own; but the reason is, because the one is a
matter of Sense, the other of Memory, or Imagination; the one is usually a
present Object, the other an absent: and even our own absent evil we apprehend
not so well as our present. Finally, all the pity and compassion and friendship
we see in the world, confutes both these pretenses; especially where our love
to any person is great, which makes us to unite it to our selves (the first and
essential property of love.) And consider it but as a part of our selves, and
sometimes much the better (as it is in Wives and Children, and very dear
friends) and consequently to be the most truly and inwardly affected with the
evil or good they suffer or enjoy. And those happy Souls who have had clear and
true apprehensions of the most perfect and amiable Nature of God, have
experienced, I doubt not, that they have infinitely preferred the felicity of
the Divine Nature before their own, his Will before theirs; and have thought
and esteemed themselves not worthy of the least regard in compare with him; and
which is still most of all, could have been content to sacrifice all Being and
Happiness to his pleasure, if it were absolutely necessary. And we see the same
frequently amongst Men one toward another, when a common Soldier, under an
apprehension of the greater worth and bravery of his Commander, exposes his
own life to certain danger, and destruction too, to save the others. In the
next place, that there is an innate appetite in all men after this perfection
of beneficence and doing good, without any self-respect, I appeal to Universal
Experience. Nor is there any man, who after he has performed any such act, is
not pleased therewith, and ready to brag of it. It is true, the gratification
of this Natural Appetite, or the possession of such a good, cannot but be
delightful: but even this delight springing therefrom, may not be any thing of
the End or Object foreseen or proposed, but only consequent upon the action; as
it is true it also may be. The pleasure of doing good, may be one distinct part
of the End and Effect of ones beneficence, as well as the good done to others,
when one takes a view of some particular good things which constitute the whole
End and Object.

Lastly, That this delight and pleasure, from this perfection of our Volition,
or from Universal Benevolence, and in part consequent Beneficence, may be
greater than from any other Object; and that there is a Capacity in our Souls
to be more delighted therewith, than any other particular good, methinks is
hence most evidently proved, viz. Because it is certainly the greatest good we
can possibly possess, (greater than our own happiness, as much as the whole
Universe is greater than ourselves) and because we are capable of seeing it to
be so. Now certainly the Sense and Perception of our actual possession of the
greatest good we are capable of; and that there neither is, nor can be any
greater, must needs fill the Soul with the most complete intense satisfying
delight. It cannot be the Nature of the Soul to be pleased as much with thep
osse ssion of any other good, as with that which only she sees clearly to be
absolutely the greatest she or any other Being can obtain. It is plain
therefore, that our duty and our interest, our perfection and our happiness are
inseparable, so long as God continues and preserves our nature such as he has
made it: nor can we easily conceive it, if at all, to be other than it is.

14. After this, I scarcely need mention so plain a consequence, as that if
Volition has any less good for its Object than absolutely the greatest, it is
a defect therein, of which there are indefinite degrees, till we come to the
lowest, which is mentioned before.

15. And it is this (...), or relation of Volition and actual and habitual
inclination to their Object, which is called Moral Good and Evil, Holiness and
Sin, bonum honestum and inhonestum, Virtue and Vice, and by an hundred other
Names, viz. When Volition has for its Object the greatest good, (actually or
habitually known, immediately or mediately) then is that Volition Morally good,
honest, or virtuous: but when it has any other lesser delectable good for its
Object, (and some good it must have) then it is Morally Evil, or a Sin. Whence
it appears, that Sin is a Defect only, or a Negation: for the Defect of this
(...), or relation of Volition to its Object (which is always delectable good)
is only this, that it has not for its Object the greatest good.

16. I have before just hinted, That this Moral Good is also a kind of bonum
utile, or profitable good; that is to say, it is a means of, or has in it some
degree of Causality of delectable good. For Volition of any good, has at least
a tendency to effect it, which is some degree of Causality; and in us it has
no more: like as the Nisus in Bodies to Motion is something, and is a tendency
which has some degree of Causality of Motion in it; as appears from this, that
if you remove the impediment only, Motion presently follows; and that there is
plainly difference between two Bodies, one of which has, the other has it
not. But in God it always actually efeffects it; and God by his power does
generally upon occasion of our Volition, make actually existent delectable
good, or those things which cause it: and in this consists all the goodness of
Moral Good, or all its Eligibility, or that which makes it the Object of any
Volition, or its perfection; for by perfection I mean bonum utile, or
profitable good, that which does perficere or effect delectable good. On the
contrary, the evil of Sin, or that for which it is not eligible, and refusable,
is the privation of a tendency to, or Causality of Delectable Good. Virtue
therefore is a tendency to an infinite good, Sin a privation of it.

17. Sin then is no small or light thing, being in one respect plainly an
infinite evil. For whereas our Volition may and ought to have for its Object an
infinite Delectable Good, in respect of Extension, Intention, and Duration, the
greatest Eternal Felicity of the Universe, and consequently tends to it, and
has some Causality thereof in it:

When this our Volition is sinful, or has any lesser good for its Object,
there is a deprivation of all this. In this sense that of the Schoolmen is
true, That Sin is a Conversion of the Will from an Infinite Good to a Finite
one.

18. But this is not all: though the Evil or Mischief of Sin immediately be
privative, yet often by necessary consequence it is positive also; as when one
wills any Delectable Good to himself, which cannot be effected without the
positive inconvenience, grief, hurt, misery of another. For example, if any one
should be of such a temper, as to be delighted with another pain or suffering,
and consequently will and desire it in order to that end, which is called pure
Malice: Or if unlimited power to do what he lists, and consequently to do
Mischief (called Tyranny) please him; or if being pleased with Superiority and
Eminency in any thing, (as in Power, Riches, Knowledge, Happiness,) in order to
this his Superiority, he takes away from any person what he has of all these;
and these appetites may be so boundless, that they cannot be satisfied but by
an infinite mischief. As if any Being, that he might be infinitely superior to
all in happiness, or in the possession of any good, should not only take from
all, all they possessed, but make all besides himself the most extremely
miserable. And there have been such Monsters among Men (some of the Roman
Emperors, and others) who have advanced very far in this prodigious wickedness.
Historians report Tiberius to have been so delighted with Cruelty, that he was
termed Lutum sanguine maceratum, a lump of Clay soaked in Blood; after which he
more thirsted, than strong drinks, notwithstanding that he loved them so well,
as to have the Name of Biberius Caldius Mero, instead of Tiberius Claudius
Nero. They tell us also, that Caligula made it the diversion of his Meals, to
see men racked and Beheaded; and that Nero set the City of Rome on fire, that
he might have the glory of Re-building it, and having it called after his own
Name, Neropolis. Dangerous certainly it is, to begin to lay aside a certain
tenderness of others good, and to be careless what mischief we do to any body,
so we may gratify our own Appetites. Though our power may be short and
insufficient, yet our Minds may be soon debauched to such a degree, as first to
be content to molest or incommode our Neighbor, then to ruin him, then to
undo and destroy whole Families, Cities, and Nations, for the sake of some
small paltry pleasure of our own; and at last to delight in it.

19. A second perfection of Volition we have said to be, in respect of the
Action, which is two fold. The first is Intension, Force, and Strength; of
which it is certain there may be various degrees in the Actions of Spirits. The
greatest good, viz. That of the whole Universe, ought to have the greatest
strength of Volition that can be, which is no less than Infinite. And here is a
necessary defect in all Finite Rational Beings whatsoever; only God, who is
Infinite in Power, Force, Action, has this; to his Nature alone it belongs;
all other Beings fall infinitely short of him; and therefore may be said too to
be faulty in compare with him. In the other perfection of our Volition, viz.
the having its due Object an Infinite Good, God has made us capable of being
perfectly like himself: but here the most perfect of his Creatures are at an
infinite distance from him. The greatest degree of this perfection, is to will
the Universal good, or rather the greatest good, with all the vehemence, zeal,
and force, our Minds are capable of; and contrariwise, a great degree of the
opposite defect, is to will the Universal good the most remisly: but a greater
degree, not to will it at all; and the greatest of all, it seems both in
respect of the Action and Object together, to will the least good with the
greatest force and vehemence. Of this intension and firmness of our Volition,
and likewise our actual and habitual inclination to the Universal good, the
passions of desire after, love to, and delight in so doing and being, are the
causes and the effects too; and therefore signs, according to their respective
degrees: and the being thus affected toward Piety, Charity, Humility,
Spirituality, and all other instances thereof, is that which is signified by
the phrases of Virtues being natural to us, it being the Temper, Complexion,
Constitution of our Minds; its being a living and vital principle, producing
fruits and effects of outward good actions. In the Scripture it is the Spirit,
living according to the Spirit, and being led by the Spirit, and delighting in
the Law of God according to the inward man, and the new man created after God;
because the Object that pleases is a Spiritual thing, and because it is
according to the Word of God dictated by the Spirit of God, and from the
influence or efficiency of Gods Spirit in us. Here may be noted, that the
degree of the strength of our Volition and inclination to the Universal good,
and in order to that of our passions, ought at least to exceed that which is to
any other particular good, or else it will be ineffectual. Whence it may be
further usefully observed, That they are not always to be deemed or termed good
men, who in Pulpit, Church, or private Conversation, not only appear, but
really are very zealous and affectionate in Religion; because they generally
are of passionate Tempers in other matters, and may perhaps have greater
affections, and consequently inclinations to other Objects. A man of a more
calm and sedate temper in Religion, provided that the greatest degree of
affection he has be directed to his duty, may be a good man; when one of a
more boisterous and passionate one, whatever he is vulgarly taken for, may be
indeed a bad man. The one shall more steadily and constantly do his duty than
the other. In like manner, when a man sins deliberately, it is a sign of a
greater bent, strength, and intension of the inclination of the Will to its
undue Object, and of a less to Virtue; when he sins by surprise, or on a
sudden, it is not so much a sign thereof. But these and many other things
usually treated of in Morality, may with a little consideration be easily and
distinctly determined from the foregoing Conclusions, and a wary observation
and experience of the operations of our Minds.

20. The second Perfection of our Volition and inclination, in respect of the
Action, is Constancy, Continuance, or Duration. So that in this respect, the
highest degree is to have the Volition and Inclination perpetually and
eternally directed to the absolutely greatest good; the lowest, to have them so
directed but for one moment, or the least of time. This perfection of the
Action of Volition, belongs only to God, who always actually so wills: (for he
is always the same without any change) but of habitual inclination, may be in
us and other rational Creatures. So that there are only these three general
perfections of Virtue. The first, the direction of Volition and Inclination to
their right Object; the second, that they be with the greatest force or
strength any Nature is capable of; the third, that they be the most perpetual
and constant, or continued and lasting; or in three words, Sincerity,
Generosity, Constancy.

21. And yet there seems to be another perfection of Volition in respect of the
Action; and that is, the just moderation of it to the various parts of this
Universal good: i. e. When we will any part thereof knowingly, to will it more
or less in due proportion to the share of goodness that is in it, compared with
another part; and the defect contrariwise will be, to will a less good more
than a greater; and the greatest defect is, when we will the least part more
than all the rest; for example, a moment of the least pleasure to our selves,
before the Eternal Felicity of God and all the world besides. And this may be,
not only when any two parts are inconsistent one with another, as when I will
to gratify my self in that which displeases God, and is mischievous or
hurtful to my Neighbor; but also when they are consistent, nay, conjoined
together, and they are altogether the Object of my Will. Thus if a man builds
an Hospital, or gives any Alms to the Poor, he knows this action will please
God, benefit others, procure himself Reputation; and he does it for all these
reasons; he wills all this good together as one: but here that of these which
he may most will, that which he chiefly intends, is his Reputation, and his own
pleasure therefrom, which ought to be possibly without compare the least
regarded, though somewhat. But in truth, this is but a sign of that perfection
and defect of Volition, which is in respect of the Object or of the Action. For
if a man wills only his own good, or only to please God, exclusively one to the
other, the defect seems to be in not having the Universal good, but some
particular good for the Object of his Volition, because both and more should be
taken together: But if a man wills one good composed of more parts, and wills
that part most which in truth is the least good, either he does it knowingly,
or ignorantly: if knowingly, (which is most frequent, whatever pretenses men
may make) then the defect is in not willing the greatest good; and
consequently, it is a defect in respect of the Object beforementioned; for he
cannot but know, that it tends to a lesser Good, to will a lesser more than a
greater. If ignorantly and erroneously, judging that the greater Good, which is
indeed the lesser, the ignorance is either through some present defect in the
actual Volition, or habitual inclination to the Universal good, ones Duty,
Right, Honest; or it is not: if it be, it is plain where and what the defect
is, viz. in the Action or Inclination beforementioned; if it be not, then
there is no defect in the present Volition at all, (whatever may have been in
former Actions of the Will, by which such ignorance may be contracted) but only
in the Understanding; the Volition may have for all that its due Object, viz.
the greatest good.

22. From these propositions it follows, that the nature of this defect of
Volition or of Sin, depends not upon any Law, or upon any Beings Will
whatsoever, (though its existence does, because it being only a (...), or
relation, it cannot exist actually, unless the subject thereof do, namely some
Will or other:) but though we suppose no other Being in the World besides one,
and no antecedent Will, yet these which have been beforementioned, would be
perfections and defects whenever it exists. It is true, that Laws may be the
signs of what is just and unjust, right and wrong; but not the efficient
causes, any otherwise than a Subject is the efficient cause of the existence of
its property, as is but now said. These Laws also are sometimes necessary and
inseparable signs, sometimes in several degrees contingent and probable only,
according to the knowledge and justice of the Lawmakers. Those which are
certainly Laws of God, who is infallibly wise, and immutably just, are most
inseparable and certain signs of what is just and right: but those which are
any other Creatures, are more or less probable ones. Laws do not make, but
suppose the thing just which they command. It is true also what the Apostle St.
Paul says, That where there is no Law, there is no transgression; because God
himself and his Volition of what is right and just are eternal: or the Apostle
may mean by Law, not strictly an act of some Will concerning another Action
and Will, but an obligation to will or do any thing; a (...), a (...). Such
there always is, whenever any will exist, being a relation between the Will and
its due Object the Universal good. Besides, St. Paul may mean comparatively;
the Transgression or Sin is much less, where there is no express known Law.

23. Nor does the nature of Sin or Virtue depend upon liberum arbitrium, or
Free Will; for whether any Will has power to determine its own Volition to the
greatest, or any lesser good or no; (which I do not deny) yet most certainly,
whenever there is a direction thereof to a lesser good, there is a defect in
that Volition, come it from what cause it will; though it should be the effect
of some other Being without it, which by his power was able so to determine it;
or suppose any Nature should be eternally and necessarily so constituted.

24. It follows likewise, that supposing it possible for any Being to have for
the Object of his Volition the rectitude the perfection thereof, and should not
place it in the willing the greatest good, but in willing some particular, or
(which is most common) some personal good, as self-preservation; this very
Volition would have that defect in it we call Sin, and would not be capable of
any reward, i. e. any thing which should maintain or encourage such an action.
If it were possible for a man unfeignedly in his Conscience to judge it his
bounden duty to desire and pursue always as his ultimate end, his own greatest
personal good, without regard to God or others, and accordingly should Will and
Act; this would be a vicious man. And whether God may not by way of punishment
for pride, etc. permit a man so to err, is not here to be determined: and there
have been two pernicious and foolish mistakes, if not wilful Errors, that men
might securely indulge their lusts, of some late new Modellers of Morality; to
which a great part of the ill nature and debauchery of the Age is to be
imputed: the one, the advancing of their personal good, to the place and
dignity of the last end of all their actions; the other, the pitching upon no
better than the preservation of life and limb, or (to enlarge their own Sense)
the greatest measures of the Conveniences, Comforts, and Pleasures proper to
this bodily life. In these Opinions they have quite perverted the nature of
things, and made Vice to be Virtue. Or because, according to the same men's
Doctrine, every one is necessarily carried to his own greatest good or
happiness in general, only through ignorance is often out of the way, they have
made no Vice at all, substituting in its room Folly and Imprudence.

25. What has been said of Volition, may be said of Actual and Habitual
Inclination; and because Volition and Actual Inclination are but sometimes
existent in men, but Habitual Inclinations constant and perpetual; it is
according to this a man is chiefly to be estimated, viz. by three things. (1.)
Its direction to its right Object, the Universal Good. (2.) The force and
strength thereof. (3.) Its constancy or frequency in the Soul: each of which
has degrees; so that it is easy to set down certain rules for the judgment of
the goodness or badness of any man. For example sake only: He is the worst man
in the first respect, who is habitually inclined to, and in love with the
meanest or least delectable good; in the second respect, who is the most
vehemently inclined thereto; in the third respect, who is perpetually or
constantly so. Contrariwise, he is the best, who has the greatest good
absolutely, or the Eternal Felicity (for by Felicity I mean the greatest degree
of delight or pleasure as to intension) of the Universe, or all Beings existent
for the Object of his Habitual Inclination; or who is habitually inclined
thereto, and that with the greatest force and strength of his nature, and then
constantly and perpetually. It is easy to see, what an indefinite number of
degrees there are between these two extremes, in all the three respects. The
greatest difficulty is not to know these Rules of our Judgment; but to know our
selves, and consequently to apply them. And since Denominatio fit a Majore, he
only is to be called a good man, who has a stronger and more constant Habitual
Inclination to the Universal good, than to any one or more particulars. And
this was, or might have been, the reason why Martyrdom was so highly esteemed
and magnified in the Primitive Church. A Martyr by his suffering for his Faith,
even though he was not actually Baptized, was thought to expiate all former bad
life, and to be undoubtedly saved, or to obtain a most glorious and blissful
condition in Heaven: because such his suffering death, or parting with life
itself, deemed the greatest personal good amongst men, rather than to deny that
Truth which they supposed God had commanded to believe and profess, and
consequently to disobey God, was a certain sign and argument of a stronger
actual and habitual inclination at that time of his death to obey God, and
consequently to that which was right, just, and good, than to any other thing
in the world besides. Nor may it be here amiss, to hint how easy it is to
understand it possible for this Habitual Inclination, Bent, and Propension to
any certain Object, to be so forcible and strong, as to be inconsistent with an
act of Free Will or choice about that Object: nor may a man be able to divert,
suspend, or withhold his actual Volition, consent, or embrace from it when it
is proposed. Though by prudent contrivance, these Habitual Inclinations
generally, (I do not say all) may also by degrees be weakened, and at last quite
extinguished and destroyed.

26. It Is as easy hence to deduce all particular virtues and vices, of which
we shall find many to have as yet no Names. For one way, and the most common,
is by distinguishing particular delectable Good or Pleasure (whether that
particular Good be in a man's self, or in another as the Subject; whether it be
mine or another; but it is usually, if not always, a man's own) from its
various Causes or Objects. And it seems there may be six general ones (I do but
now suggest, not determine.) (1) The possession of any Good in general so
esteemed; many things thus only please. (2) The pain, mischief, evil suffering
of another: Whether any Being is of such a temper as to be delighted therewith,
let others consider; but I see no reason why it is not possible. Now to will
ones delight or pleasure from this Object or Cause, is called Malice; to be
habitually inclined thereto, Maliciousness: but the renouncing of this, or the
nolition of it, or the volition of its absence, and instead thereof the
volition of the universal Good, may be called Charity, or if there be any
fitter Name. (3) The third Object causing delight to us, is power to do what
one pleases, to make any thing consequent upon ones will; of which three
degrees; Liberty, Equality, Superiority. Now to have pleasure arising from
hence, the only Object of our volition, is an action of pride; the only
Object of our habitual inclination, the vice thereof: To refuse it, as before,
or will its absence, is Humility. (4) Mere Activity and Life, and that exerted
in all the operations of our Souls; such as is, for example, mere Contemplation
and Knowledge, Sense, Imagination, strong Passions, intense Volitions or
Resolutions. And because Knowledge may be indefinitely divided according to its
Objects, here alone may be almost an infinite number of particular Vices and
Virtues. This Vice and contrary Virtue have no names, some kinds of it may. (5)
Some certain agreeable corporeal Motions, or Motions of our Bodies, to which
our Souls are united, suaves Corporis Commotiones, as some have called them,
which I know no common name to signify them by, unless Titillation may be
allowed. These (as Carts thinks) create pleasure to the mind, as a natural
sign of the health or good constitution of the Body: and the pleasures arising
in the Soul from them, Plato calls (...), Pleasures which are conveyed to the
Soul by the Body. Of this sort are all Sensations; amongst which are those of
Health, Calmness, and Serenity; other bodily tempers; many corporeal passions,
such as Love, Joy, Hope, Acquiescence, etc. Nay, I may say all perhaps; for it
may be that some Souls may be delighted with the corporeal passions of Sadness
and Grief; though in these not only the Mechanical or Corporeal Vibrations and
motions of Fibers, Nerves, and Spirits, delight and please; but also the Sense,
Perception, Life, and some kind of action of the Soul. So that this pleasure is
mixed from two very different Objects; one Corporeal, the other Intellectual: and
indeed, most of our pleasure or delight arises from several Objects mixed and
blended together. Now to have the pleasure or delight arising from such motions
of our Bodies, the entire Object of our Volition, is an act of Sensuality; and
to be habitually inclined thereto, the Vice: But to refuse this Self-pleasure,
or to will its absence, is Sobriety or Temperance, (...). (6) The perfection of
a man's nature, of all his Faculties, (which may be referred to the first) and
amongst the rest, the Rectitude, Honesty, Probity of his Actions and
Inclinations, or his Virtue, may be and is the cause of great pleasure and
delight to him. Now even to have this delight; (usually called the satisfaction
of a good Conscience) nay let me add, that pleasure which arises from hopes
and assurance of a reward, and from the possession of it too: I say, to have
this the entire Object of our Volition, Intention, Inclination, or in greater
proportion to other parts of the Universal Good than it ought, is a sin and
vice which wants a name, as does its opposite Virtue. Finally, (not to insist
upon this distribution I have made, which I brought only for example of some
general Heads) as many as there are Objects which may please or delight us, and
consequently correspondent Appetites, (which are numberless:) So many sorts of
sins or vices may there be; they all may be reduced to some general heads, and
those heads divided, and these again subdivided, etc.

27. Many other distributions of Virtue and Vice may be made; as from the parts
of the Universal Good distinguished by its Subjects, usually comprehended under
three, viz. God, All created or finite Beings besides our selves, under the
name of our Neighbor, (though we know little of any other, or what we can do
to or for them besides Mankind) and lastly our selves. The Volition of the
Universal Good, our last end, therefore may be resolved into three parts, viz.
The love of God; The love of ^ur Neighbor; The love of our selves: Or, Piety,
Charity, and prudent and sober care of our own greatest concerns. And by Love,
I mean not Gratitude, but a Volition of the good of the Object beloved, whether
the good be an absent or present good. To will an absent good, and desire it
for the person we love, can only take place with respect to our Neighbor and
our selves, not to God, who we know cannot want any thing: But to will a
present good, may be to God also. We may will, approve, rejoice, delight in the
infinite perfection and happiness of his nature, which he always does and
cannot but possess.

28. But these three parts of the Universal Good are always to be intended
together actually or habitually, although but one of them may be first
regarded. As when we actually will any good to our Neighbor, we ought at least
habitually to will it, not only because thereby we do good to him, but also
because it pleases God, and it is our own perfection, and will be for our own
greater good so to do; although that we first looked at was our Neighbors
good. And these three parts are so necessarily and inseparably conjoined, that
we may and ought always habitually to believe, when we endeavor to effect the
one, the other will necessarily follow. Thus, for example, to love God, the
Volition of good to him, or the rejoicing in the perfection and happiness of
his Nature, has necessarily consequent others and our own Good: Because all
the happiness of Creatures depends thereon, and flows therefrom, (from his
Being, and from his most perfect Nature;) and because it is and will be our
greatest Perfection, Comfort, Reward. So again, if we sincerely love and do
good to our Neighbor, we may be sure it pleases God, and is best for our
selves. And so Lastly, our own greatest good truly as to Intension, Extension,
and Duration; or our greatest perfection and happiness, is in and by loving of
God, and doing all the good we can to our Neighbor.

29. It may be further observed, that all actions and correspondent habits of
the Will whatsoever, which do effect the Universal good, have been used to be
called Virtues, without any consideration of the end of the Action, or the
ultimate Object thereof; and for distinction-sake may be called instrumental or
eventual virtues: The other sort of Volitions which have their due end, or due
ultimate Object considered as such, having the name of principal or inherent
Virtues. So, for example, to apply the mind to attention and consideration,
pursuit after or love of the Truth, [(...)] are accounted Virtues, because they
usually are the causes of good effects in the world more than hurtful ones.
Such again are to judge rightly and truly, especially concerning other men;
i.e. always only according to what really appears to us from things
themselves, not because we imagine so: Although the end of these actions may be
no other than the pleasure and delight a man takes in such conduct of himself
in such temper and actions, or some personal and proper good, and therefore
indeed are inherently vicious, according to our sense of Virtue and Vice. So
likewise Liberality, or the distribution of many good things to others,
considered without its end; I mean, the inward Volition of so doing, or the
action of the Will, of which the outward bodily action is a Sign and Effect
only, and belongs not to this present discourse.

30. And it is here only, that it is generally true, that Virtus consistit in
medio, i.e. there may be too much or too little of such actions and habits,
both which extremes do not effect the Universal good, but are of more ill than
good consequence. Thus, for example, A man may attend too much sometimes and to
some things, or too little; he may give too much or too little, the first of
which is called prodigality, the second parsimony or covetousness. But it is
false and absurd to say this of Virtue as it is before defined; for there can
be no excess therein. Nay, some of these very actions may have no excess; as
Justice rightly desined, and Faith.

31. Those of this sort of actions and habits are called Virtues, which are
observed and believed to have more good effects than evil ones in the total
sum. Insomuch that if they have very few more good than bad consequences, they
are termed mean Virtues, as Frugality; if very many and great ones, then they
are called great Virtues, such as Justice, or giving to every one his due, i.e.
that to each particular, (and consequently to ones self also) as to quality,
quantity, time, and all other respects of giving it, which is most for the
Universal good; Meekness [(...),] or slowness to be moved to anger, or
returning evil when provoked by infirmities, ill actions, or injuries to our
selves or others; Clemency, or an omission of part of punishment; Forbearance
and long sufferance, [(...)] a delay of punishment, or of returning evil for a
long time after many injuries; Forgiveness, or an omission to punish, or return
any evil for injuries at all; Bounty, Courage, Veracity, consent to the
Constitution and Administration of Government, or entering into a Society, where
some may be on purpose set apart and appointed for finding out and improving
and securing what is for the common benefit of that Society, and particularly
for the arbitration of all differences, which the Jews call (...) Judges or
Government: and make it one of the seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah, or of
those whose advantages of benefit to Mankind were so easily and well known,
that all men who had the use of Reason and Natural light only, allowed and
commanded them. But there is no greater instrumental or eventual Virtue than
Christian Faith, or to be a Believer; by which I mean, Obedience to Jesus in
Gods Name, which consists of, or contains two things. (1.) An assent to all
things Jesus, or those commissionated and inspired by him, taught and
delivered, as infallibly true. And (2.) A practicing all he has commanded.
Better words than these we have not to express these two particulars by, though
both indeed are doing and practicing commands. For the precepts of Christian
Faith contain the most sincere, and generous, and constant inherent Virtue; as
also the greatest instrumental or eventual ones. The very first part alone, or
Assent, is generally in various degrees a great instrumental Virtue. Some
habits again there are, whose advantage of good or bad effects is so uncertain,
that it is disputed whether they be Virtues or not. Some at some times say they
are, and others say not. For example, Facetiousness and Taciturnity. And for
the same reason, it is hardly yet determined, or determinable, whether some
dispositions and actions be Vices, or Vicious or no; viz. because the advantage
or excess of good or bad consequences of either side is yet unknown. Such
perhaps may be Scrupulosity, or an aptitude to examine the lawfulness of every
the smallest action; not in respect of the end only, (for that is easily known)
but of the effect, which is mostly difficult, often impossible to know. So also
Separation from some particular corrupted Church. Some may think Separation,
some Communion the greatest mischief. Such individual actions also may be
called indifferent. These for their very being such, are not by any man to be
done at all; and a man is always to do that which is not indifferent, or to act
because he judges upon so much consideration as is fit to be allowed or
sufficient for things of no more importance, that of his action there may be
more good than bad consequences, and more good consequences than of his
omission of it, or doing any other action at that time. Those actions also are
by some termed indifferent, which though they are at one time in some
circumstances of best effect, and therefore to be done; yet in others it is
confessed they are not. If so, there may be a great many degrees of
Indifferency. Some actions may be more, some less indifferent than others, in
respect of frequency and number of conveniences or good effects. Some may be
for the most part of many and great good consequences and effects, but seldom
of any hurtful ones, and those but small and few. On the contrary, some may
more generally be very inconvenient and noxious, yet sometimes convenient and
useful. Some lastly may be near equal. All which hinders not, but that every
one of these individual actions, according as with all their circumstances they
are judged to be of most good or bad consequences, are as much to be done or
not to be done at that particular time, as if they were of that sort of actions
which were perpetually to be done or abstained from. And these are the things
generally about which the World with an unproportionate confidence dissent and
quarrel, and contend unto wounds and death itself.

32. Many other are the useful inferences which may be made from these few
Observations, and many the Questions determined thereby. As only for instance
sake: It is an ordinary Question among the Writers of Ethics, and it may be of
some importance, whether Virtutes sunt connexae, all Virtues are connected? so
that if there be one in any Subject, there are all. To which it is easily
answered, that they are not. For it is plain, that a man may have a more strong
and prevailing habitual inclination to his duty, to that which is just and
right, to please and obey God, to the Universal good, than to some one or more
certain Objects, but not than to some other. So some men especially, if
advanced in years, may prefer their duty and acting according to Conscience,
before any sensual pleasures; but not before Riches, Reputation, Dignity,
Power, Self-will, etc. They may have so little inclination to the former, as
easily to subject it to their Conscience; but so violent and impetuous to the
latter, that they are not to be governed or commanded by their Conscience, or a
judgment of, and habitual inclination to their duty. They may be, as is
usually said, perhaps, Covetous, Vainglorious, Ambitious, Proud, and
Obstinate; but not Voluptuous: and on the contrary, (to speak in the received
style) some may be very insensible of Glory or Greatness, but furiously carried
to the pleasures of Sense. And hence it appears, that the Characters which
Historians have given of some men, may be true, namely, that there was in them
Magnae Virtutes, nec minora Vitia; great Virtues, and as great Vices. But it is
as plain, that it is an ordinary mistake of some persons, who say, that every
man has the seeds and roots of all particular Vices in his nature; if by those
words they mean, an inordinate and immoderate habitual inclination or appetite.
And I know not what they can mean else, unless it be a bare capacity; but then
there would be the seeds of all Virtues as well as Vices. For there may be so
many sins as there are Appetites, and so many Appetites as there are Objects:
and there are some objects from which the Souls of some men have a natural
aversion; and this is to be understood, not only of individual objects, but
also of some kinds of them, and consequently of some kinds of sins.

33. But it is a Question of much greater consequence, what Virtues and Vices
are the greatest, and who are the most Virtuous or Vicious persons? For
according to our right information and judgment herein, our Opinions and
Actions, our Inclinations and Behavior, our Rewards and Punishments toward
men, ought principally to be directed and governed. Now Vices or Sins (to take
only that part) are to be estimated either according to their principle and
end, or according to their effect and consequence: or they are either inherent
or eventual, as has been before said. In respect of the principle or end,
there is no one kind or sort of sin universally greater than another; for there
may be as great an excess of (...), or self-love, in one sort as in another;
and that is the greatest sin in this respect, in which there is a greater
excess of (...), or habitual inclination to ones proper and personal good,
above Universal Charity, or above the habitual inclination to the Universal
good. Thus there may be as great excess of (...) in sensuality, as in pride or
malice. I say it may be so, though more generally it is reasonably believed and
supposed that there is more in these two last; and that because there are
usually more and greater mischievous effects to others visible and known to him
that is guilty of them, than in the first: whence one must needs have a less
regard to the good of others compared with his own, than the other. But in
respect of the effect or consequence, there is always a great difference
between the kinds of sins, and one is much worse than another. Thus Malice and
Ambition are much greater sins than Vainglory or Sensuality, especially some
kinds of it, such as the immoderate love of Bodily Exercises, Divertisements,
and Pastimes. In particular, or rather individual sins or ill actions, there
may be always difference both in respect of the principle and the effect. So a
particular sin of Malice, and Spite, and Revenge, may be much greater and more
heinous than a sin of Intemperance or Fornication, both in respect of (...), or
self-love, in opposition to the good of others, and in respect of the hurtful
and noxious effects and consequences. Sometimes a particular sin may be greater
in respect of the effect than another, but not in respect of the principle.
Thus one act of Pride or Malice in any man, may have many more mischievous
consequences upon it than an act of Intemperance or Fornication; but yet there
may be less of the excess of (...) in that than in this; the man perhaps being
ignorant of many of the ill Consequences thereof, whereas in this he saw them
and yet committed the sin. We ought to distinguish between the greatness of a
sin and of a sinner. He is not always in Gods account (who knows the
inclinations of the Soul certainly) the greatest sinner, who commits the
greatest sin. I mean, he is not always the most guilty of an inherent sin, who
is the most guilty of the greatest eventual sin: and on the contrary, one man
may be inherently, or in respect of the principle, more sinful and vicious in
the commission of a less eventual sin, than another in the commission of a
greater. Thus oft-times he may be a worse man, or a greater sinner inherently,
who is guilty of Vainglory, (which seems to have so few more evil than good
consequences upon it, and therefore to be a less Eventual sin than Fornication
or Intemperance) than he who is guilty of Fornication or Intemperance.

34. So likewise it has been disputed, whether actual inclinations and
propensions, or (as some call them) appetites to sin, concupiscences without
consent of the Will, or actual Volition, be sinful? To which it is to be
answered, that it is plain they are sinful. But withal, that the Wills not
consenting, or rather the actual nilling and refusing them because they are
sinful, is a certain sign of the Superiority or Prevalency just at that time of
its habitual inclination to that which is right and honest; as the not
regarding at all, and not attending whether they be sinful, and not checking
them if they seem so to be, is a sign of the contrary. For there may be not
only diverse, but contrary habitual inclinations in the Soul at the same time.
But as for mere thoughts or suggestions of what is sinful or unlawful, as of
Revenge, or Lust, or Vainglory, there can be no sin in them; And when they are
assentedto, or delighted in, the sin is not in those thoughts, but in the
actual Volition or Inclination of the Will. It is not a sin, for example, for a
man to have such a thought as this: Mischief thou such a man because he once
mischieved you: Do such a thing, because such persons will speak well of and
applaud you for such a performance: For such a thought is but an Object of my
Understanding, and proposed to my Will perhaps; it is not in my Will, in which
only is sin. If it were a sin barely to have such a thought, then it would be
so if I had it conveyed to me by reading or hearing of such words; which no man
can think. Nevertheless, the emerging or springing of such thoughts from our
selves, is a very probable sign of habitual sinful inclinations in us. For it
is a sign (though not a necessary one) of some corporeal Passion of Love, or
Delight, or Desire, conjoined to such Thoughts and Objects; or of some such
bodily disposition, and perhaps mental temper, which naturally impresseth or
causes such inclinations. The spontaneous emergency of certain thoughts in us,
usually proceeds from such a disposition of the Body in us, as is the cause of
delight and love to such Objects; and then those passions (if not hindered)
impress on the Will actual and habitual inclinations. What is meant by sin, and
sinful, has been before laid down, viz. when the Inclination and Volition of
the Will has for its Object only some Particular good, and not the Universal
(or that which God has commanded by Revelation or Reason, that which pleases
him, which is all one; because the Commands of God are, and are by all men
taken to be an inseparable sign thereof) actually or habitually; i. e. actually
perceived, or habitually and confusedly remembered. For it is of great moment to
be observed, that when the Understanding actually takes notice of and regards,
and the Will is carried to some particular good only, such as is ones daily
food, sleep, etc. yet the Will may by an habitual memory be carried to, or have
for its object the Universal good, and that which is right, just, honest: for
the Understanding may have concluded generally from Revelation, or Reason, or
the common uncontradicted practice of the world, that my particular use and
enjoyment in such measure and seasons of such particular good things, is in
such circumstances for the universal good; that it enables me to do more good,
and consequently to please God and better my own condition: and the Will may
act upon such an habitual Memory, without any actual perception preceding. It Is
much like a man's habitual direction of all his steps to the end of his journey,
though he does not in every step, nay perhaps in very few, actually think
thereof. And as it is a certain sign of this habitual direction, that the man
attends and is sagacious as much as the danger of going out of the way
requires; and that if he has by another admonition, or any other means, any
suspicion that he is out of the way, he presently stops and inquires, and
endeavors to be satisfied whether he be in the right way or no: So it is also
a sign of the habitual inclination of the Will to that which is right, which is
for the Universal good, (of which the indubitable commands of God are a certain
mark) if in any such ordinary and common actions of life he be as wary and
circumspect as the danger and the importance, compared with other matters, and
the likelihood of his erring, requires: and when he has any sufficient reason
to suspect he does or may err, to stop, to abstain, to consider. And this is
all I have at present to return you in Answer to your first Question.

35. I have (Sir) in these Propositions made use of Scholastic terms, or
suchlike, which I know are not much agreeable to the humor of this Age: but in
truth I could not avoid it; oft-times in the most received style either there
wanted Words, as far as I know, or they being of confused, loose, and uncertain
signification, sometimes signifying one thing, and sometimes another; sometimes
more or less (as every one may inform themselves) they would not serve my
purpose. And I thought it of great pleasure and use, not only to conceive these
things my self the most simply and distinctly, but also to be understood
clearly by others of more close attention and reasoning; and therefore by your
self in the first place, whose Command I very well remember. If the Sense and
Notions as they are here delivered be well comprehended, as I hope they may
with a little use, it will be easy for men of Style, as they have occasion, to
make for them, and put them into a more fashionable dress, and to express them
by more tunable talk, for the sake of those, who either wanting Ability, or
shunning Pains, or admiring Eloquence, Fancy, and Wit, more than Truth and
Distinctness and Usefulness of Knowledge, are content and best pleased with a
general, confused, and figurative apprehension, or with a smooth, modish, and
affectionate expression of things. Nor are they indeed to be neglected, being
the generality of men, who though they have little Appetite to Naked Sense, and
dry Reason, the food of strong and sound Minds; yet will very well receive, and
digest it too, for use and action, when it is garnished and sweetened in such
manner, as uses to be most acceptable and grateful to them.

FINIS.
These Books following are published by the same Author, G. Bright, D. D.
A Treatise concerning Judging one another: Being several Discourses on the
occasion of our Savior's Precept, Matthew. 7.1. Judge not, that you be not
judged. in Octavo.

A Treatise of Prayer, with several useful occasional Observations, and some
larger Digressions concerning the Judaical observation of the Lords day, the
external Worship of God. In Octavo.

Tabulae Mosaicae Duae: Quarum Altera Precepta Legis Mosaicae commoda Methodo
Disposita; altera oblationum omnium, ex Efficiente, Materia, Consumptione,
Personis significatu, Tempore, Distributiones varias continet. All Three sold
by John Wright at the Crown on Ludgate Hill.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 14. read think it. Page 32. l. 16. r. kinds. Page 38. l. 11. r.
Momentany. Page 39. l. 16. r. Momentany. Page 50. l. 16. r. Beneficence. Page
62. l. 9. r. Biberius.

