Bristols second Address, As it was presented to their late Members in
Parliament, at their return from Oxford.
To THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir RICHARD HEART, Knight, Mayor of the City of
Bristol, and THOMAS EARL, Esquire, our late Representatives in Parliament for
the said City and County of Bristol.
I. THAT you may see the short life of the late Parliament has not influenced
us to Change by altering our Duty to our Sovereign or our respects to You; We
now receive You into this City with the same Loyal affections that we conducted
You out on Your journey to Oxford.

II. We are neither Presbyterians nor any of those Sects, who presuming to pry
into Gods secret Counsels, are the less to be wondered at, that they saucily
canvass and dispute all the Actions of his Vicegerent. And therefore we enter
not into the Reasons moving His Majesty unto this sudden Dissolution, but
humbly acquiesce therein with Duty and Loyalty becoming honest and peaceably
minded Subjects.

III. Whatever the Author of Vox Populi or other factious and seditious
Scriblers have with very ill purposes and designs of late falsely insinuated
into the People: We are sensible that the Power of Calling and Dissolving
Parliaments at pleasure, is one of those inseparable Prerogatives of the Crown,
which (no less necessary for the Subjects Safety than the Prince's Grandeur) We
in the third Article of our former Address assert and defend against all
Opposers.

IV. We are abundantly satisfied that our gracious King, who has hitherto made
the Laws the measure of his Actions and Proceedings, will still continue to us
the same just practice; And being assured by our former experience and His
Royal promise in His most Excellent Speech at the Opening of the late Session,
That he himself would neither use Arbitrary Power, nor suffer it in others; We
therefore take it for granted, That he saw no less just cause for the
Dissolving this than the preceding Parliament.

V. Had this Parliament continued a week longer, We had not (as now) wanted an
opportunity of vindicating our Election of You our true Representatives to the
great Dishonor of Your Competitors, in the Refutation of the many scandalous
and notorious falsehoods contained in the Petition presented (as is said) by Sir
Robert Atkins, Sir John Knight, and others, to the late House of Commons.

VI. And (here) We cannot but return you our hearty thanks and acknowledgments
for Your Courage and Resolution shown on this Occasion, and doubt not but You
will still retain the same constancy and steadiness.

VII. We desire, That You will be ready and prepared with Us with lives and
fortunes to stand by His Majesty and the established Government both in Church
and State, doing in Your respective Stations what in You lies. And wherein Your
Power shall fall short, praying from His Majesty assistance and encouragement,
countenance and protection for the due Execution of the Statutes in being,
particularly that of the 35th Eliz. made upon most deliberate Counsels (as the
History of those times attests) against all Recusants and Dissenters whatever,
their Prosecution being in our Opinion the only means (under God) to preserve
the Kings Person, our Religion, Liberty and Property from the secret
machinations and hellish conspiracies of the wicked and ambitious, whether
Papists or Fanatics.

VIII. And in this blessed Union, let us all with heart and hand join as one
man, and let all honest people heartily say (as we do) God save our good King
Charles the Second; let His and our Enemies be confounded: but upon Himself and
His lawful Successors, let the Crown be for ever established and flourish,
Amen, Amen.

Bristol the first of April 1681. This was subscribed by most of the Aldermen
and Common Council of the said City, and by several hundred more (Citizens and
Freeholders there.) As likewise was their former Address, notwithstanding
Langley Curtis had the impudence in his Protestant Mercury (Number 24.) falsely
to affirm, that the said former Address was a forgery, and an abuse put upon
the said City, and that they were altogether ignorant thereof: And thereupon
took occasion to vilify Mr. Thompson (a reverend Minister of the said City) in
scurrilous language peculiar to such Common-wealth-Protestants; which said
former Address (with this now presented) is and will be owned not only by those
who subscribed them, but by all other his Majesty's truly Loyal Subjects within
that City.



London, Printed for Henry Broom, 1681.


