A DISCOVERY OF THE IMPOSTURES OF WITCHES AND ASTROLOGERS.

-- Quicquid
Dixerit Astrologus, credunt a font relatum
Ammonis, quoniam Delphis Oracula cessant,
Et genus humanum damnat caligo futuri.
Juv. By JOHN BRINLEY Gent.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, at the Crown on Ludgate Hill, and Sold by
Edward Milward Bookseller, in Leitchfield. 1680.

To the Honorable Sir Brian Broughton of Broughton, Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
THose Infinite Obligations you have been pleased to lay upon me, have
emboldened me to present you with this Discourse; not by way of Retaliation
(for what proportion can this hold with your so many, and so great favors?) but
by way of protection: that what is weak in it self, being Cherished by the Rays
of your kind Aspect, may be able to pass through all those Affronts, which
works of this nature usually meet with. It had been easy to have varnisht this
Work over with the finer Colors of Rhetoric; but I well knew, that you, who
are so great a Lover of Truth and Sincerity, scorn all that Fucus, with which
men commonly daub over their Works. The occasion which drew me on to undertake
a work of this nature, was those frequent Cheats put upon honest and
well-meaning people, by these false pretenders to Arts. If therefore I have
contributed any thing in order to undeceive the world, which is too fond of
such Trifles, I have my end; you Patronizing my endeavors. May Heaven ever
prosper you, and all those Hopeful Branches of your Family, and may I rejoice
in your Patronage, who am,

Honored Sir, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, John Brinley.
Brockton in the County of Stafford, November. 7 th. 1679.
THE PREFACE.
CErtainly if the enjoyment of Truth be the beginning of our happiness in this
Life, as it is the perfection of it in the Life to come, there can be no
greater Charity, than to reduce the Wanderers into the way, and to undeceive a
multitude, which is always greedy of its own ruin, and fond of every thing that
carries in it any show or appearance of goodness. For I sadly observe, that the
common people are exposed to the deceipts of all Professions: They are the
Issachars of the world; They bear the burdens of all sorts of people, and few
of them have the Prerogative or the Abilities of Balaam's Beast to reply; Am
not I thine Ass? Even in the concerns of Religion, where we expect, not only
the most innocent, but most infallible Truths, are strange Deceptions and Pious
Frauds; and besides the little talking Schismatics, which fill our ears with
the noise of Sermons, there are greater heads, and more advanced
understandings, who make it there business to abuse us. The Lawyers are grown
delusive, even to a Proverb, of which the narrowness of some men's, and the
entangled condition of others Estates, is too great an Evidence. Physicians
have their Arts also, not only of gaining our Coin, but even of deceiving us
into Death it self, from hard and unintelligible names, pretending as strange
effects. Astrologers cheat our unwary and too forward beliefs into a conceit of
things, of which they even doubt themselves; and impose upon us a belief, that
arbitrary events and accidental proceedings of things below, have necessary
causes above; and the weakness of common judgments (which are ever more greedy
of things to come, than inquisitive of things past, or careful of those
present) are ready to swallow the Predictions of the most ignorant men, which
considering the independency of their Causes, and uncertainty of their Events,
are only in the foreknowledge of him, to whom all things are as present.

Hence proceed those swarms of Fortune Tellers, Geomancers, Diviners,
Interpreters of Dreams, who possess the Common people with apprehensions, that
they know all their Fate, the number of their Days, the Casualties of their
Life; and even their natural inclinations, and thoughts of their hearts: by
this means Cheating the poor innocent Souls into the grossest Superstition
imaginable.

The consideration of these things was the great motive, that stirred me up to
these undertakings, in which I design nothing but the good of my poor
illeterate Countrymen, whom I daily see imposed upon by such Deluders; who
being generally persons of broken Fortunes, have no other way to defend
themselves from the miseries of poverty; and therefore are forced to fall upon
the honest plainness of the common people, and by unnecessary and unlawful
Arts, patch up the breaches of their Fortune. And herein I hope I shall not in
the least disoblige any wise or good men, of what Profession soever.

CHAP. I.
That most men are naturally inclined to Superstition, especially the ignorant
sort.
AN Owl, an Hare, and an Old-woman, was Anciently the Emblem of Superstition;
and truly if we shall diligently search into the Causes of this Error, we shall
find that Ignorance, and Dotage, vain hopes, and foolish fears, groundless
expectations, and casual events have been the Springs from whence this folly
proceeds, which is the Mother of all these Omens and Prognostications. It is an
Ancient observation, Primus in orb Deos timor fecit, that fear Deified the
first gods, and without doubt there is much truth in the Assertion.

For though the Idea of one true God, and first Principle of all things, was at
first Imprinted upon the Soul of man; yet the fears of after Ages Canonized the
multitude of false gods. It was a Storm, and an Eclips, that Consecrated
Romulus; and Jove himself had not been Master of heaven, or worshipped upon
earth, had not the terrors of his Thunders advanced the conceit of his Divinity
amongst the ignorant, and fearful multitude. Hence Aulus Gellius observes in
Noct. At. l. 5. c. 12. That he was not only worshipped as a Iuvans Pater, a
friend and helper of Mankind, but as a Vejovis and hurtful Deity; and therefore
his image was placed in a Temple near the Capitol-with darts in his hand, to
signify his hurtful power; and therefore for this reason, Virgil in his
Georgics is thought to deprecate these unlucky gods.

In tenui labor, at tenuis non gloria, si quem.
Numina laeva sinunt, auditque vocatus Apollo.
Upon the like grounds the rest of the Stars, and Planets came to be reckoned
amongst the gods. For the ignorance of vulgar apprehensions, conceiting that it
lay in their own powers to disperse what influences they themselves pleased,
were not only fearful to offend these new Deities, which themselves had
created; but also took great care to win and please, lest they should send
forth such Malevolent Emissions of their fury, as might be to the prejudice of
Mankind, or at least the ruin of those who neglected their worship. Hence also
has it come to pass, that the Devil himself has had his Votaries, and has
still his devoutest worshippers; and the cause of this has not only been envy,
or desire of Revenge, which prompts men sometimes to the most wicked and
unlawful practices; but even cowardly and melancholy apprehensions. And this
is evident, first, in that the most ignorant and Narrowsould people are most
often seduced by evil Spirits, or by the weakness of their own imaginations, to
practice unlawful or unnecessary, and fruitless Arts. And secondly, in that all
Witches and Necromancers in their Spells, and most solemn Invocation of Devils,
have this, or the like Form. viz. Whereas thy Servant N. is unworthy to crave
the help or assistance of Good Angels, give leave to the Demons, etc. to come
to my Aid. And yet these sort of abused people have as many Followers as the
greatest Divines, while the ignorant multitude in all Misfortunes, Crosses and
Afflictions, forthwith make their Applications to them as the most ready help.

If the man be sick, where shall he have his Physic, but from one that fetches
it from behind the Curtain? If he lie under any Misfortune, he presently
betakes himself to some Fortune Tellers or Conjurer. If the Cattle be sick, the
White-Witch is presently sent for to bless it.

I shall therefore make it my business to undeceive the people, and to show
them that it is altogether unlawful to have recourse to such men, who practice
unlawful Arts; that in all Trials, Crosses, and Afflictions whatever, God alone
is to be sought after, who suffers us sometimes to fall into grievous troubles,
that we may the more devoutly call upon him.

CHAP. II.
That God's hand is in all Crosses, who Rules over Devils and all their
Instruments.
THe want of due consideration of the first and leading Cause, from whence all
Crosses and afflictions proceed, has not only been the occasion of many men's
betaking themselves to unlawful Remedies, but even of doubting either the
Existence, or Providence of the Deity. To see wicked men advanced to the
greatest Honors, enjoy the most splendid Fortunes, and continue in the firmest
health, and strength of body, and vigor of mind; while others of the most
temperate dispositions, most holy habits, and most constant Pieties, labor
under the greatest Crosses, and Misfortunes imaginable, has startled the belief
of many wise and good men. At this block the ingenious Poet Claudian confesses
that he stumbled.

Sed cum Res hominum tanta caligine volvi
Adspicerem; laetosque diu florere nocentes,
Vexarique pios, rursus labefacta cadebat
Religio.
But when I saw things so confusedly hurled,
And strangely tossed in this our lower world,
The wicked flourish, and the pious quail,
My tottering belief began to fail.
There is no need to multiply examples of this kind; it is the common Fate of man
to fall into these doubts. The example of the holy David may serve for all,
whose foot had well nigh slipped upon the like consideration.

But if we shall enquire into the Holy Scriptures, we shall find that
Afflictions come not but by the appointment or permission of God, who governs
and disposes all things as seems best to his Godly wisdom, and so as that
the events of all things may contribute most to his own glory, and suit best
with the happiness of his Saints. We are assured in Job, that Afflictions come
not out of the dust. Job. 5. 6. The evil (of punishment) is from the Lord.
Amos. 3. 6.

So the Lord smote all the firstborn of man and beast in Egypt, Exodus 21. 29.
So did he Iehoram the son of Iehosophat with an incurable disease, till his
bowels fell out. 2 Chronicles. 21. 18, 19. And so it was the hand of God, that
turned the Pride of Nebuchadnezzar into madness and brutishness. Dan. 4. 31.
And it was the Angel of God that smote Herod, causing worms to eat him to
death. Acts. 12. 23. And all the Magicians and Sorcerers in the world, nay, nor
all the power of Hell could never have relieved these. It was only in the power
of him that sent these punishments, to have removed them.

It Is true indeed, God sometimes sends out the evil Spirits, as the
executioners of his Justice, as he did among the Egyptians. Psalm. 78. 49. and
so did he send an evil Spirit upon Saul to vex him, 1 Samuel 16. 15. But when he
does send out these Instruments of his displeasure, they have their Commissions
and Orders, beyond which they cannot go. The Devils could not enter so much as
into the Swine of the filthy Gadarenes, without the leave of Christ. Mat. 8.
31. The Witches and Sorcerers acknowledge their limits. It is not all persons,
that they can pretend to hurt. Lipsius well observes Physiolog. Stoicor. lib.
1. Cap. 17. that neither Magicians, nor Devils themselves can take away Gold or
Letters out of mine, or Crassus's Chest, and Clientelis suis largiri. For they
are base, poor, contemptible fellows for the most part. Bodinus also. Demon.
lib. 3. cap. 3. Notes that they can do nothing ( in Iudicum decreta aut poenas,
in Regum concilia, vel arcana, nihil in rem nummariam aut thesauros, They
cannot give money to their Clients, alter Judges Decrees, or Councils of Kings:
these Minuti Genij cannot do it. Altiores Genij hoc sibi asservarunt, the
higher powers reserve these things to themselves. Now and then peradventure
there may be more famous and powerful Magicians, such were Simon Magus,
Apollonius Tyaneus, Pasetes, Iamblicus, Odo de Stellis, that for a time can
build Castles in the air, represent Armies, and perform very strange Feats; but
all these end in nothing, but the power of God protects those that fear him
from their Malevolence, and destroys all these Phantasms, bringing their wicked
works and the Authors of them to inevitable ruin. So it fared with that great
enemy of the Christian Faith Simon Magus, who when he had been several times
bafled by Saint Peter, at last, to give further demonstration of his great
power, ascended the Capitol, giving out to the people, that he would fly up to
Heaven from whence he came, and accordingly began his flight; upon which Saint
Peter besought God, that he would not suffer the world to be deluded by his
Sorceries; and forthwith the wicked wretch fell down, and in his fall put an
end at once to his delusions and his life. So soon can God bring to destruction
all those that work wickedness. Wherefore he only is to be sought after, in all
our Calamities and Afflictions; for he alone can remove them, and will do it,
when he sees it most for his glory, and the everlasting welfare of our Souls.

It is the greatest folly imaginable upon every Affliction, to run forthwith to
the Devil, or any of his Instruments: for it is not his will that we should be
cured of any of our Maladies. He rather glories in deceiving us, and bringing
us into all kind of misery, both temporal and eternal. Besides he can neither
do us good nor harm, but by Godspermission, and therefore all good men have
ever acknowledged, that whatever befell them, was the hand of God, yea, even
when they have known, that the most Devilish instruments have been employed
against them. Thus Job concludes, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away.
Job. 1. 21. Histerrors he called the terrors of the Lord C. 6. 4. And he said
also, that God scared him with dreams, and terrified him with visions. C. 7.
14. He therefore, from whom all things have their being, their life, and their
motion is to be Supplicated, either to remove our Cross, or so Sanctify it to
us, as that it may turn to our health and Salvation.

Passionate people will not be content to wait the Lords leisure, and so grow
impatient and furious under the Chastisements of the Lord, and are brought to
destruction. So fared it with Iehoram the son of Iesabel, who though he knew
the Lords hand was upon him, and his people; yet was he so impatient to endure
the misery, and so Hellishly enraged, that he Swore to take away the life of
the Prophet Eli. 2K. 6. 31, 33. But the end of this man was a short life, a
troublesome Reign, and a violent death, for he was trod to death by the people
in the gate, as the Prophet had foretold. 2 Kings. 7. 17. But it fell out much
otherwise with the patience of Job, who never murmured at any of Gods
dispensations toward him, but contented himself with all occurrences, and
humbly submitted to the severest Chastisements. Him therefore did God deliver
from all his troubles, and doubled his Blessings and his Rewards upon, and made
his end glorious and happy. The same Method of deportment is observable in
Saint Paul, who when the messenger of Satan was sent to Buffet him, betook
himself to Prayer, and had deliverance.

I shall proceed no further in Instances, to show that God alone has the power
to help us in all our needs, and likewise such a Dominion over all creatures
both good and bad, that without his permission and assistance they can do
nothing. I only shall mention that remarkable passage of Balaam, whom Balac did
imagine to have been endued with such a power, as that he could Bless, or Curse
whosoever he pleased. But the Prophet assures him, that though he would give
him his houseful of Silver and Gold, he could not go beyond the Word of the
Lord, to do more or less. Number. 12. 18. Therefore let no man think it lies in
the power of Inchanters, Witches, or any of their Associates or Assistants, the
Devils, to cure those whom the Lord has smitten, or to hurt any person, whom
the Lord is pleased to Bless.

CHAP. III.
Several strange Diseases happen only from natural Causes in which neither
Devils nor any of his Instruments have any hand.
THere is nothing (as we have formerly hinted) more usual with the Common
people, than to ascribe to Witchcraft, all Disasters, Mischances, or Diseases
whatever, seeming strange to vulgar sense. I shall therefore in this Chapter
give a brief account of some Diseases, which though proceeding from Natural
Causes, I have observed that the people attribute to Sorcery; and forthwith a
Messenger in any of these Cases is dispatched, either to a Cunningman for a
Blessing, or else the next Old-woman is suspected for a Witch, and the Curses
of all the Neighborhood hood are mustered against her.

1 st. For example, in a Catalepsis, the whole body is, as it were, in a minute
suddenly taken in the midst of some ordinary Gesture or Action, as Standing,
Sitting, Lying, Writing, or Looking up to Heaven, and is continued in this
posture for some space together, as if Frozen, generally stark and stiff, in
all parts without Sense or motion. Now this disease, being not so common as the
Measles, or the Smallpox, the Toothache, or the Ague, the Country people
forth with cry out there is Sorcery in the Case; cut off some of his hair, and
bring it to the Wiseman.

2 dly. The Apoplexy, wherein the Sick are also suddenly taken, and surprised
with a senseless Trance, and general astonishment, or sideration and benumming
of all the Limbs, void of all sense and moving, many hours together, only the
breath striveth against the danger of Suffocation, and still the Pulse beats.

3 dly. Others are swiftly surprised with so profound and deadly a sleep, that
no call, nor cry, nor noise, no pinching, or stimulation can in many hours
awake or raise them. Of this Disease, as Bodin affirms in his Daemonomania,
lib. 2. cap. 6. That Johannes Scotus lying as if he had been dead, was buried
before he really was so.

4 thly. Phrenitis, which the Greeks derive from the word (...), is a disease
of the mind, with a continual Madness and Dotage, which has an accute Fever
annexed to it, or else an inflammation of the Brain, or the Membranes or Kells
of it.

5 thly. Hydrophobia is a kind of madness well known in every Village, which
comes by the biteing of a Mad-dog. The reason of the name is, because the
persons thus affected cannot endure the sight of water, or any liquor,
supposing still they see a Mad-dog in it. The part affected is the Brain; the
cause Poison, that comes from the Mad-dog, which is so hot and dry, that it
consumes all the moisture in the body. Hildeshiem in Spicil. 2. Relates of some
that died so Mad; and being Cut up, had no water, scarce any blood left in
them. To such as are affected with it, the fear of water begins at fourteen
days after they are bitten, to some again not till Forty or Sixty days. Some
say not only biteing, but touching or smelling a Dog infected, may cause this
disorder; and then if any one chance to fall into such a condition, and the
cause not known, straightway half of the Parish is suspected of Witchery.

What would the people imagine of Lycanthropie, when they are so strangely
startled at these Diseases? For in this, as some Physicians tell us, men run
howling about Graves and Fields in the night, and will not be persuaded but
that they are Wolves, or such like beasts. Forrestus in his Observat. de morbis
cerebri. lib. 10. cap. 15. tells of some persons thus distracted, to one of
which himself was an eyewitness at Alcmaer in Holland, a poor Husbandman that
still hunted about Graves, and kept in Churchyards, of a pale, black, fearful
and ugly look. Such belike were the Daughters of King Praetus, who fancied
themselves to be Kine. And Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel, was only troubled with
this kind of Madness; and not really Metamorphosed into an Ox: For the soul of
man could not possibly dwell in so unsuitable an habitation as the body of an
Ox; but the proud King might be seized with so deep a Lycanthropie, as to fancy
himself to be so.

Besides this, we often see men laboring of very sad and violent Diseases, as
Convulsions, Madnesses, and such like, and some will bite their Tongues and
Flesh, some make fearful Outcries, and most hideous Shriekings, some toss
themselves violently from one place to another, some Froth, Gnash with their
Teeth, and draw their faces into strange and Ghastly Figures. All which though
proceeding from natural causes; yet the vulgar is ready to believe there is
something more in the Case. And that which does more confirm them in this
Creed, is either the want of able Physicians, or their inability to employ
them; for they are seldom so Charitable as to make any more Recipe's, than they
receive Guinies. And so the poor people are forced to go to some sorry
Emperick, who it is certain, will do them no good, and upon that disappointment,
to some Cunning man, who will do them less. Nay, it has sometimes happened,
that honest persons have been apprehended, Arraigned, and Condemned, through
the advices of such men; for in these Cases, it is observable, that a small
matter will beget suspicion, and upon this multitudes of Proofs shall be
mustered up, and so by a ready Climax, the poor people are hurried up to the
Gallows it self. Such are the miseries on the one hand, and the delusions on
the other hand, of the Superstitious, and ignorant Multitude.

CHAP. IV.
That Devils may do mischief to man or beast, without any Association with
Witch or Wizard.
THough we do not deny, but shall hereafter prove that there are Witches, and
Necromancers, and such persons as make wicked Contracts with the Devil, to the
ruin of their own souls, and the prejudice of others; yet it is most certain,
that the Devil often does much evil of himself (by Gods permission) without any
Association with any of his forementioned Instruments. For being possessed with
an irreconcilable malice against the welfare of Mankind, he goes about
continually seeking whom he may devour, laying hold upon all opportunities and
advantages, whereby he may tempt or ensnare us, or disturb our peace, or
endanger our Salvation. Thus in the beginning did he enter into the Serpent,
while there was yet no Witch to employ him. So when God gave him leave, he
entered into the Sabaeans and Chaldeans, and stirred them up to rob Job of his
Cattle. He burnt his sheep also with Fire, blew down his house upon his
Children, and killed them, and at last most cruelly tormented the body of Job,
and affrighted him with Visions and Dreams, and this without any the least
suspicion of Witchery. To these examples we may add those, whom the Gospels
mention to have been possessed in the days of our Savior; and the Herd of Swine
which by Christ's permission were driven headlong into the Sea by a Legion of
Devils. He does not always need to be set at work by his Imps and Associates.
If God permit him to afflict us, either for our sins, or for the trial of our
Faith, or Patience, or any other virtues; he is soon ready to execute his
Office, and to proceed to the utmost of his command. It is our happiness that
he has his Chains of Restraint, that his power is limited, and his malicious
nature kept within its bounds, otherwise our condition were miserable, even
beyond relief: he would not stand to tempt some, or more fully to contract with
others; but his first business would be utterly to destroy us all. Thanks
therefore be given to thee, O Almighty Jesus, who have overcome the Devil, and
do still reserve him in Chains to the Judgment of the Last Day.

CHAP. V.
That seeing Men, or Women, or Beasts may be Afflicted from some natural
Causes, or that some persons may on purpose Counterfeit many things; or that
the Devil himself may be the sole Worker, people ought to be cautious how they
Ascribe their Distempers, or Troubles to Witchcraft.
THere is nothing more common with men of Shallow understandings and Loose
lives, than to Ascribe every little Cross, or unfortunate accident to
Witchcraft. It shall therefore be my Business in this Chapter to dissuade men
from a Practice so vain, and fruitless in it self, so dishonorable and
displeasing to God, and so prejudicial to the health of their own Souls; and
there are many reasons to convince them of this folly, as for example.

1 st. The consideration of Gods own hand afflicting us to bring us to the
remembrance of our Duties, and to call us to Repentance and Amendment of life,
the power of natural causes, and the liberty which is sometimes given to Satan
without any Association with a Witch, as has been showed in the former
Chapters.

2 dly. An approved truth by the experiences of all Ages, That those, who never
Dream of Witches, or ever regard them, are hardly at any time tormented or hurt
by them: But on the contrary, such as live in suspicion of them, such as are
afraid of them, or seek to please them with Gifts, have commonly some mischief
done, as the Reward of their fears and jealousies. And truly the judgments of
God in this particular are very just, in punishing them by the same instruments
they stood in fear of, who have more awe for the Devil, than confidence in God.

3 dly. All do grant, which have any knowledge in the power of Witches, that
they work only by the Devil; for though themselves do Threaten, Curse, make
Images, and the like; yet the Devil is the great Instrument that works the
Mischief. Therefore the advice of Saint James is not unseasonable in this
Instance. Resist the Devil, and he will fly thee. Resist him, and he shall
have no power to hurt thee, either by himself or by the instigation of any
Associates. She may bid him go, but he cannot do till he has leave from God,
who will never grant it to hurt his own peculiar people; nay, he will be as an
Hedge about all those that put their trust in him.

4 thly. The manifold evils, which continually result from wicked practice, as

1 st. It draws mends minds from the true fear of God, making them to stand in
awe of the most wicked and wretched creatures in the world, the Devil and a
Witch, than which nothing can be a greater dishonor to the Creator, or more
prejudicial to their own Souls.

2. It brings honest and innocent people into suspicion and Infamy, and the
hatred of all the Neighborhood: for thus if the Horse be sick, or the Cow
dead, or the Plum-tree do not blossom kindly, some harmless old woman is
suspected, all her words, postures and actions are most criticaly observed, and
the most malicious reflections made of them, that the envy of man can invent.
So the poor creature comes to be hated and abused, and reviled by all that know
her, and that infamy shall never be wiped off her and her generation, even by
her most Religious or innocent deportment of her whole life. Hence the poor
woman is made miserable all her life, and her family Scandalous to succeeding
Ages, through the unreasonable fears and jealousies of foolish and
inconsiderate people. But this is not all; for it does sometimes happen, that
the suspected (though Innocent) is halled before Authority, and her life not
seldom endangered, sometimes taken away.

The last Argument is from this consideration, That the Scriptures never
ascribe our pains, vexations, anguish of body or of mind, losses of our Goods,
or any other Cross whatever, to Witches; but to the hand of God, or to men
openly and violently Robbing, Spoiling, or Killing. Where it may be demanded
why, seeing there is such mention of Witches, and Sorcery, and the like,
unlawful Arts in the Scriptures, they do not Ascribe any harms to them, as men
do in these days: and the reason is, for that the Word of God does never Assign
Instruments to be set on work by him, which have not power in themselves to do
what he employeth them about, whether it be Angel, Devil, or any other
Creature; and to teach us that they are but Satan's slaves, and that it is not
they, that do any, but that whatever is done, is the work of the Devil.

CHAP. VI.
That there are Witches.
THat there are Witches, and such Persons as from contracts with the Devil have
undertook, and seemingly performed some strange things; (though denied by some
Sensual men of this Age, whose Interest it is, there should be neither Heaven
nor Hell, and who have therefore proceeded from the denial of the Soul, to the
denial of Spirits, and from thence even to the denial of the Existence of God
himself) is yet deducible from several reasons.

1 st. And first from the most Ancient and veracious Authority of the Word of
God, in its forbidding such Diabolical practices, as in the first place. Deuteronomy.
18. 10, 11, 12. There shall not be found among you any one, that makes his Son
or his Daughter to pass through the Fire, or that uses Divination, or an
Observer of times, or an Inchanter, or a Witch,

Or a Charmer, or a Consulter with Familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a
Necromancer.

For all that do these things are an abomination to the Lord: and because of
these abominations, the Lord thy God does drive them out before thee.

From which words, it not only appears that there were those that worshipped
Idols, that gave themselves to Diabolical Arts; but also that for these
Abominations the Lord cast them out of the Land, and introduced his own people
the Israelites, strictly charging them, that they abstain from such unlawful
practices. For the Ammonites caused their Children to pass through the fire,
not (as some have supposed) to kill them, or burn them: but only to pay a kind
of Adoration to that Element. For (as Heurnius says) Ignem in Vr, Chaldaeorum
urbe, Abrahami Patria adorandum ponit, gravi poena in pertinaces promulgata.
Where yet there is no mention made of burning or killing. For who can believe,
that Solomon Murdered little Children, or cast them into the Fire, because the
Scripture says of him, Colebat Solomon Astharten, Deam Sidoniorum, and Moloch,
Idolum Ammonitarum. And yet this unhappy Custom has so spread it selfever
since throughout the whole world, that even in America, the Brasilians do the
same, as Johannes Lerius in Nav. Bras. reports of them. And among Christians
also Mothers did yearly cause their Children to pass over the Fire of Saint
John; which Custom, though condemned by a Council held at Constantinople, and
proved by Theodoret to have been derived from this Custom; is yet retained and
practiced amongst those of the Romish-Church. But to leave observations, and
return to our intended Business.

We find in the History of the Bible, the names and practices of certain
Witches and Sorcerers, as particularly we have the names of those two so famous
or rather infamous Sorcerers of Egypt. 2 Timothy 3. 8. Dan. 2. 2. We read that
Nebuchadnezzar had Dreamed certain Dreams, at which he was much perplexed, and
very desirous to know the Interpretation of them; he gave Commandment to call
the Magicians and the Astrologers, and the Sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to
show the King his Dreams. So we have also accounts of other Witches, as Balaam,
of Iezabel and her Witchcrafts. 2 Kings 9. 22. of Manasses, who to the rest of
his wickedness, caused his Children to pass through the fire in the Valley of
the Son of Hinnom: Also he observed times, and used Enchantments, and used
Witchcraft, and dealt with a Familiar Spirit, and Wizards. So have we Relations
of the Sorcery of Simon Magus both in Holy Writ, and other Authors of good
Credit, as Act. 8. 9. Eusebius his Eccles. Hist. which Historian tells us how
he came to Rome in the days of Nero, and how strangely he Bewitched the people
from the true Belief by his Magical Enchantments, till undertaking to fly in
the Air, God was pleased, at the Prayers of Saint Peter, to throw him down, in
which fall he lost both his Life, and Reputation.

To these Proofs we may add, the Practices of several Witches mentioned in the
Word of God, as Exodus 7. Isaiah. 47. 9. Ezeck. 21. 21. and this we read of
those that went to them. 1 Samuel 28. 7. For so goes the story of Saul, when he
said to his servants, Seek me a woman that has a Familiar Spirit, that I may
go to her, and enquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a
woman which has a Familiar Spirit at Endor. And Saul disguised himself, and
put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the
woman by night. So also did Balack send to Balaam to Curse his enemies. All
these things were done, contrary to the practice of good Josiah, who, as the
Sacred Records report, put away the workers with Familiar Spirits, and the
Wizards, 2 Kings. 23. 24. These are such evident Proofs, that it is to me a
wonder that any one, who believes the Scriptures, can offer to deny the
existence of Witches, though there were no Demonstrations in these our days, to
evidence this so palpable a Truth.

CHAP. VII.
Of the ground of Witchcraft, and of all the Practices thereof.
ALthough some persons, who have not altogether denied that there is a certain
kind of Magic, will not yet be persuaded, that there is any Contract with the
Devil; we shall endeavor to prove that there are Leagues and Covenants made
betwixt wicked persons and the Devil.

1. The word Chabor, which is an Inchanter, signifies one joined to another in
League and Society; now we cannot suppose this League to be with any other than
the Prince of Darkness, who Cooperates with these his Vassals, in their black
and ungodly Actions.

2. From the Confessions of some of these miserable Creatures, may be confirmed
what we here go about to Demonstrate. One Cyprian (whether the Ancient Father,
or some other I am not certain) avouches it from his own experience, who was
himself once ensnared in an actual and explicit Obligation with this black
Angel; but afterward through Gods mercy, was unloosed from thsoe destructive
Ties. So that as his Experience in the practice of Magic, rendered him a
sufficient Witness, his Conversion to Christian Principles should engage us to
Credit what he says, to be unfeigned.

And lastly, the privy marks and brands of the Beast, found in several parts of
Witches bodies do confirm it; as also the very Copies of the Bonds, wherein
Witches have confirmed their League and Familiarity with their Lord and Master,
of such an one speaks Mr. Fox, where the Bond was thrown amongst an Assembly
gathered together in Prayer and Fasting, for the Deliverance of a Young Man
thus engaged to Satan. But it may be objected, that such Leagues and Contracts
are not needful, forasmuch as the renouncing of God, and giving ones self over
to work uncleanness with greediness, is an implicit Covenant with the Devil;
and that therefore no such express Ceremonies are necessary, for the Holy
Scriptures say, That his Servant a man is whose work he does, whether of
unrighteousness unto Death, or of Righteousness unto Salvation. To this I
answer, that the Devil, who has ever since his Fall from his glorious Dignity
into the Regions and power of Darkness, and Confusion, made it his business to
bring Mankind into the same State of Damnation; and in that he could not
violate the most Sacred Deity in his own nature, he has gone about to deface
his Image engraven in the Soul of man; does delight to imitate God, yet so as
thereby to oppose him: so that as God makes a Covenant with his, so will the
Devil with his; as God has his Seal of Covenant, so will the Devil have his
mark; as God confirms his by Blood, so will the Devil have blood to ratify
the Covenant, which he and his do make. Hence the Learned have observed, that
in the times of ignorance, when the Devil had Dominion in the world, and
through Gods permission led Captive men's minds in the dark mazes, and Maeanders
of Superstition and Idolatry; those Devil-Idols in their names, had some
resemblance to the Divine attributes; and also most of the Rites and Ceremonies
used in the Solemnities of those Pagan gods, were in some measure (though not
obvious to each capacity) conformable to the Divine Institutions enjoined to
his people the Jews.

A second reason of such Contracts may be, thereby to aggravate the sins of
Witches, and thereby to engage them deeplier to do him Service. For having led
them on beyond hopes of mercy (though that, as the rest of his principles, be
but a Fallacy) they will be apt to wallow in all manner of Beastial and Sensual
delights, and without consideration plunge themselves into a desperate
confusion; which conceit is increased and confirmed in them, when they remember
how they have renounced God, and given themselves to the Devil; who by this
means holds them fast, and animates them to rush on, as a Horse into the
Battle, to their utter ruin and destruction.

And though it is sadly apparent to all those, not wholly given over to a
reprobate sense, that this malicious enemy of our Souls, goes about seeking all
opportunities to hurt us; yet so sadly are these poor Creatures stupefied, that
they do, Festinanti Equo calcaria adhibere, lay an obligation upon him that is
ready at any time to attend them. Hence is it that they need not much
soliciting to a Contract, forasmuch as they think thereby to secure themselves
of his Service, and have him always ready to prosecute their commands. This is
that which disposes them to the reception of such agreements, giving them (as
they fondly conceit) Superiority over that mighty Spirit that rules in
darkness, though on the Devils part it extends no further, than to a short
compliance with their humors in order to his detaining them from works of
repentance, and a retrospection into their own wicked and wretched condition.

Now although upon consideration of the infinite loss accruing to men from such
actions, it may seem strange, nay almost incredible, that they should be
wheedled into such pernicious extravagancies; yet if we have respect to the
lamentable propension of humane nature, to that which is contrary to the
heavenly Injunctions; and to the sinful follies proceeding from such
propension, it may be sufficient Demonstration to enforce us believe this
assertion; that there are such persons as (besides that indirect and unwilling
Homage which is paid ever since the loss of integrity) do tie themselves in
Spontaneous Indentures to the grand Master of Confusion.

No wonder then if the Devil catch those that greedily come unto his bait,
since his Wiles and Devices are often too powerful over the most Righteous and
holy; does he not many times lie at lurch, and ensnare those who make it their
business to watch against him, and if he dares come into the most Sacred places
of Devotion and Piety, to molest, no wonder if he Domineers amongst such
Debaucheries and impiety as is usually found in these Covenanters, who are such
as are involved and swallowed up in Earthly thoughts and Meditations, having
lost the Sense and Knowledge of Divine Mysteries; being given over of God unto
Satan's Temptation. How can they then resist? Man is weak; Satan is strong and
subtle, of great experience in serching out and prying into the several humors
and inclinations of men, and by his great skill enabled to make his approaches
to 'em in such a manner, as is most agreeable to their humors.

He can insinuate himself into their very thoughts, filling them with Conceits
and high Imaginations; making them grow excessively Proud, Luxurious, and
Ambitious, desirous of vain knowledge; tickling them with Pride of having
Spirits at their beck, to tell them strange and curious things; acquaint them
with the nature of Diseases; and work miraculous and unusual Feats, not
practicable by others; as also to supply them with what is satisfactory and
pleasant to their unruly exorbitant Passions.

There is one thing especially, which has caused many to give themselves over
to the Devil; that is, the desire of revenge. Many Examples may be had in
Authors of this kind; wherefore I thought it needless to trouble my self about
setting them down.

No wonder then if such disorderly, violent, inconsiderate persons, so greedy
of attaining their ends, so wholly estranged from all goodness (as these who
are the subject of our Discourse usually are) should seek for means to the
Devil, to enjoy their inordinate desires, as regarding more the satisfaction of
their present will, then respecting their future state after death.

All these things duly considered, it is not strange to think, that a man or
woman may be so seduced as to revolt from God, and make a Solemn Covenant with
his, and their utter and professed enemy.

CHAP. VIII.
That besides the forementioned open and express League, there are certain
practices used by Witches, which imply a Compact without any form of words.
THough the practices of those miserable Caitifs, who do, conceptis verbis
jurare, to fight the Devils Battles, be so abominable, that no man, not wholly
destitute of grace, but abhors them; yet there are another sort, not looked upon
with so much detestation, which ought to be as much detested, as lying under an
equal pressure of Guilt with the former. I mean such as not being in actual
League with Satan, perform such acts of Witchery, as do in a covert manner
imply a League, and Homage due to their Black Master.

These are such as we usually call White Witches; a sort of Sots who being
Gulled, and having their understandings Debauched by Superstition, do evil that
good may come of it, that is, use Charms, Spells and Incantations (all which
are of no force without the Cooperation of the Devil) to remove Distempers, and
do certain Feats in some measure useful to Mankind, yet of pernicious
consequence to themselves.

It may be objected, that it is not probable the Devil will attend those his
immediate Servants without some security, that they shall continue his. To this
I answer, that they being something queasie, and not able altogether to relish
the open Blasphemy, and Impiety the others run into; he is contented to deal
with them after another manner, and so lets them think themselves loose,
whereby he holds them the closer to him. He lets them make a show of Religion,
go to Church, hear the Word, and otherwise employ themselves about seeming good
things. And it is indeed a main Policy in the Mystery of iniquity, to appear in
feigned Colors.

For if a man or woman delight to use Superstitious Forms of words, and think
there is a secret power, and force in Herbs, Minerals, or the like; and in
using them, desires in heart to have the thing effected; the Devil (who is
ready to seize his prey upon any occasion) to comply with them, seconds their
Designs with success: and so there is a secret Compact, for they have desired,
and he has consented, and wrought the Business too.

Therefore those that do such things are in a kind of League with the Devil,
though ignorantly they think otherwise; and as those which in Christ's name Cast
out Devils, though they openly followed not Christ, yet finding success in
their attempts, were not against Christ, nor likely could speak ill of his
power, by reason of their Secret and implicit Faith, and Covenant with Christ:
so these kind of persons finding their practices succesful, are not against
Satan, nor can lightly speak ill of his working power, because of the secret
and implicit League they have with him; more especially, because of the profit,
they find ensuing to them thereby. And so he rests satisfied with this thought
of them, that they will be surely his, because they are not against him; as
also he lets them please themselves with hopes of Gods mercy. For that in thus
doing, they suppose they sin not, nor are in danger of the Devil, nor under
Gods wrath, as are the others, who are professed and direct Votaries of the Black
Saint that rules in the Children of Disobedience.

CHAP. IX.
The reasons and grounds of Witchcraft further Debated on.
THat there are Witches, Sorcerers, and such like, may be observed from what
has been said in the former Chapters; also that there are Leagues and
Obligations, both express and tacit; now for a further confirmation, let us a
little observe, what Force or Efficacy there lies in natural things.

That which Philosophers affirm of Nature, how she abhors a Vacuum, may well
mind us of the wonderful Connection, and strict Ties wherewith the things of
this visible world are linkt together amongst themselves, and the secret
relation that is betwixt these and the intellectual world, and of this cum
Archetypo. This being observed by the Egyptians, they called Nature Magic, by
reason of the Efficacy it has, in attractu similium per similia, and
convenientium per convenientia.

This Attraction, or mutual Coherence of Superior with inferior things, the
Graecians call (...), which we have Englished Sympathy. So the Earth (to
explain it) agrees with the Water in that they are both alike cold; the Water
with the Air in moisture; the Air with the Fire in heat; the Fire with the
Heavens in purity of substance. Nor is the Fire joined with the Water but by
the Air; nor the Air with Earth, but by the Water: Stones and Metals have quid
commune with Herbs and Plants, these with Animals, Animals with the Heavens,
the Heavens with Intelligences, these with the Divine Attributes, and with God
himself, by whose Image or similitude all things are made.

The Universe is the Image of God, Man the extract or Epitome of the Universe,
sensitive Creatures of Man, vegetatives of sensitives. Again, Plants agree with
Brutes in vegetation; Brutes with Man in that they are both sensitive; Man with
Angels in Intellectuals; Angels participate of Immortality. Divinity infuses it
self into the mind, the Mind is communicated to the Intellect, the Intellect to
the Will, the Will to the Imagination, this to Common sense, Common sense to
the Senses in particular, and the Senses to the things sensible; and such is
the Coherency of Nature, that every Superior power Communicates it self to the
inferior, by a continued Series of Mediums; and every inferior being
participates of the highest, by being linckt to the middle Beings. So that, as
things being disposed into so wonderful Order, into a capacity and possibility
of effecting many things so remote, and unusual to what commonly happens,
should Teach us to be cautious how we ascribe whatever is something strange, to
Witches and Magical operations; So it may confirm us, that what is related
concerning the Practices of these wicked people, is nothing but what is
credible enough to be brought to pass, considering the great power of these
Spirits, and the promptitude of Nature to strange effects.

For it is the Opinion of Cornelius Agrippa, that Spirits are easily induced to
obey the Dictates of Witches and Wizards, when they make use of Charms and
Incantations. To which alludes Virgil, where he says, Carmina vel Coelo possunt
deducere Lunam.

No marvel then if the Devil insinuate, and twist his power into the operations
of Nature, when he is sought unto, who is ready enough to dance attendance,
though not desired.

Magicians affirm, that with certain ingredients, having a Sympathy with
Supernatural things, rightly disposed debitis circumstantijs, partim Physice,
partim Astronomice, Devils may be drawn to have Commerce with men. Which is
also the opinion of Iamblichus, Proclus and Synesius, and of the whole
Platonic School. And Mercurius Trismegistus tells, that an Image made up of
some certain things peculiarly Consecrated to such a Spirit (they have names
for them too) has been actuated by some Demon to perform most actions of the
Animal life, as to Walk, Eat, Drink, etc. St. Augustine affirms the same in
libro octavo de Civitate Dei.

A stone which is found in the eye of an Hyaena, holden under the Tongue
confers the faculty of Divination. The stone called Selenites does the same.
The stone Synochitis will hold a Spirit raised up, so that he cannot depart
till License from the Magician. Xanthus the Historian tells of a young Dragon,
that was restored to Life by a certain Herb applied to him by the Old one; and
that the said Herb wrought the like Cure upon one Tillo. And Iuba tells
likewise of another man in Arabia, that was restored to Life by the Efficacy of
Herbs. It is to be observed, that it is not my Design to ascribe every thing
that happens praeter vulgaria, to the working of the Devil and his Ministers,
since Nature is so prevalent as to show Miracles: but to inculcate to my
Reader, that since Nature is so strong of it self, the Votaries of Satan may
play such Feats, as makes them both admired and feared; being aided by him, who
has for many Thousand years made Remarks, and Collected the Experiments of this
so Self-powerful Nature.

Hence have Witches power to hurt not only in outward Goods, or in our Bodies;
but they can work alterations in the Mind too, by Spells, Medicines, and
Fumigations; stir up to Love, Hatred, Mirth, Sorrow, vex to Madness it self.
Many instances might be brought to confirm what I say, but I think it needless
to produce Examples: I shall therefore only endeavor to speak something of the
manner how the Devil, at the Instigation of Witches, enters into the Bodies of
men or women, and of the Symptoms usually attending the Possessed.

First then for the manner. The Devil is wont before he enter into a man, to
appear to him in some Frightful, Deformed Shape, uttering some strange and
uncouth Noises, whereby he Discomposes the mind of the man to whom he appears,
and disturbs his reason, working a Confusion and Disorder in his Intellectuals;
and after having so done, enters into the Soul, now made a Chaos fit for the
Reception of him who is the grand Author of Irregularity. This he most what
does in the Night, or in Dark, Shady places, frightful by reason of their
horrid solitariness.

He enters into the Possessed thorough the Nose, or Mouth, or Ears, like a thin
subtle Wind, or a Mouse, or some such little Animal; sometimes in their sleep,
producing in their Imagination terrible Dreams, and so continuing those
Devilish Phansies in them, when the Vitals are Disentangled from the Bonds of
sleep, sometimes his Entrance is accompanied with a Chilness, and stupifying
Cold through the whole Body.

The effects which unclean Spirits produce in these Demoniacks, are noted unto
us by Holy Writ; which are as follows,

They sometimes make them Obstinate and Disobedient, backward to all that is
good, and very desirous of doing Mischief to them, whom the Devil stirs them up
to hate; as appears by Saul in the First Book of Kings. Chap. 18. who continued
obstinate in persecuting innocent David, all the days of his life.

Sometimes they make them Lunatic, as in Matthew 17. he did his son, who came
and prostrated himself to our Blessed Savior, saying, Lord have mercy on my
Son, for he is Lunatic.

Some are made Dumb, as appears from the 8 th. Chap. of St. Matthews Gospel,
where it is mentioned how one spoke to our Savior, saying, Master, I have
brought my Son unto thee, who is possessed with a Dumb Spirit; as likewise from
St. Luke, Chap. 11. others they deprive of Sight, as Mat. Chap. 12. others are
Torn and Tortured in their Bodies, and Pine away; are brought into Fury, so as
to fall violently upon any they can come to: some are struck with Infirmities
uncurable by any Natural means, and of this sort was that Woman, held with a
Spirit of Infirmity Eighteen years, healed by the Great Physician of our Souls,
Christ Jesus. Luke Chap. 13.

Thus may be observed, both from Sacred and Profane Authors, the frequent and
lamentable Mischiefs inflicted upon poor Man by the Devil, both in entering into
and possessing their Bodies, as these before alleged; and in the external
Assaults made upon their Temporal goods, of which the History of Job is a
sufficient Testimony: as also by his mediate practices, performed by his
Vassals the Votaries aforementioned; whom indeed, he more frequently imploys
to execute his fierce Wrath upon Men. What power these have to do Mischief,
Isidore tells us in lib. 8. Etymologiarum. Cap. 9. where he says, Malefici
dicuntur ob Facinorum magnitudinem. Hi Elementa concutiunt, mentes hominum
turbant, and sine ullo veneni haustu, violentia tantum Carminis animas
interimunt.

CHAP. X.
The Signs whereby one may Discover whether a Party be Possessed or Bewitched.
THat wicked Spirits have power to vex and disturb men, we have proved before
by diverse Examples; as also Cursorily shown the manner and most notable effects
of such Practices: I now intend to say something of the Symptoms, whereby it
may be known whether the distresses wherewith a person is Afflicted, ought or
can be ascribed to Natural Causes, or proceed from the Supernatural Operations
of the Devil, and his Ministers.

These Supernatural Operations are reducible to two Heads; either to the
immediate working of Satan, or to the mediate of Witches.

For the first, as it is unusually, so is it the more discernable when it
happens, the Parties thus effected being Tormented with such Paroxysms, and
violent motions in their Bodies, as cannot but give us to understand, what is
the Lord of that Misrule, of those stupendous Gambols. As to the Second; Those
Perturbations and Mischiefs occasioned by Witchcraft, are not so pernicious, as
being more twisted and assimulated to natural effects. Hence many Diseases and
Calamities, which do owe their Original really, and truly to the Impiety and
Revengeful Dispositions of Witches, are mistaken to be nothing but the Disorder
of the Natural humors of the Body, or the Casualties of Fortune, or rather
Crosses designed to befall, by foreseeing Fate.

But to go on with our intended Discourse; when Learned Physicians can find no
probable reason or Natural Cause of such Grief, Pangs, and violent Vexations as
the Patient does endure, it may lawfully be Concluded that the Devils Finger is
there. Persons Bewitched have sometimes a great swelling and heaving in the
Belly, thence passing to the Throat, ready to stop their Breath; set their
Teeth together, shake sometimes the Leg, sometimes the Arm, sometimes their
Head; will hold their Arms or Legs so stiff, that they cannot be bowed.

As also when no Rules of Art or Experience can do good, but that the Disease
grows worse thereby.

When the Distressed Vomit up Crooked Pins, Iron, Coals, Brimstone, Nails,
Needles, Wax, lumps of Hair, Knives, and such like, which are Noted to come
from several persons, as Witnesses one Doctor Cotta, and produces Witnesses
for the same; so Delrio, lib. 3. par. 1. quest. 4. Sect. 6 page 410.

Other Symptoms I find set down by Hieronymus Mengus in a Treatise called
Fustis Daemonum, lib. 1. cap. 12. Potissima (inquit) signa demonstrantia
hominem esse maleficiatum, sunt cordis, and oris Stomachalis constrictio.
Aliqui puncturas in cord sentiunt, acsi acubus pungerentur, quibusdam cor eis
corrodi videtur; alij in collo and renibus magnum dolorem sentiunt: aliquibus
ligata est vena generationis. Quidam ex indispositione stomachi, quicquid ad
sustentationem comedunt vel bibunt, per vomitum emittunt. Aliquibus ventus
frigidissimus, tanquam flamma, per ventrem discurrit. These being the most
remarkable Signs, I shall not trouble my self, or my Gentle Readers Patience
with Inserting what Delrio, Boissardus, Cornelius Agrippa, and other Learned
Authors say in this matter; what I have here said being (as I suppose)
sufficient.

CHAP. XI.
That Witches are not to be sought unto. The Conclusion of the whole work.
THough some have made use of that common Distinction of good Witches and bad,
to encourage themselves, and make some pretenses for their recourse to those
unlawful means, yet therein they do but deceive themselves; forasmuch as all
sorts of Witchcraft and Divination are forbidden by the Holy Scriptures. It is
expressly forbidden, Levit. 19. 31. and in Saul we have an Example hereof, who
added to his sin of Disobedience, that of enquiring at one that had a Familiar
Spirit; yet the profit he received was (but what is gotten by such as forsake
the only true God, and run after lies?) the knowledge of his own and his sons
Destruction.

Learned men of all sorts, generally condemn this running to Wizards, as St.
Augustine in libro 10 de Civit. Dei; King James in his Demon, lib. 3. cap. 5,
St. Basil, St. Chrysostom; nay Hippocrates an Heathen; some Schoolmen hold it
to be an Apostasy, as Aquinas, Bonaventure, Albertus, and the Edicts of
Emperors, and all Learned Divines in our days hold it unlawful; the Dead by
Writing, and the Living Viva voce in their Sermons.

Nor is it at all consistent with reason, to assert the Lawfulness of enquiring
of Witches, or using of Necromancers. For God who by his Eternal Wisdom created
the World at first, does still by his power preserve the works of his Creation,
and provides for every man, according to that station wherein he sees it
convenient to set him; he has given him such opportunites, as to make himself
happy if he please.

Has taught him to limit his Affections and Appetites, and mark unto him the
Race wherein he is to perform his Course; and so ordered, that the Restraints
are void of all unsweetness, and that a man is never more a Captive, than when
he lets himself loose to Carnal Delights. So that a man in using the said
Practices, does ipso facto declare himself a Rebel against the King of Heaven.
Nor is this ever put in practice, but by such as have given themselves over to
the things of this World. Will any man seek for Revenge against those have
displeased him, at the Devils Instruments; that remembers who it is commands us
to forgive one another our Trespasses? or inquire of what is to come, that
believes we ought not be solicitous for the Morrow?

The Arguments brought for the Lawfulness of Consulting with such as have
Familiar Spirits, are so weak and frivolous, that I shall not trouble my self
to answer them, but only desire my Reader to take Notice, that this Discourse
was Writ for no other purpose, than to Confute some Atheistical persons, who
under the maintaining of that Position, That there are no Witches, Mask their
disowning of all Spiritual Beings; and by consequence would take away all
Religion, and Worship of a Deity out of the world, whereby they might the
better deceive their own Souls, and run on in all Sensual and Brutish pleasures.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART, BEING A DISCOURSE OF THE IMPOSTURES Practiced in JUDICIAL
ASTROLOCY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

A Discourse concerning Astrology.
CHAP. I.
Of the Original thereof.
THat Astrology, which in our days by its being mixed with so many Superstitious
Fopperies, is become suspicious and almost Ridiculous, was at the first a thing
of great Value, and worthy of the greatest consideration, may be concluded from
the acceptance it found with the most Famous men in the very Infancy of the
World; we may ascertain our selves, that it was in use before the Deluge, from
Genesis 18, where it is said that Noah enterd the Ark on the seventeenth day of
the second Month, and came out again (the Waters being gone from the face of
the Earth) upon the 27 th. day of the second Month, in the year following. That
it is of great Antiquity cannot be denied, but who was the first Author of it
is uncertain: yet its Credible that it begun at Adam, and was continued by his
son Seth, and Communicated to Posterity; in reference to which Opinion, is the
Story of Seth's Pillars; which Pillars were made (by reason of what they had
heard from Adam, (viz.) that the World should be Twice destroyed, once by
Water, and afterward by Fire) to preserve the Sciences to them that were to
replenish the Earth after the Deluge. One of which Pillars was remaining in
Josephus his time, as himself Testifies, in lib. Antiq. cap. 11. (...). But
whether this of the Pillars be Fabulous or no, it matters not; it is probable
enough that it was found by the Ancients before the Flood, whose Lives usually
extended to some Hundreds of years, a thing very requisite to the perfection of
Astrology; nor was it (considered in its purity) a Study unbeseeming those
Noble Spirits. In favor of this Opinion may be alleged that of Josephus in
cap. 7. lib. 1. that Enoch left a Treatise of Astrology, or (Astrology being
taken after the Modern distinction) of Astronomy; which Treatise is yet extant
in the Kingdom of the Queen of Sheba. Tertullian quotes it in the 4 th. and 15
th. Books de Idololatria, and in the Book De habitu muliebri. cap. 3. where he
proves by many Arguments, that those Books are not spurious; and answers the
Objections that may be brought against it. Now although the Testimony of so
Learned a man as Tertullian, may stop the Mouths of all such as out of
Skeptical humor may doubt the verity of what has been said; yet considering
the great propension of some in our days, to overthrow what ever sound Doctrine
has been Taught by the Seniors, as well in Knowledge as in years, I shall
endeavor to prove the Antiquity of this most Noble Science by force of reason.

1. It Is not to be doubted that Adam, both by reason of his Converse with
Angels, and his great insight into the Intellectual world; as also by his great
knowledge of this visible world, which rendered him capable of distinguishing
things, and giving a name suitable to the Nature of each thing; could understand
the Nature of the Heavens, and those splendid Bodies there placed. So that if
the Beauties of those Caelestial Bodies were Created to be subservient and
significant to the Microcosm, it is most certain, that the first Father of
Mankind, understood it.

2. The Wise and ever-True God, who has made every thing good, and made nothing
that was not to be of some use to man, did certainly never design that Glorious
and Resplendent part of the World, to be for a Gazingstock only, and not have
operation or influence in the Universe; but to be a general Moderator, and
Governor of the most material Actions of Mortal Bodies; as he has reserved to
himself the disposing of that pure substance Man's Soul. And such was his love
to Mankind, that he would Teach a way whereby they might recover part of that
Knowledge was lost in the first Man's Fall and Disobedience. And so that they
might not be altogether involved in Darkness, and obscurity of what was to
come, he Taught them to Read in that Great Volume, the Chief Contingencies of
their Life.

That what I say is probable, and not an Idle Whimsey of some Melancholic
Brain, is Manifest from the common Opinion of Learned Men among the Jews,
Greeks, and Latins, and others, who call the Heavens a Sacred Book, wherein by
those Capital Letters (the Stars) may be read the Events of things below. The
Learned Origin, upon this place of Genesis, Et erunt in signa, Affirms, that
the Stars were placed in this Order in the Heavens for no other end, but to
show, by their diverse Aspects and Figures, whatever is to happen while the
World indures, as well in general as in particular; yet not so, as that they
were the Causes of all these things: never any such thing came into the
Thoughts, much less into the Writings of this Learned Man. For as the
Prophecies that are Written in Books, are not the Causes of those Events, which
they foretell shall happen, but only the Signs; so may the Heavens be (says he)
very justly called a Book, wherein God has Written, all that is, has been,
and hereafter shall be. And for Confirmation Cites a Passage out of a Book
called, Narratio Joseph, wherein the Patriarch Jacob, giving his Blessing to
all his Children, upon his Deathbed, says, Legi in Tabulis Coeli, quaecunque
contingent vobis and Filijs vestris: whence the same Origin concludes on this
Question, Vtrum Stellae aliquid agant? That some Mysteries may be assuredly
Read in the Heavens; by reason that the Stars are disposed and Ordered there in
the Form of Characters. Julius Syrenus has undertaken the Defense of this
Doctrine, and holds it a most safe and true Opinion. St. Augustine lib. 2.
contra Manichaeos, cap. 2. has this Expression; Neque in illis corporibus
Caelestibus hic latere posse Cogitationes credendum est, quemadmodum in his
corporibus latent; sed sicut nonnulli motus animorum apparent in Vultu, and
maxim in oculis, sic in illa perspicuitate ac simplicitate Caelestium
corporum, omnes motus animi latere arbitror. All the Platonists in a manner
were likewise of the same Persuasion, and this is the reason that Porphyrie
assures us, that when he had resolved to have killed himself, Plotinus who had
Read his intention in the Stars, hindered him from doing it. To the same
purpose is that of Orpheus, -- (...)
(...).
-- certus tuus Ordo
Immutabilibus mandatis, currit in Astris.


Amongst the Modern men, Flud has this expression in his Apology for the Rosy
Cross men, In Coelo (inquit) inserti and impressi hujusmodi Characteres, qui
non aliter ex Stellarum ordinibus conflantur, quam lineae Geometricae, and
Literae Vulgares ex punctis, superficies ex lineis, Corpus ex superficiebus.

Postellus gives us this account of his own Experience in this matter, in these
words; Si dixero me in Coelo vidisse, in ipsis Linguae Sanctae Characteribus,
ab Esra primum public expositis, ea omnia quae sunt in rerum natura
constituta; ut vidi non explicit, sed implicit; vix ullus mihi crediderit:
tamen testis Deus, and Christus ejus, quia non mentior.

After the Deluge, and the scattering abroad of the Nations through the whole
Earth, the Study of Astrology was likewise Dilated, and become common to many
Nations: so that they not only Vied one with another in the accurateness and
perfection of Skill, but also about the Invention of it; every one desiring to
ascribe the Invention of so Noble a Science to their own Country: but it is most
probable, nay in a manner certain, that they of Asia, (considering that Adam
was there made, and that Noah's Arks rested upon a Mountain in that part of the
world, from whom the Face of the whole Earth was Inhabited) were they who first
improved this Study. Nor is it reasonable to think that the Asians, who were
settled in a Residence, and had both Motives and Opportunities enough, should
let the Africans or Europoeans outstrip them in the Invention of Arts, who were
Cumbered for many years in finding out convenient Habitations, and in defending
themselves from the Incursions of their troublesome Neighbors.

Amongst the Asians the Chaldaeans Challenge Priority in this matter, and glory
of instructing other Nations herein, according to which is that of Herodotus in
Euterpe: (...). i. e. The Graecians Learned of the Babylonians or Chaldeans the
Doctrine of the Poles, and of dividing the Day into Twelve parts. Likewise
Didorus Siculus in the Third Book of Antiquities, Testifies of the Chaldaeans,
that by long observation of the Course of the Stars, they found out their
Nature, and Foretold things that were afterward to come to pass; Tully
likewise in primo de Divinatione; Principio (inquit) Assyrij, ut ab ultimis
auctoribus repetam, propter planitiem magnitudinemque regionum, quas
incolebant, cum Caelum omni ex part patens, atque apertum intuerentur,
trajectiones, motusque Stellarum observaverunt. Nor is it meet that we forget
Abraham, a man so highly approved of by God, who was a Chaldaean, and the Chief
Astrologer of the East, of whom Berosus, as Eusebius says, spoke in this
manner, (...). Decima vero post Diluvium generatione apud Chaldaeos erat vir
justus, and magnus, and Coelestium habens experientiam. i. e. in the Tenth
Generation after the Flood there was amongst the Chaldaeans, a Just and Great
Man, one well skilled in the Heavens; which no doubt is meant of Abraham, who
was so Famous in respect of the great sway he bore as a Nobleman; but more
especially for his Piety, and Sober manner of Living, and his Miraculous and
Conspicuous Preservation in all Dangers, by the immediate hand of Providence.
Abraham Learned of his Father Their or Terah, which is the Opinion of Philo in
his Book of Nobility, where he Writes thus of Abraham, and his Father Their,
(...). Primus Parens Iudaeorum Chaldaeus erat Natione, Patre prognatus dedito
syderali Scientiae, uno ex ijs, qui circa Mathesin versarentur. Where by (...)
is meant Their the Father of Abraham.

Now although we ought to look upon the Chaldaeans as the First and most
Eminent in this Faculty, yet we are not to look upon them as the sole
Monopolists of Sydereal knowledge; the Bactrians will put in for a share, and
say, that though they did not first lay down the Rules, yet they improved them
as high as any; Witness their so famous Zoroaster, who as Justin tells us, in
lib. primo Epitomes Trogi, Primus Magicas Arts dicitur invenisse, and mundi
principia, Siderumque motus diligenter observasse: and was doubtless as expert
in this Reading the Starry Book, as the greatest Chaldaean of them all.

The Egyptians Learned from the Assyrians, and had the same convenience for
the Business; that is, a plain Champaign Country, and an Air seldom or never
Overcast with Clouds, or Vapors to hinder the Eye from Viewing the Motions of
those Glorious Bodies. It Is the Opinion of Vossius in his Book De quatuor
artibus popularibus, That Abraham brought it amongst them when he Traveled
into that Country; but however it was, they proved so good Proficients, as to
invite the Graecians to come into their Schools for Instructions in this, and
other curious Arts, as Theon Alexandrinus upon Aratus his (...) tells us,
(...): i. e. The Graecians received these Arts from the Egyptians and
Chaldaeans. And as Pride is still Fatal to great Parts, the Egyptians puffed
up with their Learning began to be Ungrateful, and Kick at their Masters the
Chaldaeans, they thought themselves more Skilful, and would have the Credit of
Invention to themselves; on their side was Diodorus Siculus, who to make the
Story Plausible Affirms, that Babylon is a Colony of the Egyptians, first
Planted by Belus the Son of Neptune and Lybie, who Erected a College in
Babylon, and set Scholars therein to Study Astrology, as they did in Egypt.
Yet Diodorus Siculus is to be suspected, as being too great a Favourer of the
Egyptians; and another thing which makes this Opinion Invalid is, that the
Egyptians can produce no Observations before Alexander the Great; whereas the
Chaldoeans can prove theirs to be of far greater Antiquity.

The Arabians too were Skilled in Astrology, as may be gathered from Chap. 9.
verse 9. of Job, where mention is made of the Pleiades, Orion, and Arcturus.

The Aethiopians were not ignorant of the Stars and their different influences,
for which they were beholding to Atlas King of Mauritania, who is said to have
Lived about the time of Joseph the Patriarch, or as others, about the time of
Moses; and was so excellent in this Study, that the Poets Feigned him to bear
up Heaven with his Shoulders. Having Traced Astrology through Asia and Africa;
we will now bear it company into Europe, and see, by whom it was first Taught
in this Part of the world, which is not inferior to the other for curious
knowledge.

Though Learning be never more Disturbed and Eclypsed, than where a Country is
embroyled in War, Mars his Drum being too obstreperous for the sweet lays of
the Muses, yet it is observable that it follows the Victor, and delights to fix
her Seat where the Sword has drawn a place of Defense to secure her from the
Affronts of those that desire to enjoy the Liberties and conveniences others
have in Lawful Possession.

It was then Learning began to flourish in Greece, when they had by their
Prowess awed those that before Lorded it over them. And though it may be
observed, that they were not altogether ignorant in Astrology, but had some
Glimpses thereof at the time of the Trojan War, from Homers telling, how
Achilles his Armor had Stars Engraven on it by Vulcan; as also from the Story
of Endymions being Loved by the Moon, which was occasioned from his
Observations concerning the Moon; as also Phaethons Guiding the Chariot of the
Sun, from the like occasion: the Stories of Orion, and Perseus, and Orpheus his
Harp, being made Stars, all which only intimate unto us, their skill in the
Course of the Stars; yet 'twas never improved to any considerable height till
Thales. Before his time, they had only so much knowledge therein, as to know
the Seasons of the year, and the Rising and Setting of some remarkable Stars;
such an Astrologer was Hesiod, and such Plato calls (...), men only endued with
the little Rudiments, and unacquainted with that accurateness which Thales
brought in; of whom Diogenes Laertius gives this account in Vita Thaletis;
(...). i. e. most are of opinion that Thales was the first that Studied
Astrology (in Greece) and observed the Course of the Sun, and Taught the reason
of the Eclypses, as Eudemus says in his Astrological History. Anaximander
Milesius was the Scholar of Thales; he Taught that the Earth was the Center of
the World, and that it was Round, observed the Tropicks, and Equinoctials, and
Taught to know the hours by the shadow of a Gnomon. Scholar to Anaximander was
Anaximenes Milesius, who found that the Moon borrowed her Light, and that the
Interposition of the Earth betwixt her and the Sun, was the Cause of her
several Phases.

After Anaximines, was Anaxagoras Clazomenius, who Taught that the Moon had in
it Hills, and Valleys like the Earth, and that it was Habitable; that the
Milky-way was made by the Reflection of the Sunbeams; that Comets are a Mass
of Sparkles, proceeding from the Stars by reason of their Swift Motion,
Collected into one Body; that the Sun was a Round, Fiery-Ball, Bigger than all
Peloponnesus; that the Heavens consisted of Stones, which yet do not Fall, by
reason of that extraordinary Circumgyration. In the second year of the Seventy
Eight Olympiad he foretold, that one of those Stones should Fall from Heaven,
which (they say) came to pass by the River Aegos in Thrace; how much he was
addicted to the Study of Astrology, may be gathered from this; One asking
wherefore he was Born, he Answered, to Contemplate the Sun, and Moon, and the
Heavens; to another, Rebuking him for neglecting his Temporal Affairs, and
asking him if he did not care for his Country, he said, Yes I do, (pointing
with his Finger toward Heaven) that is my Country.

Pythagoras is accounted Chief of the Italian Sect, and Taught in Italy at the
same time as Anaximenes did at Miletum: he is said to have first observed the
Obliquity of the Eclyptick; he Taught that the Earth moved about the Sun,
betwixt Mars and Venus. After him was Democritus the Abderite, and Empedocles
Agrigentinus. About the first year of the Eighty Seventh Olympiad flourished
Meton, the Son of Panthias, who Corrected the Calendar, and found out the
Circulum decennovennalem, which we call the Golden Number; of whom Festius
Avienus.

Illius ad numeros prolixa decennia rursum
Adjecisse Meton Cecropea dicitur art,
Inseditque animis, tenuit rem Graecia sollers
Protinus, and longos inventam misit in annos.
Whereby is meant that Meton added Ten years to the Computation of Harpalus,
who made Tables for Eight years only. This period of Nineteen years was
approved of by Euctemon and Philippus, as best reconciling the Differences in
the Sun and Moons Revolutions. Eudoxus the Son of Aeschines a Cnydian, a Famous
Geometrician and Astrologer, opposed the Period found by Meton, by one of Eight
years, but to no purpose.

The Multitude of Commentators upon Aratus, will not permit me to leave him out
of the Roll; he Wrote in Verse the time of the Rising, and Setting of the
Stars, and gave Rules to know what Temperatures of Air would be upon the
different Aspects and Positions of the Heavenly Bodies.

About the time of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, Conon Flourished, who Collected the
Eclypses of the Sun and Moon; and it was he that first gave Notice of the Star
called Berenices Hair, as Catullus says in his Poem de coma Berenices.

Idem me ille Conon caelesti lumine vidit,
E Bereniceo vertice Caesariem
Fulgentem clare, quam multis illa Deorum
Non sine taurino sanguine pollicita est.
About Ten years after him, that is, about the Hundred and Fortieth Olympiad,
Aristarchus Samius was Famous for his skill; he followed the Opinion of
Pythagoras, Philolaus, and those who held the Motion of the Earth. About the
same time Flourished the Famous Archimedes, who made the Flying Dove, and the
Artificial Sphere, wherein were Motions answerable to that of the Caelestial
Bodies, the Artificial Planets keeping Correspondence with the Natural.

The Study of the Stars being now grown to a considerable height, wanted not
Admirers in all the succeeding Ages, who employed their Parts and Endeavors in
these Speculations; and by their Industry and good Fortune, daily added to the
perfection of this Art: It were easy for me to give you their Names in Order,
as they appeared to the world, to these very times: but that not being so
necessary, I shall only speak something of the Progress it had, after the Decay
of the Grecian Monarchy, and then proceed to my intended Discourse against the
Defamers, and Blots to this Noble Science, the Judicial Astrologers.

I begin with Alcuinus, otherwise called Flaccus Albinus; not that he was the
first, who deserved to be taken Notice of, but for Brevity; considering it
would Swell my Volume to too large a Bulk to name them all. He was Born in
England, a Yorkshire-Man, and was made Deacon in the days of Offa King of the
Mercians, and was by him, for his great Learning, but especially for his skill
in the Mathematical Studies, sent over to Charles the Great, and was by him
Honorably received, and staid with him in France. He got a Grant for an
University at Paris, and Taught the Liberal Sciences there. He Read Astronomy
to Charles the Great, and showed him the use of an Ephemeris: 'twas he gave the
German Names to the Winds, by which our seamen at this day call them.

This Kings being delighted so much with Astronomy, brought him into a good
Esteem with the then King of Persia, who was addicted the same way, and sent
him a Dial for the Planets, which was no less pleasant for the Favor, than
useful for the Ingenuity of it.

Not long after lived Maimon King of the Saracens, who caused Ptolomies System
to be brought in again, after it had been a long time neglected. And
Contemporary with him, was the Famous Albumassar the Arabian.

In the year One Thousand Four Hundred and Eighty, flourished Marsilius
Ficinus, at first a great Favourer of Judicial Astrology; but afterward
Reading that Excellent Treatise of Picus Mirandula's, concerning that Subject,
he Recanted, being convinced of the Fopperies thereof by the reasons of so
Learned a Man. He was a Great man in all Learning, but an especial Admirer of
Plato's Philosophy.

In the year One Thousand Five Hundred flourished Abraham Zacuti, Mathematician
to Emanuel King of Portugal; he left a perpetual Almanac for the Revolutions
of all the Stars.

From the year of Christ One Thousand and Five Hundred, Mathematical Studies
grew so Universal, and well known in the Christian World, that it is impossible
to Rank them in their Order, the Multiplicity of Students bringing Confusion
into the History. I shall only therefore speak of the most Renowned. And first,
with Ioannes Wernerus a German, who was a most exact Observer of the Starry
Motions; he Wrote two Books of the Motion of the Eighth Sphere.

Contemporary with him was Ioannes Blanchinus, and about sixteen years after
was Ioannes Staeflerus; he Taught the way to make an Astrolabe, and Wrote
Commentaries upon Proclus his Sphere; he was sometimes Master to Philip
Melancthon, and inflamed that Learned man with such a Love to Mathematics, as
endured to his very Death. After him was Henricus Baersius, and John Cario,
both very Eminent men, of which the first Wrote a Book of the Composition, and
use of the Quadrant, the other of Practical Astrology, and Ephimeredes for many
years.

In the year One Thousand Five Hundred Thirty Six, Nicolaus Copernicus became
Eminent, one who revived many Opinions that had for a long time been Buried in
obscurity; of whom Ismael Bulialdus in his Prolegomena's to Phylosophical
Astronomy, gives this Character, Nicolaus Copernicus vir absolutae
subtilitatis, non solum observator fuit, sed etiam Hypotheseos Pythagoricae
antiquae instaurator. Per eum enim ex humanis cogitationibus exemptoe
Ptolomaicarum Hypotheseon tricae, and circulorum multiplicium involutiones, and
ad Physicam simplicitatem revocatae sunt hominum mentes.

After him was Petrus Apianus, Lucas Gauricus a Neopolitan, and Ioachinus
Fortius Rithenbergius, commonly called Sterck, who lived at the same time with
Erasmus Roterodamus; and was first moved to apply himself to study, by
Conversing with Erasmus, and more particularly (as himself Confesses) by
Reading that little Treatise De ratione studij.

In the year of Christ One Thousand Five Hundred and Sixty, Lived Gerardus
Mercator, a man well Read in Astrology.

Many others there are, whom it is needless to insert, not that they were less
deserving than others, but because these I have mentioned may serve to show by
whom, and at what times this Science has been propagated.

And though some may object, that I go against my self in thus playing the
Herald, and reckoning the Ancestors of Astrology; and that it had been more
advantageous to my Cause to have sought to have proved, that none of Ingenuity
or Learning had ever studied in these matters: yet let them know, that it makes
much for me upon Consideration, that none of these ever descended to these
Nonsensical Fopperies, wherewith Judicial Astrology is stuffed full, and which
has brought into Question the more material points of the Heavenly Reading. Nor
have these Fortune Tellers any more reason to boast, that so many Worthy men
have employed themselves in Contemplating the Starry Bodies, than the Romanists
to boast of St. Peter, and the Apostles Doctrine, forasmuch as both of them
have lost their Art and Religion with Superstition and Fopperies.

CHAP. II.
A Discourse concerning Judicial Astrology.
THat Curiosity is the Epidemick Disease of the Mind, every man may Experience
in himself, and observe in others, which if it was not so, there had been no
occasion of the present Discourse. Yet forasmuch as through the Impudent
Rashness of some, and the Serious simplicity of others, not only the Stars, but
also the Votes and Desires of men are reduced into an Art, and made (against
their own Nature) Foretellers of future Contingencies; it will not be, I hope,
impertinent to our present purpose, to Discuss the Business, and to Search out
what Solidity and Truth there is in their Opinions and Tenets. Which that we
may do, I shall reduce my Discourse to Three Heads.

1. A proposal of their Principles, who are persuaded of the Omniscience of the
Stars, and have given up their Votes for Judicial Astrology.

2. An Examination of those Principles; to see how their Principles accord with
reason.

3. A Confutation of their False and Erroneous Opinions, not only in the
smaller Deductions and Conclusions, but also in the very Fundamentals.

Of which I do not intent to make a long Treatise, but only briefly to Touch at
the foresaid Method, and so have done.

Grand Patrons and Favorites of the affirmative (I mean Sticklers for Judicial
Astrology) were the Priscillianists, spawned from the Gnostics; who amongst
other their prodigious Errors had this, that the Stars had especial and
supreme Influence and Predominance over man, and Taught, that the several parts
of his Body were in Subordination to the Twelve Constellations: Assigning to
the Head Aries, Taurus to the Neck, Gemini to the Shoulders, and so of the
rest, as you may be informed from every Almanac Writer, affirming that in good
Earnest, which the Poets only spoke Allegorically, or rather Poetica Licentia;
introducing Old Atlas with the Heavens on his Shoulders, and his Body finely
Spangled with Stars.

But to proceed to our present purpose; their main Arguments, and Strong
Cables, the Homerick Chains wherewith they would Pull down Jupiter and the rest
of the Stars to the very Earth, and employ them as Link-boys, to direct us in
our very Pilgrimage here upon Earth, are reducible to these Heads.

1. To places of Scripture, seeming to make for their purpose.

2. To reasons which they bring to make good their party.

3. To Experiments and Observations, by which they would expect Credit and
consent to their Art.

First for places of Scripture. Those that are most urged by them are Genesis
1. 14. where its said, Luminaria caelestia a Deo posita esse in signa. Judges.
That the Stars fought against Sisera in their courses. Also Job 38 31. Can
thou bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades? or loose the bands of Orion?
Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his season, or can thou guide Arcturus
with his sons? Know thou the Ordinances of Heaven? Can thou set the
Dominion thereof in the Earth?

That likewise Psalm the 19. 1. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handiwork. And above all, that of the Star which
appeared to the Wisemen or Magi, who came to see Christ; from all which places
they would conclude, that the Stars are Signs of Future Events, and that
diversely, according to their several Aspects, Conjunctions, and Oppositions.

The second Rank of Arguments, are such as are drawn from reason, which they
Form on this manner, as First,

That there can be no other reason given of the vast number of Wandring-Stars.

2. There can be no reason given of the several Motions, so many Conjunctions,
Oppositions, Trines and Quartiles, or why a Planet (suppose) should be
sometimes in one Sign, sometimes in another, now exalted in his Dignities in
his own house in full force and power, again sneaking amongst his Enemies in
some Constellation, clearly contrary to his own Natural Inclination; or why two
or three Planets meeting at the Bull, or Ram, or any other Sign, should be very
Civil and Sober, and all agree to one thing; and on a sudden (no body knows for
what) fall out and come to Daggers drawing.

3. They say there is a strict Coherence, and Bond of Amity betwixt the
Caelestial and Sublunary Bodies; that the Stars have certain Influences upon
the Bodies of men, which prevail more or less according to their diverse
Positions: for example, that those who are Born in the Interlunium, should be
weak and subject to Diseases; and that those who are Born when the Moon is in
Conjunction with Malevolent ill-natured Planets, do either die presently, or
are troubled with Epilepsies at the New Mons: that Physicians observe some
Diseases to increase or abate according to the several Aspects and Positure of
the Moon with other Stars. They reason further, that considering it is
undeniable that the Stars have influence over the Elements, it should be absurd
to deny that man is exempt from that Influence, since he does infallibly
Participate of the Nature and Quality of the Elements; this is for the Body.
That they Swagger over his Mind too, they Argue thus; The inclinations of the
Mind follow the Temperature of the Body, and that Temperature of the Body is
altered and disposed of by the Elements, the Elements by the Caelestial Bodies,
therefore it is certain, that one may judge of the Manners and Inclinations of
men by the Stars.

Another reason they bring, is from the Author of Astrology, who (as they say)
was Seth, and his Children, and that he, by reason of what he had heard from
Adam concerning the Twofold Destruction of the World, Wrote the Fundamentals
and Principles of this Science on two Pillars, the one of Brick, and the other
of Stone; as also that Moses and Daniel were skilled in all the Learning of the
Egyptians and Chaldaeans, and were not reprehended for it from the Mouth of
God.

The last File to patch up a plausible Toleration for Judicial Astrology is,
from Experiments and Observations Collected by Practitioners, and Recorded by
Historians of very good Credit and Authority.

The first is that of Julius Caesar, Written by Suetonius, who being Warned by
an Astrologer, to beware of the Ides of March, and the time being come, and
seeing no danger, as the prediction seemed to signify, he jeered the Artist,
telling him that the Ides were come; who answered, They were indeed come, but
not past, and the very same day was Caesar Stabbed in the Senat-house, and dyed
of two and thirty Wounds. At the Nativity of Augustus, Publius Nigidius who had
calculated it, cried out, that the Lord of the whole Earth was then born, which
made Augustus favor the Astrologers ever after, and caused the Image of a Goat
to be set upon his Coin, being born under that Sign.

Thrasillus and Tyberius walking together the Emperor designed to have thrown
him down a steep place, and have slain him, but he coming near the place begun
to tremble, look pale, and show diverse Signs of horror and amazment; which
being observed by the Emperor, he asked what was the matter: the Astrologer
answered, He perceived some great danger very near him; hereupon the Emperor
relented, and forbore to execute his Tragical Design.

Vitellius being yet a Private man, the Astrologers told him he should be
Emperor, and afterward told him the day of his Death; for the Emperor being
displeased with the Astrologers, commanded they should all depart out of Italy
by such a day: they cast out a Paper or Libel, wherein they desired him not to
trouble himself with their going out of Italy on that day, for he should then
go out of the world; which according to their Praedictions proved true.

Xiphilinus in vita Neronis, Relates that when Nero was Born, the Astrologers
foretold that he should be Emperor, and slay his Mother, which also came to
pass.

Many other Experiments may be brought for the Credit of Astrologers, which I
shall not set down, to avoid Prolixity; who has a mind to know them, may
Consult Latin Authors, and find to their Content: these being of most Validity
I have taken Notice of, partly engaged thereunto by my proposed Method, and
partly to avoid the Censure of the adverse party, who might else have
complained of Foul-play. That we may in short lay down what is to be thought of
this Art in general, and its Fundamentals, we must make a distinction between
certainties and uncertainties, distinguishing them both from what is manifestly
False, and examine what power the Stars have over inferior sublunary Bodies,
how far this Art extends it self; and what is beyond the Reach both of the
Stars and Astrologers, and so we may come to know, what Praedictions may be
certainly had from the Heavens, what only probably, and what cannot be known at
all.

From the Stars, especially from the Sun and Moon, may be known the Succession
of Day and Night, the Fourfold Distinction of the year, Remarkable Alterations
and Changes of Weather, as Winds, Rain, Tempests, etc.

Also it cannot be denied, that the Caelestial Bodies have their Influence and
Operation upon the Elements, especially upon the Air, so as to make it
sometimes Healthful and Sweet, sometimes Noxious and Destructive. Also that
there several things, which have a particular dependence upon the Moon, and
those not only Vegetatives, but also Men, as may be observed from those we call
Lunaticks, which is thus effected. The Devil who is of great Experience and
Subtlety, Chooses those times for the Disturbance of such persons, when the
humors flow abundantly in the Body (occasioned by the Course of the Moon) and
so insinuating himself into the humor, easily Disturbs the Imagination.

Astrologers may also give certain information of the Periods and Motions of
the Caelestial Orbs, the distances, Rising and Setting of the Stars; the
Conjunctions, Oppositions, and other Aspects, of the Eclypses of the Sun and
Moon, because those things depend upon the Regular and necessary Course of
Nature.

Amongst those things which are only probable, and Contingent or to be Guest
at, are particular alterations in the Air, Collected from the observation of
certain Changes, usually attending such an Aspect of the Planets, as also
Epidemical Diseases; all which are only Contingent, because there may, besides
those general and remote Causes (I mean the positure of the Stars,) occur
several more immedate Causes, which may disturb the iotherwise-natural Effects.
Such are the Interposition of some Star in the Aspect observed of a contrary
Nature, not known of by the Astrologer; the different Qualities of Countries,
and the diverse Temperatures of the Air, which may abate the Influence, and
perhaps change the Nature of the Effect.

If Astrologers Err so frequently in their Praedictions of the Weather, and
other things which depend upon Natural Causes, we may-confidently affirm, that
those things which depend merely at the will and pleasure of man, are such, as
Astrologers cannot at all judge of.

To show the vanity and idleness of this Science, I shall make use of
Authority, both Divine and Humane, 2. Reason, and 3 dly. their own False
Observations and Praedictions.

As for Divine Authority, no greater Argument can be brought against it, than
that it is so often spoken against in Holy Scriptures, as in Numb. 23. 22.
where all manner of Divination is forbidden, inquiring after that which is to
come is forbidden, Prove. 27. Eccles. 8. 6. God by his Prophet Esaiah Taxes the
vanity of this Art, and of those that are Deluded by them, Esai. 47. 12. 13.
Stand now (says he) with thy Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy Youth; if thou shall be able to
profit, if so be thou may prevail. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy
Counsels: let now the Astrologers, the; Star-gazers, the monthly
Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon
thee. God likewise commands the Israelites, that they Learn not the ways of the
Gentiles, and that they be not afraid of the Signs of heaven, which the
Gentiles fear. God threatens Confusion, Folly, and Destruction to such like,
Esai. 44. 20.

Next come the Ancient Fathers, who subscribe to the Authority of the
Scriptures, and vote down this way of Divination; out of whose Writings many
things tending to this purpose may be gathered.

Nay so unreasonable and Profane has this Science always been accounted that
(except a few Brainsick persons, who have practiced it) it has been condemned
by most Grave and Judicious men, and by the Edicts of several Heathen as well as
Christian Emperors, as also by General-Councils; see the Acts of the first
General-Council of Toledo, in which the Priscillianists (as I said before)
great Favorers of this Art were Condemned and Excommunicated. Nor did this
sort of men fare better with the Emperors; they were Banished the City by
Augustus; Expelled out of Italy first by Tiberius, afterward by Claudius;
afterward by Vitellius they were Sentenced to Death: twice by Domitian were
they Banished out of Italy, as being a sort of men Treacherous to Princes, and
Faithless to those that Trusted in them. There is also (which ought to have
been named first) a Law made by Caesar to this purpose, If any Magician, or
Conjurer, or Soothsayer, or Mathematician, or Interpreter of Dreams be taken
within my Jurisdiction, let him suffer Punishment; but if he be Convict, and
continue obstinate, let him be Wrackt, and Lanced according to his Desert.

Likewise 'twas Decreed by Honorius and Theodosius the Emperors, that the
Books of the Mathematicians should be Burnt in the presence of the Bishops.

Thus much for Authority of Scripture and Fathers; now I come to the second
particular, that is, Reason. Whereupon I thus Argue, Forasmuch as Natural
things and such as depend merely upon Natural Causes, cannot be positively
affirmed, but only go under the Notion of probabilities; it is not to be thought
that Contingencies and things depending upon man's will, (and such are most
wherein Astrologers have to do) should be hit of by their doubtful and
Fantastical Rules of Art.

2. If the Stars have such Praedominancy as is pretended, it must either be as
Causes, or Signs; but they cannot be Causes, for that would infer a necessity
of similar Effects, which no man will either pretend to, or Demonstrate; nor
can it be a Causality, or to speak plainer, an inclining, but not a compelling
Power, that being of as bad consequence, for then how should Partial and Remote
Causes produce real and positive Effects?

But if they be only Signs, they must be either Natural, or Supernatural.
Natural they cannot be, since they can upon that Score have no agreement with
the things signified, nor proceed from the same Cause: nor can they be
Supernatural, for then we ought to suppose an Infallibility in the Event.

Now as Chemists and Mountebanks use to flourish in Oratory, and tell the
Credulous Vulgar many fine Stories of the Temperature of the Elements, of the
proportion of Qualities, and such like puzling Terms, to wheedle an opinion of
their Skill into their Auditors: so do Astrologers lash out into large and
extravagant Encomiums of the Heavenly Bodies, urge the Coherence betwixt
Caelestial and sublunary things, and tell fine Stories that so many Orbs, Stars
and Motions were not made by God Almighty to no end; and after much proving of
that which none denies, they descend to their particulars, their little
Casualties, and Tie every man's Fortune to some Star or other. What (say they)
shall we think that the most glorious part of the Creation, in which (as in a
large expanded Volume) may be Read the wonderful power and Wisdom of God, was
made to serve to no use? or shall we set at naught those things which have so
abundantly shown forth their power upon the Earth?

Let us now descend to their Masterpiece, that is, Nativities, and see what
semblance of truth there is in it.

They pretend to observe the very point of their Nativity, and the places of
the Stars, which are Fixed, which are Erratick, in what Houses they arise,
which Planets are in their Exaltation, which not; whether in a right
Triplicity; whether in a Masculine or Faeminine Sign; what Aspects, whether
Trine, or Quartile, or Sextile, or Opposition, or Conjunction; and several
other hard and Conjuring Terms. From hence (say they) it is easy, either by
the Planets considered particularly, or altogether, or with the Signs of the
Zodiac, to Collect the Events of humane Affairs, to Describe a man's
Inclinations, and give an account of his good or bad Fortune.

Now let us allow them this (which is indeed more than they can prove) that the
Fortunes of men are Guided by the Stars; yet what Midwife or Astrologer, either
can be so exact, as to know the very Minute of a Nativity, which is necessary
to be known, forasmuch as in the space of one Minute there is a vast and
unalterable Celerity in the Motion of the Heavens; so that before the Infant be
wholly Born, the Constellation will be changed, and the Head will be Born under
one, and the Feet under another, which will (if it was significant) prove but
Cross Fortune to the Party.

But supposing that this small moment of time do not Disturb the signification
of the Horoscope; how comes it to pass that Twins are oftentimes observed to
have such different Fortunes, the one of them Dying in their Infancy, the other
Living to Decrepit Age: or one of them (perhaps) exalted to Honors and
Dignities, and continually Courted with opportunities of Advancement, the other
not able to get out of a mean and abject Condition; the one is inclined to
Peace, the other to Quarrelling and Disorder; the one is strong of
Constitution, the other weak and sickly.

A greater difference arises, if the Twins be one of them Male, and the other
Female: is it possible in such a Case, that they should both have the same
Genius, and Inclinations? which ought according to these men, necessarily to
follow. I hope there is no man but may be convinced of the vanity of this
Science, if he take Notice of those that die in the Field, men of different
Ages, Born under different Constellations; yet all Perishing by one common Fate.

Were all the Firstborn of Egypt slain at the Departure of the Children of
Israel; The Egyptians Drowned in the Red Sea; The Philistines Slain by Sampson;
The Children put to Death by Herod's Officers, Born under the same Stars? I
think none will Affirm it; If not, Why did they Die by the same Death? Are all
that are Born under Saturn, Melancholic? Under Jupiter or the Sun, Princes and
Potentates? Under Mars, Soldiers or Highway-men? Under Venus, Whoremasters?
Under Mercury, Merchants?

I shall now come to Answer those Arguments which Astrologers bring out of
Scripture, from Reason, or Experiments.

First for Scriptures: to that out of Genesis, 1. 14. I answer, that they
assume more than the Sense of the words will permit; for though it be there
said, that God set the Caelestial Lights for signs of things necessarily
depending upon their Course and Nature, yet it cannot thence be inferred, that
they are also signs of things merely Contingent, and proceeding from the
different Motions of man's Will and Appetite.

To that of the Stars fighting against Sisera in their Courses, I answer; That
by Stars in that place (according to some Interpreters) is meant Angels, which
is plausible enough, forasmuch as both are promiscuously called the Host of
Heaven: or it may be said, that at that time they did not Operate by a Natural
Influence, but a Supernatural and extraordinary Power, God raising up an
unusual Effect in the Stars, of causing Tempests to the Annoyance of those
Enemies of his people.

In that place of Job so much by them insisted on, is nothing at all to their
purpose: since it may with ease be Turned against them, that it is to be
understood, that no man can understand the Statutes of Heaven, but that God has
reserved the Knowledge of such things to himself; besides, there is nothing
said of the Influence, and Rule of the Stars over men's Minds or Actions,
nothing of the knowledge of Future Events, but only Arguments of the Divine
Wisdom, to convince Job of his weakness and Frailty.

And though it be said, The Heavens show forth the glory of God, and the Stars
declare his Handiwork; that makes not for them neither, the meaning of the
place being partly the same with that last mentioned, ( viz.) that Casting up
our Eyes to those glorious Luminaries, we may remember the power of God, who
has made them all, and continues them in so wonderful and unerring Courses.

As for the Star which appeared to the Magi coming to Christ, it was no Natural
but a Supernatural Star, having a Motion contrary to that of other Stars; few
will (I suppose) be so impudent as to affirm, our Savior was Governed by the
Stars, that he who Created, should be in Subjection to his Creatures. And
though it appeared at his Birth, and ushered him into the world, yet (as St.
Augustine says) Non dominabatur Christo ad decretum, sed famulabatur ad
Testimonium, nec enim subjiciebat imperio, sed judicabat obsequio. To make this
an Argument for their Art would be an absurdity; for if it had force and
signification in his Nativity, why had it not over all those Born at the same
time with him? I hope they will not say, that they were all to share in the
same Circumstances of Life.

Let us now examine their Reasons, and see how they will stand Trial.

Their first Reason is grounded upon a false Supposition, that there can be no
other use for the Stars, than to be Characters wherein men may Read their own
Fortunes.

The second likewise, ( viz.) that we know no other reason for the several
Motions, and Aspects, is not good Reasoning, for 'twill not hold to Argue from
the Negation of our knowledge, to the Negation of the thing we cannot
apprehend; so that if we cannot find what a thing is for, we cannot justly cut
it out a piece of Service, and infer a necessity of its being designed for that
use we have devised to apply it to.

The third reason from the Cohaerence betwixt Caelestial and Sublunary things
is no better Logic; for although they may sway the Elements, yet there is no
reason they should do so in things merely Contingent, and depending upon the
Will and slippery Appetites of Man: though Jupiter, or Mars, or any of the
rest, meeting in such an Aspect and Position one with another, may produce a
Tempest in the Air; yet I cannot perceive a necessity, that they must Dart a
Disorder into my Affections with their Malevolent Rays. And supposing the time
of a Nativity can be exactly gathered, yet what reason can they show for
Confirmation of their Rules: they are only such as men have devised, and that
without any ground or Warrant from Scripture: what reason can they give that
any Aspect should portend that which they say it does, but only some
Observation of a thing happening in that time, which they cannot averr to
proceed from that Aspect, but that it had been so without it.

And though Enoch, and Joseph were given to Studies of this Nature, and that
Moses was skilled in the Learning of the Egyptians, and Daniel of the
Chaldaeans, yet it cannot be proved, that they ever favored this way of
Divining at things to come: their knowledge proceeded from another Cause, to
wit, immediate Revelation; or else was gathered from certain and Solid
Principles.

It must be confessed that the Chiefest Bulwarks wherewith Astrologers defend
themselves, are Experiments; yet are they not so strong, but they may be
Battered. For some particular Praediction proving true, does not make the Rules
Infallible, one amongst an hundred (perhaps made at the same time) Hitting, the
rest proving False: why then should all those that Fail be slipped by and not
spoken of, or not be brought in judgment against the Art, as those few which
are True, are made so stiffly to plead for it.

Many very Eminent and Learned men have Discussed the vanity of Judicial
Astrology, as Picus Mirandula, Cornelius Agrippa, Franciscus Vallesius, and
diverse others, to whose Writings I refer my Reader.

Galeatius Prince of Millain gave a notable Check to one of these men; who was
arrived at that height of impudence, as to tell the Prince, he was shortly to
Die a sudden and unusual Death, and that himself was to Live a long time after
him. But mark how prettily Galeatius Confuted the Astrologer; he caused him to
be forthwith lead to Execution, the Prince surviving him many years: and indeed
it is observable that most of them are ignorant of what shall happen to
themselves, and whilst they foretell great Success, and promise Golden Mountains
to others, cannot Enrich themselves.

Nor ought we to be Seduced by the Experiments they Brag of, since they are
most of them only Collected by little and pretending Sciolists, men of no Faith
nor Reputation, most of them too being Feigned and Falling out no body knows
where nor when.

Again, in those few which truly happen according to their Praedictions; it is
not certain whether the Artist might Consult with something else besides the
Stars, since many who Deal with Familiar Spirits, Mask their Impieties under
the Vizor of Astrology. So St. Augustine lib. 5. de Civitate Dei. Non immerito
creditur, cum Astrologi mirabiliter multa vera respondent, occulto instinctu
fieri spirituum non bonorum, quorum cura est has falsas and noxias opiniones de
Astralibus fatis inserere humanis mentibus, atque firmare, non Horoscopi notati
and inspecti art, quae nulla est.

FINIS.

