AN APOLOGY OF JOHN EARL OF BRISTOL, CONSISTING OF TWO TRACTS.

IN THE FIRST, He sets down those Motives and Ties of Religion, Oaths, Laws,
Loyalty, and Gratitude, which obliged him to adhere unto the King in the late
unhappy Wars in England.

IN THE SECOND, He vindicateth his Honor and Innocence from having in any kind
deserved that injurious and merciless Censure, of being excepted from Pardon or
Mercy, either in Life or Fortunes.

Printed in the Year 1657.

TO THE COUNTESS of BRISTOL, MY BELOVED WIFE.
HAving by the space of almost forty years lived comfortably together, and God
having been pleased to give us Children and a Posterity, to whom (instead of
Plenty which they might have expected I might have left unto them) I am now
like to leave nothing but the same want and poverty which is already befallen
my self; I have sent unto you and them the best Legacy that I can think of, to
leave amongst you, which is a Discourse consisting of two Parts. In the first,
the Motives of Honor, Loyalty, and Religion are set down, which deterred my
Conscience from taking Arms against the King: In the second, I endeavor a
Vindication of my Honor and Innocence from that severe and injurious Sentence
of Exception of the Houses, whereby they have declared me a Delinquent, that
must not expect Pardon or Mercy, either in point of Fortune, or of Life, which
must of necessity insinuate me unto the World, and unto Posterity, to have been
a Malefactor of a more h^gh and horrid Nature, than the Generality of those
that have served the King in this War,

I wish you and they may have as much Comfort in the reading of it, as I had in
the writing of it, which I believe to have been greater (notwithstanding my
Banishment and Want in my old Age) than has remained in the Breast of any of
those that have made us so miserable.

Although you may communicate it with your Children and Family, and near
Friends; yet I would not have it generally divulged, or made public: for
although it comes to you in Print, That is only because I wanted the means of
transcribing it, and I found here a great Convenience of Printing it; And it is
not the more divulged thereby, for that there is not any one Copy thereof, but
such as remain in my hands; And this unto you is the only one that I have yet
parted with.

The last request you made unto me with Tears, when I departed from you, and
left the kingdom, was, That I would set down in writing mine own Proceeding,
and the unavoidableness and Iustifiableness of the Cause, for which we have
suffered, and whereof I had so often discoursed unto you. And truly, such has
been in all kinds your great Deserving from me, That I have taken this pains
chiefly for your Satisfaction, as I should do much more in any thing that I
should judge might be to your Comfort, and that might remain as a Testimony of
my Kindness, Affection, and Value of you.

BRISTOL.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL Chapters contained in the first part of this
Discourse.
Chap. 1. THe Introduction and Motives of Writing this Discourse. page 1. Chap.
2. The particular Reasons of adhering unto the King in this Cause, and the
Method observed in this Discourse. 10. Chap. 3. Reasons deduced from Scripture.
12. Chap. 4. The Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church, of not resisting
their Princes, notwithstanding they were Heathens or Apostates. 19. Chap. 5.
Setting down the Obligations and Ties by Solemn Oaths and Protestation, of not
taking Arms against the King. 31. Chap. 6. Setting down the unlawfulness of
Hostile Resistance drawn from Humane Laws. 34. Chap. 7. The Motives deduced
from Honor, Honesty, and Gratitude, of not forsaking the King in his Troubles.
38. Chap. 8. A Vindication of the King against that false and injurious
Aspersion of unsettledness in his Religion. 44. Chap. 9. Showing the War not to
have been begun by the King, but that he condescended to all things that could
in reason be demanded of him for the preventing of it. 51. Chap. 10. Showing a
particular Tie of Gratitude by the Generousness and Reconcileableness of the
Kings Disposition. 59. Chap. 11. A brief summary of the Reasons formerly set
down, for the not taking Arms against the King. 61. Chap. 12. All the former
Reasons applied to the present Case of King CHARLES, with a positive opinion
thereupon. 63.
CHAP. 1. The Introduction and Motives of writing this Discourse.
I NEVER more unwillingly took pen in hand than at present to set down the
subsequent Discourse, for mine own Vindication against so many unjust and
untrue aspersions as have been cast upon me, and so great severities as have
been used toward me. For it was in my hopes that rather some public and
legal Trial should have given me the means of clearing my self to the World,
than my pen. Neither could I but in reason expect, that whether by Treaty, or
by Force this unatural War should be extinguished, such only as had been
accused of illegal Oppressions, or such as had been the Inventors to set on
foot, or the Instruments to act those things which were the cause of those
unhappy mis-understandings and divisions betwixt the King and the People,
should have been reserved to the highest and severest punishments. But that
others, who neither were, nor could be, charged with any other Crime, but their
adherence to either party, according as they were guided by their Consciences,
might (after some such moderate sufferings as the less successful party are
usually liable unto, or after some legal Trial) have been admitted to an Act of
Oblivion, whereby those general animosities which this War has raised might
have been allayed, and by little and little have grown to be forgotten, and
those natural and near relations betwixt man and wife, parents and children,
friend and friend, which this War by difference in opinion and part-taking has
destroyed, might (together with the peace of the Kingdom) have been restored.

And in expectation of some such happy accord, or some moderate reducement when
that all men's Cases might have been calmly considered of, and that the great
Successes of the Houses in their war would have been seconded by their Acts of
the greater and clearer Justice, And that such as had made their humble
addresses unto them, should have been admitted to the means of informing them,
and not to be censured or condemned unheard, especially such as Petitioned for,
and submitted to the Justice of the Kingdom.

Upon this hope and expectation I passed by more than twenty printed
aspersions, full of infamy, bitterness and detraction, but void of all Truth.
These I neglected, although I saw the operation they had of raising a hatred
and detestation in the People, who fetched their intelligence from them, and
grounded their opinions of prejudice upon them.

But that which I was far from neglecting, but laid to my heart, with great
sadness and grief of mind, was. The severe Censures of the Houses in their
Propositions to the King at Oxford, when (without Summons, Hearing, or
Conviction) I was censured to be made incapable of holding of any place or
employment in the Kingdom, or to come within the Verge of the Court, without
laying the least Crime or Delinquency to my charge; and since in the
Propositions at Uxbridge (their severity increasing toward me) they added much
to their former Censure; I am sure without any further Crime or Provocation on
my part, having before that time (with the Kings leave) retired my self from
the Court, with intention to have passed the rest of mine age in a private
life, which (the War not permitting me at my House at Sherbone) I did at
Exeter, for the space of more than 2 years, with as much privacy, as was
possible for me. Yet was I so unfortunate, that (although their former desires
of my being removed from Court were accomplished by my voluntary Act neither
time did allay their displeasure, nor my absence from Court restrain their
further severitie toward me. But I was voted in those Propositions prepared to
be offered to his Majesty, and afterward sent unto him, to be in the number of
the most high and capital Offenders, who were not to expect Pardon or Mercy
either concerning Life or Fortune.

Yet herewith was not my Patience and resolution of Silence overborn,
conceiving this Exception could signify nothing more than that such Excepted
Persons, upon whom the displeasure of the Houses was highly fallen, should not
be admitted to that general Pardon of Course, which, joined to some pecuniary
Mulct or Composition, should be a Discharge and indemnity to others that had
born Arms, without further Trial or Impeachment; But that the Excepted Person*
should be reserved to a particular strict Legal Trial, and being after a fair
hearing legally convicted of those presupposed, heinous and foul Crimes (the
suggestions whereof induced the Houses to lay this heavy mark of Distinction
upon them) They being so condemned should have the severity of Law and Justice
to pass upon them, and be excepted from Pardon, as far as lay in the houses to
except them. But I did not conceive that the intention of the Houses was or
could be, to except them from a legal Trial, or fair Hearing, nor from being
acquitted or cleared, if they were innocent. For no man could entertain so hard
or prejudiced an opinion of the two Houses, or of the Scottish Commissioners who
concurred and assented to the Propositions, and the Exception, that they
should, upon the transferring of such Persons as the House of Peers should
nominate of their Body, or the House of Commons of their Members, or of the
Body of the Commons, or the Scottish Commissioners of their Kingdom, condemn
implicitly, or Proscribe (in compliance one to the other, without distinct
knowledge of the Person or the Crimes) so many noble Personages and Families to
total ruin and destruction, without hearing or due process of Law.

Besides their demanding of the Kings assent to pass their Condemnations and
Incapacities by Act of Parliament, must needs imply a due preceding Trial and
Conviction to be intended for the satisfying of the King of the Crimes and
guilt of the Persons, For it cannot be presupposed of the Houses, that (either
in regard of piety or reason) they could expect, that the King should involve
himself in so merciless a sentence of shedding so many men's blood, and
destroying so many good Families (implicitly upon trust of other men) without
distinct information and satisfaction of his own Conscience, And this, against
Persons who have been most Loyal, and their Crime and Delinquencie only for
having faithfully adhered to him, according to the Law and their Oaths.

So that my Opinion then was, That the intention of the Houses could be no
other, but that whereas some were admitted to a pecuniary Composition for their
pretended Delinquency, the Excepted Persons should not be admitted thereunto,
but be reserved to the severity of Justice without mercy, but first be admitted
to a legal Trial.

And herein I was further confirmed by diverse Treaties made with their General
upon the laying down of Arms, and the surrendering of Cities unto them, and
particularly of Excester, where I was, and was to have enjoyed the befit of
those Articles, by which it was permitted unto me, and unto all other Excepted
Persons, to endeavor by the space of four months to make our Peace and
Composition, And this would never have been condescended unto by their General,
and ratified by the Votes of both Houses, if they intended their Vote of
Exception as a final Sentence, irrevocable, and unalterable, which they have
likewise by their own Acts declared to be otherwise: For that upon mediation,
and further information, they have been pleased, to several Persons to remit
the severity of the Vote of Exceptions, and have admitted them to Composition.

Upon all these preceding Reasons, being confident that some such fitting
season would be offered, either by way of Petition, or by way of being called
to a fair and Legal Trial, That I should be heard, and (after a particular
Charge of all such Crimes as could be laid against me) I should be admitted to
a just defense, Upon this ground I have hitherto remained silent, and made no
Answer to those so many most unjust and untrue Calumnies and Aspersions which
have been cast upon me both in Print and otherwise.

And now by the said Treaty of Excester I supposed a fair opportunity given
me, to address my self unto the Houses to attain that which was ever in my
desires, which was to be admitted unto an Hearing, That they might judge
distinctly of my Case, after a full Information of all that concerned me; And
thereupon I addressed my humble Petition to the House of Peers, That I might
receive so much Favor and Justice from them, That (since I was by the Treaty
admitted to use my best endeavors so far to satisfy the Houses, that I might
be left in the Condition of other men that had served the King) I might be
heard by them, And in case I should not upon hearing give the Houses
satisfaction of not deserving to be a Person Excepted, I would not decline any
thing whatsoever the Houses should order concerning me. And in Case that it
should not be seasonable, in regard of their many great Affairs at that time,
to afford me such a Trial, That I might remain privately at mine House,
engaging my self to do nothing to the prejudice of the Houses either by Act or
Correspondence; And to make my appearance whenever I should be summoned, and
to abide their Order. This Petition had likewise an humble Request unto the
Lords, That the said Petition might be communicated with the House of Commons
in such sort as their Lordships in their wisdom should think fit; For I might
not (being a Peer) make my addresses but by them, or their particular leave:
Yet knowing that the Proposition of Exceptions was by the joint Vote of both
Houses, and that no Proceeding therein could be but by joint concurrence of
both Houses, I judged this the most proper Expedient of making my addresses
unto them both.

I accompanied this my Petition with a letter of much Respect unto the Speaker
of the House of Peers, with many Motives to induce them to condescend to my
Petition. I received Answer by letter bearing date the 10. day of June 1646.
from the Earl of Manchester (Speaker pro tempore) in the name of the House, as
follows. My Lord, The House of Peers have received your Letter, and have
commanded me to return your Lordship this Answer, That they leave your Lordship
to take the benefit of the Articles of Excester, which they will carefully
observe, etc.

Hereupon, (having the Articles of Excester confirmed) I came up in person unto
London, and exhibited my second Petition to the House of Peers, with the same
Request I had formerly made, That it might be communicated with the House of
Commons; And by a letter signified unto the Speaker of the House of Commons my
being come to London upon the public faith of the Treaty of Excester, The
particular Safe Conduct of their General under his Hand and Seal, and his
letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons, and the assurance of the House
of Peers, That the said Articles should be carefully observed by them.

My second Petition was, That I might without offense solicit my Cause, and
use my endeavors to give satisfaction to the Houses. I received Answer by the
Earl of Manchester, That the Lords thought it reasonable that I might take the
full benefit of the Articles, and use my best endeavors in soliciting my
Cause in Person, to my best advantage. But the next day after I had received
this permission from the Lords to follow my Cause, I was notified and served
with an Order by the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Commons, That
notwithstanding it was agreed by the Articles for Rendering up of Excester,
Oxford, etc. That the Excepted Persons might come to London to endeavor to
make their Peace and Composition with the Parliament, the House of Commons was
resolved to admit them to no Composition, notwithstanding the said Articles,
And therefore it being to no purpose for them to use any further endeavors in
that kind, the Sergeant at Arms of that House was from time to time to give
notice unto all such Excepted Persons, That they should immediately depart
without the Line of Communication and Parts adjacent, and not to return, etc. I
conceived this very derogatorie to the House of Peers, that I should be ordered
by the House of Commons without the Concurrence of the Lords, especially in a
matter wherein the Lords had declared themselves before.

Herein I thought it fit to have recourse unto the Lords, and sent the Copy of
the said Order unto diverse of them, who seemed to find it very strange, and
wished it might be offered unto the House the next morning, which was
accordingly done; But having been read, (after some time of a general silence)
another business was set on foot, and this laid by, so that I found little
relief was to be had where I might so justly have expected it.

But (in regard the Sergeant at Arms had told me, He could return no Answer to
the House of Commons, but his duty was only to notify the Order, and to give
an account if obedience were not given to it) I wrote a letter unto the
Speaker, containing some few modest and necessary requests. But nothing would
be heard concerning me, but that I was to depart the Kingdom within the limited
time by the Articles of Excester, which being within very few days to be
elapsed, I was constrained to make all the haste I could to the sea side, and
there to imbarque my Self and Company, and horses, in a small boat, with three
Mariners only and one Boy, having used all possible means to have my time
enlarged only for some few days, for the providing of fitting Transportation,
but could not obtain it: so that two days before the expiration of the time
limited by the Articles of Excester, I imbarqued at Weymouth, and passed into
France.

The Reason of my leaving the Kingdom of England was First, for that I was
assured that the time of the Treaty being expired, I should be seized as a
Prisoner of War, and so I might have been proceeded against by Marshal law, or
an Arbitrarie Power, instead of a legal Trial according to the law; which
neither then I did, nor will at any time decline. The second was, That
notwitstanding by the 21. Article for the surrendering of Excester, it was
agreed, That no Oath, Covenant, Protestation or Subscription, should be imposed
upon any Person whatsoever, comprised in the said Articles; Yet the House of
Commons ordered 2 of June 1646. That no Person should come to reside in the
Parliament Quarters, (which was then all England) but he should take the
National League and Covenant, and the Negative Oath, notwithstanding any
Articles that had been or should be made by the Army; neither of which I
thought could stand with my Loyalty, or the Oaths or Protestation which I had
formerly taken: Besides, I did conceive, that no Person could live with comfort
or safety under such a Power, that so avowedlie broke the Public Faith of
their own Army and General, whom though I found very desirous to have his
Capitulations punctually performed, yet were they in all things broken by the
Houses or their Committees, whenever it was for their benefit: For the
General having given me his Letters, and Protection under his hand and seal for
the enjoying and disposing of my goods for the space of four months according
to the Articles; yet the Committees of Dorset-shire slighted the said Articles
and Generals latters, being both showed unto them, and sold the said good^ for
a third parr of their value, for their own or friends advantage.

By this manner of proceeding, I (having fallen from all hope or possibility
of clearing my self by being brought to a legal Trial, or public Hearing, And
being loath to go to my grave (from whence I cannot be far) branded with that
black Mark of not being capable of Pardon or Mercy, neither for Life nor
Fortunes, which must insinuate me to the world to be some horrid, pernicious
and wicked Malefactor) find my self obliged in that I owe to my self, in
Vindication of mine Honor and Innocence, as likewise to my Family and
Posterity, who will find themselves left to want and misery, to let them see
that it has been an inevitable necessity and adhering to my Loyalty and
Conscience, that has involved me in that general Calamity that has be fallen
the Kings overborn Party, and the particular indignation of others, and no
particular wickedness or demerit of mine, that has assigned and severed me to
that severe and merciless Sentence of Unpardonable Destruction.

If I could have had any hope of being admitted to a public or Legal
Proceeding, I should never have betaken me to any other way of clearing my
self, although I am not ignorant, upon how great disadvantage and hazard any
man is brought to a Trial upon the Impeachment and pursuit of the Houses:
Neither had I any reason to slatter my self with any indulgency toward we: Yet
withal, I had, and have, so great confidence of my own clear Innocence, in
point of not meriting to be excepted from the same course of proceeding
afforded others, That I was never more desirous to attain any thing, than I
was, and am, to be admitted to an equal and fair Hearing, and Legal Trial.

As for the point of having served and adhered to the King, I shall neither
deny or evade it; but my Case is in that, the same with many Thousands; and I
should be too indulgent to my self, not to expect the same misfortunes and
suffering with others: But now almost despairing of ever to be so happy as to
see mine own Country again, in regard of my Age and Infirmities, and in less
hopes of ever being admitted to a fair Hearing, since the very ways of
Addresses or Petitions unto them are debarred me, and the using of any further
endeavor to satisfy them is voted down, And since their Sentence is already
(before either Examination, Trial or Conviction) put in execution, (in as much
as concerns Fortunes or Estates) by their actual possessing and disposing of
them: So that (having nothing left unto me but an exiled Life, present wants,
and an expectation of greater poverty) I shall endeavor to bear those heavy
visitations which God has been pleased to send upon me and my Family, with
that Constancy of mind, and pious submission to Gods holy will, as befitteth a
good Christian; and leave unto my Family and Posterity the subsequent
Discourse: where, in the first place I shall set down those Reasons that
induced me to adhere unto the King, being (as I conceive) thereunto bound, in
Honor and Conscience, by the Law of God and of the Land, by many solemn Oaths,
by natural Allegiance as a Subject, and by Honesty and Gratitude, as a sworn
Servant both to his Father and to himself; Of which several Obligations I shall
speak in the first part of this Discourse: And in the second part I shall make
so true and faithful a Narration of my Proceedings, as I doubt not But to
appear to have been a Faithful, Loyal, and Affectionate Servant to the King my
Sovereign and Master, But to have had no hand in any of those Exorbitancies
which caused those misunderstandings betwixt the King and his People; To have
been no Incendiary betwixt the King and the Houses; See the Speeches made for
Acco^modation before the War was actually begun, in Append. page 1. and 9.
But on the contrary to have used all possible endeavors as far as in me was,
to have put those unhappy breaches and differences into a way of Accommodation,
whereby a Civil War might have been prevented; and since the War, there never
was any Overture, or hope of Peace, to which I did not contribute, both my
prayers, and all the furtherance that was in my power, And so not to have
deserved that merciless Sentence of Unpardonable Destruction.

CHAP. II. The particular Reasons of adhering unto the King in this Cause, and
the method observed in this Discourse.
MY intention is not in this Discourse (wherein the Vindication of mine own
Honor and Innocence, and the setting down of those Reasons which deterred my
Conscience from taking Arms against my King, is the main scope) to write a
defense of the Cause in general, or to dispute the Question of Subjects taking
Arms against their Sovereign; It will require a large and elaborate Tract
aparr, which may not be interrupted by any thing of the proceedings of a
particular man: Neither will I censure or judge other men, nor fix upon others
(though of a contrary way) any thing that may seem opprobrious, notwithstanding
the Style of Traitor and notorious Traitor has often been my Title in Print;
although that detestable name in this Case does not make me blush. I know men's
Consciences may by different Principles, be carried different ways: Neither
will I censure so many men of all Qualities and Conditions, and religious
Professions, of so much Impiety, as to have broken through all Ties of
Allegiance and Loyalty, and so many Oaths, their Consciences unconsulted, and
without conceiving they had found something to balance their Judgments
against so many precise and clear Duties. I shall only set down the motives and
inducements of mine own Conscience; which ought to be to each Christian his
Guide; against which, as he can do nothing well; so even good Actions become
evil, if they be done with an unsatisfied or dubious conscience. The Rules of
Scripture being, That we be fully persuaded in our minds, Romans 14.5. That he is
happy that condemns not himself in the thing he allows, verse. 22. That he
that doubts is damned, And that all things that are not of faith are Sin,
ver. 23. So that as it will be easily agreed, That to all Christian men,
Conscience ought to be the strongest and most unresistable guide, and of so
great and binding authority with us, That it should overruled all
considerations of Safety, Profit, Ambition, Revenge, or other Interest
whatsoever: So it behooveth each Christian man to seek out the best and most
unfallible marks and directions for the guiding of his Conscience in the right
way. And this I may with truth declare (and take God to my witness in it) That
when I did see, that no Industry (wherein I omitted nothing that was in my
power, for the stopping, allaying, or reconciling of those differences and
violences, which (breaking in like a flood) prevailed over mine, and all other
peaceable minded men's endeavors) could produce any good effect, (And that
there was now nothing left to any man, but (in an unevitable War) to make
choice of the juster side, as his Conscience toward God in the first place,
and his other civil duties and obligations should dictate unto him) I did,
(after many Conferences with learned men of the other way, much study, and
reading of all that I could find to have written in favor or excuse of
Subjects taking Arms against their King) resolve (contrary to all worldy or
prudential Interests of my own) to adhere to the King, according as my
Conscience was satisfied I was bound to do, By the law of God, By the doctrine
and practice of all Christian Churches, and in all times, By many Oaths, By
the laws of the Kingdom, By my natural Allegiance as a Subject, And by
Gratitude and Fidelity, as a sworn Servant, both to his Father and Himself: Of
each which several Obligations, I shall speak in the subsequent Discourse in
the order that is here set down.

CHAP. III. Reasons deduced from Scripture.
AS it will be easily assented unto, that Conscience ought to be the guide of
our Actions: so the most infallible Rule whereby to guide Conscience to a
Christian, ought to be, the Principles of Religion; and those Principles are,
(above all other) binding and obliging which are deduced from the word of God.
I shall therefore first begin with those religious and pious Motives which have
in Conscience restrained me from taking Arms against the King, or making to him
any hostile Resistance: For I desire it to be understood, that when I speak of
Resistance, I always understand Actual and Hostile Resistance: For I well
know, that in things in themselves sinful, mala in se, I ought rather to obey
God than Men, And in such Cases, suffering is a full performance of our Duty of
Obedience; Nay in Cases only illegal, non illicita, but illegalia, against
public or private Right, as if a Prince shall infringe the known undoubted
Prilileges of the Kingdom or of Parliament, or command that which is
destructive unto them, The Weapons of our Resistance ought to be Replies,
Petitions, Remonstrances, Nay we may withold our free-will-Offerings, though
not our Tributes of Duty, we may stop our voluntary supplies of giving
Subsidies, we may make a stand in the transactions of affairs, until the King
condescendeth to do us Right, as has been often practiced, As it was in the
Case of the Earl of Arundel, who being restrained and kept from sitting in
Parliament in the year 1626. by the King, without cause shown, The House of
Peers sat many days silent without debating or transacting any Business
until he should be restored to his liberty, and place in Parliament, or cause
showed for his detention: But to take Arms, or to use Acts of force, this is
the Resistance which ought not to be used, and is neither justifiable by the
Laws of God, nor of the Kingdom, And this Resistance I am far from being
satisfied in my Conscience may be used by any subjects against their lawful
and undoubted Sovereign.

The places in Scripture, both in the old and new Testament commanding (by
positive precept) our obedience, and forbidding Resistance to the Powers
ordained over us by God, are many; But the Arguments of necessary deduction are
infinite, whereas Resistance is no where commanded or allowed; And the
Arguments by way of Deduction which are made use of to tolerate the Subjects
taking of Arms against their Sovereign, are by putting some places of Scripture
upon wrack and torture to make them speak their sense; whereas it is an
undeniable Rule in Schools, That Inferences and deductions cannot justify the
breach of plain duties enjoined by any one positive precept of Scripture.

In the old Testament it was death to disobey (much more hostilely to resist)
the supreme Authority, Proofs out of the old Testament.
by positive precept, Deuteronomy. 17.10. Joshua 1.18. So it was to resist Parents.
And certainly in States and Commonwealths, tam Pater Nemohe is Pater patriae,
and all the civil power that was of old in Paternall Jurisdiction, is now by
the Consent and Common Agreement of the People placed in the supreme power of a
State, and the same obedience is due to it, and resistance to it as
unjustifiable.

And such as will indulge to the People, a freedom to resume their first
Original Power, grounded upon that Maxim, Omnis homo nascitur liber, every man
is born free, seduce them by so false a Principle, that the contrary of it is
the truth, Nullus homo nascitur liber, no man is born free. Neither was there
ever yet in this world, anyone man born free. It is true, there was one man
created free, our first father Adam, But all his Children, and all his Descent
after him, were born under Paternall Jurisdiction; Nay our blessed Savior
(speaking of him as a Man, and Son to the blessed Virgin) was born under this
Paternal Jurisdiction and filial Obedience, whereunto he submitted himself as
is plainly set down Scripture, Luke the 2.51. where it is said, He went with
Joseph and his Mother, and was subject unto them. Now this Paternal
Jurisdiction, which was at first the sole Sovereignty which governed the world,
By reason of Partiality in Parents, Oppression by such as were the strongest,
and a multitude of inconveniences and confusions when the World was become
numerous, and full of People, and every family become a Realm, As it was too
narrow, so it grew to be so hurtful unto Mankind, That men were forced for
their own preservation, Common Justice, and comfort of life, to transfer this
paternal Jurisdiction, (all but filial and personal Duty of honoring and
obeying Parents) into Magistracy, and willingly divested themselves (for their
own good) of that Native Liberty which they had before, And as the right power
of Government is the same, which it was in paternall Jurisdiction, only by the
Consent of the People changed into another hand: So the Obedience unto it ought
to be the same, And the fifth Commandment of obeying Parents, is by all
understood to extend unto the Magistrate, to whom the people having by consent
tranferred the power of paternal Jurisction, are likewise by Divine Precept
bound to obedience, and the People cannot still retein unto themselves, that,
which by common consent they have divested themselves of, and transferred to
others. So was it in the Commonwealth of Rome, when by lex Regia the people
had transferred all their power to the Emperor, they were not to resist, And
it was to those Emperors, to whom our Savior and his Apostles injoined
Obedience, not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake, and not unto the good
only, but unto the froward.

David was pursued by Saul unjustly, his life sought by him; yet his Conscience
checked him when he had only cut off the lap of Saul's garment, 1 Samuel 24.5, 6.
But when the attempting upon his person was mentioned, he then cried out, Who
can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. Nay, when he might have slain Saul, and he was desired by Abishai
that he might strike him to the ground, he did not only forbid him, but called
unto Abner, telling him he deserved to die, that he had not more carefully kept
and guarded his Master, verse. 15, 16. which shows, that not only not to hurt,
but to preserve, is our Duty. And truly, if I should have lift up my hand, or
drawn my Sword against the King, I fear I should not have been so happy, as
diverse have been that have gone the other way, in finding out such satisfactory
Arguments or distinctions as would have rid or cured me of that horror of
Conscience which would have made me most miserable in the height of all
prosperity and success.

All the whole context of the old Testament incite to the obedience, to the
honoring, fearing and reverencing of the King; And all the Attempts that have
been made upon the persons of Kings, or their Government, are either condemned
as wicked, or else were by the extraordinary and especial Commandment of God,
making use of wicked men to be the Executioners of his just Judgments; Besides,
the Government of the Jewish Commonwealth was a Theocratia, an immediate
Government of God himself, and by the Consent of all Divines, Gods
extraordinary Judgments are not to be made Rules or Patterns of ordinary
Government. But God has given us a written law in the Scripture; and by the
constant precepts contained in them, we are to be guided; and not by the
extraordinary Examples recited in them, Of which we may boldly say, That as it
is most certain they were not wicked (how severe soever they may seem) because
God commanded them; so it is as certain it were wickedness in us to imitate
them, not having Gods especial Command for them, which will not now be
pretended unto by any. The Cases of Eglon, Zimri, Jehu, etc. are justified by
Gods being the Commander of them; and Sin is nothing but an Obliquitie from
Gods will: But it is Gods revealed and declared Will which is to be our rule.
God is pleased to declare Deuteronomy. 24.16. Ezech. 18.20. 2 Kings 14.6.
That the Father shall not die for the sin of the Son, nor the Son for the sin
of the Father; But every one shall bear his own iniquity, This is his revealed
Law by which we are to govern our selves: Yet God in his secret, yet most just
Judgment, will have Achan with his Wife and Children, and all belonging unto
him to be stoned to death, the like of Corah, and diverse others; which
particular Judgments of God we ought to fear and reverence, but not to draw
from them Example or watrant against the Commandment or declared Law of God.

But in the whole old Testament I conceive there will not be found any one
Precept or toleration of hostile Resistance, nor any Example (the extraordinary
Cases excepted) countenancing Disobedience to the lawful Supreme Magistrate;
But so much to the contrary, That there is no Duty (next after the fearing,
honoring, and serving of God) more inculcated, than the fearing, obeying, and
honoring of the King, as his Vicegerent, Dixi vos Di^ est is, Psalm. 82. v. 6.
I said ye are Gods. Deuteronomy. 1.17. 2 Chro. 19. v. 6.
The Kings Throne is called the Throne of God, the Judgment of the Supreme
Magistrate, the Judgment of God, and most of the Attributes of God are applied
unto them.

Proofs out of the New Testament.
And for the new Testament, The Precepts therein against Resistance, are not
only much more positive and direct, but the punishments of much a higher
nature: For the punishments of the old Testament are no where explicitly beyond
death; whereas S. Paul says, Romans 13. v. 2.
That He that resists the Powers ordained by God procures to himself
Damnation.

Our Savior ( Mar. 12.17.) commands us out of his own mouth, to render unto
Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, and to God, the things that are Gods. Now
I must clearly prosess, That before the War was actually and hostilely entered
into, my Conscience was in great suspension, and doubt, that those ways and
Courses which were pursued, tended not only, not to give unto Caesar what
belonged unto Caesar, but to take from him that which undoubtedly and
undeniably was his; as likewise to take from God that which belonged unto him,
by applying that which had for many hundred years been dedicated and
appropriated unto him, and his Service, to common uses, which has in all
times, and even amongst Heathen, been known by the name of Sacrilege. And which
diverse grave and learned Divines of that way (as Dr. Burgess, and Mr. White of
Dorchester by name) in the beginning of the Parliament told me, That they would
never a^^ent unto or approve the applying the Revenue of the Church, unto
temporal uses; They conceived they might be better employed than they were, for
the maintenance of Preaching Ministers, and other pious uses, But to be taken
from the Church, and applied to profane uses, I am sure their Opinions were
then against it.

For the former of taking from the King what was his, I was too much confirmed
by the 19. Propositions of Grocers Hall, which were sent unto the King, some
months before I withdrew my self from Parliament, As likewise by diverse other
particulars denied unto the King, which were as undoubtedly his, as the Crown.
And for the second, of taking from God what belonged unto him, I wish my doubts
had not been so well confirmed by the use that has been made of the Lands and
Revenue of the Church, to be made in great part, the Hire of Foreign Forces
against their Prince; and the rest to satisfy the Usury of the said wages. So
that those ancient devout Dedications, intended for a perpetual Maintenance of
Gods Church, and his Ministers, have by way of Commutation and Change been
applied to the pious uses of Usury, and the maintenance of a Civil war. But our
Saviors Command being clear and positive, to give unto Caesar what belonged to
Caesar; I did conceive, That Honor, Fealty, Loyalty, and Obedience did as much
belong unto him, as Tribute, Service, and other Regalities of his Crown, All
which I had by Oaths legally established, and by lawful Authority administered
unto me, sworn more than ten times to King James, to belong unto him, and to
his lawful Heirs and Successors, and often likewise unto King Charles, And that
I would in them bear to him Faith and true Alleagiance. Now whether the said
19. See the Propositions in Append. page 13.
Propositions (which are here unto annexed) And many other things, which as
occasion shall be offered, will be instanced in, might not administer unto me a
just Scruple of Conscience, of swerving from this plain precept of our Savior,
of giving unto Caesar what belonged unto him, and unto God the things that are
Gods, I shall remit to any Christian of what Profession soever he shall be.

Our Savior does further confirm this his Precept by his own Example of paying
Tribute-money, though he might have exempted himself from it, as being no
Stranger: Yet Mat. 17.27. Notwithstanding (says he) lest we should offend
them, Go to the Sea, and cast in an Angle, etc. So that he would rather do a
Miracle, than do that which might seem to be like Sedition, or Disobedience.

St. Paul in the 13 chap. of his Epistle to the Romans, 1, 2, 3, and 4 verses
tells us, That we may not resist the Powers ordained over us by God; And he
that resists this Ordinance, shall receive to himself Damnation. And verse
the 15. That we must be subject, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.
Now that the King is this Power ordained over us by God, I never heard any
doubt made by any, of his just and rightful Title. In all the Acts of
Parliaments which have been by the Houses offered unto him for his Royal Assent
since his coming unto the Crown, it is acknowledged, We your Majesty's most
humble and most faithful Subjects. And if we ackowledge our selves his
Subjects, we do therein acknowledge him our Sovereign. And in the beginning of
every Parliament both in the House of Peers, and in the House of Commons, Vide
Stat. 1. Jacobi cap. 1. in App. page 18. wherein the Sovereignty of the King is
fully set down.
before they take their Seat and Place in Parliament, they do by Oath declare
and testify in their Conscience, That the Kings Highness is the only Supreme
Governor of this Realm, and all other his Countries and Dominions, etc. And
this Declaration I and all the rest of the Members of both Houses have made. So
that it being an uncontroverted and confessed truth, That the King is our
lawful Sovereign, and we his faithful Subjects, and consequently the Power
ordained over us by God, the which to resist, by S. Paul's Doctrine delivered in
plain and explicit terms, is, To procure to our selves Damnation. I must
confess, That (although I will not judge other men) yet I durst not adventure
my Soul upon a Moot-Case, or upon Distinctions or strained Interpretations,
against that which appeared unto me to be the literal and clear sense. S. Paul
declaring Romans 14.22, 23. That he that doubts is damned. The meaning whereof
I understand to be, That he that doubts that that which he does is sinful
and wicked, and yet adventureth to do it, therein sins presumptuously, and
thereby runs a hazard of Damnation. And truly I did much more than doubt;
for I was as S. Paul requires we should be, Romans 14.23. Fully persuaded in
mind of the contrary. So that (without Impiety and making Shipwreck of my
Conscience against the plain Precepts of Scripture) I could not adhere to the
way of Resistance.

CHAP. IV. The Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church, of not resisting
their Princes, notwithstanding they were Heathens or Apostates.
I Well know that the Authority of Scripture needs not any humane or foreign
support; But because the Parties of several, yea, contrary ways, will both
pretend to have the Scriptures in their favor, and from them to draw the rule
of their Consciences alike, to me it seemed that nothing ought to be of greater
Authority (under Scripture) or like rightly to interpret Scripture, than the
unanimous Doctrine and practice of the Primitive times, and of those holy and
learned men, who as they were nearer to the times of our Savior, and of the
Apostles, and of those Penmen of God, so doubtless they saw by clearer light
than we do now at a greater distance. And really by what I could ever read or
be instructed in from others, I could never find any thing, either allowing or
countenancing the Subjects taking Arms against their Sovereign, although it
were in the highest and most bloody persecution, and under the worst of
Princes, many of them being Heathens, Tyrants and Apostates; And yet it was to
these wicked Persecutors, to whom our Saviout and his Apostles injoined
Obedience; And the primitive Fathers practiced it in their sufferings and
Martyrdoms.

But I must confess I have met with a most untrue Allegation, and most
injurious to Christian innocence. That the reason of the Christians bearing so
many wrongs and oppressions, was, because they had not then power and means to
do otherwise, or right themselves. The untruth of this Allegation will appear
by the writings of those Fathers whose profession it was to bear and suffer,
Lib. 5. Orat. in Auretium. Epist. ad Demetrianum. Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Tertulliun. in Apologetico.
but not to resist; Flere potero, dolere potero, etc. aliter, nec debeo, nec
possum resistere, was the Saying of S. Ambrose; S. Syprian says, Quamvis
nimius and copiosus noster populus, non tamen adversus violentiam se
ulciscitur, sed patitur; And Nicephorus reports, that in one day, twenty
thousand Christians were slain in the City of Nicomedia under Dioclesian. And
many of their books are full of passages of this strain. And to conceive that
power to resist was only wanting, is not only injurious to the Innocence of
those Holy Men, but injurious to God, who if his Glory had not been more
advanced by their Sufferings, Martyrdom and Persecution, than by Resistance; or
that Resistance had been commanded by him, or he pleased therein, Those his
holy Servants should not have perished for want of Power. Our Savior says,
when for the defense of his own Person he prohibiteth resistance, Mat. 26.53,
54.
If he would he could pray to his Father, who would send him more than twelve
Legions of Angels. And when the preservation of Gods Servants redoundeth more
to the Glory of God than their sufferings, He is never wanting to them; 2 Kings
6. v. 16, 17, 18. etc. Act. 12. v. 11. Act. 27.24. Act. 16.26. and 36.
As we see by so many deliverances by the extraordinary Power of God. But the
truth is, That unto these Primitive men (treading in the steps of the Apostles)
their sufferings were their Glory, their Rejoicing, and their Advantage. And
diverse of the Fathers, by way of prevention (as it were) foreseeing that this
Scandal might be cast upon their Innocence and Christian Patience ( That it was
want of means and power, and nor of will that they resisted not) do clearly
declare, That neither Numbers, Arms, or Courage, were wanting to them
wherewith they might defend themselves; nor Injuries, Oppressions, and
Persecutions wanting that might provoke them thereunto: But it was the Example
of Christ and his Apostles sufferings, and their holy Doctrine and Precepts
commanding Obedience, that suffered not their hands to fight against the Powers
ordained by God over them, although they used both hands and arms with
remarkable Valor and Success against the Enemies of their Princes,
notwithstanding the said Princes were Heathen, and Persecutors of the Church of
God.

But this Doctrine of not Resisting, some of our new Divines (who cannot but
acknowledge it to be both the Doctrine and practice of the Apostles and
Primitive Times) do now say, That God was not then pleased to reveal the
Doctrine of Resistance, But that Martyrdoms and sufferings were the way, by
which he thought it then sit no plant the Church, which he is now pleased
should be protected by Resistance, and enlarged by power. Wherein they have
mistaken the Text, For that, that Doctrine (instead of the Bible) is taken out
of the Alcoran, where Mahomet says, That God had sent Christ in the Spirit of
meekness to establish his Law: But now by him he would have his Law settled and
established by the power of the Sword and Conquest. And if prevailing or
success might stand for Arguments, it will be hard convincing this Mohammedan
Doctrine. But certainly the general and universa Tenent of all the Churches of
Christendom were, and I conceive are still, That as Religion ought not to be
planted by force or constraint: So Christian Subjects ought not to make
Religion the ground of their Resistance or taking Arms against their Prince.
The Protestant churches declare against Subjects taking Arms against their
Princes.
And herein there is a concurrence of all Protestant Churches (although they
differ in many other points) who in their public Confessions do not admit of
Hostile Resistance against their Supreme Magistrate, And more particularly the
Church of England (which (without any immodestie) may challenge her part in the
Reformation, she having had many learned Propugners of it by their Writings,
and not a few that have sealed it with their Blood, by patiently dying for it)
has declared against it, confirming the Exhortation to Obedience, published in
the time of Edw. 6. and the Homily of Obedience, by the Articles of their
Confession of Faith; Confessio A^gust* (...) 6. Gallia Art. 40. Helvet. Art.
26. Scot. Art. 24. Anliae Art. 27.
The like does the rest of the Reformed Churches in the Harmony of their
Public Confessions. So that it has been the constant Doctrine of all
Protestant Divines since the Reformation down until our times. And I have heard
diverse men (very eminent for their learning) aver it, That upon their
Reputation they will make it appear, That these few years of Distractions in
England have poduced more seditious Pamphlets, tolerating and encouraging
Disobedience, than all the Christian world ever saw before.

The Prosestants had wont to charge the Doctrine of Resistance upon the Roman
Catholics; They likewise endeavor to father it upon the Protestants. It
seems both are unwilling to own it, I mean in their general received Tenants;
though it be true that some of both professions have written in the defense of
it, though disclaimed and burned by public Authority, as wicked and seditious
on both sides. Osor. de Iur. Majest. fol. 140.
Andreas Rivetus Professor at Leyden writing against a Jesuit that cast this
Aspersion upon the Protestants, that they agree with them in the Doctrine of
warring against or deposing Kings, says, That no Protestant does maintain that
damnable Doctrine, and that rashness of Knox and Buchanan is to be ascribed,
praefervido Scotorum ingenio, and ad audendum prompto; To the over-hot spirit
of the Scots, ever apt to be over-hold. The Protestants of France, not only in
their Articles above cited, but in their books protest their Innocence, and
that they abhor this Doctrine of Resisting forcibly. Pierre du Moulin has
these words. Pierre (...) in his ^^^fence of (...) Faith, Page 3.4.
Nous tenons que ce n'est point a un Sujet de trouner en la Religion de son
Prince occasion de desobeissance, feisant de la Piete vne allumette de
Rebellion. Nous sommes prests a' exposer nos vies pour la defense de nos Rois,
contre qui que ce soit, fust il de nostre Religion. Quiconque feroit autrement,
ne defendroit point la Religion, mais serviroit son ambition, and attireroit un
grand blame sur la verite de l' Evangile. We hold that a Subject ought not from
the Religion of his Prince to take occasion of disobedience, making of Piety a
match whereby to kindle Rebellion. We are ready to expose our lives for the
defense of our Kings, against whomsoever it be, although of our own Religion,
And whosoever should do otherwise, should not defend Religion, but serve his
own ambition, and would draw a great reproach upon the truth of the Gospel.

The Roman Catholics, especially the Doctors of the Sorbons have written
Volumes against it, and never fail to censure all books that maintain that
Doctrine, to the fire. And the University of Paris in their published Censure
of the 4. of June 1610. declare, that Seditiosum, impium, and haereticum est,
quocunque quaesito color a quocunque Subdito, Vasallo aut Extraneo, sacris
Regum aut Principum personis vim habere, That it is a seditious, impious and
heretical thing for any Subject, Vassal, or Foreiner, upon what pretense or
color soever, to offer violence to the sacred persons of Kings or Princes. So
that both Protestants and Roman Catholics declaring against it, (that is, in
the general received and approved Tenants and Opinions of their several
Churches) of how little Authority ought the private Opinion of some few
hotheaded Men to be, who (seeking to get themselves a name by being the
Authors of some new and bolder Opinions) shall upon their own fancies, or some
witty or subtle Inferences and Deductions (contradict the unanimous and
universally received Opinions of all Christian Churches, and the Practice and
Examples of so many Holy Martyrs from the very times of the Apostles even unto
our days. Mr. Fox in his Book of Acts and Monuments specifieth many, even to
their death, exhorting to Obedience to their Prince. I shall only set down one
instance of many.

Those famous Sufferers in Queen Martes days, although the Reformed Religion,
being newly planted, was likely by Persecution to be extirpate, and that some
more hot and zealous seemed to have an Inclination to preserve themselves and
their Religion by way of Force (for at that time their power was great) Twelve
of the most eminent amongst them for Learning and Piety agreed to the setting
forth a Declaration of their Faith and Doctrine, in which they set down their
Hatred to any such Inclination, and exhort with great earnestness of Spirit,
and beseech in the bowels of Jesus Christ, all such as fear God, to behave
themselves as obedient Subjects to the Queen, and to the Superior Powers
ordained of God under her, and rather (after their Example) to give their heads
to the Block, than in any sort to Rebel, or to Mutter against the Queen, the
Lords anointed: And toward the end of this their Declaration, they renew their
Exhortation, humbly praying all men to be in no point consenting to any kind of
Rebellion, or Sedition against the Queen, But where they cannot obey, but they
must disobey God, their to submit themselves with all patience and humility to
suffer as the Will and Pleasure of the Higher Powers should adjudge, as they
themselves were ready to do, rather than to consent to any Doctrine contrary to
that Confession which they had made in the said Declaration. And most of all
these men sealed this their Doctrine with their blood, being burnt in several
places of the Kingdom, some in Smithfield, some at Gloucester, some at
Coventry, as is set down particularly in the said Story, page. 1470. So that
both the Protestants and Roman Catholics, in their published and avowed
Doctrine, disclaiming and censuring this Doctrine of Hostile Resistance as
Impious and Heretical (as is abovesaid) of what Authority can the private
Opinions of a few men (condemned by their own Churches) be, for the settling and
satisfying for any sober and uningaged man's Conscience; against the Doctrine
and practice of the whole Christian World and in all times? It is true, that a
strong fancy against any thing, makes us hardly to be persuaded to it. But we
easily believe that which we earnestly wish. And it is as true, that all times
have brought forth some great and able wits that have ever affected to be the
Authors of new Opinions, and the Arch-Heretiques have ever been noted to have
been Men of parts, though of stronger fancy than solid Judgment. Many of these
new Men (if not all of them) have (by learned answers of particular men) been
confuted, as well as by public Censures been condemned, as Impious and
heretical; as Iunius Brutus by Baricane Dr. in Divinity and Canon of the
Cathedral Church of Toulouse, Anno 1614. This Iunius Brutus is an assumed and
counterfeited name, the author of it (as it should seem) being unwilling to
avow the Doctrine, and was published first in Latin, and afterward set out in
French Anno 1611. by Lewis Mayerne Turquet. It laid the ground of such Maxims
and Tenants, as the Authors that have written against them do not content
themselves with showing their Opinions to be false and erroneous, but they in
veigh against them as detestable and execrable. And i is far from my Intention,
in this Discourse, the scope whereof is only to set down faithfully mine own
proceeding in matters of Fact, and in matters of Opinion to show those Grounds
and Reasons which have deterred my private conscience from having any part in
lifting up my hand against the King, Admitting all the Positions either by
Protestants or Papists were true, which allow Subjects to take Arms against
their Princes, yet they agree not with the present Case.
to enter into any matter of Dispute or Controversy with these new Doctors,
but leave their Scholastical Confutation, to the learned Writings of those that
have answered them, and to those public Censures that have condemned them.
Thus far I have, and shall make use of them, which is to show, That (admitting
all their bold and new Positions were true, I say, posito non concesso,) yet by
their own Maxims and Principles I could find nothing that could warrant me in
point of Conscience to Hostile Resistance, for that the matter of Fact in the
present Case, neither is, nor can be, with any truth or color of truth
applicable to their Tenants and Positions, which I shall endeavor to make
clear by that which follows.

All the Roman Catholics which have written in favor of resisting Princes in
some Cases, lay for their ground a supposed Supremacy in the Pope, Showing that
the Tenants of Roman Catholics are not applicable to the present Case.
in matters spiritual, and thereby erect a superior Jurisdiction over Princes,
which must of necessity be presupposed, before they can pretend to censure or
punish: for par in parem non habet imperium, and that is the true and
unanswerable Reason why Kings cannot be punished but only by God, because there
is over them no other superior Jurisdiction on earth; but the Pope pretends
over all Christian Princes, as well as other Men, a direct superior
Jurisdiction, in spiritualibus, in matters spiritual, and an indirect Power, in
ordine ad spiritualia, in temporalibus, in matters temporal. And upon this
ground, the Romanists affirm, That in such cases, viz. If they be Heretics
with obstinacy, Persecutors of the Church of God, Incorrigibly Disobedient, or
Apostates, The Pope may then (say they) discharge their Subjects of their
Obedience, and they may lawfully resist their Sovereign. But this Tenent is to
me, and to all other Protestants of England, of no Authority, who eject this
Doctrine as erroneous, and have solemnly sworn the Contrary. But that is not the
point that is now to be proved, my Assertion being, That (admitting this their
Tenent were true) yet it is no way applicable to the Kings present Case in
matter of Fact: For those that give unto the Pope, power of censuring and
punishing of Kings, first presuppose the Crimes of Apostasy, Heresy,
Persecution, etc. and them to be duly and sufficiently proved, There must go
out Citations to the party supposed to be the Delinquent, there must be
Hearing, Conviction, and Sentence. Further, before any execution of Sentence,
there must be Admonition, and a Return of Obstinacy, And after this there does
precede Excommunication before Deposition or Delegating of power to any other,
either to execute the Sentence, or to discharge Subjects of their Obedience.
And this will be seen in all their Writings, and in their Practices, and
particularly in the Case of the King of Navarre. But it is impertinent to
insist further thereon, and to fight against the Air, when no man will have the
Folly or Malice to attempt the application to our present Case. The use that I
only make thereof, is, to assert what I have formerly said, That (admitting the
false positions of the new Doctors that have written in favor of Subjects
making Hostile Resistance against their Prince were true) yet the present Case
against the King can neither be justified or maintained by any of their
Principles.

Having instanced with those of the Romish Church, I shall examine the Tenants
and Principles of other Professions, though I know not in what Church Communion
to place them, since no Protestant or reformed Church does avow, (as before is
showed) their Principles. And because Junius Brutus, is, as it were, the
Groundwork and Text of all these new Opinions, I shall faithfully set down
what his Opinions and Tenants are, And how they are appliable to the present
Case. He is forced as well as the Romanists to Constitute a Superior
Jurisdiction above Kings (for hitherto they both agree) which as they place it
in the Pope, so he places it in the people, deriving the power of Princes
originally from them, and from that Maxim of Quicquid efficit tale est
magistale, he makes the People above the King, and that although the King be
Major singulis, he is Minor universis.

Having laid this as his Foundation he descended to set down upon what kind of
Sovereigns, and in what Cases this their Power may be lawfully exercised, which
he says may be only against Tyrants; of which he says there are two sorts;
Tyrants of Usurpation without any just Title, Shows that the opinions of such
Protestants as allow in some cases of subjects taking of arms against their
Prince, if they were true, yet are not applicable to the present case.
and Tyrants in Government, which (although they may have a just Title) yet
they become Tyrants in Regimine, Tyrants in point of their government. For his
first sort of Tyrants, it will be impertinent to speak of them, for that all
men acknowledge the Kings Title to be just, and we have all sworn it, and
submitted unto it as our Ancestors have done unto his Ancestors, by the space
of many hundreds of years, So have we particularly unto himself for the space
of these twenty years and more. But for his second sort of Tyrants, who from
legitimate and rightful Princes, become Tyrants by their wicked and lawless
Government, and thereby (in his opinion) make the Subjects taking of arms
against them lawful, and justfiable, The best way to apply his Doctrine unto
this Case, is, to set down in his own words whom he would have to be so
qualified and conditioned, as may be esteemed such a Tyrant, and so
consequently (by his Doctrine) may be hostilely resisted: his words are, If a
Prince of deliberate purpose do ruin the State; If audaciouslie he
overthrows all Laws and Duties; If he no ways care to keep his faith; If he
have no regard to Convention, Justice or piety. If he be an Enemy to his
Subjects; briefly, If he practice all these wickednesses which we have
specified, or the principal of them, Then certainly he may be judged a Tyrant,
that is to say, an Enemy to God and Man. So that the question is not here of
the Prince that is none of the best, nor of the wisest, nor of one that does
the best Justice, nor of the most valiant, But of a Prince that is most Wicked,
Malicious and Treacherous, a Contemner of the Laws, an enemy of the People, and
Destroyer of the Realm. And in the Page before, he says, We must not expect to
have Princes in whom there is no fault to be found, but rather esteem that all
goes well with us, if those that govern us are midlinglie good.

Now although the Doctrine be wicked and false (for if any such Chimera or
Fantasm as he has made his Tyrant, were to be found, The People ought not (
quocunque quae sito color, upon no pre^^se whatsoever to take arms against
their lawful Sovereign) yet (taking it for good and Orthodox Divinity) I
conceive there needs no other Argument but the reciting of his Tyrant to make
good my Assertion that the Case would no way concern the King. But the
Wickedness, Malice and Danger of this Tenent (besides the falseness of ir) is,
That (having once constituted a Position, That by the people the Prince may be
hostilelie resisted in such and such Cases, and being in such and such a degree
wicked, and the people likewise thereof to be the Judges) there is a latitude
left to every Sect, to every man's Passion, or to every man's Interest to fancy
to himself, that what disliketh him, is Impiety, Heresy, or Oppression, And to
judge of the measure of his Princes wickedness; or if he be not wicked enough,
yet to resist him by way of prevention, lest he should become such: For he
says not long after, That Tyranny is like an Hectique Fever, which at the
beginning is easy to cure, but hard to discover; but afterward is easily
known, but is become incurable, and therefore must be timely prevented. But
leaving the wickedness, danger, and falsenesse of this Doctrine to be
considered of (admitting it were good and true, as is before said) let us
examine how it is applicable to our present Case. He supposes his Tyrant to be
an Enemy to God and Man, with so many other Attributes of wickedness and
impiety, That Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Julian the Apostate, Phalaris, and
Dionysius may well be ranked in his middle number of Princes, that were not of
the worst, And I conceive that Treason and Malice it self will abhor the
applicarion, in any sort, of his description of a Tyrant unto the King, and so
consequently of this new Doctrine, to our present Case.

For my self, I must avow it, that by what I have read in the above cited
Author, in Buchanan, in Suarez and Mariana, and what our Countryman Bishop
Bilson has written, I was much confirmed in my Opinion of the unlawfulness of
taking Arms against the King: Exceptio firmat Regulam in non exceptis.
For all rules with Exception confirm in all things but in the things excepted.
And all these Authors write with great strength, against Resistance and taking
Arms against the Prinre, but only in the Case of Tyranny, and the Romanists in
case of the Popes deposing of them; The latter whereof (neither being, nor
admitted if it were) I shall lay aside, And shall only show how far the King is
from any of these Wickednesses and Impieties, of which they compose their
Tyrant.

I well know that Kings are Men made of the same Paste of flesh and blood with
others, and subject to the same weaknesses, and to the same passions, And (as
Brutus says) our reason can no more be severed from our said passions and
infirmities, than the soul can be from the Body, whilst the man is yet living,
And thereupon says, We must not expect to have Princes against whom nothing
can be said, but we must think that all goes well with us, if they be,
moyennement bons, Middlingly good. And Commines says, That a Prince whose
virtues exceed his vices, ought to be esteemed and styled a good Prince. And of
Princes it is a good rule, Optimus est qui minimis urgetur, He is best that
has the fewest faults; for some faults, being Men, they will all have. And
certainly whosoever shall rightly know the King, and be acquainted with his
irreprovable Course of life, his constant and daily practice of devotions of
Piety, will not deny him the Title of a right good Prince, And so
(notwithstanding his misfortunes, and the unsuccessfullness of his affairs) he
will be esteemed when he shall be rightly known, and considered without
prejudice, as he is unto me, by reason of my long and near attendance about his
Person, and of whom I will be bold to say without flattery, That (having by the
space of almost Forty years been conversant in most of the Courts of the
Princes of Christendom, as a public Minister, and been no uncurious observer
of the Deportments of the Princes of my time) I never knew any Prince, or
scarcely any private man, in whose life there has been less reproveable: And
what is here said, I conceive will be abundantly sufficient to show, that, if
this new Doctrine of hostile Resistance were admitted for good, it would in no
kind justify it in this present Case; It being only applicable to the worst of
men, when here it must be made use of, against an exemplary good Man, and who
may be justly numbered amongst the best of Princes, As I doubt not but it will
clearly appear, when the truth of many things which have been suggested against
him, shall be faithfully set down, As there will be occasion to do in the
following Discourse.

And so I shall pass to the next religious Obligation, whereby my Conscience
has been restrained from taking arms against the King, which is the sacred
Tie of the late Protestation, and of so many solemn Oaths, whereby I have
engaged my self before God to bear him true Faith, and Allegiance, and to
defend his Person, and all his just Rights and Dignities.

CHAP. V. Setting down the Obligations and Ties by solemn Oaths and
Protestations of not taking Arms against the King.
IT will be easily assented unto by all sorts of Christians, that Solemn Oaths
established by lawful Authority, and legally administered, and in a matter that
is not Malum in se, absolutely wicked, are the highest and strongest
Obligations that can pass from Man to God, from Nation to Nation, from Subjects
to their Prince, or Prince to their Subjects, or from Man to Man, And this is
not only so declared in Scripture, but was undoubtedly part of that Natural and
Moral Law which was by God planted in the heart of Man even from the Creation.
For we find it in practice before any written Law, and by all Nations, Heathens
and Unciviliz'd, and altogether ignorant of the Precepts, either of the old or
new Testament: yet by the light of Nature, In Appendice page 17.
they held Oaths the most sacred of all Assurances, and Perjury amongst the
most execrable and detestable of all Impieties.

Now the Oaths that I and the rest of the Kings Subjects have taken unto him
for the serving of him with Loyalty, with true Faith and Allegiance, for the
Adhering to him against all Persons, for the defending of his Royal Person, for
the Maintaining and Upholding of all Rights, Dignities and Prerogatives
belonging to him or annexed to his Imperial Crown, will be clearlyest expressed,
by setting down the Oaths themselves in terminis, which shall be annexed
hereunto, for not interrupting too long the series of this Discourse.

Besides the Oaths formerly established by Law, at the beginning of this
Parliament, There was a solemn Protestation propounded by the Houses of
Parliament, to be taken by themselves, and so through the whole Kingdom, And
was allowed of by the King; And this Protestation was by my self taken in the
House of Peers and subscribed by me, wherein I Promise, Vow and Protest in the
presence of God, as far as lawfully I may, with my Life, Power and Estate,
according to the Duty of my Allegiance, to Maintain and Defend his Majesty's
Royal Person, Honor and Estate. Now how the taking arms against him, and the
assailing and pursuing of him in Battle, can be for the defense of his Royal
Person, or the seizing of all his Revenew, for the Maintenance of his Estate,
or the divesting of him of all Power and Authority with so many other sad
things, that against him have been said and done, and which my Pen blusheth to
set down, can be for the Defense and Maintenance of his Honor, or how the
Style of Majesty which in this Pootestation we give him (the Usage of him
considered) can be otherwise judged of but as a Scorn and Derision, I
understand not; sure I am, that I took the said Protestation in earnest, and
with an Attestation of God, that I would faithfully perform it; And so by his
holy Assistance I will ever do, according to the express words in the said
Protestation, with my Life, Power and Estate. Neither am I in any kind able to
conceive, how it is possible for any Christian Man, that has taken the former
Oaths, and Protestation of Adhering, Defending and Assisting of the King
against all Persons whatsoever, to swallow, much less to digest the new
Negative Oath, which in the subsequent words: In Appendice. page 18.
I, A. B. do swear from my heart That I will not directly nor indirectly adhere
unto or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause against the
Parliament, etc. I am likewise as much unsatisfied of the late National
Covenant how it may stand or be reconciled to these former Oaths and
Protestation. But in regard that is a Business of great Consequence and
length, I will set down in a Tract apart those Scruples which hitherto have
deterred my Conscience from venturing upon it.

That these Oaths have been established by lawful Authority, they were made
and enjoined by free and unquestionable Parliaments, whose Acts (I speak not of
Ordinances, but of Acts wherein the Royal Assent has concurred) are of that
high and Sovereign Authority, that the Law admits of no Plea nor averment
against them, And this I am confident will be by all acknowledged. They have
likewise been legally administered by the Ministers, that by the said Acts have
thereunto been appointed and ordained; and for the Justness and Righteousness
of them, the Confirming of them by so many several Acts of Parliament; by which
Laws no person can have a Voice in Parliament, but stands to all intents and
purposes, as a person that had not been elected or returned; if he sit in the
House before he have taken the said Oaths; And the continuing of the enjoining
of them by the Houses unto this day, must clear all Dispute or Question of that
kind: For the Houses do not admit of Members unto their Houses, nor Officers
into their places, until they have first taken the said Oaths, in such sort, as
by the Statutes is ordained: So that it is clear, that they are as well as
others satisfied in the goodness of them. Besides, the subject matter of these
Oaths is just and righteous in it self, being only in pursuance of those duties
of Obedience which are commanded us both by the Law of God and the Land, and
which are extra juramentum, obligantia, obliging in themselves, though there
were no Oath.

It is further to be observeed, That besides the legal penalties that may be
enjoined for the refusing or breaking of rhese Oaths, they contain something
further than temporal Punishment can reach unto, they carry with them, The
heavy Judgment of God declared in Scripture against the breakers of solemn
Oaths; And in this Case, there is yet much more added, for we accompany the
breach of them with the most horrid and fearful Execration that any Christians
can draw upon themselves, renouncing the Help and Protection of God Almighty,
and the Benefit of our Reemption contained in the Holy Gospel, if we fail in
the performance of them; which I understand to be quantum in nobis est, if we
do not endeavor to do the utmost in our power to keep them. But voluntarily
for Fear or Interest, not only to break them, but to do that, which by the very
plain words, is contrary to the said Oaths, and is contrary to that sense in
which I took them, (as I understand the taking of arms against the King to be)
with many other things of necessity following thereupon, I durst not adventure
upon that which my Conscience judged so great an Impiety.

CHAP. VI. Setting down the unlawfulness of Hostile Resistance drawn from
Humane Laws.
HAving thus set down those Reasons which deterred my Conscience from making
Hostile Resistance unto the King, which have been deduced out of the Word of
God, the Doctrine and Practice of holy Men, and the Obligation of sacred Oaths,
I shall now propose my Scruples drawn from humane Laws, but especially from the
Laws of our Kingdom.

By the Common Law of England many things were Treason; But because the Common
Law is not composed in one entire body or Text, and it was difficult for the
unlearned and Lay People to inform themselves exactly and distinctly what was
Treason, and what was not, the goodness of the King, and the wisdom of the
Parliament, in the time of Edw. the 3. was such, that for the avoiding of the
insnaring of the People in so high a Penalty and Destruction as follows the
being convicted of Treason, It was thought fit that all those things which for
the future should be esteemed or adjudged Treason, should be particularly and
distinctly set down in one Law, and exclusively to all things else; which was
accordingly done in the Statute of the 25 Edw. 3. And in case it should so fall
out, that any matter should arise, besides those particulars specified in the
said Statute, No judgment should pass thereon, but it should be reserved till
the next Parliament, But for those Cases in the said Statute expressed they
were enacted to be Treason, and so to be adjudged by the ordinary course of
Justice.

And in regard that in the troublesome and disorderly time of Richard the 2.
the prevailing party (which still swayed the Parliament) had made and unmade
many several Treasons, as suited to the Designs and Interests of those that had
the Power: In the first year of Hen. the 4. all those newsprung-up Treasons
were revoked and abolished, and Treason again reduced to the Statute of 25 Edw.
the 3. The like inconveniences growing in the Wars betwixt the Houses of York
and Lancaster, and afterward by the fierceness of Hen. the 8. who upon the
alterations he had made in Religion, had so ensnared the Subject that the
Protestants of the reformed Religion could not (by reason of the six Atticles)
escape the Fire, nor the Roman Catholics (by reason of the Oath of Supremacy)
the Halter; Whereupon it was again desired by the Houses, that Treason might be
reduced into a certainty, according to the Statute of the 25 of Edw. the 3.
which was accordingly so enacted the 2. of Phil. and Ma. And all these three
Statutes, 25 Edw. 3. 1* Hen. 4. and 2 Phil. and Ma. are yet in force; In which
the attempting of any thing against the Kings Person, the adhering to the Kings
Enemies, the leavying War against the King, The seizing of any of his Forts or
his Ships Royal, The Counterfeiting of the Kings Hand or his great or privy
Seal, See the Stat. in Append. page 19.
with many other particulars are so explicitly and clearly enacted to be high
Treason, That whosoever should be guilty of the Fact, would have as ill a Plea
to plead, That ^unius Brutus, Buchanan, or any of our new Doctors did hold and
maintain by their writings, That it is lawful in such and such Cases to take
Arms against the King, and so consequently in all the other particulars
specified in the said Statute, As a Felon that had robbed upon the high way
would have to plead, that Theft by the Law of God is not punishable by death,
for which he would not want likewise his ^ Lod. Vives.
Authors. But such as have been acquainted with the Courses held with those
that have been Indicted and Arraigned for Treason, will know, That to be
proceeded against only upon the plain and clear letter of the Law, is to have
favorable Justice; And he shall have the Kings Atturny, and the learned
Counsel with Eloquence and great strains of Wit, by Deductions and Inferences
(as though they had lost the day, if the Accused should be acquitted) stretch
the litteral Text beyond what it can rationally or honestly bear, and speaking
(as they say) for the King, no man dares reprove or restrain them. But to
suppose that any Allegation of Conscience, or the Opinion of learned Authors
(nay if it were Texts out of Scripture against the explicit letter of the Law,
would be heard or admitted) were a great Ignorance. But he would be told, as I
know some have been, That all other things were Matters dehors, Nothing to the
purpose; The issue was only factum or non factum, And truly woeful experience
had taught me to be wary in humane prudence, not to imbarque my self in a
Business wherein my Conscience was not only altogether unsatisfied, but if I
should ever be brought to a legal Trial upon it, mine own Judgment told me, I
could have nothing to say in mine own Defense of Justification; or that could
preserve my Self and Posterity from total Ruin and Destruction but Prevailing
and Victory. Which at the most, could but protect, but could not make a bad
Cause good.

But besides humane Prudence and fear of Punishment, there is a Conscientious
Tie of obeying the Law, we being taught to obey, not only for wrath but for
Conscience sake. S. Paul says, That if there had been no Law, there had been
no sin; If all sin be the transgression of some Law, I would be satisfied how
men are become Delinquents that have transgressed against no law.
which shows, That the breaking of just Laws and legally established, is sin.
For the supreme Powers therein are chiefly disobeyed who are supposed to
command more Authoritatively by their Laws, than by their Verbal Commands.

Further, as the Laws are so positive against Resistance and taking Arms
against the King: so likewise have the Laws been as careful to Protect and
thereby to Encourage the Subject to adhore unto their King: for it is provided
by the Stat. 11 of Hen. 7. Cap. 1. That from henceforth no manner of person or
persons whatsoever he or they be that attend upon the King and Sovereign Lord
of this Land for the time being in his Person, and do him true and faithful
service of Allegience in the same, or be in other places by his Commandment in
his Wars within this Land or without: That for the said deed true duty of
Allegiance he or they be no wise Convict or Attaint of high Treason, nor of
other offenses for that Cause, by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, by any
Process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall lose or forfeit Life, Land,
Tenements, Rents, Possessions, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, or any other
things, but to be for that deed and service utterly discharged of any Vexation,
Trouble or Loss. And if any Act or Acts, or other Process of the Law,
hereafter thereupon for the same happen to be made contrary to this Ordinance,
That then that Act or Acts, or other Process of the Law, whatsoever they shall
be, stand and be utterly void. Provided always That no Person or Persons,
shall take any benefit or advantage by this Ast, which shall hereafter decline
from his or their said Allegiance.

So that if they that have served the King with Fidelity according to the Law,
shall by their prevailing Fellow Subjects be attainted, and their Estates
forfeited and disposed of at their pleasure, It must be by some such
Transcendent Power, as must be above all Laws: For as by the Law, no Subject
ought either to be attainted, or lose his Estate, for serving the King in his
Wars; so can no Confiscations, by the Law belong to any, but unto the King, or
such as derive their Right from him. It is true, in the Heat and Contestation
of War, it is usual, that whatsoever Goods or Wealth, the soldier can lay
hands upon, is ( de facto) esteemed good Purchase; But after the War is ended,
the Law uses then to recover her Force. And settled Inheritances in all former
Civil Wars in England, have never been disposed of by the Arbitrary Power of
the prevailing Party, although they were Kings claiming the Crown by Title and
might have Right to Confiscations, but by legal Convictions and due course of
Law; much more in the Case of Subjects taking Arms against their King, which is
always (in the beginning) styled and proclaimed Rebellion, by the King that
they Oppose, until Success or Treaty qualify that Name, That they should not
content themselves with a General Pardon, and Act of Oblivion, and the
settlement of the Government for the future, to their reasonable Content and
Security for themselves, and their Estates, But that Inheritances must be
confiscated and disposed of by them, and such persons as they shall please,
without legal Trial, and as it were by Proscription or Decimation, be by a Vote
designed to loss of Life and Estate without Pardon or Mercy; What greater
Cruelty could have been used toward them, if they had fallen into the hands of
the Turk or most merciless Conqueror? especially if it shall be considered,
that in this Case no Neutrality could be admitted, nor the most
peaceable-minded man avoid the being engaged. For as by the Law it is Treason
to take Arms against the King, by the above-recited Statutes, so by the
Statute of the 19 Hen. 7. It is loss of all Honors, Castles, Lordships,
Manors, Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments, etc. not to take Arms for
the King, and not to follow him in his Wars against his Enemies or his Rebels;
which the Subject ( de been esse) is to understand to be such as the King
proclaims to be Traitors; Not that a Proclamation makes them so; but the
Subject is so to esteem them until they be brought to a legal Trial.

The most miserable condition of the Kings Loyal Servants by no prudence to be
prevented, nor they by any Innocence to be preserved.
So that there never was a harder Condition, nor more unavoydable, than this of
the Kings present Loyal Subjects, who should have been Traitors by the Law if
they should have taken Arms against the King: and should likewise lose there
Lands, Honors, Castles, etc. if they did not fight for him; And yet contrary
to the Law, Providing that no man should forfeit Life or Estate for serving of
the King, He shall by an Arbitrary Power of his fellow Subjects be condemned to
lose both, without Pardon or Mercy; for doing that, for which he must have lost
legally both Life and Estate (and his Soul to boot) if he had not done it.

CHAP. VII. The Motives deduced from Honor, Honesty and Gratitude of not
forsaking the King in his troubles.
BEsides the Obligation formerly set down, deduced from the Law of God, and the
positive Law of the Kingdom, there is a third Law, which has a great Authority
in the hearts of all generous and noble-minded Men, which is the Law of Honor
and Gratitude, which Law I conceive to be a Branch of the Original and first
Law, The Law of Nature; For it has had and still holds a Value and Reverence
through all Religions, as it has done through all times.

I must confess this Law has been, and is in some kinds too high lifted up,
and is become the Idol of many men's fancies, who pay unto it a more exact
Obedience, and are more careful not to transgress against it, than they are
not to offend God, or the Laws they live under, whereof we have daily too many
Presidents, when men rather than to be failing in point of Honor, will upon
frivolous provocations, decline all duties to God and Man, and sacrifice to
this Idol oftentimes the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, together with
their Souls: But this is an Excess and Excrescency of Honor and Courage, in
the justification whereof I know nothing that can be said; In the excuse of it,
it is to be hoped, that in so generally-received an Error, whereby men become
Infamous, and scarce fit for honest company that comply not therein, Custom and
Universallity may allay and mitigate the Offense: But that Honor which I speak
of, is better expressed by plain moral Honesty and Gratitude, when neither Fear
nor Disadvantage shall drive us or withold us from just Duties; nor the
Misfortunes or Distresses of those to whom we have had former obligations, make
us leave and forsake to be assistant and serviceable unto them in all just and
lawful things, although it be to our own Hinderance, or that we can expect no
further good or advantage by them. And herein my Case is different from the
common Cases of Subjects, being more particularly bound unto Gratitude by many
Benefits; and unto Honesty, Affection, and Fidelity by my Service in places of
greatest Trust about the King, both for nearness to his Person, as a Gentleman
of his Bedchamber, and as a Servant consided in as a privy Counselor.

As for Ingratitude, it has been at all times so detestable, That to the
Reproach of being ungrateful, nothing can be added. And the betraying or
forsaking of a man's Master in his Distress, has so great a Relish of the
Judas, that no noble and generous Heart, would for any earthly Respect, do any
thing that might seem to be like it, or be in hazard of being mistaken for it.
For mine own part, I do ingenuously confess; that, had I no Precepts of the Law
of God, no Ties by the Law of the Kingdom, nor Horror of Conscience for
breaking those sacred Obligations into which I was entered, by taking so many
solemn Oaths; Yet Gratitude and Honor singly should have been unto me of so
high Recommendation, That no Respect of my Life, Fortunes, or Posterity, should
have made me lift up my Hand against my King, or to have forsaken my Master in
his Miseries and Distress.

I have had the Honor to have served this King and his Father by the space of
more than forty years, and was by his Father, from a younger Brother of a
Gentleman's Family, raised by his Goodness (above my Merit) to the Dignity of an
Earl, and a Convenience of Subsistence in that Quality. I was trusted by him in
seven Ambassages, and called to his privy Counsel, recommended unto the Prince
his Son, as a Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and (which was above all these
Obligations) I was admitted to more than an ordinary measure of his Trust and
Confidence. And certainly these great Obligations from the Father could not but
imprint Gratitude in my Heart toward the Son, especially He being now become
my King and Master, And so by all the Oaths that I had taken to the Father, I
was likewise by him obliged to them as his Successor.

But besides these Ties of Gratitude, I must Protest, that weighing and
considering impartially the Kings Actions, either as they relate to his
Government as a King, or his personal Deportments as a Man (setting Conscience
aside, and that I had not been thereby restrained) I could never find any thing
that could satisfy my judgment in point of Moral Justice or right Reason for
the taking Arms against him. I must and do confess that some things and too
many w^^^ ill done by the Kings Ministers, and the Subjects Propriety and
Liberry might have run great hazard under an ill Prince, by those ways that
were then set on foot. For to speak freely my sense, by the Principles then
received, all was put into the Kings hands; for Necessity was made Master of
all, and of that Necessity the King was made the sole Judge, (and Princes may
easily mistake their own private Wants for public Necessity) But from this
Excess, little of the fault can with Reason be charged upon the King, and less
ground for the taking of Arms; For it is well known, (the King having been
unseasonably imbarqued in War both with France and Spain) his Treasure was
wholly exhaust, and he was reduced to great streights. The King called diverse
Parliaments, but they proved so unhappy, that two or three of them were
dissolved in great disorder, and the Kings Wants were not relieved, but the
King and his People parted with little satisfaction on either side. The King
then being enforced to use all endeavors for his Relief in these his great
Wants, consulted with the Officers of his Revenew, and his learned Council,
what course was to be taken for his Supply without calling a Parliament, For it
had been voted at the Councel-Table, That the Calling of a Parliament was not
then fit or seasonable. And at the breaking off of the last Parliament before
this, An. 1640. It had been declared by some of the Kings Ministers in the
House of Commons, That if the King were not supplied by Parliament, he must and
would betake himself to new Counsels, The plain English whereof was understood
to be, That the King would find out some other Course for his supplies, without
making use of his People in Parliament. And this Opinion that Parliaments would
for some time be laid aside, gave Boldness and Encouragements to all Promoters
and Projectors to set on foot many Monopolies and Projects, which were still
countenanced by the color and pretense of Law; And amongst the rest, and
indeed striking at the Root of the Subjects Propriety, was that of the
Ship-mony brought forth. In what sort the Project of the Ship-mony was set on
foot* the fault whereof cannot with any Justice be attributed to the King.
And the Attorney Noy has the name to have been the Father of it. He was in
his time held to have been a great Oracle of the Law, and had been in former
Parliaments a great Patriot and Propugner of the Subjects Liberty, and his
Opinion was of high Authority in point of Law with the King and with all Men:
He assured the King, that there might be means found out of the Kings own
(especially in times of Necessity) for him to supply himself justly, and
according to the Law, And so propounds this Project of the Ship-mony. The
King relied not upon the single Opinion of his Attorney, But as a good Prince
ought to do, He took the further Advice of the Judges who are his proper
Counsel in matters of the Law, and with whom he ought to Consult, And they are
sworn to Counsel him faithfully, The Major part of them, which involveth the
rest, approved this Project as legal, But the King would not content himself
with their Verbal Advice, But required the then Lord Chief Justice and the
Judges to set down the Case, and their Opinions of it under their hands, which
they did accordingly. So that it being to be presupposed that the King (mote
than in the points of administering Justice) cannot have a distinct knowledge,
either of the Extent of his own Prerogative, or the abstruse Cases of the Law,
In a point so much concerning him, as the relieving of him in his great wants
by ways avowed to him to be just and legal, what more upright or prudent Course
could a Prince take, than to be advised (not by young Men, or Favorites at
Court) but by his learned Counsel, and his grave Judges, sworn to advise him
faithfully according to their best skill, who if they have behaved themselves
wickedly or corruptly, upon their heads let Judgment light, But let the King
and his Throne be free. But many Men conceiving (and not without Reason) That
this private and extra judicial Opinion of the Judges, was not to be a binding
Rule, did not acquiesce therein, but did refuse the Payment of the Ship-mony,
and did endeavor to defend this their refusal by a due and legal way of
Process, and particularly Mr. John Hamden. And the Business was brought to an
Issue, and to a public Trial in the Exchequer-Chamber, which is the highest
and supremest Judicature (under the Parliament) which the Kingdom of England
knows in point of Law; for it is a Court composed of all the Judges of the
several Tribunals, for the ending of such difficult and dubious Cases, as have
not been formerly overruled, or wherein there is found a difference in Opinion
amongst the Judges themselves; And herein the Counsel on both sides, whether
the Case be betwixt Party and Party, or the King and Subject, do not only
plead, but argue the Case in Law, and the Judges do commonly before they give
Sentence, argue themselves the Case, in point of the learning of the Law, All
which solemnities passed in this Case, without any interruption by the King;
And after diverse days hearing and arguing, Judgment passed for the King by
Plurality of Votes, for the fewer Votes are involved in the Judgment of the
Major part, as there is a Necessity they should be in all Counsels and
Iudicatures, otherwise Controversies could not be ended, unless there were an
unanimous Agreement in all that had Votes, which seldom happens. But in this
Case three parts of four Agreed in the Judgment for the King; So that if the
Judges have erred now in Judicature, being sworn to do equal Justice betwixt
the King and the Subject, as they did before in their Advice unto the King,
being sworn to Counsel him faithfully, the greater is their fault and Offense;
But I must confess I am not able to set out the Kings Transgression.

This Case yet passed further, For it being brought into the Parliament by way
of Grievance, the Judgment was not only reversed, all Records burnt, and all
Courses given way unto by the King, which the Houses themselves could think on,
That no such Excess might be attempted again in future times: But the Lord
Keeper and the Judges were (without any Interposition of the King) left unto
the Justice of the Parliament, And the Lord Keeper and diverse of them, were by
the House of Commons impeached of high Treason; So the King having no hand in
the setting it on foot, nor in the erroneous Judgment, nor having protected
the Parties culpable from Punishment, But the Grievance being redressed, and
sufficient Caution and Provision assented unto by the King, for the preventing
of the like for the future, I could not deduce from hence any Argument of the
Kings intention to subvert the Law, or of any justifiable ground of taking arms
against him.

And what is said in this Case of the Ship-mony does likewise hold in the Cases
of Monopolies, The fault of Monopolies, not to be attributed to the King, but
to evil Ministers and Referrees.
which are always suggested to be for the good of the Subject, as well as
legal and beneficial to the King, who never grants any of them without
Reference; In point of Convenience or Dis^dvantage to the Subject, they are
usually referred to some of his privy-Counsell, In point of Law, to some of his
learned Counsel, In point of his Benefit, to some Officers of his Revenew, Who
if they have erred, or were corrupted, and the King by their ill Advice drawn
to pass any unfit or illegal thing, I have known the Parliament for the space
of these forty years address themselves by Petition unto the King for Redress,
but unto the Referrees for the Fault, and the Causers of the Grievances. And if
they could get the said Grievances redressed, and the Referrees brought to
punishment, they always esteemed it so gracious a Proceeding from the King
toward them, that usually it was acknowledged with the return of some Gift or
Supply: But that any Argument should be deduced from thence, of any Intention
in the King to subvert the Laws, I never knew it, Neither have I known that the
King has ever proceeded in matters of this kind, but in the manner here set
down. And in this Parliament all Projects and Monopolies were put down, and all
men that either had a Hand or Interest in them, (unless it were such as the
House of Commons thought fit, for Causes known unto themselves to pass by) were
left unto the Justice of the Parliament, without the Kings Protecting or
Interposing for any one of them.

CHAP. VIII. A Vindication of the King against that false and injurious
Aspersion of unsettledness in his Religion.
THe second main and important point that has been made use of to the Kings
Disadvantage, and by which the Hearts of the People have been most alienated
from him was chiefly by ill informed Ministers in the Pulpit, who have most
untruly suggested an unfirmness and unsettledness in the King in point of his
Religion, and an inclination in him to overthrow the true reformed Protestant
Religion established by the Laws of the Kingdom, and to introduce Popery. This
I must confess was so far from planting in me any thing to the Kings Prejudice,
That by so much the more it confirmed me in my Duty and Affection toward the
King, by how much of mine own knowledge this wicked Aspersion was false and
injurious: For in that point of the Kings Religion, few men living had the
Cause, or could have the means to be so perfectly informed of it as my self.
For besides that from his Youth upward I had been an eyewitness of his
Education, being in the King his Fathers time admitted as a Gentleman of his
Bedchamber, I was for diverse years employed in the Treaty of a Marriage for
him, with a Princess, of a differing Religion, And was to that purpose his
Fathers Ambassador in Spain, when the King (then Prince) arrived there in
Person, And it is true that the Spaniards had conceived great hopes of his
becoming a Romish Catholic (wherein there wanted not encouragement both from
diverse in England and from some about him) and for the effecting of it, there
was no industry omitted by them, but the learned men in Spain were employed
to satisfy him; And he was by Artifice brought to set a Conference with the
said Divines upon Terms of great Disadvantage: For one Wadesworth that had
been an English Minister, and was then become a Romish Catholic, was put upon
him for his Interpreter, neither had he the Assistance of any learned man with
him: Yet gave he so good an Account of his own Religion, and answered so
pertinently the Objections of the others, as was much beyond the expectation of
all that were present at the said Conference. But seeing himself still pressed
in that kind, Although the King of Spain assured him, that with this one thing
all difficulties were overcome, and that he would sign him a Blanck in all
things else; yet not to entertain them with any further hopes, he positively
declared his Resolution to remain unremoveable in his own Religion; and would
afterward admit of no more Conferences in that kind, and certainly, if any
earthly consideration could have been prevalent with him, he had then such
Motives as might have wrought upon him. For besides the Disgrace of failing in
his first Enterprice, (especially an Enterprise of Love and in his own Person)
the Princess was of that Merit, and her Value of him such, And his satisfaction
of her Virtue, and his Affection to her Person so great, that nothing but point
of Religion could have made him leave her behind him: For it was declared unto
him that in Case he would conform himself in point of Religion, no Dispensation
from the Pope would be then needful, but the Marriage should be consummate
without any further expectation from Rome, as soon as he should desire it.

But he thereupon declared that he would rather expect the Dispensation, and
resolved to employ his endeavors that way, and so presently sent one Mr.
Andrews (a Servant of his) to Rome, to cause Mr. George Gage (that was then
there soliciting of the Dispensation) to procure the dispatch thereof with all
possible diligence, and Letters were written unto him by the Princes Order to
desire him, that if there were at Rome any Opinion of the Princes becoming a
Roman Catholic, and upon hope thereof any Retardment of the granting the
Dispensation, he should undeceive them in that point, and press the
Dispensation upon the Articles of Religion agreed upon; The Prince was then
moved by the Spanish Ministers to write unto the Pope in answer of some Letters
which the Pope had sent unto him, and to move him for the granting of the
Dispensation, and the Letters were brought ready drawn unto him, and some
passages there were, from which some hope might be gathered, that in time, when
it might be thought more seasonable than at the present (lest it might be
thought he had changed his Religion for a Wife) he would not be unwilling to
receive further satisfaction in the Catholic Religion; all which he struck
out, and wrote only a Letter of Civility, such a one as he thought fit to write
to one, from whom he was to receive favor in a Business that he most desired,
and without whom there was no possibility of obteining it, unless he would have
conformed himself in point of Religion, which he being resolved not to do, he
thought it fit to apply himself unto the Pope by all fair and amiable means,
and particularly in promising not to be severe against those of his Religion,
thereby to facilitate with the Pope the granting of the Dispensation: All which
Diligences he might have excused by his Conformity; for then no Dispensation
would have been needful, And hereby no further hope remaining in the Court of
Spain or at Rome of his altering his Religion, the Dispensation was granted
upon the Articles formerly agreed on in point of Religion. These Letters have
been published and translated into several Languages, which though I cannot say
corruptly, yet strained as much as might be to his disadvantage. And it is
probable that the like Letters of Compliance to the Pope may have been procured
in the Treaty of the Match with France, wherein the Popes Dispensation was
likewise held necessary: But all are Arguments of the Kings firmness in his
Religion, when he would rather undergo the trouble and delay of the
Dispensation, than by his Conformity to have effected what he desired without
any difficulty or further hazard; and this has been fully confirmed ever
since, by his profession and living in the Reformed Religion established in the
Church of England, from which no man can say with truth, that he has
prevaricated in the least tittle.

Besides this great proof of his firmness and settledness in his Religion, his
constant and daily Practice both in Public and Private in the exercise of his
Devotions, may and ought to give satisfaction to all that consider him without
prejudice; For his resorting twice every day to Public Prayors, and twice a
week at least to Sermons, and his frequent receiving of the Holy Sacrament, is
publicly known unto all; but his private Devotions to those only that are of
nearer Attendance about his Person, who well know that he never fails morning
nor evening to retire himself to his private Prayers, and upon Occasions in the
day time besides, he shuts up himself to his Devotions; Insomuch that it is
known, that upon particular Causes, he has constituted to himself some Fasts,
with that secrecy, that those nearest ahout him have gotten no knowledge of it,
but by his Abstinence, for God has given him so good a Health, that he neither
needs, nor otherwise uses to forbear Meals. It is likewise well known that
he has Composed excellent Prayers, which he has caused to be used suitable to
the Occasions, as particularly, for the good success of the Treaty at Uxbridge.

Further, I may testify, and do it in the presence of God, that in Conference
with me of great and private Trust concerning his present sad Condition, he
has told me, that although he could not but be sensible of his own Distress,
of that of the Queen, and of his Children, the Calamity of the Kingdom, and
very particularly of his Friends, likely to be destroyed for their fidelity
unto him: yet that which most afflicted him, was the Apprehension of the Ruin
and Destruction of the Church of England, and of the true Protestant Religion,
which he conceived had the least to be mended in it, and most both in Doctrine
and Discipline) agreeing with the Primitive Times of any Church he knew in the
World; And I am of belief, that it will be found of much difficulty to pull
from him this Opinon, unless his Conscience and Judgment shall be convinced by
some such learned and unanswerable Arguments as he has not yet known: For
although it be very probable that temporal regar^s may make him condescend unto
great inconveniences and great lessenings; yet if I much mistake him not, that
have known him many years, no sufferings or Dangers, nor other worldly
Considerations whatsoever, will be of Power to cause him to make Shipwreck of
his Conscience.

And although it be very true, that the Queen his Wife be most dear unto him,
and in all other things of greatest Power with him, yet in matter of Religion,
his Resolution to live in it, and his Ability to defend it, was so well known
unto Her, and to all about her, that as they could not but think it bootless to
Attempt any thing in that kind, so they knew they could not essay it without
Offense.

And although he has always endeavored to breed up the Prince his Son in
great Duty and Reverence to the Queen his Mother, with a strict command unto
him to be obedient to her in all things; yet it has always been with this
Restriction, Except it be in point of Religion, And upon my own knowledge I
dare and do deliver this for a positive Truth.

So likewise the matching of his eldest Daughter to a Protestant Prince (though
not of the Rank of Kings) may be judged as a great Argument of his love to the
Reformed Religion. Besides, in the beginning of these troubles, knowing this
malicious suggestion cast upon him, he set forth a public Manifest unto the
Protestant Churches to vindicate himself from that scandal, and to assure the
World of his Constancy and Resolution to live and die in the Reformed Religion.

And as for his Piety in this his Profession, the Scripture says, Show me thy
Faith by thy Works, And what greater Argument of Religion and Piety can there
be to man who cannot search into the Heart, (to God that only belongs) than a
temperate, sober, good Life and Conversation. What blood in his Reign has been
sacrificed to his Wrath or Revenge? What Confiscations have enriched his
Treasure? What noble Family has been dishonored by his Lust? What
Encouragement has Vice, Excess, or Licentiousness received from his Example?
Nay, I am persuaded, that it will much trouble his Enemies, yea Malice it self,
to find out the Vice wherewith to reproach his Life: yet how many Shimei's have
reviled the Lords Anointed, of whom we are taught not to speak ill in our
Bed-chambers? And when Cause of speaking ill against him has been wanting,
they have set him up as a But before them for their scurrilous Wits, Libels,
and Hue and Cries, etc. I am far from charging the Houses for having a hand in
these low and unworthy things, only I shall say, that it is possible for
private Errors to become public Faults, non Committendo, sed non Castigando.
A Princes Religion ought not to be a ground of Rebellion or disobedience.
It was Elies Case, and Gods Judgment followed it.

Besides this certain knowledge that I had of the Kings settledness in his
Religion; I was far from being satisfied in my Conscience (that if the King
should have changed his Religion and become a Papist) it should have been
lawful to take Arms against him. For (as Moulins above says, in the name of
the Church of France) We ought not from the Religion of our Princes, to take
occasion of disobedience, making Piety the Match whereby to kindle Rebellion,
etc.

And when Hen. 4. that great King of France did leave the Communion with the
Reformed Churches, and was reconciled to the Church of Rome and conformed
himself to the Rights thereof, by going to the Mass, and performing all other
Ceremonies, and Worship established by it; yet those of the Reformed Religion
in France did not thereupon think it lawful to withdraw their Obedience, or
take Arms against him, but continued to serve him with all faith and Loyalty,
And such as made those detestable Assaults, and that Paricide, who committed
that horrid and execrable murder upon his Royal Person, took not their
Incitements and Encouragements from the avowed Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches, but from the writings of some hotter-headed Papists, to the great
Scandal and Reproach of their Church, And from the Tenants of our new Puritan
Doctors, (...)

Hen. 3. King of Fr. by Iacque (...).

Hen. 4. King of by Fr. by (...).

The Prince of (...) by (...).


who by those Maxims (wherein they both agree) have (instead of the Eastern
Assassinates) brought in on both sides their Enthusiasts, fitly prepared
Instruments for Treasons and Murders, by whose hands so many Princes and Kings
have fallen, and by whose Doctrine so many States have been involved in
Rebellions and Civil Wars. So likewise upon the several Changes of Religion in
England under Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Queen Ma. and Queen Eliz. The Protestants of the
Reformed Religion declared against h^stile Resistance, and exhorted to
obedience and suffering, and confirmed their Doctrine by their own Martyrdom,
as is before set down. Besides, the Precepts of Scripture (of not resisting the
Powers ordained by God over us) were, to command obedience to Princes that were
all Heathen, Idolaters, and Persecutors of Gods Church. Our Saviors Precept
was, To give unto Caesar what belonged unto Caesar, and what St. Paul and the
Apostles enjoin, was toward Nero. Neither did the Christians take Arms against
Julian notwithstanding his Apostasy, but continued to serve him, and to sight
against his Enemies with fidelity and courage. And I conceive it is the general
received Opinion of all moderate Christians, That as Religion ought not, The
Non-conformists them^selves (...) out (...) P^^tell a^^ 3 ^^c. 1605. (...)
clear to this point. Vide Art. 4, 6, 9. in Ap. page 19.
or (to speak more properly) cannot (though Dissimulation and Hypocrosie may)
be planted by force so Subjects may not withdraw their civil and natural
Allegiance due to their Kings upon any color or pretext of Religion: For as no
private man does forfeit his Inheritance or freehold, by Impiety or Atheism,
(although he may forfeit his Soul* unless he commit some legal Crime: So a
Prince, that holds his Crown by unquestionable Right of Succession, cannot
forfeit his Temporal Inheritance by the erroniousness of his Religion (his Soul
must only answer that forfeit) And although some have gone so far as to admit a
lawfullness of the Subjects taking Arms against their Prince, for the defense
and maintenance of their Laws and Religion, yet no man has adventured so far,
as to allow the taking Arms for bringing in of new Laws and a new Religion
contrary to the established, and that by force, and without consent of their
Sovereign, which is the present Case.

CHAP. IX. Showing the War not to have been begun by the King, but that he
condescended, to all things that could in reason be demanded of him for the
preventing of it.
THere is yet one further Objection, wherewith I have heard some endeavor to
countenance and justify their taking Arms against the King, which was, That he
first made War against his Parliament, meaning by force to introduce an
Arbitrary Power in Church and Commonwealth; And that the War on their side was
only defensive, and for the maintenance of their liberties, proprieties,
privileges, and Religion.

The steps and progress of this unhappy War are so well known unto me, even
from the first misunderstandings betwixt the King and People, and the
improvement of them by Tumults and several Artifices until they broke out into
Acts of open hostility, that nothing did so much terrify my Conscience from
taking Arms against the King, or more confirmed me in my Duty of adhering unto
him, than the certain and infallible knowledge I had of the Kings hearty and
unfeigned Desires and Endeavors to have prevented this War, and to that end to
have done, and was ready to do all things that had been or should be with
justice or reason propounded unto him for the satisfaction of his Parliament,
which I conceive, to all unpreoccupated Judgments will be easily most apparent,
when it shall be considered how many things he has done (besides the easing of
just grievances whereunto he is indeed obliged) which were merely Acts of
Grace, and which if he had denied, he should have done no wrong, And for the
doing whereof, the wit of man can find no other reason or inducement, but his
desire to satisfy his Parliament, and the keeping of things from extremities:
For besides the giving way to the putting down of the Court of Starchamber, the
High Commission, and the regulating of his Councel-Table; many other things he
has done, which some Kings would rather have adventured a War, than have
parted with any of them, As the consenting to have his Privy-Councel (that had
been sworn to secrecy) to be examined upon Oath concerning those things that
had passed in his Presence in his most secret Cabinet Council, The giving his
Assent in such conjuncture of times to the taking away the Bishops Votes in
Parliament, The King caused Pr. Charles (his Son and Heir) to become a Suter
unto the Houses for the saving the Earls life, who came in person and
propounded it as the first Request he had ever made unto them, but could not
obtain it.
And the divesting of himself of the Power to dissolve the Parliament;
notwithstanding that the evil Consequences that might happen to him thereby,
were represented unto him in my hearing. And I conceive, that no man will be so
partial but they do believe, that howsoever the King might be satisfied in
point of Conscience by the Bishops and Judges and the joint authority of both
Houses, for giving his Assent to the passing of the Bill for my Lord of
Straffords Attaindure; yet no man but believes he would have saved his Life at
a great Ransom: But hoping thereby to have allayed the rage of his people,
as well as to have given full satisfaction to his Houses, with a sad and
afflicted heart he signed the Warrant for the Earls execution. For he was then
made believe, that with his giving way to his death, and his consenting to the
Bill for not adjourning or dissolving of the Parliament, but with the
Concurrence of the Houses, all misunderstandings betwixt him and his Parliament
would be removed, and all things return to a calm and orderly way of
Proceeding. Now if the King had had any secret Intention of making of a War,
would he have done so many things so prejudicial to himself, and so against his
heart, only for the preventing of it? and although his hopes of a quiet
settlement by the passing of these two Bills failed him, he yet gave not over
the doing of all further things which he thought might renew a right
understanding betwixt him and the Houses.

So likewise when that unhappy and unseasonable Act of his going to the House
of Commons in Person happened, he endeavored to redeem it with such Acts of
acknowledgemeot, submission, nay I may say asking forgiveness, as were never
done by any King unto his Subjects.

So likewise in the particular of his Attorneys accusing of the Lord Kimbolton
and the five Members, notwithstanding he had a President for it in his own time
of Sir Robert Heath his then Attorneys impeaching of my self of High Treason,
which Impeachment was received and admitted of by the House of Peers, and
Arraignment and due process of Law, was by the said House ordered and awarded
thereupon, yet, the King (finding the Houses therewith displeased) did not only
command prosecution to be withdrawn, but left his Attorney to the Justice of the
Parliament; And I conceive, that it will be acknowledged by all Laws and
Religions, That the very excesses and errors of Sovereign Princes, if
reparation and satisfaction may be obtained by Petition and Remonstrance, (as
in these Ca^es they have been) Recourse ought not to be had by Subjects, to
Arms or Hostile Resistance; and I am deceived if this be not also the Opinion
of the severest of our new Doctors.

Where wrongs are done, if the party offending shall upon demand make
reparation and give satisfaction to the party offended, and yet he shall
notwithstanding make War, it is He that is the Agressor and that makes the
offensive War. Melior causa ad partem poenitentem transit, And the party first
offending, by his penitency and satisfaction, brings over the Right and Justice
to his Cause: and if this be betwixt Independent States, betwixt whom such as
write de Iure Belli, say a legitimate War can only be, (for (War being defined
to be publico^um Armorum justa contentio) Subjects are not allowed as lawful
Enemies opposed to their Sovereign for want of supreme and public Authority)
How much more ought such Acknowledgment and Reparations (as have before been
set down) have satisfied Subjects in the behalf of their King, so far humbling
of himself, as certainly would have pacified a modest Conqueror.

After the King had found himself disappointed of his expectation, and that by
his former yieldings and complyances the misunderstandings were little allayed,
but greater appearances grew every day that other of unquietness and troubles,
And that he had thought fit to withdraw himself from London for his safety, and
the avoiding of Affronts, which he had cause to fear; (for that the five
Members were the next day by the armed Train'd-bands of the City in martial
manner to be brought to Westminster, and to pass by the Kings Palace) Yet so
desirous was the King to sweeten things again, that (upon great instance) he
passed the Bill for debarring the Bishops their Seats and Votes in Parliament,
upon hopes that were given (with no small Assurance,) that upon gratifying the
Houses therein, all things would speedily be put into a way of Accommodation.

I had often heard the King say, That (besides the wrong done unto the Bishops,
who had as good Right to their Votes in Parliament as any other Peers from the
first Original of Parliaments) he conceived he could not do any Act of greater
Prejudice to himself and his Successors, than the passing of that Bill. Yet the
desire he had of a reconciliation with his Parliament, overweighed all other
Considerations and Interests whatsoever, And he gave his Royal assent unto the
Bill; But instead of that effect which the King expected thereby, it produced
the 19 Propositions of Grocers Hall before mentioned; Whereupon although the
King gave no negative Answer, yet he put on a Resolution to make no further
Answer to any new Propositions: But his Request to the Houses was, That they
would set down together all such means as would give them satisfaction,
whereunto they should receive a gracious and satisfsctory Answer to all they
could justly or reasonably demand; But this was declared to be a breach of
privileges, to restrain the Proposals of the Houses either in matter or form.
The King on the other side thought, that whatsoever he had formerly done had
served only to strip himself of his known Rights, but had no way advanced a
general accommodation, And so for the future, betook himself to Declarations
and Protestations instead of Answers, wherein he proffered to concur in all
things they should desire for the settling of all Liberties and Immunities of
the Subject, either for the Propriety of their Goods, or Liberty of their
Persons, which they either had received from his Ancestors, or which by himself
had been granted unto them. And if there did yet remain any thing of Grace, for
the good and comfort of the Subject, he would willingly heaken unto all their
reasonable Propositions. And for the settling of the true Protestant Religion,
he most earnestly recommended the Care thereof unto them, wherein they should
have his Concurrence and assictance. The Rule of his Government he protested
should be the settled Laws of the Kingdom; And for the Indemnity and Comfort of
the Subject, he offered a more ample and General Pardon than had been granted
by any of his Predecessors, and for the performance of all he had promised,
(besides solemn Oaths and Execrations whereby he bound himself) he desired God
only so to bless and prosper him and his Posterity, as he should faithfully
perform the same. And further, for the greater securing of what should be
agreed and settled, he gave such voluntary security, as I conceive was never
before demanded, nor by any King offered to his Subjects; That in the Case he
failed in performance, or should do contrary to that which he had promised or
agreed, He acquitted and freed his Subjects of their Obedience.

And this great desire of the Kings to have purchased Reconciliation with the
Houses, will appear to have been known to me, In ^ppendice page 1.
and to have been so believed by me, by what I spoke in the House of Peers the
20 of May 1642. and was published in print; most of this being but a repetition
of what I then said, as will appear by the said Speech hereunto annexed.

Besides the above specified Reasons of the Kings desiring Peace, It could not
be supposed, that in humane prudence the King could desire a War, being
altogether unfurnished of men, money and ammunition, and the contrary party
provided of all, by the being seized of his Forts, his Magazins, his Navy, his
Rents, the Revenew of his Crown, and of the powerful and rich City of London,
and of the perverted Affections of his People. He was fain at his return from
Dover (whither he had accompanied the Queen when she passed into Holland) to go
from place to place, as to Theobalds, and to Newmarket, lingering up and down in
hope still of some Overture of Accommodation, and many Motions tending
thereunto, were made by my self and other the Kings Servants that stayed behind
him with the Parliament; But they were not then thought seasonable, and wrought
little effect, and the King having lost all hopes in that kind, held it fit to
retire himself further from danger, (as he conceived) and so went unto York
with a very mean Equipage and a slender Attendance of not above 30 or 40
Persons. It is true, that many of the Nobility and Gentry repaired thither unto
him, showing great Affection and Resolution to follow him in all Fortune; and
Endeavors were used that the King might be put into the best posture of
Defense that was possible, but ever with a desire that those small Forces might
rather countenance some Treaty or Overture for Accommodation than that there
was any belief that those Forces were fit to carry through a War. And to that
purpose the Earls of Southampton and Dorset were sent unto the Parliament with
new Overtures from Nottingham. But nothing would be heard until the King had
first taken down his Standard, and laid down Arms, which the King understood to
be a total submission and yielding of himself up, seeing my Lord of Essex came
forth, and within few days march of him, with a great and powerful Army, He
himself having by Sr. Jacob Ashleys Certificate, not above 700 foot, whereof
there were not above 400 armed, and 900 foot of Colonel Bellasis at Newark,
most of them without Arms, An Equipage certainly not to have encouraged the
King unto a War, if it could have been avoided; But such was Gods will for the
punishment of the Nation.

But the Kings Forces indeed unexpectedly increased, by which the War has been
continued to the Destruction of the Kingdom, and more particularly of the Kings
Party; but later by much than could have been expected by any foreseeing man:
and neither the King, nor any rational man with him, but would have accepted
and sought an Accommodation, though with great loss and prejudice. So that to
make the King the first Agressor, and beginner of an Offensive War, and the
Houses to have taken only defensive Arms, I could never understand it, nor know
what it was they could pretend to defend; Since there was no wrong left
unredressed, nor any thing that they could have pretense or color to demand,
that was not offered. Many things undeniably the Kings were witheld from him,
and more daily seized, But I conceive no one thing can be instanced, wherein
the King has detained from them any Right, to which they laid Claim. A. The
Right of all th^se specified particulars from the l^tter A. to the Letter B.
are fully shown to belong unto the King, and that the Houses can have no color
of pretense unto them. In App. page 20.
But if the making of Ordinances (without the King) of equal Authority with
Acts of Parliament, to which the Royal Assent had passed; The keeping in their
hands the Militia, Forts, and Navy, exclusively to the King; The altering of
Church Government established by Law, without the Kings Consent; The making a
new Great Seal; The proscribing of the Kings loyal Friends and Servants, to
loss of life and estates without pardon or mercy, before either Summons, Trial,
or Conviction; The taking to themselves the sole Power of pardoning and
disposing of Confiscations; If the setting unto sale the Lands and Revenew of
the Church, (for so many hundreds of years appropriated unto it) by their
single Arbitrary Power, without the Kings Consent, who is Founder of all the
Bishoprics, and which he was sworn to preserve; If the abolishing of the Court
of Wards, and discharging the Subjects of their Tenures, and so consequently of
their service to the Crown; If the deteining of the Kings Children from him,
the breeding of them, and the future Marriage of them, belongs unto them; If
the Power of injoining new Oaths upon the Subject, contrary to all Law, and
without the King; If the making what they please Treason, ex plenitudine
potestatis, ^s the Dic Lun^e 4 Ma^i 1646. O^dered that whosoever should ^a^^our
or conceal the King, and not (...) it, etc. should be proceeded (...) as a
Traitor, and d^ without mercy. B.
harboring of the King, etc. notwithstanding that the Law has determined what
shall be adjudged Treason and nothing else; If the sending to, and treating
with foreign Princes, of War and Peace; or the nominating of Judges, Sheriff,
and the Officers of the Crown, and many things of this kind; If they lay Claim
unto these as their Right; I must confess I have not known any satisfaction
offered unto them by the King: Only in the point of his Servan^s, he has
always protested, that he would protect no man whatsoever, so that he might be
brought to a Legal Trial, according to the due Course of Law, which he is bound
to see afforded to all his Subjects. But for the rest of the above specified
particulars, I do not know that the King has endeavored their satisfaction:
Neither can it be supposed by any rational man, that they will ground their
defensive War upon any Claim they will make unto them. For although de facto in
the Contestation of War, they have seized and possessed themselves of them, yet
they will not pretend, that they have right unto them de jure, And it is Right
that constitutes the Iustness or Uniustness of the entering into a War; Success
protecteth, and may establish for the future, but cannot rectify or make good
an unjust beginning. And it must be their future proceedings, by which the most
probable Judgment can be made of their former intentions. For now that they
have overcome all oppositions, If they shall return to a peaceable legal
Settlement, and leave to use Arbitrary Government, which they may pretend they
have been enforced unto, during an Actual War; and shall only retain their just
Liberties and Privileges, with such additions and inlargements of Graces, and
Immunities, as the King, (being free, and without constraint) shall be
contented to grant, together with prudent Cautions for their own Indemnity,
and Security for the future (which in Cases of this Nature, must ever be
supposed that rational Men will endeavor, and successful men that have the
Power in their hands, will expect) If they will let the Subject have the
comfort and security of a general Pardon, and an Act of Oblivion; not force the
consciences of their fellow subjects, by new Oaths, which they themselves have
acknowledged to be contrary to the Law and against the Petition of Right; If
they will endeavor really, the settlement of Religion, by a moderate
Reformation, and not by a total ruin of the most Orthodox and flourishing
Church of Europe; and so restore the King to what is undeniably his, and make
the known Law the Rule of Government, These will be the strongest Arguments,
that Defense was rather intended, than a Conquest. But if Armies shall be
retained when there are no Enemies; and by them an Arbitrary Power held up over
men's Lives, Liberties, and Estates; and the King kept in the nature of a
subdued and useless Person; little will be believed of any Intention of taking
only defensive Arms.

CHAP. X Showing a particular Tie of Gratitude, by the Generousness and
Reconcileableness of the Kings Disposition.
THere was yet a further Tie of Gratitude put upon me, by the Generousness, and
Reconcileableness of the Kings Disposition: (a virtue ever to be wished, but
not often found in offended Princes) For I having been so unhappy, as to have
fallen very highly into his Disfavour, and to have remained many years under a
Cloud of his heavy Displeasure: yet not long before the beginning of this
Parliament, having the opportunity of access unto him, at the great Counsel at
York, And then being employed as Prolocutor in the Commission for the Treaty
with the Scots at Rippon for a Cessation, and afterward for the Peace at
London; he was pleased to receive so good satisfaction concerning me, and all
my former proceedings, that he did graciously pass by, whatsoever offense he
had conceived against me, and did not only call me to his Counsel-Table,
(where, in regard of my many years service under his Father, he might have
judged me useful unto his service) but out of a Confidence and Trust (which to
fail in even amongst Heathens, would be held odious) admitted me to the place
of the nearest Attendance about his Person, as a Gentleman of his Bedchamber,
who (besides the Privileges of Access in all places) have the Honor to sleep by
him in the night in his Chamber, and to be trusted alone with the safety of his
Person, as I have often been. And this place is accompanied with a particular
Oath of distinct services, Of attending upon his Person, of not Acting or
Concealing any thing to his Prejudice, and other things of particular service,
more than other subjects do swear unto.

And I must confess, that if all the above alleged Reasons had been laid aside,
and that there had been no other Tie, but this new Obligation of the Kings
Reconciliation, and of his trusting and confiding in me, knowing him to be so
free, not only from all things that might justify the taking Arms against him,
but from all things of doing wrong, or oppression, (if other men's errors or
corruptions, were not put upon his Score) That if all the misfortunes that have
befallen me and my Family, had been foreseen by me, and might have been
prevented by my forsaking of my Master, only because he was in distress; I
would rather have embraced this poor and exiled condition, than to have lived
in any Estate of plenty whatsoever, reproaching to my self daily and hourly my
Infidelity and Ingratitude.

CHAP. XI. A Brief Summary of the Reasons formerly set down for the not taking
Arms against the King.
THese are the Reasons that have retained me in that Duty, which I conceived my
self bound unto toward the King, The sum of them being briefly thus.

1. I understood Hostile Resistance against the King, to be expressly prohibited
by the word of God, both in the old and new Testament.

2. I should have gone against the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive
Church, and against the present Tenants and Confessions of Faith, of all the
Reformed Churches.

3. Admitting the Maxims of those hotheaded men, either Romanists or
Protestants, that have written in favor of Subjects taking Arms against their
Prince to be true, (as they are false, and condemned by their own Churches
respectively) yet in this Case, they could be no Arguments to me; For that
their Doctrine and Principles, are in no kind applicable to the present matter
in Fact.

4. I should have directly broken all those solemn Oaths which I had so often
taken, of Fidelity and Allegiance to the King.

5. I should have gone against the Laws of the Kingdom, by which to take Arms
against the King, or to adhere to his Enemies, etc. is made Treason.

6. I should have been failing in the Obligations of Honor and Gratitude.

7. I should have transgressed against Moral Honesty, and natural Justice, to
have fought against the King, as an unjust and an irreligious Man, whom I knew
to be, in more than an ordinary measure, Just and Religious.

So that if I should have broken through all these Duties of Religion, of
Oaths, of Loyalty, of Laws, of Gratitude, and Moral Honesty, by doing
presumptuously against my Conscience; how could I but have feared to be made as
miserable in the next World, as I should have remained desp^cable in this?

And howsoever this may be judged a severe Censure, 'It is only against my
self, as I say in the beginning of this Discourse, Men may upon differing
Painciples go differing ways; And I cannot be so uncharitable, as to think so
many grave, learned, and noble Personages, would break through so many plain
Duties, under which they had formerly lived, And unto which they had not only
sworn but conformed themselves; But that they had either found out or had had
revealed unto them, some such things for the satisfaction of their Consciences,
as God has not yet been pleased I should attain unto. If I may see them in
writing, I shall peruse them willingly; And if I shall find in them, but so
much Reason, as may induce me to believe, that upon their own Principles, and
not by Fear, Interests, or likelihood of prevailing, their Consciences may have
been persuaded that way, Although I disapprove their said Principles, and still
retain mine own, yet I shall say, Bona intention mali sunt; which though it
does not justify an evil Action, yet it does in some measure excuse and
lessen the Offense. St. Paul was a great Phil. 3. v. 6.
Persecutor of the Church, But because he did it out of abundance of Zeal, 1 Timothy 1 v. 13. John 16.2.
He obtained Pardon, for that he did it ignorantly: Our Savior says to his
Disciples, The time will come that whosoever kills you will think they do God
good service. And those very Murderers would have been in much better Case
than I should have been, that should have sinned presumptuously and against the
persuasion of mine own Conscience; whereas they had the Glory of God for their
end, though upon false Principles. And certainly, presumptuous sins, being as
it were a defying of God, are of greater Provocation, And I shall recommend
unto those whose Consciences have led them another way, that Imborn, Charitable
principle of the Law of Nature, as well as of the Gospel, Quod tibi fieri non
vis, alteri ne feceris; Whatsoever ye would that men should to do you, do ye
even so unto them. Matthew. 7.12.
And if Conscience shall be a discharge or supersedeas unto them, against known
Duties, against Oaths, and Established Laws, Let Conscience in me, grounded
upon so many Reasons, as in this Discourse are set down, be likewise pleadable
for the doing of those Duties, to which I conceived my self obliged, both by
the Law of God and Man, and which hitherto, both they and I have practiced.

CHAP. XII. All the former Reasons applied to the present Case of King Charles,
with a positive opinion thereupon.
THese have been the Motives of settling my Conscience in the Opinion that I
shall briefly here set down, deduced from the Principles of this Discourse,
which (upon this individual Case) is;

That neither upon pretext of Religion, Personal Vices, Excesses in Government,
nor any other Color or Pretext whatsoever, the Subjects of the Crown of
England may withdraw their Obedience, or make Hostile Resistance to King
CHARLES the present King, Being by Right of Inheritance, justly possessed of
the Crown, His Title no way depending, either upon his Divine or Moral Virtues;
And the said Subjects having received him, and acknowledged him for their only
Supreme Governor, done him Hommage, and sworn to him Faith and Allegiance
absolutely and without Condition.

As for other Kings or Potentates, whether Elective Kingdoms, or Kingdoms that
(at the Erection of them) were received by the first King upon Express
Covenant, and only with a Conditional Obedience, as is pretended by those of
Aragon and others: of these I shall not speak. Neither shall I adventure to
speak of those Catholic Kings and Princes, which acknowledge (in spiritual
matters) a Superior Jurisdiction in the Pope over them, (And he pretends (as
has been before set down) by necessary Relation and Dependency of the Temporal
upon the Spiritual) to have a Temporal Power over them, in ordine ad
spiritualia; and has often put this his Claim in Practice, by accompanying his
spiritual Censure of Excommunication, with the Sentence of discharging Subjects
of their obedience to their Princes, and so consequently of deposing them.
Herewith I shall not meddle, None of these cases being applicable to the
present Case of King CHARLES, who is no Elective King, but holds his Crown by
an unquestionable Title of Succession, derived to him by Descent from his
Ancestors, for the space of more than six hundred years: Neither was there ever
any Pact or Condition with him, or any of his Ancestors of forfeiture, in Case
of misgovernment or wickedness; And breach of Covenants forfeiteth not an
Ordinary Estate, unless there be an express Clause and Condition of forfeiture:
which in this Case, neither was, nor ever can be pretended. It is true, that
his Ancestors and himself, have limited and restrained their Legal Right, by
many Concessions and Laws in some Cases, as, The making of Laws without Consent
of Peers and People, and the levying of Money, etc. which he cannot violate
without great Injustice, as shall be after shown: But no such Pact or Covenant
can be produced, or pretended, whereby upon breach, he forfeiteth his
Sovereignty, or makes it justifiable for his Subjects to take Arms against
him, or to inflict Punishments upon his Person, either by deposing, Death, or
Imprisonment.

The Case likewise of Catholic Princes no way concerns him, who
acknowledges in the Pope, no such Superior Jurisdiction: Neither if he did,
are there any such Ecclesiastical Censures issued out against him, as might
warrant so much as his Catholic Subjects to take arms against him. So that
whatsoever Pretenses may be in some Cases, concerning such Princes as I have
above specified, (wherein I shall not presume to deliver any Opinion) yet in
the present Case of King CHARLES, there can be no colorable pretense of taking
arms against him, or of deposing him, which I understand to be, (in effect)
when he is divested o^ his just Regal Power; Or of the imprisoning of his
person, which I understand to be, not only when he is in Bonds, or locked up in
a Room; but when the liberty of going, and the freedom of speaking is
restrained, to such places or persons as others shall please, and he remain
under the Guard of Armed men, not of his own choosing, but imposed upon him by
others.

It must be acknowledged, that the Kings of England derive their Title and
Right from William the Norman, who although he came in by Conquest, yet his
Successors (considering that a Right acquired by Force, may likewise be
recovered by Force, by those upon whom the forceable Intrusion was made) were
pleased by way of pact and stipulation, to limit and qualify that Imperium
absolutum, which is acquired by Conquest* And the People of England, thereupon
did submit themselves to his Government, and became his Subjects and his
Liege-men, And thereby was Constituted Imperium legitimum, a just and Rightful
Sovereignty; the Kings remaining with Supreme Power, and the People with Common
Right, whereby they were freed from the Servitude of Conquest, and remained
under a free Subjection, whereunto they had by their Consent submitted
themselves.

The Kings likewise did recede from Absolute and Arbitrary Power, and remained
with Supreme, but not with Absolute Empire.

By free Subjection, I understand when a People live under Laws to which they
have given a free Consent, and not under the mere Will of the Prince; And that
they retain such a Propriety in that which is their own, that without their
Assent or legal forfeiture, it cannot be taken from them; And this is a true
difference betwixt a Free Subject and a Slave or Servant. Quicquid acquirit
servus, acquiritur Domino, Liber quod acquirit, acquirit sibi, Whatsoever a
servant gets, he gets for his Lord, Whatsoever a Freeman gets, he
gets for himself. And so although that Dominion of all belongs to the
Prince, Propriety belongs to every man, Dominium totius apud Caesarem,
Proprietas apud singulos.

The Difference that I understand betwixt a Supreme, and Absolute Empire, is,
That in Absolute Empire, the Rule of the Peoples Obedience, is only the
Sovereigns Will. So it is in Turkey, Muscovia, and all such Princes, as retain
entire, the Right of Conquest; and was in some sort under the Roman Emperor
after the Lex Regia was established by the Peoples Consent; whereby they
transferred their entire Right unto the Emperor.

Supreme Empire I understand to be, when a King has a Supremacy and
Soveraingnity over all, but his Absolute Power is limited and restrained by
reciprocal Pacts, Laws, and Stipulations betwixt Prince and People, which is
the Case of the Crown of England: And to these Pacts, the King and People are
equally bound, before God and Man; And the King is as much bound to Justice,
and to the protection of his Subjects, and to the observance of the Laws, (not
only out of Religion, but out of Moral Honesty) as the Subject is to Obedience.
And he is not only accomptable to God, but his People have just and legal ways
to seek Redress, wherein he shall do Wrong; notwithstanding that Axiom of our
Common Law, Le Roy ne fait to^t* is only to be understood in the ordinary
course of justice which the King administering by his Ministers, and not in
Person, it is they that are the wrong doers and not the King, and the subject
against (...) his Remedy.
That the King can do no Wrong; which is very false in many senses, and may be
very well called fictio Iuris, a kind of Metaphysical Fiction. For Kings may do
Wrong, and be as wicked as other men, and may commit Murder, and lie with
other men's Wives, and wrongfully take take other men's Estates, which no Fiction
of the Law can make not to be Wrong, although his Person be exempt from
punishment. And that abstract Consideration of the King, for his just Power and
Office, as it has been often ill used heretofore in way of Assentation: So
there has been as ill use made of it in these troubles; when the taking of
arms and the fighting against him, was pretended not to be against the King,
but against CHARLES STEWART. But (to speak in Terms intelligible) a King both
may do Wrong, and the People may seek their redress, in such sort as the Law of
the Land allows: And the difference betwixt King and Peoples failing in their
reciprocal Duties, is not but that they do Wrong alike, offend God alike, and
are both of them liable to be questioned, according to the extent of the Law,
by both their Consents established. The Subjects transgressing the Law, shall
be punished according to the quality and measure of their Delicts. Felony, by
loss of their Goods and Chattels, and by a milder Death, Treason by a more
severe Death, and Confiscation both of Goods and Inheritance. But hereof they
must be convict per pares, by People of their own Condition, and adjudged by a
Superior Jurisdiction, which can be derived only and singly from the King. So
that the King not having his Peer, or any of his own Condition, cannot have a
legal Trial; And having no jurisdiction superior to himself, cannot be
adjudged, or sentenced by any. For neither the Extent of the Law, nor any
Condition of the Pacts, or Stipulation, do reach to the punishing of the Person
of the King, or the forfeiture of his Dominion over us. It is true, that (in
civil things) Trials may be (and often are) brought against the King; And
Kings do give way, That the Judges be sworn to do equal Justice betwixt them
and their Subjects. And in point of Oppression and Wrong, we may Remonstrate
our Grievances, and challenge Redress by our Petitions; Which if they be not
condescended unto, we may insist upon them as our right, and claim them as a
due, and not as of grace; And although we do it by way of Petition, that is but
a dutiful form of Subjects bringing their Plea against the King, For in other
sort he ought not to be impleaded. Besides these Petions of Right, we may (as
it has been formerly said) remonstrate, enter our Protestations, and take all
those Courses which the Laws allow. Neither ought the King to take Offense at
these legal Contestations with him, because by his assent unto the Laws, he
has assented unto them: Nay he ought in them to do us Right, being bound
thereunto by the Law of God, and by his Oath, and by moral Honesty and Justice.
But, if he fail in all these Duties, our Jurisdiction reaches not to his
personal Punishment; therein, he is sub nullo, nisi sub D^o; and the Law
stops there, and tells us, satis sufficit ei ad poenam, quod Deum habet
ultorem, It will be a sufficient punishment to him, that he has God for an
Avenger. Yet are we not altogether left without remedy, For Kings, although
they be Gods Vicegerents, yet they cannot work as God works, saying Fiat,
and it was done. Kings must work by mediate Instruments, And if they Command
illegal things, the Executioners of them are responsable, and must make
satisfaction to the Parties injured. And therefore the King ought not
immediately to imprison, nor in Person to execute any thing, because that in
Case of wrong-doing, the Subject would be left without Remedy, in regard the
Kings Person is not to be impleaded by Law. I know the usual Objections, In
Case Kings will do that which they ought not to do, and will by their own
immediate Warrants, Commit, and be the Personal Actors of the Injuries, or not
suffer the Executioners of their unlegal Commands to be legally proceeded
against; shall the Subject be left wholly without Remedy, and the People be
debarred of the benefit of that Right of Nature inbred in all Creatures, of
self preservation? Yes. We must be contented with that Condition wherein God
has placed us, and wherein, by our own Consents, and Stipulations of
subjection, we have placed our selves, and may only right our selves by those
means, which by the laws (whereunto we have given our assent) are permitted
unto us: Neither is our native Liberty hereby ravished from us, but, as we have
parted with it, by our own Consent and Agreement, So we cannot resume it, but
by those ways which we have reserved in the Stipulations of our submission.
And besides that, herein there is no Injury, for that Volenti non fit Injuria,
It would be more hurtful to mankind if it were otherwise: For there is a
necessity, that in all sorts of Governments, as well as in Monarchy, there
should he an Impunity and Power, somewhere, of not being questioned, else all
would presently fall into Anarchy and Confusion, Neither could there be a final
ending of Controversies, if there were not a Dernier Ressort, and last Appeal,
wherein we are bound to acquiesce; And this Power must be trusted in some hand,
and that must of necessity be, where the Sovereign Power remains, else* there
mstu be supposed a Superior Power to that Sovereign Power, and so in
infinitum, until we come to some such Power that has nothing above it, and
then that must be trusted, and must be submitted unto, without being
accomptable to any but to God, because on earth there can be to it no Superior
Jurisdiction. And this Power is in the King of England, in all things except
such wherein he himself or his Ancestors, have by Laws and Stipulations,
lim^ted their Absolute Power, as has been above set down; As enacting or
repealing Laws without his Parliament, levying of Moneys, and many other
things, wherein He and his Ancestors have restrained their Power; And this we
are by the Law of God and of the Land bound to obey, and not to make any
resistance but what the Law allows us; We must in the rest, have recourse
unto God, if our Princes be wicked: Neither may we mutiny or repine at God,
when we have ill Kings, more than when he sends Diseases, Plagues,
Caterpillars, Blightings or Blasts* For wicked Kings are but Blastings of the
People that God is pleased to punish; Neither must we think our Condition worse
than that of wicked Kings, (notwithstanding their temporal Impunity) For
certainly it is much better both in regard of Punishment in the World to come,
and commonly in this. For the next World, As their Sin is greater; So it is
declared, that their Punishment shall be greater. Hear o ye Kings, and
understand, etc. Wisd. 6. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Because being Ministers of Gods Kingdom, you have not judged aright, nor kept
the Law, nor walked after the Counsel of God. Horribly and speedily shall he
come upon you, for a sharp Judgment shall be to them that are in high places,
For mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but mighty men shallbe mightily
tormented. Whereas Subjects which suffer with patience, because they are so
commanded by God, make him their Debtor by their sufferings, and he always
pays faithfully, who says that if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign
with him. And for this World, Their Wickedness and Oppression, is ever
accompanied with those Fears Distractions, and Horrors of Conscience, which
have ever been unseperable from Tyrannies, by which their lives are rendered
more uncomfortable than the unhappiest of their Subjects. And for the most
part, their ends are as miserable as their lives, For what they fear, and by
their Tyranny seek to prevent, does commonly fall upon them. Their People do
Revolt, and Rebel, And although they be never so well Catech^zed in the points
of Obedience, yet their Natural Inclination to return to Liberty, much more to
cast off unjust Burdens and Oppressions, is such, that slight and weak
Arguments will easily persuade them to that whereunto they are so strongly
inclined; and the least pretense of Religion, or color of Reason, or
Lawfulness countenancing or tolerating the freeing themselves from Subjection
in any Case, will be more prevalent with them, than the most positive Precept
of Gods Word injoining Obedience. And if in any Case taking of Arms be
admitted, Theirs shall ever be that case. And if the wickedness of their Prince
shall be allowed as a ground for Rebellion, Their Prince shall ever be the most
wicked; And of this, all Ages have produced many examples, and especially these
latertime through all the Estates of Christendom. And although the Christian
churches of all Professions (as before is showed) declare against the Doctrine
of Resistance, Two or Three hot-headed-men writing or preaching, suitable to
their Affection and Desires, will prevail against the Authority of all the
Churches of Christendom. And wicked Princes will find, that Precepts in this
Case will not serve the turn: But it will be in this point of Resistance, as
Tacitus says of Divinations in Rome, which was a wickedness that had been, and
ever would be forbidden, yet ever would be retained, semper vetabitur and
semper retinebitur. And so Princes that will highly oppress and make their
Will, and not the Laws, the Rule of their government (though to resist be a
wickedness, and that it is against the Law of God and Man to do it) yet where
the wrongs are great, and a fair opportunity offered of prevailing, It will be
ever done: For that amongst men, there are a Thousand for One, that prefer
their own Interests or Inclination, before Duty or Conscience. And certainly a
prudent and foreseeing Prince, that will impartially examine things, cannot but
expect it should be so For why should he suppose, that other men will be more
honest, or more religious than himself? And when he breaks through all the
Bonds and Ties of Oaths, of Divine Precepts, and Moral Justice, only to stretch
and extend his Power and Greatness; why should he not expect, that Subjects
should make as bold to transgress the same Duties, in hope of recovering
Liberty, with the false show whereof, people are apter to be further
transported than by any earthly desire whatsoever? Neither will the fear of
Death or Danger restrain them, because they will not attempt, until
opportunity make them hopeful of prevailing, and then they conceive by Power
to provide for their own Impunities,

But besides this proness in people to be easily led, and persuaded into
Rebellion, under the false and specious show of recovering liberty, The great
Monarchs and Princes of Christendom, have been (in great part) the fomentors
and upholders of Rebellion, and their Doctors have not so much by their
preaching, and writing beaten it down, as the Princes themselves have by their
Examples and Actions given encouragement unto it; for although I shall ever
speak with Reverence of Princes and their Actions, yet I shall hope that the
humble representation of this truth will receive a fair interpretation. For it
is undeniably true, that in this later Age all the great Monarchies and States
of Christendom have been made unhappy by Intestine Wars, which have been
fomented (if not contrived and designed) by one Christian Prince against
another; every one countenancing and encouraging Rebellion, until it become
his own Case, and then he is offended: of this I shall give no particular
instances, the Notariety of it is too great, and I fear every State may too
easily apply it to what they have done, And it may be feared that the sad
Condition of almost all the States of Christendom at this present day, Matt.
7.12.
may feel something of Gods Judgments, who has said; With what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again.

And wicked Kings (as they are sure they shall not escape the severe Judgment
of God in the next world, (if they do believe the Scripture) So (if they will
believe Ancient Histories of what has passed in former times, or their own
experience of what they see daily with their eyes, or that they do believe,
that God will repay unto them, that which they have either countenanced, or
contrived against others they must expect to have troublesome and uncomfortable
lives, accompanied with Hatred, Hazard and Infamy. And if these considerations
will not restrain them, yet we must not be wicked because they are so; Neither
will God admit of Recrimination for our Excuse. Our Duty of not resisting is
positive, upon pain of damnation, from which no good Success or Prevailing can
kee^ us, although it may save us from the Gallows. Besides this great hazard of
our Souls, Moral Prudence should teach us, That a Civil War is commonly a Cure
much worse than the Disease; For no Oppression, nay, no Tyranny brings with
it half those Miseries and Calamities, which of necessity do ever accompany an
Intestine War. Wicked Kings may be Cruel, Covetous, and Licentious, But their
Oppressions and their Lusts are restrained to some Wickednesses, and to some
Persons; But in a War, Rapes, Murders, Robberies, Sacrileges, and all
Impieties break in, and all sorts of People are made miserable, which the poor
Kingdom of England has found by sad experience; where within these five years
last past, more has been taken from the Subject, than would have been exacted
by Subsidies, Projects, or any unjust Taxes whatsoever, by the worst of Kings
in the space of one hundred, And so all other wickednesses proportionably have
been increased.

I shall conclude this Discourse with my humble and hearty Prayers to God
Almighty, to avert his heavy displeasure from that most unhappy Kingdom, which
I have seen the most prosperous and flourishing of all the Kingdoms of Europe,
And by our own Dissension* is now become of all other the most miserable; And
so like to continue, unless it shall please God so to dispose the minds both of
King and People, that they may really desire and endeavor a just, moderate,
and equitable Accommodation; Whereby they and the Kingdom may be again put into
the Way of recovering some measure of happiness; It not being to be doubted,
but that the many Afflictions which have happened to the King, will add much
of Wisdom and Circumspection unto his other Virtues. And the public
Calamities that have befallen the Kingdom* and the Distractions that the War
has visibly brought both in Church and Commonwealth, will make the people value
and esteem Peace, and not so Wantonly be again engaged in new Miseries. And
although unto me (in regard of mine Age and other Considerations) there
remains little Hope of ever seeing my Country again. Yet where or howsoever
it shall please God to dispose of me, I shall dye with Comfort, if I may judge
it in a probable way of recovering some measure of its ancient Happiness and
Honor.

THE APPENDIX Containing Many PARTICULARS Specified in the First Part of this
DISCOVRSE, With the Citations of the Chapters and Pages where they are Cited.
CAEN, 1647.

A Speech made by the Right Honorable, JOHN Earl of BRISTOL, in the High Court
of Parliament, MAY 20 1642. Concerning an Accommodation.
MY LORDS,
I Have spoken so often upon the subject of Accommodation, with so little
acceptance, and with so ill success, that it was in my Intention not to have
made any further estay in this kind; but my zeal to the peace and happiness of
this Kingdom, and my apprehensions of the near approaching of our unspeakable
miseries and calamities, suffer me not to be Master of mine own Resolutions.

Certainly this Kingdom has at all times many advantages over the other
Monarchies of Europe. As, of Situation, of plenty of rich commodities, of Power
both by Sea and Land: But more particularly at this time, when all our
neighboring States are by their sevetal interests, so involved in War, and
with such equality of Power, That there is not much likelihood of their
Mastering one another, nor of having their differences easily compounded. And
thereby, we being only admitted to all Trades, and to all places: Wealth and
Plenty (which follow, where Trade flourishes) are in a manner cast upon us.

I shall not trouble your Lordships by putting you in mind of the great and
noble undertakings of our Ancestors: Nor shall I pass higher than the times
within mine own remembrance.

Queen Elizabeth was a Princess disadvantaged by her sex* by her age, and
chiefly, by her want of Issue: yet if we shall consider the great effects which
were wrought upon most of the States of Christendom by this Nation under her
prudent government; (the growth of the Monarchy of Spain chiefly by her
impeached; The United Provinces by her protected; The French in their greatest
miseries relieved; Most of the Princes of Germany kept in high respect and
reverence toward her and this Kingdom, and the peace and tranquillity wherein
this Kingdom flourished; and which has been continued down unto us by the
peaceable government of King James of blessed memory, and of his now Majesty,
until these late unhappy interruptions) We cannot but judge this Nation
equally capable with any other, of Honor, Happiness, and Plenty.

Now, if instead of this happy condition, in which we have been, and might be,
upon a sober and impartial inquiry we shall find our selves to have been for
some few years last past involved in so many troubles and distractions, and at
the present to be reduced to the very brink of miseries and calamities; It is
high time for us to consider by what means we have been brought into them, and
by what means it is most probable we may be brought out of them.

This Kingdom never enjoyed so universal a peace, neither has it any visible
enemy in the whole World either Infidel or Christian: Our Enemies are only of
our own house, such as our own dissentions, jealousies, and distractions, have
raised up: and certainly, where they are found (especially betwixt a King and
his People) no other cause of the unhappiness and misery of a State need to be
sought after: For civil discord is a plentiful Sourse, from whence all
miseries and mischiefs flow into a Kingdom.

The Scripture tells us of the strength of a little City united, and of the
instability of a Kingdom divided within it self; So that upon a prudent
inquiry, we may assign our own jealousies, and discords, for the chief cause of
our past and present troubles, and of our future fears.

It must be confessed, that by the counsel and conduct of evil Ministers, the
Subject had cause to think their just liberties invaded; And from thence have
our former distempers grown: For it is in the body politic of a Monarchy, as
in another Natural body, the health whereof is defined to be, Partium corporis
aequa temperies, an equal temper of the parts. So likewise, a State is well in
health and well disposed, when Sovereign Power and common right are equally
balanced, and kept in an even temper by just and equitable rules.

And truly (My LORDS) by the goodness of His Majesty, and by the prudent
endeavor of the Parliament, this State is almost reduced to that equal, and
even temper, and our sickness is rather continued out of fancy and conceit (I
mean fears and jealousies) than out of any real distemper or defect.

I well remember, that before the beginning of this Parliament, some Noble
Lords presented a Petition unto the King, and in that Pettion did set down all
or most of the Grievances and distempers of the Kingdom, which then occurred to
them. To these (as I conceive) the Parliament have procured from his Majesty
such redresses as are to their good satisfaction.

Many other things for the ease, security, and comfort of the subject, have
been by their great industry, found and propounded, and by his Majesty's
goodness condescended unto. And now we are come so near the happiness of being
the most free and most settled Nation in the Christian world; Our dangers and
miseries will grow greater and nearer unto us every day than other, if they be
not prevented.

The king on his part offers to concur with us in the settling of all the
liberties and immunities either of the propriety of our Goods, or liberty of
our persons, which we have received from our Ancestors, or which himself has
granted unto us; and what shall yet remain for the good and comfort of his
Subjects, He is willing to hearken to all our just and reasonable propositions:
and for the establishing of the true Protestant Religion, he wooes us to it:
And the wisdom and industry of the Parliament has now put it in a hopeful
way.

The rule of his government, he professes shall be, the Laws of the Kingdom,
And for the comforting and securing of us, he offers a more large and more
general Pardon, than has been granted by any of his Predecessors.

And truly (My LORDS) This is all that ever was or can be pretended unto by us.

We, on the other side make Profession, That we intend to make his Majesty a
glorious King, to endeavor to support his Dignity, and to pay unto him that
Duty and Obedience, which by our Allegiance, several Oaths, and late
Protestations we owe unto him, and to maintain all his just Regalities and
Prerogatives, which I conceive to be as much as his Majesty will expect from us.

So that My Lords) we (being both thus reciprocally agreed of that which in the
general would make both the King and People happy) shall be most unfortunate,
if we shall not bring both Inclinations and Endeavors so to propound and
settle particulars, as both King and People may know what will give them mutual
Satisfaction, which certainly must be the first Step to the settling a right
understanding betwixt them, And in this I should not conceave any great
difficulty, if it were once put into a way of preparation. But the greatest
difficulty may seem to be, how that which may be settled and agreed upon, may
be secured. This is commonly the last point in Treaties betwixt Princes, and of
the greatest niceness, But much more betwixt a King and his Subjects, where
that Confidence and Belief which should be betwixt them, is once lost: And to
speak clearly, I fear that this may be our Case, and herein may consist the
chiefest difficulty of Accommodation; For it is much easier to compose
differences arising from Reason (yea even from Wrongs) than it is to satisfy
Jealousies, which arising out of Diffidence and Distrust, grow and are varyed
upon every Occasion.

But ( My Lords) if there be no endeavors to allay and remove them, they will
every day increase and gather strength; Nay they are already grown to that
height, and the mutual replies to those direct terms of Opposition, that if we
make not a present stop, it is to be feared, it will speedily pass further
than verbal Contestations.

I observe in some of his Majesty's Answers, a Civil War spoken of: I confess
it is a word of Horror to me, who have been an eyewitness of those
unexpressible Calamities, that (in a short time) the most plentiful and
flourishing Countries of Europe have been brought unto by an intestine War.

I furrher observe, that his Majesty protests against the miseries that may
ensue by a war, and that he is clear of them. It is true, That a Protestation
of that kind is no actual denouncing of War, but it is the very next degree to
it, Vltima admonitio, as the Civilians term it, The last admonition; So that we
are upon the very brink of our miseries; It is better keeping our of them, than
getting out of them: And in a State, the Wisdom of Prevention, is infinitely
beyond the Wisdom of Remedies. If for the sins of this Narion, these
misunderstandings should produce the least Act of Hostility, It is not almost
to be believed, how impossible it were to put any stay to our miseries; For a
Civil War admits of none of those Conditions, or Quarter, by which Cruelty and
Blood are amongst other Enemies kept from Extremities; Nay if it should but so
happen (which God of his goodness avert) That mutually Forces, and Armies
should be raised, Jealousies and Fears would be so much increased thereby, that
an Accommodation would be rendered full of difficulty and length; and the very
charge of maintaining them, (whilst first a Cessation of Arms, and then a
general Accommodation were in treating) the Wealth of the Kingdom would be
consumed.

And of this we had lately a costly Example; for in those unhappy Troubles
betwixt us and Scotland, after there was a stop made to any further Acts of
Hostility, and a desire of Peace expressed on both sides, Commissioners
nominated, and all the Articles propounded; yet the keeping of the Armies
together for our several Securities (whilst the Cessation at Rippon, and the
Peace at London where in treating) cost this Kingdom not much less than a
million of pounds. And if two Armies be once on foot here in England, either a
sudden Encounter must destroy one of them, or the keeping of them on foot,
must destroy the Kingdom.

I hope therefore we shall make it our endeavor, by Moderation and Calmnesse,
yet to put a stay to our so near approaching miseries, and that we shall
hearken to the wise advice of our Bretbren of Scotland in their late Answer to
the King and Parliament, wherein they earnestly entreat us, That all means may
be forborne, which may make the Breach wider, and the Wound deeper, and that no
place be given to the evil Spirit of Division, which at such times works
uncessantly, and rests not: But that the fairest, the most Christian, and
compendious way may be taken by so wise a King and Parliament, as may (against
all Malice and Oppositions) make his Majesty and Posterity more glorious, and
his Kingdom more happy than ever. And in another place they say, That since the
Parliament has thought meet, to draw the Practice of the Parliament of
Scotland into Example, in point of Declaration: They are confident that the
Affection of the Parliaments will lead them also to the Practice of that
Kingdom, in composing the unhappy Differences betwixt his Majesty and them, and
(so far as may consist with their Religion, Liberties, and Laws) in giving his
Majesty all satisfaction, especially in their tender Care of his Royal Person,
and of his Princely Greatness and Authority.

Certainly (MY LORDS) this is wise and brotherly Advice, and I doubt not but we
are all desirous to follow it. We must not then still dwell upon generals (for
generals produce nothing) But we must put this Business into a certain way,
whereby particulars may be descended unto; And the way that I shall offer with
all humility is, That there may be a select Committee of choice Persons of both
Houses, who may, in the first place truly state, and set down all things in
difference betwixt the King and the Subject, with the most probable way of
reconciling them: Secondly, to descend unto the particulars, which may be
expected by each from other, either in point of our supporting of him, or his
relieving of us. And lastly, how all these Conditions, being agreed upon, may
be so secured, as may stand with the Honor of his Majesty, and the satisfaction
of the Subject.

When such a Committee shall have drawn up the heads of the Propositions, and
the way of securing them, they may be presented unto the Houses, and so offered
unto his Majesty by such a Way, as the Parliament shall Judge most probable to
produce an Accommodation.

MY LORDS, What I have said unto you, has been chiefly grounded upon the
Apprehensions, and Fears of our future Dangers. I shall say something of the
unhappiness of our present Estate, which certainly stands in as much need of
Relief and Remedy, as our Fears do of Prevention; For although the King and
People were fully united, and that all men that now draw several ways, should
unanimously set their hand to the work, yet they would find it no easy task,
to restore this Kingdom to a prosperous and comfortable Condition: If we take
into our Consideration the deplorable Estate of Ireland, likely to drain this
Kingdom of Men and Treasure: if we consider the Debts and Necessity of the
Crown, the Engagements of the Kingdom, the great and unusual Contributions of
the People, the which although they may not be so much to their Discontent,
(for that they have been legally raised) yet the burden has not been much
eased: let us likewise consider the Distractions (I may almost call them
Confusions) in point of Religion, which of all other Distempers are most
dangerous and destructive to the Peace of a State.

Besides these public Calamities, let every particular man consider the
distracted discomfortable estate of his own Condition: for mine own part, I
must ingenuously profess unto your Lordships, That I cannot find out (under the
different Commands of the King and the Parliament) any such Course of Caution
and Wariness, by which I can promise to my self Security or Safety. I could
give your Lordships many instances of the Inconsistency and impossibility of
obeying these Commands: But I shall trouble you with only one or two.

The Ordinance of Parliament (now in so great agitation) commands all Persons
in Authority, to put it in execution, and all others to obey it according to
the Fundamental Laws of the Land: The King declares it to be contrary to the
Fundamental Laws, against the Subject, and Rights of Parliament; And commands
all his Subjects of what sort soever, upon their Allegiance not to obey the
said Ordinance, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

So likewise in point of the King, commanding the Attendance of diverse of us
upon his Person, whereunto we are obliged by several relations of our Services
and Oaths; in case we comply not with his Commands, we are liable to his
displeasure, and the loss of those places of Honor and Trust, which we hold
under him: if we obey his Commands, without the leave of the Parliament (which
has not been always granted) we are liable to the Censure of Parliament, And
of both these we want not fresh Examples. So that certainly this cannot but be
acknowledged to be an unhappy and uncomfortable Condition.

I am sure I bring with me a ready and obedient Heart, to pay unto the King all
those Duties of Loyalty, Allegiance, and Obedience which I owe unto him; And I
shall never be wanting toward the Parliament, to pay unto it all those due
Rights, and that Obedience which we all owe unto it. But in contrary Commands a
Conformity or Obedience to both, is hardly to be lighted on. The Reconciliation
must be in the Commanders, and the Commands; and not in the Obedience, or the
Person that is to obey. And therefore until it shall please God to bless us
with a right understanding betwixt the King and Parliament, and a Conformity in
their Commands, neither the Kingdom in public, nor particular men in private,
can be reduced to a safe or comfortable Condition.

I have said thus much to give Occasion to others to offer likewise their
Opinions; For if we shall sit still, and nothing (tending to the stay of the
unhappy misunderstandings, namely betwixt the King and his People) be
propounded: It is to be feared, that our miseries will hasten so fast upon us,
that the season and opportunities of applying Remedies may be past.

I have herein discharged my Conscience, suitable to that duty, which I owe to
the King my Sovereign and Master, and suitable to that zeal and affection,
which I shall ever pay to the happiness and prosperity of the Kingdom, toward
which I shall ever faithfully contribute my humble Prayers and honest
endeavors. And I shall no ways doubt (whatsoever success this my Proposition
may have) it will be accompanied with the good wishes of your Lordships and of
all peaceable and well-minded men.

The Earl of Bristols Speech in the House of Peers. The 11 of June. 1642.
My Lords,
YOu were pleased not many days since, to declare your displeasure for the
printing of a Speech made by me in this House, on the 20 of May last; and the
Cause of your displeasure was declared to be, for that the said Speech did seem
to insinuate, that my former motions for Accommodation, had found but little
Acceptance, whereby there was cast upon the House an Imputation, as though it
should not be inclined thereunto.

Your Lordships Displeasure in that kind has given me Encouragement to renew
my former Motion, hoping it may be now more seasonable than at former times; At
least (MY LORDS) I fear it is at such a season, that whosoever is desirous to
move for the preventing of a Civil War, ought to speak now, or he may
hereafter hold his peace; For differences are reduced to that height of
opposition, betwixt his Majesty and the Houses, that if some speedy means be
not laid hold of for the allaying and reconciling of them, it is to be feared,
that a very few days will change our Contestations, which yet are but in words
and writing, into actions of blood and open Hostility, the which certainly may
yet by your Lordships wisdoms be prevented; but being once begun, will not be
remedied, but after long time, and unspeakable miseries.

The way that I presumed formerly to offer was, that this Honorable House would
be pleased to move, that a select Committee of choice Persons of both Houses
might be nominated, who may truly state, and set down all things in difference
between the King and the Subject, with the most probable ways of reconciling
of them: Secondly to descend unto the particulars, which may in reason be
expected by each from other, either in point of our supporting of the King, or
of his relieving of us: and lastly, how all those Conditions being agreed upon,
may be fittingly secured.

MY LORDS, The greatest difficulty (as appears unto me) in this point of
Accommodation (which so highly imports the good of the King, of the Kingdom,
and our own) consists in the beginning of it, For certainly, if it once were
put in a way (being accompanied with the Inclination which your Lordships
express to it, and with those earnest desires which the King professes by his
so many Invitations, that we would clearly set down all that (from him) would
give us satisfaction) it could not miss of a happy, and blessed Conclusion:
For, in substance, if our desires be suitable to our professions, we are
agreed: For our professions are that we intend to pay unto the King all Duties
of Loyalty and Obedience, and to make him a Glorious King. The King says, that
to those great Liberties and Eases which he has already granted unto us this
Parliament, he is ready to add any thing that shall be (with reason) further
propounded unto him for our Comfort and Satisfaction, So that little seems to
remain, but that from Generals we fall to the Inviduals, and express
particularly what we mean by making him a Glorious King, And paying unto him
Loyalty and Obedience, And likewise that the Individuals for our further
Comfort and satisfaction be propounded, So that the intentions of the one and
the other being clearly known, if any thing remain in difference, it may by
Treaty, and by calm ways of Debate be reconciled, Whereas the Professions
which are now made on either side of desiring an Accommodation, being only in
Generals, tend rather to a Vindication or Justification of one part against the
other, than any way to advance an Accommodation, whereas in particular
Proposals, Reason and Equity would sway; and if we do really desire Peace, as
we profess, we should on both sides stretch toward the effecting of it, whereas
if War be once on foot, it is no longer Reason and Justice which we make the
Rules of our demands and Propositions, but Success; which as it is unequitable,
So it is a leaden uncertain Rule, bowing and bending to the various chances of
War, and of Advantage; And therefore if we do heartily desire Peace, Let Us
follow our Saviors Counsel, Agree with our Adversary whilst he is yet on the
way, Otherwise we shall find by sad experience, that, that which might now be
easily prevented, shall hardly hereafter be remedied.

If a War happen to be here in England, (which God avert) it cannot be but most
bloody and feirce, for being shut up here in an Island, we shall fight as in a
Cockpit; And there being in the Kingdom few considerable strengths, there
must of necessity be more fighting in a year or two, than has been in the Low
Countries in twenty. It is probable the War will not be so long, but it will be
more bloody; And if we should prevail for the present, there will remain a
succession of troubles. We all bear a reverence to Monarchy, under which, we
and our Ancestors have lived so many Ages, And the King is blessed with a
plentiful Issue, And our Professions and Intentions are not to cast off just
Subjection, but to preserve just Liberty, which I am most confident we may do
without the hazard of a War; And what with our ancient Privileges, his
Majesty's new Concessions, and what he yet further offers, we may remain the
happiest and the freest Subjects that live under any King; The King likewise
whatsoever Success he may have, will be no Gainer by a War, For if he should
conceive by Force to introduce an Arbitrary Government, (which I am most
assured is far from his thoughts) he will find his own Adherents, his chief
opposers; who although they may fight in defense of his Person, and just
Rights, according to their Oaths and Allegance, yet they will be loath to fight
themselves into slavery. So that what is good for him, will be good for us,
which is an happy and equitable Agreement, and the contrary will make both
miserable, in so great a degree, that as now we may be justly esteemed the
happiest Kingdom in Europe, and the very Envy of all our Neighbors; So in a
short time, if a Civil War break in amongst us, we shall remain the Scorn or
the Pity of them.

I am far from thinking that any of your Lordships are less inclined to an
Accommodation than my self, but some body must be the mover, And those
miserable spectacles, which mine eyes have of late years beheld in the
Palatinate and in Germany, make me zealous and importunate, that they be
prevented here, if such be Gods holy will, if not, yet I shall have this
particular Comfort (what fortune soever shall befall me) That as I am assured
that I have had no hand in any those things which have caused the unhappy
differences betwixt the King and his People, so I shall appeal unto your
Lordships, if I have not been subservient unto your Lordships in all things,
that might have removed these misunderstandings, and to have employed my
Endeavors and solicitation, even unto Importunity, for the setting on foot
some way of Accomdation, whereby only our unspeakable Calamities (and very near
at hand) can be diverted from us.

Nineteen Propositions sent unto his Majesty the 2 of June 1642.
1. THat the Lords and others of your Majesty's privy Counsel, and such great
Officers and Ministers of State, either at home or beyond the Seas, may be put
from your Privy Counsel, and from those Offices and Employments, excepting such
as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament; And that the Persons put
into the Places and Employment of those that are removed, may be approved of by
both Houses of Parliament. And that Privy Counselors shall take an Oath for
the due execution of their Places, in such form as shall be agreed upon by both
Houses of Parliament.

2. That the great Affairs of the Kingdom may not be concluded or transacted by
the Advice of Private Men, or by any unknown, or unsworn Counselors; but that
such matters as concern the Public, and are proper for the high Court of
Parliament, which is your Majesty's great and supreme Counsel, may be debated,
resolved, and transacted only in Parliament, and not elsewhere, And such as
shall presume to do any thing to the contrary, shall be reserved to the Censure
and judgment of Parliament; And such other matters of State as are proper for
your Majesty's privy Counsel, shall be debated and concluded by such of the
Nobility and others, as shall from time to time be chosen for that Place by
Approbation of both Houses of Parliament. And that no public Act concerning
the Affairs of the Kingdom, which are proper for your Privy Counsel, may be
esteemed of any Validity as proceeding from the Royal Authority, unl^ss it be
do^e by the advice and consent of the Major part of your Counsel, attested
under their hands. And that your Counsel may be limited to a certain Number,
not exceeding twenty five, nor under fifteen; And if any Counselors place
happen to be void in the Interval of Parliament, It shall not be supplied
without the Assent of the Major part of the Counsel, which choice shall be
confirmed at the next sitting of Parliament; or else to be void.

3. That the Lord High Steward of England, Lo. High Constable, Lo. Chancellor,
or Lo. Keeper of the Great Seal, Lo. privy Seal, Earl Marshal, Lo. Admiral,
Warden of the Cinque Ports, chief Governor of Ireland, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Master of the Wards, Secretaries of State, two chief Justices and
chief Barons may always be chosen, with the Approbation of both Houses of
Parliament; and in the Intervals of Parliaments by Assent of the major part of
the C^unsel, in such manner as is before expressed in the choice of Counselors.

4. That he or they, unto whom the Government and Education of the Kings
Children, shall be committed, shall be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament; and in the Intervals of Parliament, by the Assent of the Major part
of the Counsel, in such manner as is before expressed in the choice of
Counselors; And that all such servants as are now about them, against whom
both Houses shall have any just exceptions, shall be removed.

5. That no Marriage shall be concluded, or treated for any of the Kings
Children, with any foreign Prince, or other Person whatsoever abroad or at home,
without the Consent of Parliament, under the penalty of a praemunire unto such
as shall conclude or treat any Marriage as aforesaid; and that the said penalty
shall not be pardoned, or dispensed with, but by the Consent of both Houses of
Parliament.

6. That the Laws in force against Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants, be
strictly put in Ececution without any toleration or dispensation to the
contrary; And that some more effectual Course may be enacted by authority of
Parliament; to disable them from making any Disturbance in the State, or
eluding the Law by Trusts or otherwise.

7. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the House of Peers may be taken away, so
long as they continue Papists; And that your Majesty will consent to such a
Bill as shall be drawn for the Education of the Children of Papists by
Protestants in Protestant Religi^n.

8. That your Majesty will be pleased to consent, that such a Reformation be
made of the Church Government and Liturgy, as both Houses of Parliament shall
advise; wherein they intend to have consultation with Divines, as is expressed
in their Declaration to that purpose; And that your Majesty will contribute
your best assistance to them, for the raising of a sufficient maintenance for
preaching Ministers thorought the Kingdom; and that your Majesty will be
pleased or give your Consent to Laws for the taking away of Innovations, and
Superstition, and of Pluralities, and against scandalous Ministers.

9. That your Majesty will be pleased to rest satisfied with that Course that
the Lords and Commons have appointed for ordering of the Militia, until the
same shall be further settled by a Bill; And that your Majesty will recall your
Declarations and Proclamations against the Ordinance made by the Lords and
Commons concerning it.

10. That such Members of either House of Parliament as have during this
present Parliament been put out of any Place and Office, or otherwise, have
satisfaction for the same, upon the Petition of that House whereof he or they
are Members.

11. That all privy Counselors and Judges may take an Oath, the form whereof
to be agreed on, and settled by act of Parliament, for the maintaining of the
Petition of Right, and of certain Statutes made by this Parliament, which shall
be mentioned by both Houses of Parliament; and that an Inquiry of all the
breaches and violations of those Laws, may be given in charge by the Justices
of the Kings Bench every Term, and by Judges of Assise in their Circuits, and
Justices of the Peace at the Sessions, to be presented and punished according
to Law.

12. That all the Judges and all the Officers Places by Approbation of both
Houses of Parliament may hold their Places, Quamdiu been se gesserint.

13. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether they
be within the Kingdom, or fled out of it, And that all Persons cited by either
House of Parliament, may appear and abide the Censure of Parliament.

14. That the general Pardon offered by your Majesty may be granted with such
Exceptions as shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament.

15. That the Forts and Castles of this Kingdom may be put under the Command
and Custody of such Persons as your Majesty shall appoint, with the Approbation
of your Parliament; and in the Intervals of Parliament, with the Approbation of
the Major part of the Counsel, in such manner as before is expressed in the
Choice of Counselors.

16. That the extraordinary Guards and Military Forces now attending your
Majesty may be removed and discharged, and that for the future you will raise
no such Guards or extraordinary Forces, but according to the Law, in case of
actual Rebellion or Invasion.

17. That your Majesty will be pleased to enter into a more strict alliance
with the States of the United Provinces, and other Neighbor Princes, and
States of the Protestant Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof,
against all designs and attempts of the Pope and his Adherents to subvert and
suppress it, whereby your Majesty will obtain a great access of Strength and
Reputation, and the Subjects be much encouraged and enabled in a Parliamentary
way for your aid and assistance, in restoring your Royal Sister and her
Princely Issue, to those Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them, and
relieving the other distressed Protestant Princes who have suffered in the same
Cause.

18. That your Majesty would be pleased by Act of Parlia- to clear the Lord
Kimbolton and the five Members of the House of Commons in such manner, that
future Parliaments may be secured from the Consequent of that evil President.

19. That your Majesty will be pleased to pass a Bill for restraining Peers
made hereafter, from sitting or voting in Parliament, unless they be admitted
thereunto with the Cansent of both Houses of Parliament.

H. ELSYNG, CLER. PARL. D. COM.
The Oath of Supremacy, Cited page 31.
I, A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things, or causes, as Temporal, etc. I do promise that from henceforth, I shall
bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness, his Heirs and lawful
Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences, and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united or annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

The Oath fa Privy-Counsellor, Cited page 32.
You shall swear to the uttermost part of your cunning, wit, skill, and power,
you shall he true and faithful to the Kings Majesty our most dread and
Sovereign Lord, and to his Highness Heirs and Successors, Kings and Queens of
England, according to the Statute for the establishment of the Succession of
the Crown Imperial of this Realm; You shall not know nor hear any thing that
may in any wise be prejudicial to his Majesty, or to his Heirs and Successors
in form aforesaid, or to the Common Wealth, Peace and Quiet of this his
Majesty's Realm; but you will with all diligence reveal, and disclose the same
to his Majesty, or to such Person, or Persons of his Highness Privy-Counsel, as
you shall think may and will honestly convey and bring it to his Majesty's
knowledge; You shall serve his Majesty truly and faithfully in the room and
place of his Highness Privy-Counsel: You shall keep close and secret all such
matters as shall be treated, disputed, debated, and resolved of in Counsel,
without disclosing the same or any part thereof, to any but only to such as be
of the Privy-Counsell; And yet if any matter so propounded, treated, dispated,
and debated in any such Counsel, shall touch any particular person sworn of
the same upon any such matter as shall in any wise concern his fidelity and
truth to the Kings Majesty, you shall in no wise open the same to him, but keep
it secret as you would do from another person, till the Kings pleasure be known
in that behalf: You shall in all things to be moved, treated, disputed, and
debated in any such Counsel, faithfully and truly declare your mind and opinion
according to your heart and conscience, in no wise forbearing so to do for any
matter of respect or favor, love, meed, dread, displeasure, or corruption.
Finally you shall be vigilant, diligent, and circumspect in all your doings and
proceedings touching the Kings Majesty and his Affairs. All which points before
expressed, you shall faithfully observe, fulfill, and keep to the utmost of
your power, wit, and cunning. So God you help and by the holy Contents of this
Book.

The Negative Oath, Cited page 32.
I, A. B. do swear from my heart, that I will not directly nor indirectly
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King, in this War, or in this Cause,
against the Parliament, nor any forces raised without the Consent of the two
Houses of Perliament in this Cause or War. And I do likewise swear that my
coming and submitting my self under the power and protection of the Parliament
is without any manner of design whatsoever, to the Prejudice of the proceedings
of the two Houses of this Present Parliament, and without the privity or advice
of the King or any of his Counsel or Officers, other than what I have now made
known. So help me God, etc.

An Act of Parliament 1 Iac. cap. 1. acknowledging the Right of the Crown to
him and his successors by inherent birthright, etc. Cited page 19.
We do upon the knees of our hearts agnize constant Faith, Loyalty, and
Obedience to the King and his Royal Progeny in this high Court of Parliament,
where all the body of the Realm is either in person or by representation. We do
acknowledge that the true and sincere Religion of the Church is continued and
established by the King, And do recognize as we are bound by the Law of God and
man, the Realm of England, and the Imperial Crown thereof does belong to him,
by inherent Birthright, and lawful and undoubted succession; and submit our
selves and our posterities (until the last drop of our blood be spent) to his
Rule; And beseech the King to accept the same, as the first fruits of our
Loyalty and Faith to his Majesty and his posterity for ever; And for that this
Act is not complete nor perfect without his Majesty's Consent, the same is
humbly desired.

A Declaration which Offenses shall be adjudged Treason, Anno 25 Edw. 3. cap.
2. Cited pa. 35.
Whereas diverse Opinions have been before this time, in what Case Treason shall
be said, and in what not; The King at the request of the Lords and of the
Commons has made a Declaration in the manner as hereafter follows; That is
to say, when a man does compass or imagine the death of our Lord the King, or
if our Lady his Queen, or their eldest Son and Heir: or if a man do violate the
Kings Companion, or the Kings eldest Daughter unmarried, or the Wife of the
Kings eldest Son and Heir, or if a man do levy War against our Lord the King in
his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings Enemies in his Realm, giving to them aid
and Comfort in the Realm or elsewhere, and thereof be proveably attainted of
open deed by people of their Condition. And if a man Counterfeit the Kings
great or privy Seal, or his money; and if a man bring false money into this
Realm, counterfeit to the money of England, as the money called Lushburg, or
other like to the said money of England, knowing the money to be false, to
merchandise or make payment, in deceit of our said Lord the King, and of his
people, etc.

Certain Articles taken out of a Protestation of the Kings Supremacy made by
the nonconforming Ministers which were, suspended or deprived, 3 Iac. Anno
Dom. 1605. Cited page 51.
Art. 4. We hold, that though the Kings of this Realm were not Members of the
Church, but very Infidels, yea, and Persecutors of the truth, that yet those
Churches that shall be gathered together within these Dominions, ought to
acknowledge and yield the said Supremacy unto them. And that the same is not
tied to their Faith and Christianity, but to their very Crown, from which no
Subject or Subjects have power to separate or disjoin it.

Ar. 6. We hold, that no Church or Church Officers have power for any Crime
whatsoever, to deprive the King of the least of his Royal Prerogatives
whatsoever, much less to deprive him of his Supremacy, wherein the height of
his Royal Dignity consists.

Ar. 9. We hold, that though the King should command any thing contrary to the
word unto the Churches, that yet they ought not to resist him therein, but only
peaceably to forbear Obedience, and sue unto him for Grace and Mercy, and where
that cannot be obtained, meekly to submit themselves to the punishment.

Animadversions upon some particulars set down in the 57 and 58 pages of this
Discourse, there referred to this Appendix, for not interrupting the Series
thereof, here expressed more fully.
If Ordinances without the Kings assent, 1. That Ordinances of the two Houses
without the King, have not the power of Acts of Parliament.
should have the force of Acts of Parliament; our Lives, Estates, and Laws
might be Arbitrarily disposed of by the two Houses; for that Acts of Parliament
have undeniably Power over them all.

If Ordinances have power of Acts of Parliament, the King has no negative
Voice, which has been acknowledged in all times, and that no Act of Parliament
binds the subject with out the Kings assent, neither is it otherwise a
Statute. 1^ H. 7.24 H. 8. cap. 12.25 H. 8. cap. 21. This has likewise been
acknowledged several times at the heginning of this Parliament, before the
Doctrine of Coordination was hatched, as will appear by their books of
Ordinances and Declarations. 1 par. fol. 727. 1 Iac. cap. 1. 1 Car. 1 Cap 7.

If the King has not his negative Voice, he were the only Slave in his
Kingdom; for that he alone should be tied to Laws, to which he had not
assented; whereas all other men either by themselves or their Representatives
give their Consents to the Laws they live under, which is the true mark betwixt
Slavery and free Subjection; Slaves living under the will of the Prince; free
Subjects under Laws to which themselves or their Ancestors have assented: And
the King only shall be bound and sworn to those Laws, which are imposed upon
him without his Consent, which were irrational as well as illegal.

Ordinances were never pretended but only pro tempore. 4 part. Inst. fol.
23.48.292. 2 part. Inst. fol. 47, 48. Rot. Pa^. 1 number. 4 Ed. 3.

2. ^^at the orde^^^g of the Militia appertainet^ to the K.
The Militia belongs to the King, as unseparable from the Crown, without which
he cannot protect nor punish, withstand Enemies or suppress Rebels; The Lords
and Commons cannot assent in Parliament to any thing that tends to the
disherison of the Crown, 4 Par. Inst. fol. 14.42 Ed. 3.

The Law does give it him, Stat 7 Ed. 1. with many other Statutes, besides
practice of all times, and custom of the Realm. Cook 4 part. Inst. 51.125.

The Forts and Navy Royal are his; and to seize any of them is Treason. 25 Ed.
3. 1 Ma. etc. So declared by all the Judges of England in Brooks Case.

3. That the great Seal appertains only to the King.
The great Seal being the Power by which the Kings Royal Commands are legally
distributed and conveyed, cannot be severed from the Crown, without the
overthrow and destruction of Sovereignty. 2 part. Inst. 552. And to counterfeit
the great Seal is high Treason. 25 Ed. 3. 1 H. 4. cap. 2. 1. Marsess. 2. cap. 6.

For the Church Government, The Houses have sworn the King to be the only
Supreme Governor in all Causes and over all Persons as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil. 4. The Church Government.
The two Houses of Parliament may humbly offer to the King such Alterations and
Reformations in Government as they shall think fit: But to overthrow and change
the Government without the Consent of the sole Supreme Governor, nay contrary
to his express Command and public Declarations, is against natural Reason
and Common Law, as well as against the said Oath.

The two Houses are (as they say) the Kings great Counsel, which is true of the
House of Peers, The House of Commons Writ is only ad faciendum and
consentiendum: But admitting them to be the Kings great Counsel, it is a great
absurdity and Nonsense, that Counselors should compel consent.

The Government of the Church is established by Law, and by many Acts of
Parliament, To advise the repealing of the said Acts, the Houses may do; But
without the Kings assent by force to endeavor the Change of the Government,
either in Church or Estate, is high Treason, so acknowledged by Mr. St. John's
at the Arraignment of the Earl of Strafford, and so declared by several Laws.
And was one of the Charges of Treason against the Lord of Canterbury.

Ir is contrary to all Divine and humane Laws that any Man should be condemned
unheard or untryed. 5. The prescribing of their fellow Subjects without trial.
And the Law of the Land in Magna Charta orders, That no man lose Life or
Estate but per judicium parium, aut legem terrae* And the Stat. 2. Phil. and
Ma. that all Trials for Treason be by Course of the Law, Petition of Right, 3
Car.

It is an Inherent flower of the Crown, 6. To grant Pardons belongs only to
the K.
And by the Common Law, Mercy belongs to him as well as Justice; And is so
expressly declared, and annexed unto the King by the Stat. of the 27 H. 8. c. 24.

The Revenues of the Church have been annexed unto it for the better part of
one thousand years, 7. The taking away of the Lands of Bishops and Cathedral
Churches.
confirmed by many Charters from all our Kings, have Prescription of many
hundreds of years, and are firmly annexed to the Church, as Law, Charters, or
Prescription can settle them; Now if these Revenues shall be taken away and
disposed of without process of Law, without the Kings consent who is sworn to
uphold them, and is founder of them all, without the consent or forfeiture of
the Possessors; What man can think he has a better Title to any thing he
holds, or assure himself of any Land, or other thing he possesses for one
day longer than Houses shall please? Besides it is against Magna Charta, the
Law, and the Kings Oath, and the Usance of the Kingdom in all times.

8. The Court of Ward.
For the King to have Wardships, is an inheritance and Right of the Crown,
approved by the Common Law of Enland, and acknowledged and submitted unto in
all Ages; And the Court of Wards is settled and established by Act of Parliament
in the time of H. 8 And it was endeavored to be compounded for at a valuable
consideration in the time of King James, and by him refused, because it was so
great a flower of his Crown as was not fit to be severed from it. And now if
the Houses should force a Bargain at their own pleasure, and their own price,
it were contrary to all Law, all Reason, and Moral Justice, and to the
disherison of the Crown.

The detaining of the Kings Children under their governance: 9. Touching the
Kings children.
The ordering of their Education, and their future Marriage cannot belong unto
the Houses, but unto the King, by all divine and human Laws, and by the Law of
Nature; Neither is the contrary any where practiced, but by the great Turk.

No new Oaths can be imposed upon the Subject, but by the warrant of an Act of
Parliament, 10 Touching imposing of new Oaths.
as is declared by the Petition of Right, and is so settled by the Act of 3.
Car. and has been so declared during this Parliament by the two Houses, upon
occasion of the new Canons, as appears in the Collection of their own Orders,
page 159.160.908.910. And we find the two Oaths of supremacy and Allegiance,
the first, in 1. Eliz. the second in 3 Iac. were both framed and injoined to be
taken in and by several Acts of Parliament: and yet now do the Houses press
Oaths upon their fellow Subjects, utterly inconsistent with the other legal
Oaths which they have formerly taken; and for the refusal of their Oath of
Covenant and of their Negative Oath, (in express terms to abjure their
Alleagiance to their Sovereign) they condemn them of Malignancy (a new word of
Art, not formerly known to the Laws of England.)

11. Concerning Treason.
It is defined by the Act of the 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. and afterward 1 H. 4. and 2
Ma. that Act was confirmed and enacted, That nothing should be adjudged
Treason, but what is declared to be so by the Statute of the 25. Ed. 3. or
should be afterward declared to be Treason, by Parliament, which is understood
to be by Act of Parliament, which cannot be without the Kings Royal assent; and
therefore in the Reign of H. 8. we find several Treasons enacted to be so by
Parliament, which afterward were all repealed, by that of the 2 Mar. And again
in the Reign of Queen Mary, Queen Eliz. and King James, new Treasons declared
by new Acts of Parliament in their several times: But now in this present
Sessions, the two Houses in many several Cases singly of themselves without the
solemnity of an Act, by an Ordinance only, have ordered that men should die as
Traitors, and lose their whole Estates without pardon or mercy, for such
supposed crimes; as formerly were so far from being Treason, as that they are
not legally crimes or misdemeanors, as may be instanced in diverse particulars,
out of their own Coll. of Orders.

The treating with foreign Princes and States, 12. The treating with foreign
Princes and Sta^es.
the making of Peace and War, and the sending of Ambassadors or Messengers to
those purposes, are Acts merely regal and inherent in the Crown, and never
questioned till now. By the Statute of 2. H. 5. cap. 6. The breaking of Truce
and Safe-Conducts is enacted to be Treason, so much it imports the Honor of
the Crown. The King may out of doubt conclude Peace or proclaim War without his
Houses of Parliament. But to contribute to the maintenance of a foreign War, the
Assent of the Houses is necessary, it being in their free liberty to give or
not to give Subsidies or other Aides to that purpose. But for the making of
Peace or War they have no Votes, but it is in the sole power of the King. Yet
doubtless Kings do the more prudently, when they take the advice and
affections of their people along with them in those weighty affairs,
especially in making a War with a foreign Prince or people, otherwise they shall
hardly have the Assistance of their purses, 13. The nominating of Judges,
Sheriffs, Justices, etc.
without which the Kings of England can hardly make or maintein a War to their
Advantage.

The nominating of Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, etc. was never
pretended unto by the Parliament, but in tumultuous and rebellious times; and
the Kings of England for some hundred of years last past have nominated and
appointed them by their Writs or Commissions under their great Seal. And by the
Acts of 9. Ed. 2. the Statute of Lincoln, and 12. R. 2. cap. 2. it is appointed
how the choice of Sheriffs and other public Ministers of Justice shall be
recommended to the King, and that the King has the sole appointing of them.
And it is so settled by Act of Parliament, the 37. H. 8. That such nominations
do and shall wholly belong unto the King and his Successors, etc.

By these Animadversions it will clearly appear, That the particulars which are
mentioned in the 57 and 58 pages of this Discourse, are merely usurped and
intruded upon by the Houses, but de jure do solely and wholly belong unto the
King, or can have no life without him; which was thought fit rather to be added
by this Appendix, than by inserting them in the Discourse it self, for not
interrupting the Series thereof.

FINIS.

