Dr. BRINGHVRST's SERMON BEFORE THE LORD MAYOR.

Pilkington Mayor. Martis xviii. die Junii 1689. Annoque R. Rs. and Rnae Willmi
and Mariae Angl. etc. primo.
This Court does desire Dr. Bringhurst to Print his Sermon lately preached at
the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

THE EASINESS and DIFFICULTY OF THE Christian Religion, IN A SERMON Preached
before the Lord Mayor, AND Court of ALDERMEN of the City of LONDON, At
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday May 26. 1689. By ISAAC BRINGHVRST, D. D. Rector
of Toddington in Bedfordshire.

London, Printed for Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS PILKINGTON, Knight. LORD MAYOR; And to the
Right Worshipful The ALDERMEN OF THE City of LONDON.
My Lord, and Gentlemen:
IN Obedience to your Order, I here present You with this Sermon; I had done it
sooner but that my necessary Affairs detained me so long in London.

I present You with this Subject, because I could not think any other more
seasonable at this time. How uneasy are we still both in our selves, and to one
another, notwithstanding all that God has done for us by his Providence, as
well as our Savior by his Religion? But it must be because we love our selves
more than God, as well as better than one another. The great Example in the
Text, a Man might rationally think, if but publicly read over to our
Congregations, might make us more kind and easy to one another than we are. If
I have contributed any thing to that purpose by this mean Discourse upon such
an excellent Subject, I have contributed so much to the Security of our Church
and Reformed Religion; for if we are divided against our selves, and continue
so, we cannot stand. I was before I was aware anticipated by the Time, which
made me break off abruptly; but I have added no new Sense, but expressed what I
then delivered more intilligibly.

May your Lordship, and you the worthy Magistrates of this great City, see
Jerusalem at Peace within it self, and may you in your Stations be instrumental
to it, that the present Age may honor your Persons, and Posterity your Memory,
in this World, and the Felicity of Heaven may be your Reward in the World to
come, is, and shall be the hearty Prayer of

My Lord, and Gentlemen, Your most Obedient Servant, Isaac Bringhurst.
June 17. 1689.
A SERMON preached before the LORD MAYOR.
MATTHEW. xi. ver. 30. For My Yoke is easy, and my Burden light.


IN the 27th Verse our Savior tells us, All things are given to him of the
Father; neither knows any Man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the
Son shall reveal him. Thus by first asserting his Ability to receive them, that
is, to govern and teach them, he encourages weary and heavy laden Sinners to
accept of his gracious Invitation, which he makes in the following Verse; Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Having
before told them his Ability to make good this Promise, he now gives them the
Promise, to encourage them to come unto him. And in the 29th Verse, he asserts
his Willingness; For I am meek and lowly in Heart; therefore very apt to
sympathize with you, and consequently as willing as I am able to give you rest
to your Souls.

My Text assures them of the Truth of this Promise, thus repeated in the 29th
Verse, from the Goodness of his Doctrine and Government, the means of giving
them this Rest; My Yoke is easy, and my Burden light.

That these two Metaphors, Yoke and Burden, are used in the Scriptures, as well
as other Authors, to signify Doctrine, or Law, or Government, I shall (for
Brevities sake) prove only by one or two places, Acts 15.10. The Law or
Doctrine of Circumcision is said to be a Yoke which neither they nor their
Fathers were able to bear: And Gal. 5.1. The Ceremonial Law of the Jews a Yoke
of Bondage. Zach. 9.1. The Word of God is called the Burden of the Word of the
Lord: and so Mal. 1.1. The Burden of the Word of the Lord to Israel by Malachy.
So the Christian Religion is here to be understood. For our better
Understanding the sense of the Text, I shall, I. Show in what sense the
Christian Religion may be said to be a Yoke or a Burden. II. Demonstrate, that
this Yoke is easy, and this Burden light. III. Make some seasonable Reflections
for our Practice at this time.


I. In what sense the Christian Religion may be said to be a Yoke or Burden.
Which will be evident,

If we consider, the natural Frame and Constitution of Man. And here, both
Scripture and Reason, and our own Experience concur to inform us, that Man
consists of two parts, very different from one another: One Heavenly, and from
God more immediately, spiritual or intellectual; the other from the Earth of
which it is made, called often in Scripture, carnal or sensual, Genesis 2.7. We
have also the same Assurances, that the Rectitude and Prefection of Man's Nature
consists in the Prefection and Subjection of this Earthly and Sensual Principle
to that which is Heavenly and Spiritual.

The State of Innocence was nothing else but this Consent and Conformity of the
inferior Faculties to the superior.

But in this honorable and healthful state, Genesis 3.
Man did not long continue; but in a little time became like the Beast that
perishes: The Serpent working upon his Curiosity and Sensuality, persuades him
to remit the Government of himself to his inferior Faculties: They sensible of
their strength, run away with the Reins: and meeting daily with these
following Advantages or Provocations (notwithstanding the Spirit lusts
against the Flesh, as well as the Flesh against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17.) have
gotten such Head, that they bid fair for an unaccountable Sovereignty and
Dominion.

1. The Temptations of this World so applied by that old Serpent, which first
tempted them with Success, that he prevailed upon them, to take their Liberty;
that they are not only kept waking, and on their guard, but daily excited and
exasperated. These are innumerable, provoke us continually, and are in our way
wherever we go, we are surrounded with them in all places, whilst we inhabit
these Bodies, and dwell in this World.

Heb. 12.1. We read of Sin that does so easily beset us, (...), Sin well
circumstanced; that is, the Temptations are near us, present to us, of that
likeness of Nature, that our Bodies presently close with them, sympathize with
them, and so they more effectually entice us, and work upon our Senses and
Affections, than spiritual Objects can do upon our Understandings. Heaven and
the Felicities of the other World are at a distance, and Men cannot tell when
they shall come there: And our Apprehensions of that state are indistinct and
obscure; Neither Eye has seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into the Heart
of Man to conceive the Blessedness of this state.

Therefore these Objects work upon us only by Faith, Devotion and Meditation,
which suppose great pains and care in our superior Faculties, and Restraint
and Severities upon the Inclinations, and our outward Man.

But in the other case, we may sit still; those Objects are contiguous, and
they work extempore, and continually and spontaneously, like natural Agents, so
that every sensual Object is a Basilisk, and looks us dead, if we are not aware
of it, and do not consider the poisonous Influence of its Countenance, before
it looks upon us; and the innocent (...) of Nature, given us at first for our
Nourishment and Diversion, prove mortal to us, unless we live under the daily
caution of Touch not, Taste not, Handle not.

2. Examples, which everywhere attend us, and greatly encourage, and enforce
this Disorder and Rebellion of our inferior Faculties. These surprise us in
our Infancy, conduct, and manage us in our Youth and Age, so that before we are
Men, many times we are Beasts; and young Devils before we are old Men.

We are naturally apt to go quo itur non quo eundum est, as Seneca observes;
therefore these more powerfully affect us than Laws or Precepts, or the most
rational or eloquent Lectures of our Duty.

Thus provoked by Temptations, and animated by Examples, this Rebellion is
habitual; for every Act strengthens the Habit, and our Sins thus become
exceeding sinful. Jerem. 13.23. Can the Leopard change his Spots, or the
Black-moor his Skin? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
Here Custom or Habit is represented as intractable as Nature it self; according
to the Proverb, Custom is a second Nature.

Thus Man is fallen, and so degenerated from the Rectitude and Integrity of his
Original Frame and Constitution; that had not God so loved the World, as to
send his Son into it to restore it, and pass a new Creation upon it, Man must
have been for ever lost and buried in his own Ruins.

The doing of this is called Mortification, Regeneration, and when it is done,
the new Man or new Creature.

These all signify Regret and Reluctance to a great Degree, unless a Man has
been so happy as to have born the Yoke in his Youth.

Now the Son of God doing this for us by his Religion, from the Uneasiness of
it at first, it may well be expressed by these Metaphors in the Text, of a Yoke
or Burden.

II. But though it be so, and there is such a plain Reason for it, yet I shall
evidently demonstrate that this Yoke is easy, and this Burden light. (...) is
the Original, which signifies gracious, profitable, fit, and therefore must be
easy; and not only so, but something a Man would not be without, esteeming it
his Ornamen rather than his Yoke.

So also the Word which in the Text is translated Light, (...), signifies also
Light, that a Man may not only walk, but run with it upon his Shoulders;
according to the Etymology of the Word. And if there be any weight in it, it is
only to poise us, keep us steady; our Security rather than our Encombrance.

Thus the Words in the Text naturally import. I now come to demonstrate the
Truth of the Proposition; Though Christianity is a Yoke, yet it is an easy Yoke;
and though it is a Burden, yet it is a light Burden.

For our more distinct Understanding what I shall say upon this Subject, we are
to remember that the Christian Religion is usually divided into two parts:

1st. The Credenda, or Articles to be believed.

2dly. The Agenda, or Duties to be done.

1st. The Credenda or Articles of Faith, contained in the Christian Religion,
and these are so few, and so plainly revealed, that these can hardly be in any
sense called a Yoke or Burden to any one that believes the Being of God, and
that he is a Being infinitely perfect. The Apostles Creed is a summary of
these, and they are principally matters of Fact concerning the Nature or Person
of our Savior, in opposition to Judaism and Heathenism; so plainly related in
the Holy Scriptures, that they are understood as soon as read: And wherever
the Scripture it self does impress a Character of Necessity, either for Faith
or Practice, we cannot speak plainer to one another, than that does to us.

And if any thing be revealed which we cannot comprehend; as for instance, the
Article of the Trinity; yet the Revelation is plain: And in all matters of
Revelation, we are to believe no more than is revealed, and no otherwise of it
than as it is revealed; and thus to believe is no difficult thing; nay it is so
easy, that it is impossible for any Man that acknowledges the Being of God, not
thus to believe; because the very Notion of God, necessarily implies an
Impossibility of saying any thing to his Creatures which is not true.

And the difficulty of comprehending the nature of the thing revealed does not
make our Religion uneasy, because we are not bound to understand, that is, to
comprehnd it; which also is no Objection to its Credibility, because an
Infinite Nature, and all those Perfections which belong to it, cannot be
supposed to be comprehensible, we cannot comprehend Eternity, nor our own Souls
by our finite Understandings.

But the Agenda, the Matters of our Practice, Duties to be done, these are the
Difficulties of our Religion, and signified by these Metaphors in the Text of
Yoke and Burden.

That this Yoke is easy and Burden light, I demonstrate from these following
Topics.

1. It is most agreeable to our Natures: whatsoever is natural is easy and
pleasant, because, Amor fecit Mundum, the Creation is the Effect of God's
Goodness as well as of his Power, and he made nothing to be an Affliction, or
Torment to it self; and the Goodness of every thing is to be fitted for its
End, and the Perfection of every thing is to be in Conjunction with it.

That the Christian Religion is thus suitable to our Natures, will appear, if
we consider Man, 1. In his Private; 2. In his Public Capacity.


I. In his Private Capacity: Here we are to respect, 1. His Soul; 2. His Body.

1. His Soul: By this a Man is a busy active Being, his Thoughts are restless,
his Desires are craving and stretching till they meet with that for which they
were created; which is the Contemplation of Truth in this World, and the
Enjoyment of God in this and that which is to come. Here we feel his gracious
Influences to our Support and Comfort; hereafter we contemplate and enjoy him
to our Everalasting Happiness and Satisfaction. Of these two, briefly.

1. The Contemplation of Truth. That this is natural to our Souls, the great
and indefatigable Pains and Hardships many have undergone for it, the Ecstasies
of Joy and perfect Satisfaction they have felt when they have found it, the
great Honors they have been courted with whilst they lived, and even adored
with after their Death, when they have published the Fruits of their Industry,
the Truths they have discovered to the World, abundantly demonstrate; I cannot
particularize these things at this time.

Silence and Solitude, Recess and Separation from the World and Sense, are the
Opportunities for God and Truth; and nothing so prevents the discoveries of
Truth, as the clamorous importunities of Riches and Honor, or the gross and
foul Suffusions of Sensuality: The first anticipate our Time which is
absolutely necessary (for Truth the Philosopher rightly tells us, lies in the
bottom of a deep Well): The second thicken and obstruct the Mind, and indispose
it, as foggy Steems and Mists our bodily Organs, that the pure Light and Spirit
of Truth cannot be sensible to us: (...), that pious Man, that exquisite
Philosopher.

Therefore the Philosophers tell us, Virtue is absolutely necessary for the
acquiring of Truth, because that regulates all the inferior Faculties and
Inclinations, quiets and retrenches all the Exorbitancy of the Passions and
Affections (...), said Antoninus; the Soul is tinctured and died with the
Objects it most converseth with.

Now how does our Religion dispose us for this? the Apostle tells us, 1 Thessalonians.
5.22. Abstain from all appearance of Evil: How does it caution us against it, 1
Cor. 7.31. (...), species forma, the Show, or Form, or Beauty of this World
passes away; as if the World were nothing but a great piece of Pageantry, or a
Dream, or a Fancy of something that is not, or an Apparition without any
Substance, passing by us, and seen no more. Many places more to this purpose I
might produce.

And for Sensuality, 1 Pet. 2.11. Fleshly Lusts are said to war against the
Soul; therefore the Apostle beseeches the Christians as Strangers and Pilgrims,
to abstain from them. And how many severe Threatenings do we read of in the
Scriptures against all that do not crucify the Flesh with the Lusts of it, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians. 5.3. to ver. 8. and many other, to keep our Minds even and
pure, and then they are fit and ready both for the search after, and
Contemplation of Truth.

The second thing I mentioned for which our Souls are created, was the
Enjoyment of God in this World, and that which is to come.

Omnis intellectus tendit in Deum, says the Philosopher, and it cannot be
otherwise; for all this World is too little for their Satisfaction, as infinite
Experience demonstrates. The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with
hearing.

Men run from one thing to another, and never pleased, always mistaken, knock
at the wrong door for Happiness; as drunken Men mistake another Man's House for
their own. Antoninus, one of the greatest and happiest Emperors, not only that
Rome, but the World ever enjoyed, thus expresses the Insufficiency of this
World for our Happiness, (...). What do I care to live in a World void of God
and void of Providence: Yet no Man ever enjoyed more of the World's Glory and
Happiness than he did; which demonstrates that only God is the natural Felicity
of our Souls.

How carefully then is our Nature restored and perfected by our Religion? The
two great Obstacles to our Enjoyment of God, it endeavors to set at the
greatest distance from us imaginable: These are love of the World, and excess
of bodily Pleasures: James 4.4. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not
that the Friendship of this World is Enmity with God? whosoever therefore will
be a Friend of the World is the Enemy of God. How smartly does the Apostle
assert the great Inconsistency of God and the World together in our Hearts? and
repeats it twice in the same Verse; and when he speaks never so mildly he still
tells us the same thing, 1 John 2.15.

And for Sensuality: The very Character of a Christian is to crucify the Flesh
with the Affections and Lusts of it, Gal. 5.24. And Purity of Heart is made
absolutely necessary to our seeing of God by our Savior, Mat. 5.8. Very many
places more out of the Scriptures might be produced to this purpose: All which
demonstrate our Religion must be natural to our Souls, because if we would
observe it, it would make our Souls free and open to receive the comfortable
Emanations of the Divine Goodness, as a clear Air the Light and Influences of
the Sun: and so, in this respect, our Savior's Yoke must be easy, and his
Burden light.

Besides, what admirable matter of our Contemplation does it afford us? 2 Cor.
4.6. The Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ;
and when by the exceeding great and precious Promises of the Gospel we
apprehend what Interest we may have in this Glory, Heaven it self is
anticipated, our Souls are in Conjunction with their Center, our Consciences
are easy and cheerful, and we are filled with all Joy in believing: For it does
not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3.2. But we know when he shall appear
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

Thus in respect of our Souls the Text is demonstrated, because our Religion
fits us for the Enjoyment of God here and hereafter, the Complement and
Perfection of our Natures.

2. In respect of our Bodies: Intemperance is the worst Disease we are capable
of: The most searching Pains and accutest Torments are the Effects of it, it is
a Womb, a Mine of all the Diseases of the Body; so that to indulge our Lusts
makes them their own Executioners as well as ours; for when Nature is overborn,
all Pleasure and Delight is extinguished.

Now our Religion gives us the plainest Precepts imaginable for Sobriety and
Temperance and Purity. I should be too tedious to name the places, they are
almost everywhere in the New Testament, and written with the Beams of the Sun
of Righteousness: Those I mentioned under the last two Heads are sufficient,
where it utterly excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven, all irregular and
intemperate Prosecutions of the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and
the Pride of Life, as St. John tells us, 1 John 2.15, 16. And by doing thus,
our Bodies have no more reason to complain than our Souls, as if our Religion
denied or envied them their proper Diversions or Satisfactions; for all this is
nothing but the restoring of us to our natural Health and Strength; for it
requires of us only to recover and maintain our Original Frame and
Constitution; the Consent and Harmony of our Carnal and Inferior Faculties and
Inclinations to those within us which are more Noble and Spiritual. And being
of this Nature, and for these Ends, even in this case also, this Yoke must be
easy, and this Burden light.

Thus we have seen that if we consider Man in his private Capacity, our
Savior's Yoke is easy and his Burden light. In the second place,

II. I now come to consider him in his Politic or Public Capacity; and here
at first sight it is most easy, because agreeable to the Nature of Society.

In this respect our Savior has given us an Epitome of all he requires of us
in very few words, To do as we would be done unto, Matthew. 7.12. This is the Law
and the Prophets which he came to fulfill and perfect, Mat. 5.17. So Mat. 22.39.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. How safe and easy must every Man be
in all his Concerns and Interests, by Observation of these Rules. We should
never offend one another; but if it should so happen, to forgive and forget, is
the next thing we would do; for that certainly every Man would have done to
himself were he the Offender.

The Apostle St. Paul gives us all our Duty to one another in this one word,
Love, and proves it to be so, Romans 13.8, 9. There is no Fear or Jealousy one of
another in Love, but perfect Love casts out such tormenting Passions as these
are, and makes Men confident in one another, and that is the great Security and
Perfection of Society. In a word.

There are but two things which make Men uneasy to one another; Aptness to
provoke, and to be provoked. How effectually our Religion has provided against
these, we read in 1 Cor. 13. It makes Charity the Root or Spring of all our
Religious Actions, so necessary, that without it we are nothing, neither can we
do any thing in Religion, ver. 1, 2, 3. and then tells us how it secures the
World against both these troublesome Humors.

Verse the 4th; Charity suffers long, and is kind, therefore is not easily
provoked, envies not, vaunteth not it self, therefore is not apt to provoke:
ver. 5. does not behave it self unseemly, (...) rudely or disobligingly;
seeks not her own, therefore does not provoke; is not apt to be exasperated,
so is the Original (...) thinks no Evil, but heartily interprets: but if
the Evil be evident, it rejoiceth not in it, ver. 6. but in the Truth or
Goodness of any Body; therefore not easily provoked.

Verse 7. Bears all things, because it believes all things may be well
meant, at least hops so of all things: but if the Evil or Malice be apparent
and indisputable; then Charity endures all things, as long as pleases God; so
that Charity can never fail to make Men easy to themselves, and one another,
and fits Men for a happy Enjoyment of one another here, as well as the blessed
Enjoyment of God altogether hereafter.

Thus I think it is clearly demonstrated that Christ's Yoke is easy, and his
Burden light, because it is agreeable to our Natures, considered either in our
private or public Capacity, either in our selves, both in respect of our Souls
and Bodies, or in our mutual Relation to one another. And as an indisputable
Confirmation of all I have said from this Topic, be pleased often to read and
consider, Tit. 2.11, 12. where the Apostle tells us, that the great Lesson the
Gospel teaches us, is to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World: These three Words,
soberly, righteously and godly, mean all that I have said upon this Subject;
and thus used as they are here, are an undeniable Confirmation of it.

Object. But it may be objected; Does not our Savior himself say we must pluck
out our right Eye, and cut off our right Hand, in order to eternal Life, if
they happen to stand in our way to it, which supposes they may do so? And does
he not, Luke 14.26, 27. tell us we must hate our dearest Relations, and our own
Lives for his sake, and take up our Cross and come after him, or else we cannot
be his Disciples? Are not these hard Sayings, very uneasy and difficult to be
born, if not immoral and sinful? and also that the Gate is narrow, and many
shall seek to enter, and not be able?

Answ. Because the time will not give me leave to make a nice and distinct
Explication of the words; I shall only tell you, that by hating Father and
Mother, etc. and our own Life, is not hating in a proper and strict sense, but
loving of them less than our Savior, or his Religion, which he valued above
his own Life. And so it is expressed, Matthew. 10.37. He that loves Father and
Mother more than me, etc. And so Genesis 29.30, 31. Jacob loved Rachel more than
Leah: in ver. 30, 31. it is said, and when the Lord saw that Leah was hated. I
now proceed to my Answer.

1. Though the Words thus taken import nothing that is sinful or immoral, but
what is very rational; because our Savior loved us, so as to dye for us, and
his Religion for our sakes, so as to seal it with his Blood; yet they do
signify something that is not easy, and do seem to put upon us a Burden too
heavy for us to bear.

1. But then consider in the first place; When a Man is sick mortally, and his
Physicians tell him if he will take such a Medicine, it will certainly, or at
least very probably cure him, and no other will: If he believes his Physicians,
will he not readily suffer this Medicine to be applied to him? will not the
bitterest Potion in this case be tolerable, if not pleasant? And will not a
Man in his Wits, choose it rather than a more pleasant or more gustful draught?
And what we have reason to make matter of our choice, may in a just sense be
called easy or light to us. This case if we apply it, our Religion is our own;
our Souls are mortally sick and wounded by our Sins; our Religion the only
Medicine that can help us, restores us to our Health; and that certainly will
do it if we apply it. Now though this requires of us to live no longer to this
World, or our selves, but to him that died for us; is it not a plain case, what
we are in Reason to do? and does not the Plainness of the case make our Duty,
if not easy, yet not intolerable? But the following Reasons make it easy.

2. The great strength it affords us: that may be to a Man but a Diversion,
which to a Child is insupportable; no Man ever had more Difficulties put upon
him than St. Paul. The utmost sense of the Objection was his frequent Exercise.
How many times did he venture his Life for the Gospel of Christ? yet he made it
easy; 2 Cor. 11.23, to 28.
as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, 2 Cor 6.10. and he gives a very good
reason for it, in Phil. 4.13. (...), I can do all things easily, so the Word
imports, through Christ which strengthens me. And this strength wherewith
Christ assisted him, was no less than the Power of his Resurrection, chap.
3.10. that is, the same Spirit that raised Christ from the dead, made him do
all things easily; for this was an experimental Knowledge as the whole Verse
demonstrates.

That this is our case as well as St. Paul's, is evident by many places of
Scripture; I shall name two or three; 2 Cor. 3.6. The Gospel is called the
Ministration of the Spirit, in opposition to the Law, which was but the
Ministration of the Letter, which signifies, that by the Law of Moses there was
no inward Assistance of the Spirit of God, for our Assistance in Religion, as
there is under the Gospel, for the Performance of all the Duties it requires of
us; and that every Christian as well as St. Paul, is to know experimentally the
Power of our Savior's Resurrection, or is assisted with that Power which
raised Christ from the dead. He himself tells us in Romans 8.9, 11. where he
makes it an essential Character of our Christianity, to have the Spirit that
raised Jesus Christ from the dead in us. And Col. 2.12. he attributes our being
buried with him in Baptism, and raised again to Newness of Life, which contains
all that the Gospel requires of us, to the Faith of the Operation of God, who
raised our Savior from the dead. Philosophy tells us, that Sublunary Bodies
are influenced by the Heavens as Celestial Bodies; Is it not as reasonable to
believe that our Souls are influenced and enlivened by God? Cannot the Father
of Spirits as easily and naturally assist our Spirits, as the Celestial Bodies
these below? If so, then what Yoke can possibly be uneasy to us, or what Burden
heavy or troublesome, I do not say insupportable, when in all our religious
Actions, we act in Conjunction with our Creator?

3. The Greatness of the Reward, proposed in the most emphatical, but
intelligible Expressions of Felicity, As Crowns of Glory, Inheritances
incorruptible, and that fade not away, Immortality, Eternal Life, and for these
light Afflictions which last but for a Moment, a far more exceeding and Eternal
weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And whatever we lose here, we are promised for it
an hundred fold hereafter.

If we venture and lose into the bargain our Lives, in the dispute for our
Savior and his Religion, we lose but crasy, heavy, painful Bodies, for Bodies
spiritual, healthful and incorruptible; Sin and Sickness and Putrefaction, for
Holiness and Health and Incorruption; these Tabernacles of Clay daily declining
and dissolving into the Earth, of which they were at first made; and subject to
be broken by many accidental Violences and Knocks they are like to meet with,
in the hurry of this World, for a Building of God, a House not made with Hands,
Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 4.1. Who would not choose to be thus unclothed to
be clothed upon with those everlasting Robes of Light and Glory? A full
Persuasion of this Reward has made Fire and Faggot, Swords, and wild Beasts,
and all the cruellest Instruments of Death, not only eligible, Heb. 11.35.
but easy to many hundreds of Christians, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection: And we have reason to believe it from common Experience of humane
Affairs, for we daily see that neither Seas nor Rocks, nor Storms nor Tempests,
will discourage Men from making very desperate Adventures, when they have but
probable Expectations of a great Reward; but here is all the Assurance God that
cannot lie can give us. And whilst we are here, in the conscientious and
sincere Practice of our Religion, we have that Peace of God which passes all
Understanding, and is able to make every Yoke easy, and every Burden light our
Savior has any where in his Religion laid upon us.

4. It affords us the most powerful Examples, God himself: Matthew. 5.45, to the
end, where our Savior commands us to love our Enemies, etc. that we may be the
Children of our Heavenly Father: and in the last verse, perfect as our Heavenly
Father is perfect. Now who would stick at any thing that may advance him not
only to the Similitude, but Perfection of God himself? The Duty is something
difficult, but the Example is a sufficient Reward, to make any labor or pains
delightful and easy to us. The Son of God took upon him our Nature, to be an
Example to us; and here we have an Example of our own Nature, in the Practice
of the hardest Duties, in the midst of Opposition, and the worst of times, and
of more than he requires of us, namely laying down his Life for his Enemies,
and all for our sakes, that we might be encouraged in our Duty.

Complanatur itur vestigiis Domini, said Tertullian: To this Example the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews directs us, chap. 12. ver. 2, 3, 4. lest we be
weary, and faint in our Minds.

In chap. 11. he proposes the Examples of very great and wise Men, Noah,
Abraham, Moses, and diverse others, and both what great things they did and
suffered; and in chap. 12. ver. 1. he does as it were sum up the Evidence, that
this so great a Cloud of Witnesses, in storms of Persecution assist us with, to
make it easy, to lay aside the Sin that so easily besets us; and then
reinforceth the whole Argument, with the Example of our Savior in the
following verses, before mentioned: In chap. 6.12. Be not slothful (says the
same Apostle) but Followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises. He is certainly strangely degenerated, and sunk into the Ground of
which he was at first made, that finds it an uneasy thing not to be slothful.
And the Apostle plainly here tells us that any body else will follow those
great Examples our Religion affords us, and by Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises.

Examples all Men acknowledge, and all Experience demonstrates, are a most
effectual way of persuading; and in these Examples we have all the advantage
the Reverence of Persons, or the Reason of the Thing can assist us with.

5. It supplies us with the most pregnant, and efficacious Principle of doing
or suffering any thing it requires of us. This the serious Consideration of our
Religion must necessarily beget in us, if we really believe the Truth of it;
for it is nothing else but God's so loving the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
Everlasting Life; Joh. 3.16. And this his only begotten Son so loving it, as to
be crucified for it. These two Articles contain the substance of the Revelation
given us in the Gospel of our Religion. Now if Love begets Love, can we believe
and think of this Religion without being constrained to live no longer to our
selves, but to him that died for us? to live to him and die for him when he
requires it of us? And the Constraints of Love are the Ecstasies and Triumphs of
it, which make every thing easy and delightful. Thus our Christianity without
us impresseth its own Characters within us, and becomes the Gospel of Christ
written in our Hearts, and our Faith removes Mountains, and makes all ways
plain, and overcomes the World, and crucifieth the Flesh with its Affections
and Lusts; working by the Love of Christ shed abroad and rooted and grounded in
our Hearts. This one Article of Christ crucified thus digested in Succum and
Sanguinem, into the Temper and Nourishment of our Souls, producing the most
pleasing Acts (as all the Acts of Love are) upon the most perfect and
Satisfactory Object. God thus manifested in the Flesh, must needs give Power to
the faint, and to them that have no Might increase Strength. So that they shall
mount up with Wings like Eagles, and run the Ways of our Savior's
Commandments, and not be weary, and walk continually in them and not faint, as
the Prophet Isaiah speaks in another case.

This is a great Demonstration that our Savior's Yoke is easy and Burden
light; because when we see our Savior's Love to us stronger than the bitterest
Death in him; our Love to him must needs be as strong as any Death can be in us.

6. And lastly, From the kind Acceptance of our Heavenly Father, he requires
not Perfection, but Sincerity: He knows our Frame, and remembers we are but
Dust, Psalm. 103.14. remembers how he at first framed Man of the Dust of the
Ground. And ver. 13. As a Father pityeth his Children, so the Lord pitieth
those that fear him. The Apostle says the same thing in other words, 2 Cor.
8.12. If there be first a willing Mind, it is accepted, according to that a Man
has, and not according to that he has not.

Now no Man can pretend difficulty in Sincerity; our Wills are more our own
than any thing else we call ours, our inward Thoughts and Inclinations the only
(...) that belong to us, the Philosopher will tell us. Lying and Dissimulation
plainly are a force upon us, and we feel it so when ever we are guilty:
Hypocrisy is stoutness against God, and Cowardice to Man, (as my Lord Bacon
tells us) and is not this the most unnatural and uneasy thing in the World? Our
own Experience will assure us, that it is much easier to act our selves than the
Person of another; we act our selves often to our disadvantage, because we do
it extempore, before we are aware: but to act another, Men learn and try
Practice beforehand, some time before they will venture to do it in public.
This also demonstrates (being so acceptable to God) that our Savior's Yoke is
easy, and his Burden light.

Thus I have finished what I proposed in the second place, which was to
demonstrate, That although the Christian Religion be a Yoke and a Burden, yet
this Yoke is easy and this Burden light.

I shall apply it as briefly and seasonably as I can.

Then let us not make it more uneasy to one another than our Savior has made
it.

1. In respect of our common or ordinary Conversation, there is an old Proverb
too true, (...), Men are Devils to one another, to tempt one another to Sin.
Hab. 2.15. Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor Drink, that put thy Bottle
to him, and make him drunk also, that thou may look on his Nakedness: Where
the Prophet plainly threatens that sort of Men that make a Mock of Sin,
especially of that beastly Sin of Drunkenness, and for their Sport and
Diversion tempt one another to it, and vie one with another for the Victory in
the commission of it; notwithstanding the Prophet Isaiah's Woe which he
pronounces against those who are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to
mingle strong Drink; Isa. 5.22. There is the same Reason against our tempting
one another to any Sin; for by so doing we make the Yoke of Christ much more
sharp and uneasy, and the Burden of Christ much heavier to one another than
otherwise it would be; that is, our Conversion and Regeneration. Heb. 10.24.
the Apostle tells us we are to consider one another to provoke unto Love and to
Good Works. Thus we shall bear one another Burdens, Gal. 6.2. and so help one
another to fulfill the Law of Christ, to make his Yoke easy, and his Burden
light.

2. Upon the Account of our Religion, which at first I said was the Yoke and
Burden mentioned in the Text.

We make this uneasier than Christ has made it to one another.

1. When we impose as necessary Articles of our Faith, either what it is
certain our Savior and his Apostles never imposed, or uncertain whether they
did or no.

Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation can derive Authority from none but
God; he only can tell us what will be acceptable to himself: so that the
Scriptures only of the Old and New Testament (by all Protestants) being the
Revelation that God has given of his Will in this case to us: Whatsoever is
made necessary that is not here, must be a very uneasy Yoke, and heavy Burden:
for it is not in a Man's power to believe as Men would have him; we cannot
believe beyond our Evidence, and our Evidence must be as we can understand it:
So that what is necessary must be supposed to be intelligibly revealed to all
concerned in the belief of it.

This has often made me think that we should be easier to one another were the
Articles of our Faith given us in the very words of the Scripture; I am sure
that both the Orthodox and the Arrians in the Council of Nice concurred in
this; that all the Mischiefs of the Church of God were caused by bringing in
words into the Creeds of the Church, which were not in the Scriptures;
Consequences indeed are as sure as the express Terms of the Scriptures, but
Infallibility in these Consequences seems to be necessary for Articles of
Faith; because infallible Authority only can create them. Certainty may satisfy
a Man's Conscience for his own Sense and Compliance, but for Terms of Communion
that may not be sufficient, because that is so according to Men's different
Capacities and Apprehensions: And it is Humility and Piety to consent with
Antiquity, but still this will recur; we cannot be sure of our Revelation,
because nothing is infallible but the Word of God. And upon this account the
Papists objecting to us the uncertainty or insecurity of our Faith, would be to
their purpose, did not we attribute the same infallible Authority to the Word
of God, which they do to the Determinations of their Church. And did not the
Word of God declare what is nececessary to be believed, as intelligibly as
their Church ever did or can express it self. But this necessarily follows that
we are to believe no more than the Word of God declares to us, and also as it
declares it; and if we desire more of one another, we make Christ's Yoke more
uneasy, and his Burden heavier than he has made it: I cannot see how this
Consequence can be avoided. But I speak all this with Submission.

This sufficiently confutes and condemns the Tyranny of the Church of Rome, in
making the grand (...), or Character of her Communion, the belief of
innumerable Contradictions in that one Article of Transubstantiation,
stantiation, by her voluntary misinterpretation of one of the plainest places
in the New Testament, Mat. 26.27, 28. where our Savior uses the plainest way
of speaking, namely Metaphorical, and the most intelligible Metaphors of Bread
and Wine, to signify to us by our very Senses, the great Benefits of his
Passion. This must be very uneasy; for our Souls feel a Contradiction as our
Senses discern their proper Objects; else we could never know the Reason of any
thing we enquire after.

But this justifies the Moderation of the Church of England, which in her
public Catechism makes the Articles of the Apostles Creed, made up of nothing
but Scripture, only necessary to Salvation: Where we do not put our Sense to
God's Words, and then Curse, and Burn, and Damn one another for dissenting, as
Mr. Chillingworth observes: But it is most evident they do in very many Articles
of their Faith, and then stamp the Character of Necessity upon them, which
undeniably makes the Yoke of Christ far more uneasy, and his Burden much
heavier than he has made it.

2. Thus also the same Church of Rome has made our Savior's Yoke much
straiter, and his Burden heavier than he has made it, in imposing innumerable
Rites, and external Observances in the Practice of Religion and the Worship of
God.

That the Worship of God under the Gospel is to differ from that under the Law
(called Heb. 9.10. Carnal Ordinances; and there said to be imposed until the
time of Reformation, that is, the Gospel) in its Purity and Spirituality, is
clearly asserted by our Savior, Jo. 4.21, 24. and proved from the Spirituality
of God's Nature; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him
in Spirit and in Truth: not only in the Sincerity of our Hearts, but with a
sort of Worship as near as may be in its Nature and Constitution, suitable to
the Purity and Spirituality of the Nature of God; which we apprehend as well as
we can in this imperfect State we are in, when we abstract from him all the
Imperfections of Body or Matter, and retain no other Conception of him, but of
a Being infinitely Perfect; and one great End of Divine Worship is, to impress
and preserve this Notion of God sensibly and distinctly in our Minds, by the
gracious Influences of his particular Attributes and Perfections (his infinite
Mercy, Righteousness, Purity, etc.) in our attendance upon him, until we were
changed into the same Image, 2 Cor. 3.18.
as we are capable.

Now though the public Conduct of Divine Worship be left to the Governors of
the Church, yet at their Peril they are obliged not to institute any thing to
the Prejudice of this blessed Effect of God's Worship and Service upon the
Souls of Men.

Corporeal Images and many bodily Rites or Ceremonies are great and manifest
Inconveniences in this case; for they are so contrary to the Spirituality and
Purity of the Divine Nature, that like a thick and condensed Cloud they so
eclipse the Light of the Sun of Righteousness, the Light of the Glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ; that to worship God who is a Spirit, in Spirit and in
Truth by these, must be a very uneasy Yoke, and a Burden, at least to the
generality of Men, insupportable. The Church of Rome is greatly concerned to
take notice of this; for such Tricks she plays in the Worship of God, both with
her Images, and innumerable Ceremonies; such Pageant Shows she sets off her
Public Devotions with; that it is reasonable to fear the far greatest part of
her Communion, instead of edifying their Minds with Divine Service, with the
gracious Influences of the Divine Attributes, only divert and entertain their
Senses; and when they go to Church, either worship nothing at all, or they know
not what, or commit the grossest Idolatry in worshipping Pictures and Images,
Stocks and Stones gilded and printed. And though they renounce the Names of
Judaism or Heathenism in their Religious Worship, yet they would oblige the
World to an Equivolent in too strict a Sense to all the Superstitions of the
Jews, and the Idolatries of the Gentiles, and so impose upon Mankind a Yoke far
more uneasy, and a much heavier Burden than our Savior does.

But we must not rest here: For the Spirituality of God's Worship under the
Gospel being a necessary Qualification of it; some Men may possibly scruple
without any Malice or ill Design, some Rites or Usages in the Worship of God,
as being contrary to its Spirituality. Nothing but Order and Decency may be
designed by them, or some external Ornaments for the Service of God; and by a
fair and rational Interpretation they may be so used, without being any
Impediments to the Purity or Spirituality of Divine Worship. Yet seeing all Men
cannot have the same Sense of these things, and seeing what a Man scruples he
can never be edified by it, we are to consider the Infirmities of our Brethren;
for Order and Decency here is best, when they are in Subserviency to
Edification.

Men are not made for Laws, but Laws are made for Men. Our Ecclesiastical
History is a Demonstration, and many other Histories too, that the World must
be governed as it can, and not as we will; and it is to be considered, the
narrower the Fence is, the more are excluded to attack it; and what is often
attacked in this World, we see by constant Experience, tumbles down one time or
other. Unity only does not create strength; there must be a Conjunction of
Unity and Number together.

But then as wise Builders consider what the matter will bear, they are to make
use of; so must also the Builders or Edifiers of the Church, and accordingly
apply themselves to it; or else before we are aware, we impose a more uneasy
Yoke, and a heavier Burden upon one another than our Savior has.

Dr. Hammond out of Rabbi Joshua interprets the heavy Burdens of the Pharisees,
Superfluities of Worship, and troublesome Rites introduced underhand into the
Jewish Religion. And Maimonides (he observes) calls the Addittaments by which
they made the Law heavy, Plagas, Severities. Thus they made God's Yoke more
uneasy to one another, and his Burden heavier, than God had made them. It is
our Duty not to imitate the Scribes and Pharisees, but our Savior in the Text,
whose Yoke is easy, and Burden light.

3. Let us not make it more uneasy to our selves, then our Savior has made it.

1. In our private Capacities, Let us not by evil Company, or Customs,
habituate our selves to Sin, and make it natural to us; If ever our Religion
does us good, it must reform us; for Faith and Repentance are nothing less than
Regeneration.

The longer we wear the Yoke of our Sins, and carry the Burden of our Lusts
about us, the more uneasy will it be to put on our Savior's, though in
themselves never so much easier or lighter than they: Isa. 28.7, 8, 9, 10. The
Priest and the Prophets, erred through Wine, they were swallowed up of it, they
had swallowed it down so fast: What was the Consequence? Whom shall he teach
Knowledge, and make to understand Doctrine? them that are weaned from the Milk,
and drawn from the Breasts; for Precept must be upon Precept, Precept upon
Precept, etc. The Sense is, they had by their Sensuality rendered themselves as
incapable of understanding spiritual things as little Children, and must be so
instructed as they use to be. How unfit then for the beatifick Vision
hereafter? Flesh and Blood thus qualified, (to be sure) cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: Fugite enervatas delicias per quas permadescunt animi. Senec.

Those feeble Pleasures whereby Men's Minds are weakened, and being thus steeped
and soaked in Sensuality; and put down by this Burden of the Flesh, thus bound
upon them by their Lusts, are utterly senseless of higher or more noble
Felicities than the Earth affords them.

2. In our religious Relation to one another, Phil. 2.14. The Apostle commands
us to do all things without Murmurings and Disputings. Nothing more in its
proper place, than Unity and Obedience in Religion. The Golden Rule our Savior
has given us of doing as we would be done unto, can never be more usefully
applied, than in this case; we are to use our Governors, as we would be used
our selves, were we in their Circumstances; and when they are coming to meet
us, let us not start back or turn away from them: let us concerning them,
believe all things, hope all things; that is, put the most charitable and
candid Interpretation upon their Commands.

The Church of England is not superstitious in imposing her Ceremonies, because
she declares the Nature of them, and pretends only to humane Authority for
their immediate Appointment or Obligation.

But Superstition may easily get in at the other Door, because God is here
immediately pretended: for nothing can excuse our Disobedience, but some Law or
Command of God; now if there be none, and yet the Fear and Authority of God is
pretended, we are soberly to consider where the Superstition in this case must
be applied: for Superstition is not so much in the matter a Man is about, as in
his Mind; innocent things may be superstitiously used, yea the best and holiest
Institutions. And there is a negative as well as positive Superstition; a Man
may be as superstitious in being against the use of some things in Religion, as
any Man can be, in being for them; because the Superstition lies in fearing God
where no Fear is, where God has been pleased not at all to concern himself.
And thus we may easily make our Savior's Yoke more uneasy to our selves, and
his Burden more heavy than he has made them.

4. Lastly, Let us all consider, how earnestly St. Paul beseeches us; Ephesians. 4.1,
to the 7th. by the peculiar Graces of our Religion, ver. 2. To keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, ver 3. He tells us, ver. 1. that it is to
walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith we are called; that is, otherwise we are
unworthy of the Name of Christians; and proves it, ver. 4. because we are
called into one Body, and therefore must be acted by one Spirit: which he
further proves, ver. 5, 6. because there is but one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
us all. How passionately he beseeches us to do it, Phil. 2.1, to 9. adding to
all his other Arguments the Example of our Savior's voluntary Passion, and
Death upon the Cross for us.

Let us all seriously read Gal. 5.20, 22. Are the matters we differ about, and
produce so many of the Fruits of the Flesh amongst us, mentioned in ver. 20. of
such Consequence as that we should hazard the sweet and blessed Fruits of the
Spirit mentioned, ver. 22. Love, Joy, Peace, etc. either in the Vindication of
them, or opposition to them? And are not these excellent Fruits of the Spirit,
too often checked and in danger to be blasted both by our Zeal for them and
against them?

Let the very Heathen provoke us to Love, and good Works toward one another.
St. Austin tells us that the Philosophers had almost as many Opinions about the
chief Good as there were Sects amongst them; which (from Varro) he says were
above 200. Yet Tertullian observes they all agreed about the Necessity of
Patience, which may be a Reason why they did not persecute one another as we
do. And certainly the Article about the chief Good is an essential Article in
every Religion; and that they wanted not Zeal to preserve their Religion, the
poor Christians felt very often to their cost.

Let us fear lest whilst the Protestant Princes are confederate, and spending
their Blood and Treasure, for their own and our Preservation, we by our bitter
Zeal about uncertain and little things should make it impracticable; for if we
bite and devour one another, we shall be consumed one of another. And what
account can we give of our selves in the other World: for certainly as the
planting Christianity at first was the best Cause God ever had in this World,
so the Reformation of it must be the next best; and as that was first planted
and secured very much by the Love and Unity of its Professors, so must also the
Reformation of it be.

Let us remember what we would have done in the day of our Distress ('it is not
so long since but we may do it) for this Unity I am speaking of, when we
plainly saw for want of it, we were but threshing Instruments in the Hands of
our Enemies to break in pieces one another; and they are as malicious and
industrious still as ever they were, and also as confident they shall do it.

Lastly, Let us consider that no return for our miraculous Deliverance, can be
more grateful than this to the Divine Majesty; for God is Love, and he that
dwells in Love dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. And also that
the Love that was in our Savior's Passion, made it an Offering and Sacrifice
to God for a sweet smelling Savor. The Providence of God has given us a
greater Opportunity than any Age ever saw, to heal our Divisions, that I know
of; every Opportunity to do good is an Obligation, but a special Providence is
the Voice of Heaven, calling upon us upon that occasion to do our Duty.

Thus I have, as briefly as I could, laid open the Easiness and Difficulty of
our Religion, and proved, that though we have made it difficult, our Savior
has made it easy; and that to wear our Savior's Yoke, and bear his Burden,
and imitate him in the Text, is the only infallible means of Ease and Happiness
here, both in our selves, and one another; and everlasting Happiness, in the
Enjoyment of God together hereafter; to which blessed Temper here, and happy
State hereafter, the God of Peace and Love bring us all: And the Peace of God
which passes all Understanding, keep our Hearts and Minds through Christ
Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed and Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lionin St.
Paul's Churchyard, relating to the great Revolutions in England and Scotland
1688, 1689.
AN Account of the Reasons of the Nobility and Gentry's Invitation of the
Prince of Orange into England; Being a Memorial from the English Protestants
concerning their Grievances; with a large account of the Birth of rht Prince of
Wales: presented to their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange.

A Collection of Political and Historical Papers relating to the wonderful
Revolutions in England, and Scotland in 12 Parts, from the time of the seven
Bishops petitioning K. James the 2d. to the Coronation of K. Willian and Q.
Mary.

A Brief History of the Succession of the Crown of England, etc. Collected out
of the Records, and the most Authentic Historians; written for the
Satisfaction of the Nation.

Wonderful Predictions of Nostredamus Grebner, David Pareus, and Autonius
Torquatus; wherein the Grandeur of their Present Majesty's, the Happiness of
England, and Downfall of France and Rome are plainly Delineated. With a large
Preface, showing, That the Crown of England, has not been obscurely foretold to
their Majesty's William the 3d, and Queen Mary, late Prince and Princess of
Orange; and that the People of this Ancient Monarchy have duly contributed
thereunto, in the present Assembly of Lords and Commons, notwithstanding the
Objections of Men of different Extremes.

A Seasonable Discourse, wherein is examined, what is lawful during the
Confusions and Revolutions of Government, especially in the Case of a King
deserting his Kingdoms; and how far a Man may lawfully conform to the Powers
and Commands of those, who with Various Successes hold Kingdoms. Whether it be
lawful. (1) In Paying Taxes. (2) In personal Service. (3) In taking of Oaths.
(4) In giving up himself to a final Allegiance.

A Seasonable Treatise; wherein is proved, That King William (commonly called
the Conqueror) did not get the Imperial Crown of England by the Sword, but by
the Election and Consent of the People. To whom he swore to observe the
Original Contract between King and People.

An Answer to a Paper Entitled, The Desertion Discussed: being a Vindication
of the Proceedings of the late Honorable Convention, in their Filling up the
Throne with King William and Queen Mary.

An Exact Collection of the Debates of the House of Commons (particularly such
as relate to the Bill of Exclusion, a Popish Successor, etc.) held at
Westminster, October. 21. 1680; Prorogued the 10th, and Dissolved the 18th of
January following. With the Debates of the House of Commons at Oxford,
Assembled March. 21. 1680. Also a Just and Modest Vindication of the
Proceedings of the said Parliaments.

Jullan's Arts to Undermine and Extirpate Christianity, etc. By Samuel Johnson.
The Impression of which Book was made in the Year 1683, and has ever since lain
buried under the Ruins of all those English Rights which it endeavored to
defend; but by the Auspicious and Happy Arrival of the Prince of Orange, both
They and It have obtained a Resurrection.

Dr. Gilbert Burnet (now Bishop of Salisbury) his Tracts, in Two Vollumes; in
which are contained several Things relating to the Affairs of England.

The Mystery of Iniquity working in the Dividing of Protestants, in order to
the subverting of Religion, and our Laws, for almost the space of thirty Years
last past, plainly laid open. With some Advices to Protestants of all
Persuasions, in he present Juncture of our Affairs. To which is added, A
Specimen of a Bill for uniting of Protestants.

Liberty of Conscience now highly necessary for England, humbly represented to
this present Parliament.

An Enquiry into, and Detection of the Barbarous Murder of the late Earl of
Essex, (now under consideration of a Committee of the House of Lords): Or, a
Vindication of that Noble Person, from the Guilt and Infamy of having destroyed
himself.

An Account of the Trial of Mr. Papillon. To which is added, The Matter of Fact
in the choosing of Sheriffs in Sir John Moor's Year, now under the consideration
of the Committee for Grievances.

A Collection of strange Predictions of Mr. J. P. for the Years 1687, and 1688;
about K. James the Second, Prince of Wales, and the scampering away of many
great Ministers of State.

Arguments against the Dispensing Power, in Answer to L. C. J. Herbert.

The Royal Cards; Being a lively Representation of the late Popish and
Tyrannical Designs, and of the wonderful Deliverance of this Kingdom from the
same, by the glorious Expedition of William Henry Prince of Orange, now King of
England, (whom God long preserve) in curious Copper Plates. Price 1. s. a Pack.

Murmurers reproved, in a Sermon preached by Mr. Hopkins, etc.

England's Call to Thankfulness, for her late great Deliverace. By Mr. John
Olliffe, etc.


