THE Earl of Bristoll HIS SPEECH IN THE House of Lords, The XX. Day of July
1660. upon the BILL of INDEMNITY

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660

THE EARL of BRISTOLL HIS SPEECH IN THE HOUSE of LORDS.
My Lords,
BEING to speak unto Your Lordships somewhat more extendedly than is my use,
and upon a Subject wherein there may be perhaps not only difference; but even
fervor of Opinions; I find my self obliged by some(...)what that happened to me
here the oath(...) day, to beg a favor of Your Lordships, t(...) if I should
chance to err in forms and orders of the House, (...) that there should slip
from me unawares any expression th(...) may be dissonant to the ears of those
who understand b(...) than I the force and propriety of words, You will not be
se(...) unto me, but be pleased to consider, That I have been six(...) years
out of my Country, and in a profession far differing fr(...) what I am now a
doing: In confidence of this Indulgence I sh(...) proceed.

MY LORDS, YOU have here before you in this Bill of Indemnity the most
important Business that perhaps the House of Peers has at any time had in
deliberation; it is that upon which the Honor or eternal Reproach of the Nation
abroad, and its Happiness or Confusion at home, seems (next under Gods
inscrutable providence) most principally to depend. For on the one side, how
abhorred a Nation must we needs be to all others, if the Infamy of our
Sovereigns Murder should not be thoroughly washed away by Justice in the blood
of the guilty? And on the other, what happiness or quiet can we hope for at
home, nay, what new combustions ought we not to apprehend, if the Criminal and
the Misled (between whom the Eye of the Law can make little distinction) making
up so numerous a part of the Nation, their fears, which might urge them to new
Crimes, should not be secured by the firmest assurances of Impunity? Punishing
and Securing are certainly the two principal ends of this Bill, and wherein as
certainly every one of Your Lordships does concur; but whether the means of
attaining those ends have been sufficiently lighted upon by the House of
Commons (...)n this Bill, That I suppose is the present Question; and
where(...) I think my self in duty obliged to express unto Your Lord(...)ips
with freedom and sincerity my Judgment, in all humble (...)mission unto Yours.

As for that part of the Bill which relates to Our Sovereigns (...)rther, I
find it so short and so much out of the way, of what (...)e owe, both to the
severity and solemnity of that Revenge, (...)t I cannot but think it in some
sort (pardon the expression) (...)rophanation of the due Rites of that sacred
Expiation, to (...)ndle it in the same Bill promiscuously with other more
vulgar things.

My Motion therefore shall be, That there be forthwith a Committee appointed,
to consider of all things fit to be done for the washing away of that Stain
from the Nation, and from the Age wherein we live; and to draw up an Act
purposely and solely for that end. In confidence that this Motion will either
be embraced by Your Lordships, or that, if it be opposed, I shall have the
liberty to fortify it by my Reasons, I shall set that business apart, and
apply my discourse to what concerns this Bill in all other relations: In which
I shall not make nice to tell Your Lordships, that I think it defective in many
things reasonable, and redundant in some things unreasonable; and yet,
notwithstanding, not only my humble Motion, but my most earnest pressure, as
far as with humility I may, shall be, That We may proceed immediately to the
Passing of this Bill, with little or no alteration.

This, my Lords, may appear a surprising motion from a Person thought to be, as
indeed I am, as much inflamed as any man living with Indignation at the
detestable proceedings of the late usurped Power, so pernicious to the Public,
and so injurious to my own particular; in whom the motion may seem yet more
surprising, when I shall have told You with truth, That I am irreparably ruined
in my fortune for my Loyalty, (if this Bill of Indemnity to others for their
Disloyalty should pass as it is here offered unto Your Lordships.) But the
ground I go upon is, this received Maxim as to all public Sanctions, Better a
Mischief than an Inconvenience: yea, Better innumerable Mischiefs to particular
Persons and Families, than one heavy Inconvenience to the Public.

My Lords, I profess unto You I find my self set on fire, when I think that the
blood of so many virtuous and meritorious Persons, Peers and others of all
ranks, so cruelly and so impiously shed, should cry so loud for vengeance, and
not find it from Us.

That many of the wickedest and meanest of the people should remain as it were
rewarded for their Treasons, rich and triumphant in the spoils of the most
eminent in Virtue and Loyalty of all the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom.

What generous Spirit can make reflection on these things, and not find his
heart burn into rage within him?

Here it is, My Lords, that we sufferers have need of all Our Philosophy.

But when I consider that these are mischiefs only to the sufferers, and that
to insist upon a remedy might perhaps expose the public to an irreparable
inconvenience, I thank God I find in an instant all my resentments calmed and
Submitted to my primary duty.

My Lords, We have here in Our view a Kingdom tossed and rolling still with the
effects of past Tempests; and though, God be thanked, the storm be miraculously
ceased, we can not say that the danger is, until we get into Still Water: That
Still, that Smooth Water is only to be found in the Generalities security from
their guilty fears, and in the Two Houses Union between themselves, and with
their Sovereign.

Whether the latter may not be endangered if we should enter into Controversy
upon the particulars of this Bill, I leave unto Your Lordships to judge. But
certainly as to the former, there can be no hopes of raising Moneys, of
disbanding Armies, or of settling that Happiness and Tranquillity which We all
sigh for, of being governed under Our Gracious Sovereign by the Ancient and
known Laws of the Land, whilst universal fears shall subsist by the delay in
passing this Bill.

My Lords, I shall sum up unto Your Lordships my whole drift in a few words.

I think that in this Bill there are many things wanting which solid and
important reasons would require to be added, and many things inserted into it,
which Justice to His Majesty's interests and to particular persons would
require to be omitted of rectified: But I conceive at the same time that the
mischiefs of the delay in passing it do far outweigh all the advantages of
improving it.

My Lords, I shall conclude my discourse and Your Lordships trouble with the
application to this purpose of a memorable saying of that Illustrious Minister,
the Cardinal Mazarins, at a Council in the Wars of France, whereunto I had the
honor to be called. It was, That in the great affairs of the World He had not
known any thing do more hurt then these two words, Faisons Mieux, let us do
better. For, said he, whilst good Wits endeavor by debates to bring good
Counsels to a greater perfection, they do for the most part lose the
opportunity of timeing things rightly, which in great actions is of far more
importance then the preference according to refined reason betwixt Good and
Better.

Upon this ground my conclusion is, that, that part which concerns the Kings
death being put in the way proposed, we should proceed to the speedy passing of
this Bill without losing any time in emendations; but if we be destined to so
fatal a loss by raveling into particulars, I shall in that case desire leave
to offer unto Your Lordships therein my reflections also.

FINIS.

