The Freehold Estates of England, or England it self the best Fund or Security.
AFTER so many Assurances given by some Persons, to furnish the Freeholders of
England with Money, upon the Securities of their Estates, one would have
thought no Landed-Man in the Kingdom could have remained under any Difficulty
to raise Money for supplying his Occasions, or to clear off his Encumbrances,
and that Leases of Ejectment, and Sub-poena's in Chancery to foreclose Equities
of Redemption, would have been out of Date; but notwithstanding all that has
been promised, we find the Freeholders under as bad if not worse Circumstances
than ever. The Bank of England, who have caused many Advertisements to be
inserted in the Gazettes, of furnishing the Freeholders with Money at 5 l. per
Cent. per Annum, not meeting with one Title in an hundred that will please
them, have turned the Current of their Business another way, and are setting up
Banks in Foreign Countries, leaving the poor Freeholders to shift for
themselves.

The Orphans Bank have set out an Order to lend Money upon a Deposite of Gold
or Silver, and to discount Bills of Exchange at 3 l. per Cent. per Annum, but
mention not one word of lending Money on Land-Security.

In fine, tho all make use of that pleasing and popular Argument, of easing the
Freeholders, and raising the Value of Land, yet not one step has been taken
therein, nor must we expect ever will, so long as the Management is in private
Hands, and not by Persons appointed either by the Public, or by the
Freeholders themselves; but all that has been said or promised (if one may
have leave to judge by Men's Actions) seems only a Pretense, without the least
Reality or Purpose to perform the same. Now when the Revenue of the Excise, the
Annual Income settled on the Orphans, the Lottery-Tickets, the Annuities for
Lives, and indeed almost any thing that has but the face of a Security, although
depending on Contingencies, are made use of for Funds whereupon to issue out
Bills, and have some of them actual Credit for three times more than the real
Value; It cannot but seem strange to any considering Man, that the Freehold
Estates of England, or rather England it self, which all must acknowledge to be
the very Basis of those Funds, should be disregarded; and the issuing out Bills
on Land-Security for a far less Sum than the Value, should be ridiculed, and
made a Jest of: yet some People have had so little Sense as to pass their
Censures on my Proposals to the Parliament, for issuing out Bills of Credit on
Land-Security; and the Bill which was brought in by Mr. Brockman this last
Sessions by Order of the Honorable the House of Commons, entitled, An Act for
the Improvement of the Freehold Estates of England, and the Encouragement of
Trade, and which was referred to a Committee, who made a considerable Progress
therein, was by some Persons opposed, for no other Reason as I could ever hear
of, but because it would have been prejudicial to their particular Interests. I
did therefore once design to have printed a Breviate of the said Bill, that all
Persons might have seen whether the same was reasonable or practicable; but
upon further Consideration I forbore it, finding too many led more by Humor
than Reason, and that they will not believe any thing possible to be done,
until they see it effected. I shall therefore (being encouraged so to do by
several Persons of great Worth) reduce the same into Practice, and to lay the
Foundation of a National Bank (and probably the greatest Bank in the World) so
far as it is capable of being done, without the Assistance of an Act of
Parliament; still submitting the same to such Regulations, Alterations, or
Amendments as the great Council of the Kingdom shall in their Wisdom at any
time hereafter think needful to make.

Some perhaps who are desirous to keep the Freeholders Necks still under the
Servile Yoke of 6 l. per Cent. per Annum Interest, besides other Charges, which
with the Taxes has eaten up several of their Estates, may make trivial
Objections against these my Proposals, and demand where will the Money be found
to answer the Bills of Credit? But I do not think my self obliged to acquaint
every impertinent Querist with the Methods I have to propose for raising a Fund
of Money: It is sufficient I have hitherto born the whole Charge of prosecuting
this Business, which when accomplished will be so greatly for the Freeholders
Advantage, and will more than double the Value of their Estates. All that I
desire of the Freeholders is that they will enable me to do it by subscribing,
and settling their Estates in Trust upon credible and substantial Persons of
their own naming, and to choose some from among themselves to put in Practice
those Methods I have to lay before them, so far forth as they shall appear
agreeable to Reason and no farther.

PROPOSALS for Subscriptions for a National Land-Bank.
THat Books shall be laid open on Tuesday the 11th of this instant June, at the
Chambers of Thomas Gooding Sergeant at Law, in Field-Court in Grayes-Inn. At
Philip Neave Esquire his Chambers, the second Staircase of the Paper-Buildings in
the Inner Temple. At Lawrence Braddon Esquire his Chambers, Number 4. the second
Staircase in the new Square at Lincoln's Inn. At the House of Robert West Esquire
the Corner of Buckingham-Court near Scotland-Yard. At Mr. John Smith's in
Exchange-Alley: And at Mr. Humfry Hackshaw's in Lothbury near the Royal
Exchange in London. Where any Persons by themselves or others, may subscribe
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, whether Freehold, Copyhold, or Lease-hold,
to what yearly Value they please, to be settled upon such Trustees as shall be
chosen by the Subscribers, for Funds to issue out Bills of Credit upon the
Security of such Estates.

That an Account shall be published in Print every Month of the yearly Value of
the Estates subscribed.

That so soon as 100000 l. per Annum shall be subscribed, a List of the
Subscribers shall be printed alphabetically, with the several yearly Values by
them and each of them subscribed, and timely Notice given to the several
Subscribers, to meet together in some public place within the Cities of London
or Westminster, to choose by the Majority of Votes, such and so many credible
Persons, as they or the Major Part of them shall think fit to be Trustees of
all Estates to be settled on such Trustees in Trust for the aforesaid Purposes.

That the Subscribers shall at the same time choose by the Majority of Votes,
such and so many to be Directors or Managers, and also one or more Treasurer or
Treasurers of the said intended Land-Bank, to be continued in their respective
Offices for so long time as the Subscribers or Major Part of them shall think
fit, and no longer.

That each Subscriber shall have one Vote in the Election of Trustees, Managers
and Treasurers, for each 50 l. per Annum, by him or her subscribed.

That any Person or Persons who shall settle his or their Estate or Estates
upon the said Trustees, shall at any time after such Settlement of such Estate
or Estates, have in Money or Bills of Credit, to the Value of three fourth
parts of his or their Estate or Estates so settled, he or they paying to the
said Directors or Managers Two Pence per Cent. per Diem, being 3 l. 0 s. 10 d.
per Cent. per Annum, for Interest, and all other Charges whatsoever, and no
more; and may also repay to the said Directors or Managers all or any part of
the same, at any time or times whenever, and as it shall best suit with his
or their Convenience to repay the same; but no Man's Estate is to stand or be
engaged for any other or greater Sum than what he himself shall actually
receive and be indebted for.

The Proposer doubts not but he shall be able to reduce the Interest which the
Freeholder is to pay to less than 3 l. per Cent. per Annum, as will appear by
the Conditions in the Subscription Books, to which all Persons for farther
Satisfaction are referred.

JOHN BRISCOE.


