THE FAITH BY WHICH We are Justified, IN Scripture-Sense: According to
Scripture, Opened, Explained, and Applied, on Romans 5. 1. In Six Sermons.
Published as Preached, with little or no Alteration, at the Desire of some of
the Hearers.

Esaiah. 55. 1. Ho every on that Thirsts, come ye to the Waters, and He that
has no Money, come ye, Buy, and Eat without Money, and without Price.

LONDON: Printed for W. Marshal, at the Bible in Newgate-street. 1695.

THE FAITH BY WHICH We are Justified, etc.
The First Sermon.
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.


INtending to Treat of Faith, whereby we are Justified, I have taken this
Weighty Text, as the Foundation of the Discourse, wherein we have these Four
remarkable Points concerning Faith, as we are Justified by it.

1. This plain Point first comes before us, That we are Justified by Faith,
expressed thus, Being Justified by Faith. 2. That we are Justified by Faith, is
a conclusion resulting from a strong nervous and vehement Reasoning of the
Apostles, that had gone before in the foregoing Chapters, signified in that
Particle, Therefore, assuring to us this great Truth. 3. The Blessed
consequence of being Justified by Faith; we have peace with God, the Judge of
all; This gives full Peace, Rest and Quiet to Conscience, Peace and Assurance
for ever, according to the Nature of a full and perfect Righteousness. 4. The
supreme Principal Cause of our being Justified by Faith, and having Peace from
it, is our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom, as the Apostle goes on, we have access
unto this Grace, wherein we stand.
This then is the grand Proposition of the Apostle. That being Justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

I shall at this time, therefore, propose to open the great Grace of Gospel
Faith to you, by which we are Justified; because, indeed, it is one of the
greatest Points that can be spoken of; And therefore, these Heads of Discourse,
I will now undertake to handle to you concerning it.

First, To show you that the Supreme and Highest, and Original Account, or
Description of Faith, is to be taken by its Relation to Jesus Christ the
Mediator. And it is nothing at all, if you remove that; If you take away that
Respect, that great Respect, that it looks upon, and Eyes Jesus Christ the
Mediator.

In the second place, I shall come to consider, how Faith, even in its relation
to Christ, and as it looks upon him, is said to be Justifying Faith; or that
whereby we are Justified.

For, if we did not rightly state this, as the Gospel does (as it is said) the
last Error might be worse then the first.

And therefore I would particularly guide your Thoughts and Apprehensions, how
Faith, as it looks to Christ, Justifies. I shall therefore show you, that it is
not Faith it self, but only the great Righteousness of Jesus Christ received by
Faith, that Justifies.

In the Third place, I shall com^ consider that great certainty that Faith is
to obtain in every point wherein it so Acts, which it ought to reach after, and
to aspire to, in every point wherein it has to do with Christ, that we may
have Peace by it, through our Lord Jesus Christ; as Christ says, John 17. 7,
8. They have surely known, and have believed, that I came forth from thee, and
that thou did send me. So in every thing Faith is surely to know. And then,

In the Fourth place, I shall show you the Life, and the Power, and the
Activity of this Faith; and compare thein, Heb. 11. and James 2: where that
Apostle speaks of Faith being Dead, that is without Works. And I shall
endeavor to show you, that there is no such Commentary, no such way of
Reconciling the Apostle James, with the Apostle Paul; The Apostle Paul speaking
of Faith Justifying without Works; And the Apostle James speaking that a Man is
not Justified by Faith only, but by Works also. I say the great Reconciliation
will be, by laying Heb. 11. and James 2. together.

Now I begin at this time with the first of these; And I Will lay down, with
great assurance, this Assertion, concerning the respect Faith has to Christ;
That there never had been such a thing as the sound of Faith in the World;
there had never been the Name; Not the Air; and much less, the Thing; had not
God brought the first Begotten (as the Apostle says) into the World. Had not
Jesus Christ given a Being to Faith; there had never been such a thing as
Faith. And therefore it is very observable, that the Apostle calls Christ by
this very Name, Gal. 3. 23. Before Faith came (says he) we were under Tutors
and Governors; We were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith, which should
afterward be revealed. Before Faith came. It is certain Faith was in the World
before the Gospel, before the New Testament; For, it is said, Abraham was
Justified by Faith; and Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
Righteousness* and yet, says the Apostle, before Faith came, that is, before
Christ came; because Faith is so Essentially Dependent upon Christ, and
Respective unto him. Christ is such a real Foundation and support of Faith;
that he is worthily and properly called by the very Na^, or by the word, Faith,
before Faith came.

But for the clearer opening and making out of this to you, I shall insist upon
these three Heads.

First, That Jesus Christ is the highest Revelation of God. Now Faith, it is
described by almost all (in part, at least) to be an Assent to a Divine
Revelation, upon the Credit that we give to the Revealer; upon the Authority
and Veracity, and Certainty of the Truth of the Revealer.

For, Faith, you know properly, is a believing the Report of another, or the
Witness of another. We cannot properly be said to Believe, when we do know the
thing our selves, and have seen it by our own Eyes; but when we Trust and
Credit that Assurance, that another gives us of it.

Now therefore I shall endeavor to make out to you, That Jesus Christ is He,
Faith must needs Live and Die with him (as I may so express it in familiar
Language (it is as Essential to Faith to have the Manifestation and Revelation
of Christ, as it is for the Eye to have Light. And then,

In the Second place, Whereas the notion of Faith is a Trust, and a depending
upon some great Good that is offered to us, from the Supreme Good; that we have
no Right nor Title to, in our selves. I shall show you that Jesus Christ is
that Great and Rich Good that is given to us from the Father. And that tho we
have no Right to the thing in our selves; yet we come to Trust, and to Depend,
and to Rely upon it, as if we had a Title. And then,

In the Third Place, Whereas Faith is very truly, tho not in the first Account
of it, described to be a Power of Holy Life, and Holy Action: And a Man
believes no more, than he is truly and really transformed by into the thing
that he Believes. I shall show you, That Jesus Christ is that great principle
of Holy Life, and of Heavenly Life, that does empower the Souls of his People,
according to the degree of the present State; and shall bring them to that
spotless, to that blemishless state, in the Glory of his Appearing.

I begin with the First thing, and that is to show you, that Jesus Christ is
that great Revelation that Faith has Primarily, Principally, Originally and
Supremely to close with, and to give up it self unto.

You shall find in the 3d of John, that this is a Notion of Faith; and a Notion
of Faith proper to the great Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ. says John, 1
John 5. 10. He that believes in the Son of God, has the Wit^ in himself. He
that believes not God, has made him a Liar, because he believes not the
Record that God gave of his Son. The great Record that God has given, it is of
his Son; that he has given his Son as the Great Mediator; as the Great
Redeemer; as the Great Sacrifice; as the Great Righteousness of the World: And
therefore, if any Man does not believe this, he has made God a liar. God has
done all in the Gospel, that can be done, to give us an Assurance of it: So it
is the great Revelation. And so, when our Lord says, They have surely known,
and believed that thou did send me: It is the very same thing, that Jesus
Christ is the great Savior and Redeemer of the World. For, what is the meaning
of God's sending Christ, but a sending him as a Sa^or? As you may find plainly
John 3. 17. For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World; but
that the World, through him, might be saved. And, Him has God the Father
Sealed, John 6. So that from all this, it is most Evident that it is the great
Revelation. And tho this be a great Truth, yet still the Gospel raises it
higher. And I beseech you, that you would seriously consider; when a Man
Believes in Jesus Christ, he does not only believe a written Word; I desire
again your serious Attention to it: He does not only believe a written Word; he
does not only Believe a great Testimony from God, or a sound of words
concerning it, but Jesus Christ the word himself comes to him. Indeed it was
heretofore in a manifestation in the Flesh: But the very same thing is now
manifested by the Spirit of Jesus Christ. And by his coming in Spirit, he comes
as that Word of the Father; as the Eternal Word of the Father: And he shows
himself to the Soul; he shows himself in Spirit to the Soul; so that the Soul
Believes the Word of God; because Christ, the word of God shows himself to him.
And we never have the Truth of Faith, till we have this very coming of the
Eternal Word to us. As you see (1 John 1. 1.) how the Apostle speaks concerning
this word, That which was from the Beginning, which we have heard, which we
have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled
of the word of Life. For the Life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear
Witness, etc. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you. Now pray,
Why does the Apostle declare this? Not that you should rest in a written word:
That Is the thing I would desire you to observe. Not that you should rest in a
sound of Words; but that ye also may have fellowship with us; (ver. 3.) and
truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. Not
that we should expect any Visional Representations of these things: That Is not
the Intention of it. But that we should look for a real Manifestation of the
Father, and the Son; or of the Father by the Son, and through the Son: And also
of the Son by the Father. So that there is certainly. a Sight of Christ; I say,
a sight of the Son, in Faith. And if we did but thus consider the excellency of
Faith; indeed, I cannot but apprehend, there could be no difference between
Christians, and Christians, in these points concerning Faith; and so concerning
Justification; if we had but true and right apprehensions of Faith. It is true
indeed, there is a great deal of false Faith, of counterfeit Faith, that has
never seen Christ. But all true Faith, it has seen Christ; it has come up to
the very word of Jesus Christ: That is, to Jesus Christ the Word So, John 6.
40. there must be a sight of the Son, before there can be a believing in him.
And this is the the will of him that sent me, that every one, which sees the
Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting Life. And therefore, as I told
you, he is called the Word of God; that is, the Essential and Eternal Word of
God, manifested in Flesh; manifested in Human Nature. And There is no sight of
Christ without his coming to us, without our receiving of him, by the Teaching
of the Father, and by the manifestation of himself. And so says the Apostle
Paul; when it pleased God to Reveal his Son in me. You see here is not only
words, either Spoken or Written; but there is the very Son himself Revealed in
us. I do acknowledge all this is in a Spiritual Sense, not only in an
Intellectual Sense: Tho it is true, That shall be Subservient, and as it were
the Conveyance and Vehicle of this sight. But it is a Spiritual Sight, wrought
by the Power of God, and by the Spirit of God. And O therefore! This is the
great Point I would press upon you. And indeed, I have taken notice that the
most Spiritual Writers, and Preachers of Faith, They have said, That Faith is
upon the Person of the Son; the Person of the Eternal Word in our Nature, the
Lord Jesus Christ. It does not deal first of all with his Benefits and
Salvation that comes by him; I mean, principally: I don't say, but God may draw
a Soul first by the consideration of his Benefits. But the principal Touch of
Faith, it is upon the Son of God. I might give you innumerable Scriptures that
verify this great Truth. And I desire that we may take notice of it. In that
forenam'd place, John 17. v. 8. Christ says, (this is the point) They have
believed that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee; and that I
came forth from thee, and that thou did send me. All this, Christ says, you
may see, immediately concerns the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ. So in the
Epistle to the Galatians, a place that is worthy our notice; and that I shall
have occasion of continual recourse to, Gal. 2. 20, 21. I am Crucified with
Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. I urge it here
only, to this purpose, to show you, that Faith, it immediately goes out to the
Person of Christ, even in the point of Revelation. This is, That, it
principally goes on and touches there closest and fastest; upon the very person
of Christ.

O therefore, that our Souls now might find something of this going out to the
person of Christ! A Tender of the Person of Christ to us; that Jesus Christ the
Word would come, and show himself to us! That in a Spiritual sense, we might
see him with our Eyes, and handle him with our hands; we might have all
assurance of a real Union, of a real Touch betwixt Christ and our Souls.

And then I would desire you to take notice also of this; that when this great
Revelation of Jesus Christ has come in, and has a Reception in the Soul; then
all the Truths that flow in along with him, they come in also into the Soul;
and the Soul receives, according to all the Knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ
it receives all Truth, when this great Revelation has first of all entered, and
taken place in it. All the Truths of God, they come in by Jesus Christ; as he
is said to be The Truth; and the Son of the Father in Truth. It is a very great
consideration, this; no Truth is indeed truly taken in, till Christ is taken
in. If you would but apprehend this; I confess there are many Learned, and
Wise, and Great Men in Discourse; they insist very much upon the Proof, by
Natural Demonstration, Argument and Reason of the Being of a God. I am very far
from Detracting, or Derogating from what they do: For it is very worthy in its
own kind and place. But this I do assure you, that there is no man in the whole
Universe, that has taken in truly the Knowledge of the One God; But he has
taken it, in and through Christ, and by Christ: Or else, he has it not
savingly, if he has it not in, and through Christ.

So there are great Arguments to Distinguish between Good and Evil; the Law,
and Natural Conscience go far in it. But, I assure you, no Man has taken in any
of the Principles of Natural Conscience, in a saving way, till he has taken in
Jesus Christ. All Truth, it comes in by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17. The
Evangelist there, has it expressly, The Law came by Moses, says he. There was
a measure of Light given by the Law: But (says he) Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ. And I Will give you one great Scripture, that will make this very
plain, Heb. 11. 6. Says the Apostle there; Without Faith, it is impossible to
please him: For he that comes to God, must believe that he is. A great many of
the Rationalists that are in this very Age, at this very time carry it, as if
they would not thank the Gospel (as I may so express it) they are ready to say,
they would not thank the Revelation of it for the Proof, that there is a God,
that is, One God.

But, as it may be true in their sense too; that is, It is Demonstrable by the
Light of Nature, and by Reason, and by Argument, I acknowledge, with all my
Heart, it is so; And yet, notwithstanding, I say, no man that savingly believes
that there is a God; But he that does it by that Faith, that has taken in the
Lord Jesus Christ.

And therefore, says the Apostle, If any Man has not the Son, he has not the
Father. If he does not come to the Knowledge of the Father, by the Son; he has
not the true, and the right Knowledge; the true Evangelical, Spiritual, saving
Knowledge, so much as of a God.

So, concerning Eternal Happiness and Misery; there may be great Light of Truth
offered, from Natural Argument.

We never come to see, and know Truths indeed; till we come to know them by the
Eternal Word; that word of God coming in to us, who is (the) Truth.

Therefore, I beseech you, That you would retain these things in your Minds and
Judgments; and that you might be able, when you hear Disputes, concerning
Faith, and concerning Justification by Faith, that you would remember, that
this is the true excellency of Faith, To touch the Person of the Son of God; to
come to Him, to see Him, to be united to Him, as the Great Truth.

It is true, all the Truths that we have, in the Word of God; they are All of
great Excellency, and of great necessity: But they all Center in Christ (the)
Truth; who (...) (the) Truth. They Center in him, who is (the) Truth; they are
all but Lines flowing from him, and Return to him. I know, every one will
easily grant, that the Knowledge of the Angels is much greater than the Knowledge
of any Man; or of all men put together. Now you shall find, that the Angels,
notwithstanding the great Orb of Light that they make, or are; notwithstanding
they are great Intelligences; yet notwithstanding, the Knowledge of Christ, is
the Supreme Knowledge that they have, says the Apostle, To the intent that now
unto the Principalities and Powers in Heavenly places, might be known by the
Church the manifold Wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3. 10, 11. And therefore indeed, tho
Angels and Men were Created with very large measures of knowledge (I make no
doubt) and excellency of an Intellectual Being; yet, that God has so ordered
things; that the great Knowledge, the great Manifestation of his manifold
Wisdom, should come in by Jesus Christ, that has given occasion to such
wonderful Explication of that Infinite Essential Truth, That God is. I say, it
has given the occasion: That indeed, I may say, there had never been such a
thing as Faith; that is, an higher understanding than Natural Understanding is;
a greater Comprehension of Truth, than all Natural Comprehension of Truth is.

O Infinite Treasures of Truth, that will be found to have flown from the
bringing in of Jesus Christ the great Mediator! This is that which has broken
up the great Deep of Truth; I say, the great Deep of Truth is broken up by the
Manifestation of Christ: The great Cataracts (as they call them) of Heaven, are
opened by this very Wisdom. The great flowings in, and Cataracts of Truth have
flown by the Manifestation of Christ. Indeed, I am not able to conceive the
greatness of this Truth, or to speak to you. How greatly Rich will Heaven, and
Saints and Angels be made, by knowing this great Truth of the Manifestation of
Christ! And therefore, it is not Truth Rivetted into their Natural
Understandings; But it is properly called Faith; tho indeed, all Truth will be
Demonstrated so really in the Future State, that it will make that kind of
Faith to cease, that is an Evidence of things not seen; tho it may still
properly be called Faith; in regard of that Infinite Knowledge Flowing from God,
through Influence by and in Jesus Christ.

So I have spoken of the First Head I proposed.

The Second thing I would therefore open to you, is, Faith does properly
adhere, and run to some good that is offered: And especially, under a sense of
Danger, and a sense of great Ruin and Misery, if there be not extraordinary
Rescue; And therefore this is the Second thing I assert, That there had never
been that Faith and Trust; that Faith of Refuge; that Faith of Reliance; that
Faith of Dependence, if Jesus Christ had not been made known: For, What (...)
Jesus Christ, but the great Deliverer? As the Apostle speaks in 1 These. 1.
last. He that Delivers, ver. 10. It is not, Delivers us: But he is the, (...),
The Deliverer; his Name is the general Deliverer. Who is (The) Deliverer; even
Jesus Christ, Styled and Surnamed; made notably known to us, by being (The)
Deliverer from the Wrath that it to come. He is (The) Deliverer from the wrath
that is to come.

So I say, There had never been Footing for Faith, if it had not been for
Christ; because of that great Good. And indeed, as I have often declared to
you; so I am positively of that Judgment, that the Elect Angels did fly to
Christ, even as we do, in a lost and undone state: So they to be secured from
that lost State, the Fallen Angels and Mankind run into. I make no doubt, they
found all Created Beings stood in themselves too slippery, and too ready to
fall: And they thought it safest to be under the Wing of the Mediator, to be
within the everlasting Arms of the Mediator.

Therefore much more, if God had not given this great Savior to lost Man; this
great Deliverer; this great Ransom; this great Sacrifice; this great
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, the Righteousness of God; there had been no Room
for the Faith of Trust; for the Faith of Relyance among Men.

You know, oftentimes in scripture, Faith is spoken of, as trust: That when a
Creature does not know what to do; nor whither to run; It runs to God, by
Faith. Now, this is all founded in the absolute necessity, that we all have, to
fly to Christ for Redemption, being lost and undone without him.

And therefore you find all scripture agrees to it, that we are under a
necessity to come to him, as the greatest Good that can be offered to us.
Christ is that greatest Good that can be offered to us. Even Eternal Life, Life
from Everlasting to Everlasting.

And therefore, observe the vein of Scripture: It is indeed, so much, That I
need not almost name such things to you, John. 13. 14. As Moses lifted up the
Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: That
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have Eternal Life. It is very
plain, what our Lord here intends. We are under the same necessity, that they
that were bitten with the Serpents in the Wilderness, that died immediately;
they swelled, and died, and broke in pieces immediately, if they had not the
Remedy in this Brazen Serpent. And so we are in the same Condition: Our Thigh
would Rott, and our Belly would swell (to allude to that Representation under
the Law); I say, the Thigh; That is, the Soul, and the Conscience, and all the
Powers of the Soul, they would presently be Gangrened, (in a spiritual sense)
and give up to Ruin and Destruction, were it not for Jesus Christ. And so
again, ver. 16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
Life.

That very word, should not perish, it is as much as to say, he shall certainly
perish, if he does not come to Christ, If he does not believe in him. And v.
36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life: And he that believes
not the Son, shall not see Life, but the wrath of God abides on him. As
Jeremiah says, He that trusts not in the Lord, he shall be like a barren
Wilderness, that shall not see when good comes. So, he shall not see Life, but
the wrath of God abides on him. Wherever he goes, the wrath of God abides on
him. Though he be Rich, and happy in the world; yet still he does not know what
a Companion he has with him: The wrath of God going along: And what a Roof,
and what a sky he is always under? what a Canopy of Heaven he is under? The
wrath of God abides on him, Dwells over him.

So, He that has the Son has Life; and he that has not the Son of God, has
not Life. And therefore here is Faith in Jesus Christ, Reliance upon him, the
Faith of Trust. Jesus Christ is he that has brought in the Faith of Trust.

I have said it to you before; and I should never be afraid to say it to a
Congregation of the Learned and Wisest in the World; That the Angels fled to
Christ, foreseeing possibility of Ruin, if they stood upon themselves.

But we are upon a plain, and Confessed, and Acknowledged necessity; we had
never had such a thing as Faith, if God had not offered, and given, and made
known his Son to us, as a Redeemer.

Now, I would desire you to Consider; That Jesus Christ never came to any Soul,
with his Benefits: And not come himself. He does not send his Benefits, and not
come himself. Which is the thing, I would very fain, in every thing, press upon
you. I say, he never sends his benefits, but he always comes himself. I am the
way, the Truth, and the Life. I am the Life, says Christ. And he is
Redemption, says the Apostle Paul. He is (the) Redemption. There is not a
Redemption separate from him: But he is our Redemption; and he is our life; and
he is our Ransom; He is our Sacrifice; He is our Redeemer; He is our Mediator;
He is our All. And therefore Faith, It has to do with the Person of Christ.
Indeed, it may be very necessary to hold out; and is certainly, absolutely
necessary, to hold out the Benefits of Christ. But we should take heed of this:
For here comes in a great deal of dispute and wrangling, who should have the
Benefit of his Righteousness by his Blood. Alas! This is not the thing.

First, but we are to come to the very Person of Christ, and to unite with him;
who loved us, and gave himself for us.

For, It is not a disputable thing, how we shall have his Benefits; If we pitch
first upon him by Faith, and by his coming into us, and dwelling in us; and we
in him; As I shall after show (if the Lord give opportunity) that our
Justification is by union. There is no Justification, but by union. It is not
by what we do; or what Conditions or Terms of the Gospel we observe; Though
they shall more effectually follow, than any other way we Discourse of. I don't
say, that there is no need of Repentance, of Faith, and holiness of life. But,
our Justification is immediately flowing from union, and no other way; As I
hope, by the assistance of God, and his Goodness giving leave, evidently to
make out by Scripture.

I shall therefore pitch upon that, Heb. 6. to show you, that Faith flies with
all the speed it can for Righteousness; says the Apostle, who have fled for
Refuge, to lay hold upon the hope set before us, verse 18. who have fled. All
the speed they can possibly make, is little enough; too little (as it were) to
lay hold upon that Hope that is set before us, Jesus Christ; so says the
Apostle, I desire to be found in him. The Expression evidently alludes to that
Expression in Scripture, when the Man slayer fled from the Revenger; when the
Pursuer of Blood, and the Minister of Vengeance was at his Heels, he made all
the way he could, to fly to the City of Refuge. So I say, the Soul by Faith,
makes all the way it can, with all the speed it can, to flee for Refuge to the
Hope set before it, in Jesus Christ.

Now, I would argue another thing to you, as I did in the former; as I told
you, All Truth comes in by the Knowledge of Christ, the Great Truth. All the
Report of Truth comes in by Jesus Christ, the supreme Truth. So all Trust, and
Hope of Good comes in the Great Sacrifice.

As now, suppose a Man be in want, or in fear of Danger; or in fear of this or
that Inconeniency in the present State: Why Faith, this Saving Faith in Christ,
having taken him in, as the great Redeemer; as the great Sacrifice; it flies to
God through him, in every Case.

As now, It was certainly a Fruit of Saving Faith in David, when he said to
God, I flee to thee to hide me from danger; when my Heart is overwhelmed; Lead
me to the Rock, that is higher than I. I make no doubt, but this was a Fruit of
Saving Faith. And so when the Servants of God cry to him for necessary Food and
Raiment, if they have taken Christ; it is a Fruit of Saving Faith of that kind.
When Jehoshaphat cried out to God, when he was likely to have been slain, as
Ahab was; it was Saving Faith in Jehoshaphat, that cried to God; why? because
he had taken in the Redeemer.

But, if we cry to God without the Redeemer; it is but howling. But when once
we have taken hold of Christ, it is Saving Faith. There Is one Scripture more,
(and then I Will conclude this with Application) to show, when we come to Christ,
upon a Title; when we have first taken Christ as the supreme Good, and Savior,
and Deliverer, 1 Pet. 4. 19. Wherefore, let them that suffer according to the
Will of God, commit their Souls to him, in well doing, as unto a faithful
Creator. He does not say, a faithful Redeemer, but a faithful Oreator. Why?
because Jesus Christ the Redeemer had been taken in. We can never trust in God,
as a faithful Creator, till we have first trusted in Jesus Christ the great
Redeemer, the great Sacrifice of Atonement.

I come therefore to make the Application of this, in these three Particulars;
in which, I will be very brief.

The first Use is, Oh! I beseech you, let us in every thing consider Faith.
When ever you think of Faith, don't look upon it in it self, but only in its
Relation to the Redeemer. Indeed, Faith is like the Eye; there is a great deal
of admirable curious Workmanship in the Eye, as the Anatomists of the Eye have
made very plain. One would stand amazed, to behold the admirable Skill of the
Creator, in the Eye! that excellent Machine, as I may call it. And yet
notwithstanding all this, Without Light, what were the Eye? even nothing at
all. And so Faith has a great deal of curious Workmanship; It is a great Work
of God; The Work of Faith with Power, as the Apostle says. It is the Faith of
Gods Power; It is the like precious Faith. But if you take away Christ from it,
alas! It is nothing at all. All its Excellency is in its Union to Christ. I
speak this, that I would not in the least seem to quarrel, or to raise a
Controversy with any Holy Servants of Jesus Christ. Yet I say, we are ready to
run into such a kind of Notion of Faith, as if there was some Excellency in its
self; and because it obeys; as it is very true, it does: And because it
purifies the Heart and Life, and lays Arguments and Engagements of Obedience: I
don't deny any thing of this; but desire to speak the same thing. But I still
affirm, that we may not be mistaken in Faith: For, this is not its Excellency;
no more than it is the Eyes Excellency, that it is curiously made, whereas it
would be nothing; no, not so much a beauty, if it were not for Light. It were
all one, as if a Man were blind, or had no Eye. So it is all one, if it were
not for Christ, whether there were such a thing as Faith, or no such thing as
Faith; It were of no value, or Account, if it were not for him. And therefore,
I beseech you, keep all this strictly in your Thoughts, Faith is excellent:
Why? because Christ is excellent* and it has to do with him. It has a great
many Subordinations of Excellency on this side Christ; but its great Excellency
is, it touches Christ. And then,

In the second Place, I beseech you let us always mind this, the Person of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Don't think of his Benefits divided from his Person, for God gives you his
Son: he gives you his Son first and Principally; but when he gives you his Son,
all his Benefits come with him. There is Pardon, Righteousness, Sanctification,
and Redemption; every thing comes in by Jesus Christ. He gives you Christ
himself first; It is He that is made this to us. There are so many Scriptures
in this Point, that I don't know where to stay, when I come to consider it. As
now, He that has the Son, has Life. And God gives his Son, and all things
together with Him. And, we have not Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, as it were, apart, that God sends them by themselves, and we have
them: And though Christ be to be known to be the Author only of them, it is no
matter whether we mind him further or not; I say, this is not the Truth of the
thing. But ye are of God in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, etc. And you cannot have them, except you have Christ first; you
must have him first, and unite first with him. But that which I shall pitch
upon, is Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not
I, but Christ lives in me; and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live
by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. But
indeed, the first and principal thing that we are to look to in Christ, is
Redemption, Pardon of Sin in his Blood; Righteousness, and Justification, as I
shall after show you; and therefore we should always look to his Person. And
then,

In the third, and last place, I shall desire, if we love Christ, let us love
these Truths of Christ, and these Manifestations of Christ.

Because they are gloomy; there is a great gloom upon them, you may plainly
perceive, not only among the Heathens, Mahometans, Antichristians, and Papists:
But there is a gloom among Protestants; they are not so clear, so bright, so
lively and excellent among us, as in themselves: For, if these things I have
spoken of, be true, It is certain, here is the Oriency of the Gospel; here is the
Pearl of great Price, Jesus Christ. And our Souls should close with, and cling
to Him. Now, because there is a Fog and Mist about these things; how earnestly
should we pray for the Kingdom of Jesus Christ? For, then these things will
come into their Glory, into their Beauty; into their Perfection.

And therefore, I say, if we love Christ, our Souls should earnestly desire
that this Kingdom of Christ should appear. For then, (as I have often told you)
the New Song shall be sung, as it were a New Song. It was as it were lost, and
shall be recovered again; and therefore it is, as it were, a new Song.

The first thing in the Kingdom of Christ, (I beseech you, remember it;
remember, it is spoken to you this day; and I hope, that many of us may live to
see the thing) the first thing that shall be, after the Kingdom of Christ shall
be known, shall be the Voice of Harpers, with their Harps, so loud, as it were
the Voice of Thunder; this, As it were a New Song of the Redempiion of Jesus
Christ, etc.

The End of the First Sermon.
THE FAITH BY WHICH We are Justified, etc.
The Second Sermon.
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.


THE great point of Discourse that I have singled from these words, is to open
to you the Nature of that Eminent and Transcendant Grace of the Gospel; the
Grace of Faith, which our Lord has an especial respect to in these words, John
17. 7, 8. They have known, that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are
of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they
have receied them, (that is, they have received them by Faith) and have known
surely, that I came out from thee, and they have believed them that thou did
send me. They have known surely; and they have believed that thou did send
me. They have Believed. Knowing, and Believing, are here United one with
another, because of that sure Knowledge, and that strong demonstration of Faith
gives to the Souls of his People. And then,

Secondly, Here Is the great Object of this Faith. For, they have known, that
all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee. Whatsoever thou have
given me; the things are of thee. And the words which thou gave me, they have
received them: And they have known surely that I came out from thee, and that
thou did send me.

Jesus Christ is the Supreme Object of Faith, as he is one with the Father, and
has come into the World, as the Mediator and Redeemer of lost and undone
Sinners.

Therefore I have undertaken, in the first Place, to make out this to you; that
the proper Object of Faith, is the Mediator; and that Faith came in with the
Mediator; and subsisted wholly in him, and upon him. And if you take away the
Mediator; Faith becomes a mere Nullity, a mere nothing. There is the same, and
far greater Conjunction betwixt Christ and Faith, than there is between the Eye
and Light. As you know, the Eye is nothing without Light: so Faith is nothing,
without that great Light, the Mediator.

This I began to open to you,

First, In that Jesus Christ is the Supreme Revelation of God. For, Faith (by
those that strictly Define it, or Describe it) it is an Assent to Divine
Revelation.

Now, the great Revelation of God, it is Jesus Christ. He is the great Truth,
the Alpha and Omega of Truth. And all Truth (as I showed you) depends upon him.
For there comes in with Jesus Christ, a Notion of Truth, proper and peculiar to
himself. All the great Truths of Scripture. Indeed, there are notable
Intimations, and great Representations in all the Holy ways of God, in which
the Soul of Man was at first Created.

But the great Subject of Truth; it is the Truth that comes in with Christ: As
I showed you, he says of himself, He is (The) Truth.

And even Natural Truth (as I abundantly showed you) it comes under Christ.
Natural Truth; that Truth, that there is an everlasting Being: That God is;
This comes under Christ: It removes (as it were) from being a Natural Truth;
and it comes under Christ. Tho it is true, there are great Arguments to prove
it; yet it chooses (as it were) and delights to come under Christ. And so the
Truths of Eternity (as I shall speak more presently) they come under Christ.

In the Second place; as Faith, it pitches upon some good, upom some grace that
is showed to the Children of Men; so Jesus Christ, he is the great object of
Faith; because all Good it is in him. The Promises of Grace, they are all in
him. And therefore, that is a great Scripture, that I did not mention to you
the last day; and therefore, I beseech you, now to take it into great
consideration, 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the promises of God are in him, yea, and in
him Amen, to the Glory of God. In him, yea, and in him Amen. All that God has
spoken of Grace, and of good will to the Children of Men; it is all in Christ:
All the promises in him are, yea; and in him they are Amen. And he is (The)
Deliverer, as I showed you, from the Wrath to come. Christ in you the hope of
Glory, Col. 1. 27. It is wonderful, how all Good is Treasured up in Christ.
Faith runs to a Promise; it runs, especially to Grace; and to a Revelation of
the Infinite Riches of Grace: And all is in Jesus Christ. Christ in you the
hope of Glory.

I come now to go on.

In the Third place, As Faith is a mighty active Power of Holiness, and of New
Obedience; so its whole Rest and Trust is in Jesus Christ. As the Trust of
Faith ( in whom ye trusted, as the Apostle speaks) the Trust of Faith, in
regard of Eternal Life and Salvation; so the Activity of Faith flows from the
Mediator; And as all the Promises, or Hopes that we can have of God, are in
Christ; as I showed you, they come under Christ, now, as the Redeemer: As I
instanced to you, in that expression: That you would (says the Apostle) give
up your selves unto him, as a Faithful Creator: That is, as a Redeemer. So it
is in this point; All the Holiness of a Christian, it flows from Faith in Jesus
Christ. That is the true Holiness, that comes in by Faith in Jesus Christ; that
Derives from Christ; and is conveyed to us by Faith.

So that if you enquire, How shall I come to be Holy?

I do not deny, that all the Rules of the word of God, are of great help and
assistance herein; But yet, still I say, that the Center, and the Root, and the
Fountain, and the Wellspring of All, is Jesus Christ. And therefore we find in
that, 1 Cor. 1. 30. a place often to be remembered and mentioned, when we are
speaking of these things. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us, Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

He is made Wisdom and Sanctification. The first being in a Soul by Wisdom;
it is from Christ. He is the Wisdom by which a Man considers the madness and
folly of all the ways of Sin; and engages therefore into the ways of Holiness.
Christ is his Wisdom to do it. He is the Wisdom of Faith, and the Wisdom of
Repentance: The Wisdom by which a Soul seeing its lost state in it self; its
unholy and corrupt state in it self; It comes to say, Where shall I have a
change of this State and Condition? And it sees Christ to be the only
Foundation of it. And therefore, the Power of Holiness, it comes in by
Believing; you find therefore how often Christ is pleased to speak of himself,
such words, as do certainly imply the Power of Holiness to be from himself. As
now, John 14 6. He comprehends all those in himself; says Christ, I am the
way, the Truth, and the Life. No Man, etc. Take these words, either in the
point of Justification, or in the point of Calling; or in the point of
Sanctification; or, take them in the highest Glory of Saints: it is very true:
Christ is the way, the Truth, and the Life. Now He is the way, in regard of
Sanctification; And he has the mighty Power of all that Life of Holiness; of
all that Life of Grace, derived from himself. So that indeed, when we find our
Graces to be either in a declining, or in a low State; or when we find our
selves under any Temptation, or, when we find our selves to be to grapple and
contest with things that Flesh and Blood cannot tell how to contest with; our
great Wisdom is to run to Christ for Power; for the Power of Grace; for
strength of Grace to do it; and to depend upon him, wholly for it.

For, As I showed you last day, That a Servant of Christ, a true Believer in
Christ, he is Crucified with him: Even as to the point of Justification; he is
upon the Cross together with Christ; he comes under the sentence of Guilt, with
Christ; and all his own Righteousness is is slain. Why so, in the very same
manner, all his Lusts, they are brought under by the mighty Efficacy of Truth
that is in Jesus Christ: As now, in the Epistle to the Galatians, chap. 6. you
shall find where the great Power of Crucifying of our Lusts is. It is certainly
by our Being in Christ, I say, it is certainly the Being of the Soul in Christ,
that Crucifies all these. Says the Apostle, Gal. 5. 24. They that are
Christ's, (pray observe) have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and
Lusts. They that are Christ's, have done it: A Man does not become Christ's, by
Crucifying his Lusts and Affections; But, because his is Christ's, therefore he
has Power from Christ, to crucify his Lusts and Affections. This is a great
Truth; they that are Christ's, have crucified their Lusts and Affections: Their
sinful Lusts and Affections. And in the 6th chap. of the Gallatians, says the
Apostle, as he said before, That he was crucified with Christ; so he says in
this chapter, Gal. 6. 17. From henceforth let no Man trouble me; for I bear in
my Body the marks of the Lord Jesus. And ver. 14. God forbid, that I should
Glory in any thing, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

You see here how plainly the Power of Christ is that, that crucifies Lust, and
crucifies the love of the World.

Here is our great misery, our great unhappiness in the Power of corruption
over us; That we do not receive Christ. And then, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21. When the
Apostle had set out the exceeding evil conversation of the Heathen; He says,
ye have not so learned Christ; If so be that ye have heard him, and have been
taught by him, as the truth, is in Jesus: That ye put off concerning the former
conversation, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts.

I do most sincerely acknowledge, that all the Scripture, and the Gospel of
Christ, and all the commands and Admonitions, and Exhortations, and Reproofs of
it; and all the Terrible Expressions of it; they are all, ( I do acknowledge) of
great use, of great influence in an Holy Life. But yet it is all through the
Spring, in whom they are; and through that mighty Power, in whom they are. And
therefore we do but go down to the Philistines Forges, when we go in the Power
of Mortification, and being crucified to the Affections of the Flesh; when we
do not look to Christ, as the Principle hereof: He is the Sanctification of
Believers.

And so in the 1 Cor. 6. 9. Such were some of you, (says the Apostle) having
spoken of the greatest sinners: But ye are washed, but ye are Sanctified, but
ye are Justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
Abundance of Scripture might be added to this, that show that the Powers of
Sanctification, and Holiness of Life, are all in Christ; who makes perfect in
every good Work to do the will of God; and works in us that which is well
pleasing in his sight.

So that I say again, We do not become Christ's, by doing these things; But we
do them, because we are Christ's; because a Power, and a Might flows from him,
and from his Blood, to do it by.

O that therefore, we may know the true Method and Order of being Holy! It is
certainly of first being Christ's: And if we are strangers to Christ, we shall
be strangers to Holiness, and of all the ways of Purity, without him.

Let us therefore lie under this Rich Redemption of Jesus Christ, in setting us
free from the Plague of our own Hearts, and from the evil of our Lives. And
then,

I beseech you, consider further; (for this is most necessary to be understood)
that all the Reasons, Rules, Measures, and Arguments of Holiness; Christ has
brought them all under himself. For, that Law of Holiness, that God planted in
the Heart of Man, that Law of Holiness that is given out every where in his
Word; all that is derived from thence; it is all now come under Jesus Christ,
and under his mighty Power.

The Law came by Moses; but Grace, and the Power of Holiness, it comes by Jesus
Christ. He has, as the Apostle says, implanted the Law, by himself: And the
Law is written in the Hearts of his Servants, by and through the Grace of the
New Covenant, as you know that great Place, Heb. 8. 10.

How comes the Law to be written in the Hearts of the Servants of God? It is
because of the New Covenant, of which, Jesus Christ is the Surety, and the
Mediator. This is the Covenant, that I will make with the House of Israel,
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write
them in their Heart.

All the Holy Laws of God, they are written in the Heart and Mind, through the
New Covenant; of which, you know, every where, the Apostle declares Christ to
be the Surety, and the Mediator, and the Testator of.

So that, if there be any thing that is well spoken, in the whole World, of
Morality, it is properly transplanted under the Influence of Jesus Christ, the
Son of Righteousness; and the great Sanctifier of his People.

And so, if we take those Places of Scripture; to be sure, Holiness and
Sanctification, in the strict Sense, is not to be excluded. That he might
Sanctify his People with his own Blood. For their Sake, I sanctify my self,
That they might be Sanctified through the Truth.

Now, Faith is that (as I shall show you) by which we derive from Jesus Christ,
All Sanctification in what sense soever.

I come to the fourth thing, in which I would show the excellency of Faith; and
that it is all in and through Christ. And that is, those Heroic Acts, those
extraordinary Acts, that the Servants of God have done in the World, at any
Time; they have been done by the Power of Faith; as that Power has been
received by Faith, from Jesus Christ. In Heb. 11. We have a great Record of
those things that the Servants of God have done, in the several Ages of the
World; the great many things they have done; those mighty Acts that they
achieved; as you see all along, in that Chapter.

The Apostle begins with Abel; and so he comes down to Noah, and to Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob; and then to Joseph, and to Moses; and then, to the
Servants of God together; as you find, verse 33. Gideon, and Barak, and
Sampson, and Jepthah, and David, and Samuel, and the Prophets it comes down to:
Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises,
stopped the Mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of Fire, escaped the edge of
the Sword; out of weakness, were made strong, waxed valiant in Fight, turned to
flight the Armies of the Aliens. Women received their dead raised to life
again; and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might
obtain a better Resurrection. And others had Trials of cruel Mockings, and
Scourgings; yea, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments. They were stoned, they
were sawn asunder, were tempted, were flain with the Sword; they wandered about
in Sheeps^skins, and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented. And
these all, says the Apostle, verse 39. having obtained a good Report. Indeed,
a good Report, are Words, in our ordinary use of them, too low. For, the
Apostle means, they obtained a high Renown; for, they are words of a
celebrating Nature; they are of a Holy, great Fame; they obtained a great Fame,
that is the meaning of it; they are spoken of with great Honor, in all Ages. And
all this was by Faith. And their Faith, it rested upon Jesus Christ. For, as a
Captain, (as he spoke to Joshua, who is here referred to) he appeared. Nay
(says he) Captain of the Lords Host, am I now come; and now thus appear unto
thee. It is very remarkable, that all the great Acts, that the Servants of God,
have at any time done, they have done it by the power of Faith; and that Faith,
in Christ, Josh. 5. 13.

And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jerico, that he lifted up his Eyes,
and looked, and behold, there stood a Man over against him, with his Sword
drawn in his Hand; and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, art thou for
us, or for our Adversaries? And he said, nay, but as Captain of the Host of the
Lord, am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the Earth, and did worship,
and said unto him, what says my Lord unto his Servant?

Now, this we know, is not what any Holy Angel would accept. And therefore, it
is certain, it was Christ.

He fell down, and worshipped. But when the Angel, in the Revelation was
offered to be worshipped, you know, he said, see thou do it not, for I am but a
fellow Servant. But says Joshua, What says my Lord unto his Servant? And the
Captain of the Lords Host said unto Joshua, loose thy shoe from thy foot, for
the place whereon thou stand is holy ground; and Joshua did so.

I speak this only, as an evident Argument, that this was Christ. And it is
evident, that he is the Captain of the Lords Host, in any great thing that his
Servants do.

And therefore, when any of the Servants of God, in the old Testament, did
extraordinary things, it was by the Power of their Faith; and their Faith, it
was a Faith in Christ. And therefore, certainly, if we had the power of Faith,
there would be great things that we should do.

We do but very little things; because we have very little Faith. But if an
abundance of Faith was given to us, we should be able to do the great things,
that the Servants of God have done heretofore.

And, when ever such things, as I cannot, but upon all Occasions, say to you, I
hope the time is near, that great Things shall be done; they shall be done by
the Power of Faith; and by the Captain of the Lords Host appearing, and coming
on our side. And, as a further proof, (if there needed any; but I think, there
needs nothing more to be said) The Captain of the Lord's Host, was Christ. The
Apostle takes that very Expression; surely, we have Reason to think so: For,
Scripture delights in its own Language, and to refer to it, and to speak like
it self. Heb. 2. 10. For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom
are all things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their
Salvation perfect through sufferings, the Captain of the Lord's Host. So that I
say, all the great things that have been done by the Servants of God, have been
done by the power of Faith. Such things had never been done, if it had not been
for the Power of Faith, coming in by Jesus Christ. It is certain, such things
had never been done, so as to give glory to God, in the doing of them.

Indeed, I know, you may be ready to say; why, the Enemies of God have done
great things; Have we not heard, and read of great Alexander? Of the great
Caesar's of the World? Of the great Princes of the Turkish Army! They have done
great things.

It is true: Because (as God says) they were his Servants, in the doing of
them: And they were as the Axe, and as the Saw in his hand; he gave them great
strength. And so now, what is done, and has been done by the French Potentate;
certainly, it is, because God has had a great End and Design in it.

And, I am very sure, it is well known, that God has set him up, to do all
that he has done, for special purposes of his own, and According to all that
Frame of Prophesy, that is given.

But now, here is a great Difference: As here, do but observe it; As God speaks
in the Prophet Isaiah. There Is great difference between David and
Nebuchadnezzar; Between Joshua, and such a one as Nebucadnezzar; or such a one
as Alexander; or such a one as Julius Caesar, that History makes so famous. I
say, here is the great difference. As God says, They are but like the saw in
his hand. Isa. 10. 15. Shall the Ax boast it self against him that heweth
therewith? Or shall the Saw magnify it self against him that shakes it?

That is, These are things without Sense: You know, an Ax or a Saw, whatever it
does; it does without any Sense of what it does. So these have done great
things; because they have been in God's hand to do by: But they had no sense at
all of the things they did: They had no Faith: Here Is the great difference.

Now, I say, if we could receive it; this I look upon to be the great
Reconciliation between the Apostle Paul, and the Apostle James. This 11th to
the Hebrews, it Expounds what the Apostle means by a Faith of Works: He does
not speak of the ordinary Works of Holiness; but he speaks of extraordinary. As
Abraham Sacrificing his Son; and Rahab leaving the Interest of his Country,
from a sight, that God was pleased to Exalt that People of Israel. These were
the Heroic Acts of Faith: And these, the Apostle properly speaks of.

And therefore, to Argue the ordinary Duties, Practice, and Conversation, and
Holiness to Justification; is not according to the sense and intention of the
Apostles meaning; not in Justifying Abraham, as I shall speak particularly to
that, wherein, and how Faith comes to Justify.

But still I go on further; Lest any one should say, why then, are not the
ordinary ways of Holiness, under the Power of Faith, and so Derived by Christ?

Yes, by all means, as I have spoken to you before. He is our Sanctification.
But I speak of it only now, as under this Head; the Heroic Acts of Faith. For,
all the ordinary Acts of Faith come under him.

As now, suppose any one is called out, either as a General, in this very Age;
if he be truly a Believer in Christ; tho he does but the things that are
Accountable, according to the Law of Arms, (if I may so speak) according to the
Law of a General; and the great use and office of a General; yet still, even
those ordinary Actions; where they are Believers; are done by the Power of
Faith.

You Will say, Why? when others do the same thing.

I Answer, as I did before; They are but Axes and Hammers; As God calls
Nebuchadnezzar the Hammer of all the Earth. And his Empire was the Hammer of
all the Earth. They do things but as Hammers. There Is a great deal of
difference (I Will assure you) in this thing; tho the outward Action be the same;
yet the inward is not the same.

When a Man, as a General, leads an Army in the Cause and Interest of God; and
when another does it by his own Prowess; The one does it by Faith; the other by
an Instrument.

There is a living Spirit in Believers; and therefore God does many times raise
them up to greater Actions than Ordinary.

But I only speak, when God calls Men to Deny to be the Son of Pharaoh's
Daughter, as Moses, when he calls Joshua to be so great a Warrior in the
World; And David, and those Worthies to do extraordinary Works; It is by Faith,
through the Mediator: it is all upon his Account; and is managed for him and by
his strength, by Faith.

The Fifth thing, in which I would open to you the great excellency of the
Nature of Faith; That in the obtaining of Wonderful things; it is a Wonderful
thing how God has enlarged Faith to the obtaining of extraordinary things, in
several Ages of the World.

Indeed, you may say, such things are ceased now.

But (as I have endeavored to show you) there shall be a Revival of them. But
now, when such great things as we read of, at any time, in the Scripture;
Extraordinary Appearances of God, in a way of Deliverance of his Saints. When
Elijah prayed and shut the Heavens: When great Deliverances were obtained by
Prayer, in Fights; When there has been great Answers of Prayer, extraordinary
Answers of Prayer, in any case; That God has Appeared in the Mount; This has
been from the Power of Faith. And therefore the Apostle ( Heb. 11) one of the
things that he puts into the great Record of Faith; it is this, That they
obtained promises, verse. 33. They stopped the Mouths of Lions. When the Fire
could not burn upon those three, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Why, this was
by the Power of Faith they quenched the Violence of the Fire. And Women
received their Dead, raised to Life again: This was by the power of Faith.

All these things are extraordinary things, given to the Mediator, to do for
his Servants, according to the season that he sees fit. And they are conveyed
to. But I would very earnestly desire, to add something concerning the Kingdom
of Christ.

What is the Reason that the Scripture is so abundant of such a World to come?
Whereof, (as the Apostle says) we speak; In such a new Heaven; in such a new
Earth; In such a Sabbattism that remains for the people of God; In such a
glorious Inheritance as shall he? What is the Reason we are so hard to believe
it? It is only the want of Faith.

I Will give you one Scripture concerning this, Heb. 11. 39, 40. These all having
obtained a good report through Faith, receiving not the promise: God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect. This place of Scripture, if it were but well pursued, followed, and
Argued from, would prove to you, That the great Point of Faith, is the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ. Undoubtedly, there should have been an Eternal Life, an
Eternal Happiness for Adam; If he had stood in Innocence, There had been a
preparation, and a provision. But this very state of things comes in by the
Mediator; by his entering into Rest for us, this great Sabbattism comes in.

But now the thing that I would urge; (I wouid help you in this) through Faith
they obtained a good Report.

A great Fame, (as I told you before) a great Renown. But they received not the
Promise.

How can it be said, They received not the Promise, if it be so, that Heaven is
the Promise? For, I would ask any Man, that gives Reverence to this word of
God; Do you Believe that Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, Samuel,
David, etc. Do you think they are now in Heaven? And yet (says the Apostle
expressly) they went away out of this World, and left a great Fame and Honor,
and record of themselves, behind them; but did not receive the Promise. Did
they not receive the Promise immediately, when their Spirits went out of their
Bodies to Heaven? Can it be said, They Received not the Promise, if Heaven were
the Promise intended? And yet, the Apostle says, They received not the
Promise; God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect. Therefore I say, That Glorious Kingdom of Jesus
Christ; That Visible Glory of Saints, both in Body, and Spirit; That they did
not receive: The New Heaven, and the New Earth, they did not receive; which the
Apostle Peter says, We look for according to promise; they have it not yet; tho
they have been in Heaven for so many Ages. And therefore Faith is on purpose
for this Kingdom of Jesus Christ, among the things that are to come: Among
them, I say; and as a Principal of that World to come, whereof we speak.

I shall therefore add at this time, by way of Recollection (and so conclude
with Application, a recollection of all that I have spoken, of the great
excellency of Faith. And I beseech you, in the First place, Let this be a
general Position concerning Faith; That Faith is proper to that New Creation
(from first to last) that comes in by Jesus Christ.

It is as really a New Heaven (if I may so represent it to you) a New Heaven of
Grace, As that New Heaven, the Apostle Peter, and John speak of; shall be a New
Heaven, in comparison of that we have now. The Heaven we have now, declares the
Glory of God: It is one of the wonderful Works of God: The Sun, Moon and Stars;
How wonderful are they! And yet, for all this; there shall be a New Heaven. God
does not like the Heaven that is now, as sufficient to declare his Glory. For,
if there had been no fault found with the Heaven and Earth that are now, what
place had there been for a New Heaven? As the Apostle Argues in the Case of the
Covenant.

I beseech you, consider; it is the Apostles own Argument, in another case,
Heb. 8. 7. For if that first Covenant had been faultless; then should no place
been sought for the Second. And in that he says, A New Covenant; He has made
the first Old. Now that which decays, and waxes old, is ready to vanish away.

I would but apply it to the New Heaven, and New Earth. If there had been no
fault found with the present Heaven and Earth; (tho they declare the Glory of
God) what place had there been for another Heaven and Earth? For the Second
Heaven and Earth? and why are they said to wax Old, but that they are to vanish
away? Surely, the Apostles Argument is very Substantial, according to the
Discourse here. But the thing that I intend it for, is, just as the New Heaven,
and the New Earth, that God will make; just such is the Faith that God has
brought in; That great Grace of Faith; It is as New, as the New Heaven and the
New Earth. It is a way of Salvation; a way of Righteousness; a way of Holiness;
a way of Eternally making Happy, As new, as the New Heaven, and the New Earth.
And therefore it is no wonder that Men boggle at Faith so; and that they make
such a stir about it; and are such Enemies to it; That no Discourse that is
found in the Gospel, will please them, or serve their turn: It is because God
has Created a New thing. It is not of the First Creation; but a New thing;
Grace of a New Erection, of a New Extraction. O Blessed are they that have it!
For, it is as much above Nature, as the New Heaven, and the New Earth shall be
above the present Heaven, and the present Earth. It is prepared and fitted on
purpose, by the Mediator.

To give it you in another Expression: And, I beseech you, rest upon it; And
that you may have it ready to Discourse, when any Assail the Doctrine of Faith;
that you may have it fitted within your Lips, as Solomon says.

I say again, Just as the Righteousness of the Second Adam, exceeds the
Righteousness of the First; just so does the way of Faith exceed the Integrity
and uprightness of Adam, in the First Creation, wherein he was Created.

You Will say, How can you make this appear? There is a plain Scripture for it: I
appeal to all the World, upon this Scripture, against the greatest Enemies of
Faith. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by grace; to the end, that
the promise might be sure to all the Seed, Romans 4. 16.

As much therefore, as Grace excels the Righteousness of Man in his first
Creation; so much does Faith excel all Natural Power.

And, as the certainty of Grace excels that of our Doing; So much does Faith
excel the First State in which Man was Created. For, It is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace. And then, that it might be sure; It must be of Grace. I say
therefore, I beseech you, conceive right of the excellency of Faith, by what I
have spoken to you, out of this very Scripture, Romans 4. 16. And have it in your
Mouths, as that word of Truth, by which you may Answer any that Reproach the
Holy Doctrine of Grace, and Faith in the Gospel.

But I would add but briefly, of the Excellencies of Faith, wherein God has
magnified Faith, above any other Grace. And yet, I shall show you, in the next
Discourse (if the Lord will give me leave to do it) that notwithstanding all
this excellency of Faith; It cannot in the least be said, to Justify by it
self; but only by that hold it has of Christ, and of the Righteousness of
Christ. But, I say, at the present;

First of all, here is the excellency of Faith; That Faith hangs only upon God,
and Christ, and that which is Divine, and Eternal; it will not venture upon any
thing that is Created. And if you come once to true Faith; you hang only upon
God and Christ, and the Spirit of God. A great deal of difference, when a man
hangs by this, and that Title, that he thinks is well grounded, and is in
himself, and in the Creature.

He has nothing then of Faith: For, Faith hangs wholly upon God, and Christ,
and the Spirit, and Grace, and what is Divine and Eternal.

In the Second place; Faith, it gives all the Glory to God; It must needs do
so, when it hangs all upon him; gives Glory to God, and Christ, and Grace;
Gives Glory wholly to him, as Romans 4. You know, Abraham was strong in Faith,
and gave glory to God. And then,

In the third place, It acknowledges all to God back again. It gives Glory to
him in the Action. That, that I mean now is, setting to the Seal, that God is
true; depending upon Infinite Grace, Infinite Power. And then, when the thing
is done, it returns all back again to God. To him be Glory that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb; who Loved, and Washed in his Blood; To the Holy
Spirit, as seven Spirits before the Throne. It returns all to him. And then,

In the last place, It Receives, even to Eternity, by way of free Communication
from God, and from Christ.

And therefore, tho there be some kind of Faith (I acknowledge) that fails (as
the Apostle says) and ceases, in the Happiness and Blessedness of Eternity,
and of the Kingdom of Christ; some kind of Faith does.

But yet that Faith whereby the Spirits of Saints, even to Eternity, receive
Glory, and Blessedness, and Life from God, and from Christ; That Faith never
fails.

I am very assured, when Saints have been ten Thousand, Thousand of Ages in
Happiness and Blessedness; They Will own it still, as Free, and pure gift of
Grace, in and through the Mediator. That they are one with the Father, through
Christ. And the Love wherewith the Father Loves Christ, is in them, because
Christ is in them. This never Ceases to Eternity, a dependence upon God in
Christ a Being in him.

I shall make but two brief Applications of what I have spoken, and so
conclude. And,

The First Application I would make of it, is, To bring all our Hearts to that
we read in the Gospel, when Peter said to Christ, Matt. 18. 22. How often shall
my Brother not sin against me, and I forgive him? Till seven times? Jesus says
unto him, I say unto thee, until seven times; but until seventy times seven.
And in another Evangelist, when Christ had said thus to Peter; He cries out in
the great Sense of this thing; It seemed so great a kind of Difficulty and
Impossibility to him, the forgiving so often; Says Peter, upon Christ's
saying, there must be a forgiving so often; Lord, increase our Faith.

Now, this is that I desire every one of us, to make use of what I have spoken
to you; to cry out unto Christ, Lord, increase our Faith. And another, Matt. 9.
24. When the Father had brought his Children to Christ; and Christ told him,
All things are possible to him that Believes; straightway the Father of the
Child cried out, and said, with Tears, Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief.

So I say, O that we could cry out with Tears! If Faith be such a thing (as
certainly it is; or this Book of God is not true) I say, certainly, Faith is
such a thing, as I have described. O that we could cry out with tears, in every
case I have named to you! O Lord, I Believe; Help thou my unbelief. That we
could cry out with Tears! O! Want of Faith is the great want among us all. We
have not so much Faith, as a Grain of Mustard Seed, certainly. O, How therefore
are there not great things done among us; because we believe not! No great
things done in our Souls; no great things done for us, in a way of Providence.
There are no great and mighty Conquests over Lusts and Corruptions; No great
and mighty Powers of Holiness, and Heavenliness; because we want Faith.

Indeed, Men go to work without Faith; and they think they can manage the
thing; But as I hope to have opportunity to show you; No one in the World, can
make so much as a grain of Mustard seed; so not so much Faith as would amount
to a grain of Mustard seed.

O! therefore, Let us cry out to Heaven for more Faith. We should obtain
Promises; we should have great things done, if we had but more Faith. And then,

The Second thing (with which I conclude) to beseech you, to look to that
Kingdom and Glory of Christ, wherein so much mighty Power, both of Faith and
Action shall be given, Psalm. 46. 1. God is our Refuge and Strength, a very
present help in trouble, therefore will we not fear, tho the Earth he removed,
etc. We should not be so intimidated; so full of fear, if we had but Faith. Tho
the Waters, etc. even when Mountains were thrown in the midst of the Sea, and
the Waves Roaring; yet there shall be a still, silent stream, that shall make
glad the City of our God.

The End of the Second Sermon.
THE FAITH BY WHICH We are Justified, etc.
The Third and Fourth Sermons.
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.


I Have, in the former Discourses set out the Nature and Excellency of Faith,
as it has so close an Union with, and derivation from Christ in the whole
Nature and Action of it.

Now I shall go on in showing you how much All is in Christ, and not in Faith
it self, by showing you; That if you consider Faith as in it self, it cannot be
that which Justifies; if you consider it, in, and by it self. And then,

In the Second Place, I shall more plainly lay down to you, how, and upon what
account, Faith is said to Justify. And then,

In the third Place, I shall show you, that if Faith it self, considered in it
self, cannot Justify, Then the works of Faith, tho they be never so excellent,
they cannot Justify, much less then faith it self. And so conclude this point
with the Application. And then, there will remain one point more concerning
Faith, And that is the Plerophory and full Assurance. They have known surely
that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou did send me. But
that will be the last point.

The First thing therefore that I shall endeavor (not in a Controversal, but)
in a Practical, Applicatory way, and in all the Sweetness of it, to all our
hearts, in the power, and life, and virtue of it.

The First thing that I lay down, is this; that Faith considered as a work, It
cannot Justify. The account that I give you of it is this; That Scripture does
every where, when it speaks precisely and clearly to the point; It does assure
us, it is the Righteousness of God; And not the Faith that takes the
Righteousness of God.

I desire to be very far from stirring up any Controversy; But to draw out our
hearts (I say) into the Sweetness of it.

Head 1. I begin now therefore to handle this great Point; and that is, Seeing
we meet every where in Scripture, with these Expressions, Justified by Faith;
The Righteousness of Faith; The great Question that I shall handle first, shall
be to show you, how, and in what sense Faith justifies; and in what sense it
cannot be said to justify. For, indeed, this is a point very necessary to be
cleared; seeing many are ready to say, That Faith is now instead of
Righteousness; and that it justifies, as the perfect Righteousness of the Law
should have done; And that this is the Condition upon which Christ is ours, and
upon which his Righteousness becomes ours: and thus Faith Justifies. And thus
Faith comes to be (through such very Discourses of Faith) an Eclipse upon the
Righteousness of Christ. And so the Works of Faith come to be so also; for, say
they, Every true, Faith must have Works. And the Apostle says, A Man is
justified by Works, and not by Faith only.

Now these things, they raise not only great Disputes; concerning which it were
indeed, much and earnestly to be desired, that they may be laid among the
Servants of God; that they may be calmed and composed; because it is greatly to
the dishonor of the Gospel, that there should be those noises of Axes and
Hammers in the Work of the Gospel; and because Men are ready to be scandalized;
And it is told in Gath, and published in the streets of Askalon, as the
Expression is. And therefore I say, we should earnestly desire to speak all the
same thing, and to be in one Mind, and in one Judgment, according to the Truth
of the Gospel. And then, besides, they are ready to stagger Souls, and to make
them they know not which way to turn; and they must dispute the things with
themselves; and so they are kept off from the healing that wound of Conscience,
and from the getting that full Assurance of Faith, and of Hope, and of
Knowledge. So that while the wound of Conscience, and the bleeding of
Conscience should be stanched; and while the close Application of the Blood of
Christ should work the Cure; the Souls and Spirits of Men are greatly in
Dispute and Perplexity, which way, and in what Method; what they should lay
first (as it were) to the bleeding Conscience, and to the distressed Spirit.

Now, I have lately given you this Rule; and I would renew it, and (...) it to
you* That you labor after, and seek after these things, from God; and that you
would not perplex your selves about the term of Dispute, in which these things
are conveyed.

O! Let but our Souls find that we have Christ indeed for ours, and that we
apply to his Blood by Faith; and that we turn from every Iniquity by
Repentance; and it is no matter for all the Disputes about the Order, and
whether a Man should stay for this, or for that: But let him give up his Soul,
according to the Impression of Grace, and the Spirit of God upon him.

But yet however, when we discourse of these things plainly and peaceably, and
according to the clearest Light and Reason of the Gospel; they are to be
attended to: And our Minds thereby, shall have Ideas and Representations of
them that may be suitable to the inward Case of our Souls.

And therefore, at this time, I shall lay down four Positions, in which, I
shall open to you the nature of Faith in Relation to Justification: Or,

The true nature of Justification, as it is taken in by Faith.

The First Position that I shall lay down, is this; I say, No Righteousness,
but a Divine Righteousness, an Everlasting Righteousness, can be the
Righteousness of a Lost and undone Sinner: Of an Immortal Eternal Soul, lost
and undone by sin: No Righteousness, but a Divine Righteousness; an Eternal and
Everlasting Righteousness.

O! Keep this always in your mind: It must be such a Righteousness; Or it will
not serve the great Purpose of your Souls.

The Second thing that I would lay down, is this; that there is no possibility,
that Faith, by any virtue, or Excellency of its own, should be our
Righteousness.

And therefore, tho there be a great Renown of Faith, in the Gospel, compared
with the Graces of the Spi^ ^f God, and the working of that Spirit in the
Hearts and Lives of Ch^stians; yet still, it is not with Relation to God, so as
to be our Righteousness; But only (as I shall show you) it takes in the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ and wherein the Excellency of it lies, to that
purpose.

In the Third place; the Third Position that I would lay down, is this;

That tho it is true, that the Faith the Gospel speaks of, is a vigorous,
working, active Faith; yet, the works of Faith are further off from the
Justifying of a Sinner, than Faith it self is.

So, that take the most excellent works of any of the Believers in Jesus
Christ; It is not their works: I say it is not their works that are their
Righteousness to Justification; they are further off from Justification, than
their Faith is: And yet this Faith cannot be their Justification.

The Fourth Position that I would lay down, is this; that Faith has not a Power
of it self, to take Christ: But Jesus Christ gives himself to the Soul: And
then the mighty Power of Faith flows out from him, and Twines about Christ, and
unites it self unto Jesus Christ

These Four Positions, I do not find, upon the most severe Examination, that
they do in the least Abridge, or take off any thing from the Holiness of the
Gospel, and from the duties in which all Christians are to be found. And yet,
they give us indeed, the truth of the freeness of the Grace of the Gospel; and
will Redeem us from all mistakes and misapprehensions, or from lessening the
Glory of Christ and his Righteousness.

I Begin at this time with the First of them: And that is, that no
Righteousness, but an Everlasting, a Divine Righteousness can possibly serve
the case of our Souls.

You find therefore in Dan. 9. 24. When Jesus Christ came into his great
Action, as a Mediator; He is said to finish transgression, and to make an end
of sin, and to make Reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in Everlasting
Righteousness: He brings in Everlasting Righteousness.

David has an Expression; which I confess, one would be ready (If one does not
weigh, and compare it with the whole Scripture) to think, it was the
Righteousness of Holy works only, he, or rather the Holy Spirit intended by
him in it. But if we consider it close, and with the whole Scripture; there is
Reason to look upon it, as having Relation to the great salvation, by the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Psalm. 119. 144 The Righteousness of thy
Testimonies is Everlasting, etc.

I say, it does seem to refer to those Righteous and Holy Precepts of God. But,
he calls it, the Righteousness of thy Testimonies; That is, the Great Testimony
of Revelation that God has given anew, by the word. Not that Righteousness
that was written upon the heart of man; But the Righteousness of the Testimony
of the Revelation of God. And therefore, give me understanding herein, and I
shall live. According as he said, there is a Covenant made with me ordered in
all things, and sure. And, it is an Everlasting Covenant. And therefore the
Righteousness of his Testimonies is to be expounded by those very words, Sam.
2. 23. 5. Although my house, etc.

And though his house was not so with God: That is, though he could not come up
any way, either before Conversion, or after Conversion, to the Holiness that
every person is tied by to the Law: Yet there is an Everlasting Covenant
ordered in all things, and sure, Which is all our salvation and all our hope.

For the opening therefore of this Position, to you more fully; The First thing
that I desire may be well Apprehended by us, is this;

That there is no Communication of Righteousness, but the Righteousness of God
himself: I say, of God himself, through the humane nature of Christ; The
Righteousness of him, who is Eternal God, through the Humane Nature; No other
Righteousness is that Righteousness, that the Gospel Expresses to us for
Justification.

And therefore, you know, it is several times in Scripture, called the
Righteousness of God. Indeed the Scriptures are not to be numbered Easily. Those
in the New Testament call it the Righteousness of God. I know, It may be
Interpreted to be called the Righteousness of God; because it is a
Righteousness of God's providing, and that he approves. But there is one place
of Scripture that will clear this to us, that there is more intended than that,
Phil. 3. 8, 9. Says the Apostle, yea doubtless I count all but Dross that I
may be found in Christ, not having my own Righteousness, but that which is of
God, the Righteousness of God by Faith of Jesus Christ. Observe the
Righteousness of the Law is truly the Righteousness of God, so far as it is
Commanded, and so far as any one can have it; that is, the Righteousness that
God has Commanded, and that God has proposed. But that which is by the Faith
of Christ, is the Righteousness which is of God, which flows from God, and is
received by Faith; the Righteousness which is of God by Faith.

The great Fountain of it is God himself in Jesus. And therefore there is
nothing so great in Scripture, as the Apprehending of Christ the Son of God, by
Faith. You shall find oftentimes, he is so called, The Son of God. And John 17.
7, 8. They have known that I came out from thee, and that thou did send me.
Here is this very thing, our Lord intends, to show himself that Divine Person,
that is, The Son of God, John 9. Consider that place; that you may know how to
direct and place your Faith. You must not rest in the Humanity of Christ, in
the Man Christ Jesus; But your Rest must be in the Divinty of Christ; the
Godhead of Christ. There Is the great Rock (as Christ told Peter) that the
Church is founded upon. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the
Father, says Christ; therefore, I beseech you, that we may all go to the very
height of this: That is, to look to Jesus Christ, as the Son of God, John 9.
33. They cast out the blind Man, that Jesus had healed; They cast him out of
the Synagogue: When Christ found him, he said unto him, Do thou believe on
the Son of God? Pray observe, Do thou believe on the Son of God? He did not
say, Do thou believe on me, that thou see before thee, in the Figure and
appearance of a Man, and to be truly a Man? But do thou believe on the Son
of God?

Indeed, there may be places of Scripture, where Christ speaks of Believing in
himself, without this high Style: But when there is one great place of
Scripture, or several great places (I may rather say) that lead higher; It is
certainly our Duty to go up to the highest, and to carry all thither. Now
(says Christ) do thou believe on the Son of God? He Answered, and said, Who
is he, Lord, that I might believe in him? And Jesus said unto him, thou have
both seen him, and it is he that talks with thee. And he said, Lord, I
believe, and he worshipped him. Here is the excellent Order of Faith, we must
go up to the height; To the Son of God

And then consider the Communication; through the Human Nature; I am he, says
he, Thou have seen him; and it is he that talks with thee.

I Will give you one very Evident place of Scripture more to this purpose; that
your Faith and your Hope might be in the Son of God. O! could we but apprehend
the Righteousness of the Son of God to be our Righteousness; what a Rock of
Support and Defense would it be to our Souls? How would it satisfy our
Scruples, and all our Fears? Indeed, it is a high act of Faith, to lay hold
thus upon the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ, etc.

Jesus Christ was Crucified through weakness, as the Apostle says in another
place. He was Crucified through weakness: That is, as a man: But he lives by
the Power of God: That is, by the Divinity. Now (says the Apostle) I am
Crucified with Christ: I receive by Communication from Jesus Christ, as Man, a
Crucifixion of my own Righteousness; So the Life which I live in the Flesh, I
live by the Faith of the Son of God, etc. who has conveyed his Salvation,
through his Human Nature. The great height of Faith, is to reach Jesus Christ
the Son of God. So in 1 John 1. 1. You may see how the Divine Excellency of
Christ streams through his Human Nature, unto eternal Life. That which was from
the beginning. He does not say, He that was from the beginning; But that which
was from the beginning, to direct our Hearts more Emphatically to the Eternal
Word, which we have heard, etc. Speaking of Jesus Christ, especially and
principally of his Divine Nature: And yet Communicated through Human Nature. So
that we have seen with our Eyes, and looked upon; and our hands have handled
the word of Life.

This therefore is the first thing, that we may understand the Nature of
Justification; It is the Righteousness of the Son of God, conveyed through the
Human Nature.

In the Second place, which I have mentioned in general Phrases, already; and I
would now imprint upon all our Hearts, through the Grace of God. That is, it is
not the Righteousness of Christ divided from himself; but the person of Christ,
and his Righteousness of Christ divided from Christ; but the Righteousness of
Christ in himself, as that person from whom it always flows. So, that our
Faith, it must be upon the Person of Jesus Christ. For, indeed, this is a great
mistake in our understanding, and in the working of our Hearts to Christ, tho I
would not entangle any Person, in the nicities of Discourse; But, by touching,
and apprehending, and applying the Benefits of Christ, the Believer does really
take Christ himself.

Yet, that we may clearlier understand this thing; I say, it is not a
Righteousness cut off from Christ, and imputed to us: As if Christ should say,
Here I lay you down so much Righteousness; a Righteousness, that I am sure,
will Answer, in every regard, for you: And take that Righteousness.

As if a Man should lay down a great Treasure of Gold, to a poor man, or to a
man in necessity; a Man in Distress; and should say, I lay you down this Gold;
this shall Answer every thing, that presses upon you; and so he goes away, and
leaves the Gold; and the person Apprehends, and applies the Gold to his use:
But he has but a far off-consideration of the person.

Now, I say, this is not fully our Case. Tho I would not be Perplexing to any
Soul; and especially, a Distressed and Tender Conscience; as if he must find
out these Nicities of Notion in his own Understanding, or he cannot be Christ's:
But ( I say) as the person that should receive this Gold; he may be united in
his Affection, and Love, and in his Trust, and Dependence, to such a person,
tho his notions of him are but dark; but here the true Righteousness is always
going out from Christ, as the Light is from the Sun. And, as the Son of
Righteousness, he gives out this Righteousness, so from himself, that it never
parts from himself.

It is not a thing by it self; that Christ is one thing, and his Righteousness
is another: But, by taking the Person of Christ, and by our being United to
him; we come thereby, to have the stream of his Righteousness, and the Beams of
it continually Flowing out, and shining upon us. And therefore this is the
thing that we are to look to; O! that our Hearts might be made Wise in it; and
might be enabled to it, to take the Son of God himself. As, indeed, it has been
the Doctrine of the Ancient Servants of Christ, who were called, in their time,
the Puritan Preachers: This Doctrine has been delivered long ago, very
excellently, by Dr. Preston, particularly, a Man of great Name, in the service
of the Gospel; this is the thing we must look to; To have the person of Christ
for ours; we must be United to him, as the great Redeemer; And so his
Righteousness flows out. That it is a Comparison we all understand he makes
great use of. As a poor Woman, suppose, clothed mean; and a distressed person:
And a great person is pleased to take her, and Espouse her to him. It is not
all the Riches, and Estate that such a person has, that should please such an
espoused Person; But it must be the very person that is pleased to espouse her;
that must be the Endearment of her Soul to Unite to him.

And so Jesus Christ must be the endeared one of our Souls. My beloved is mine,
and I am his.

And so, in that of Malachi, that I was naming to you; it does very admirably
make out the thing, Chap. 4. 2. But unto you that fear my Name, the Son of
Righteousness shall rise with healing in his Wings. You know, the Sun, it does
not part with its Beams, and with its Rays, tho it gives us their Light; but it
keeps them entirely within it self: So that you cannot clip off a Beam, by all
the Art in the World, from the Sun, and say, Here I have clipped off a Beam from
the Sun, and I Will keep it; it shall serve me for light, by Night and Day; You
know, this is impossible: he must have the very presence of the Sun, or he
cannot have the Beams and the Rays of the Sun.

So we cannot have the Righteousness of Christ, but by having the very person
of our Lord Jesus Christ for ours. And, says he, the healing is in his wings;
it is always in his Wings. Indeed, the virtue and efficacy of it passes from
the Wing, unto the Souls of the People. But, if you could part betwixt the Sun
and the healing, or the Wings and the Healings; the healing Power would
presently be gone, and lost. Therefore I say, it is our great business to keep
close to Christ; As I shall urge further still, in the prosecution of this
Point. But you see how the Scripture runs every where upon this. Who loved me,
and gave himself for me. And, found in Christ. And 1 Cor. 1. 30. Who of God is
made Wisdom, etc.

You have not Wisdom by it self; and Righteousnrss by it self; and
Sanctification and Glory by it self; But you have them all, by having Christ:
Of him are ye in Christ Jesus. There is nothing so clear as this thing, that I
am now upon, in Scripture: I say, nothing so clear; and so in 1 John 5. He that
has the Son, has Life, etc. Here is the Case: it is not Righteousness by it
self: But he that has the Son has Life.

Now, I would but desire, as I hope here are many at this time, that can
understand in good measure: I know, the thing is beyond all our Understanding,
as to the perfection of it: But in good measure, I hope we may understand. And
I would desire you but to consider, that if this point were but truly taken in;
how presently it would make an end of all that Controversy concerning
Justification. For, if we are but fully possessed, that this Righteousness flows
only from Christ; Christ in his Person, what room for Dispute, what our
Righteousness to Justification is.

I Will give you but one Scripture, and so pass off from this Head, Ephesians. 5. 25.
Wherein the Spirit of God makes use of this Similitude I named to you, out of
Dr. Preston: That is, of an Union; a Marriage Union. Husbands love your Wives:
From 25th ver. to the 32. For we are members of his Body; of his Flesh, and of
his Bones. If it were not so, his Righteousness could be no more our
Righteousness, than (as the Papists speak) the whiteness and Beauty of another
person, could be our Beauty, or Whiteness, or our pure Complexion. And so it
would be, if we were not Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones.
And for this cause, shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be
joined to his wife. This is a Great mystery, says the Apostle: But yet I speak
concerning Christ, and his Church. That is, there is a true Marriage Union: All
other Marriage Union is but a Foil, to set off the Greatness of that Marriage
Union betwixt Jesus Christ, and his Church. That is, All the Souls of
Believers, in Union and Communion, and Communication. And therefore,

In the Third Place; To bring this thing to a Head. The truth is, Righteousness
to Justification is in Christ only: And that is the sum of all that can be said.
For, if we be united to Christ; It is no Improper thing, that we should have
his Righteousness for ours.

You know, that marriage, it conveys a Right to the wife, of all that the
husband has: So Christ has a supremacy of Righteousness, of Sanctification
and Redemption; but still, he gives a Union. And the Righteousness of Christ
may well be our Righteousness; If we are members of his Body; of his flesh, and
of his bones. As you know, the Head, and all parts, they share one with
another; in either the Honor, the Glory; the Acquittal, or in the Condemnation
of any one particular. Therefore the Fourth Particular is this;

That indeed, if any one could frame a Notion of the Righteousness of Christ to
be his Righteousness; Or, of the Blood and Death of Christ to be his, for
Justification, and Pardon, and clearing from sin; If that Righteousness
separated from Christ; It would be no other to us, and in us, but as a
Creature-Righteousness, and as a self-Righteousness: And for us to trust in it,
and to stay our selves upon it; would be a trusting to our own Righteousness.

Therefore, as it is in him, a Spring, and a Fountain; There is the Life, and
there is the Glory of it.

I Will give you but one Scripture, Romans 5. 17. Mark, Here Is a Receiving
abundance of Grace, and of the gift of Righteousness. Nothing can be more
express than this; A man takes in by Faith abundance of Grace, and of the gift
of Righteousness.

But now, the Question is, does he live by this receiving abundance of Grace,
and of the Gift of Righteousness?

No: For, the Apostle goes on; He shall reign in Life by one Jesus Christ. He
shall not reign by abundance of Grace, and of the gift of Righteousness, which
he receives simply, and separately, and distinct from Jesus Christ; But he
shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.

Surely, this Scripture does cut off all disputes, and all Controversies; and
shows, that Justification is only by union to Christ, and by nothing else,
whatsover is the abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness; And
healed by the Wings of Christ, and flowing out, and Righteousness streaming out
continually, from the Sun of it; that is Christ.

Oh then that we were but clear in this great truth of the Righteousness of
God, Jehovah being our Righteousness. For, if such a poor weak thing, as Faith,
because it is conformable (as is supposed) to the Evangelical Law, were our
Righteousness, we should have Reason to fear, and much more, because indeed, no
one comes up so much as to the Evangelical Law, as they would phrase it: Our
Faith is so weak and low, that if we were to be Justified by it, we should be
utterly undone, even by that which we call the Gospel-Law, but when it does,
but only attend the Communication and giving of the Righteousness of the
Eternal Jehovab to us; when it does only that; O we that are in this
Righteousness, and are made the Righteousness of Jehovah; It is impossible we
should be condemned: We must needs condemn every tongue, that rises in Judgment
against us, because we have the Righteousness of Jehovah. I confess the thing
is so great; that many even would be ready to look upon it, as strange, and
next to Blasphemy. But it is the very words of Scripture, and even the thing it
self it always presses; Not that we are Righteous, as God is Righteous, (As
some would Infer from such Expressions) or Righteous as Christ is Righteous:
That is, according to the Divine Original Righteousness of Jesus Christ; or
according to any perfections that are proper to him: But that we are utterly
uncondemnable, and set out of the reach of Condemnation hereby; and arrayed, as
in our degree, with this rich Robe; Because it is the Righteousness of God we
are found in; and that we are made by Union to Christ, the Righteousness of
God. And yet all the distinction that ought to be preserved to the greatness of
the Righteousness of God, and Christ, is still preserved.

And that is the first thing, in which I would open this point.

The second thing is to show you, that Faith in it self, it cannot be looked
upon as our Righteousness; Because there is a great deal of difference, in all
our Reason and Apprehension, between the taking of a Gift, and the Gift.
Because I take a great Gift; shall therefore my taking be counted of Equal
value with the Gift? You know this is contrary to all our Reason, to all our
Apprehension in the case. A man may have a Pearl of Incomparable value given to
him, suppose in a state of necessity and want: Shall his taking of the Gift, or
of the Pearl be looked upon, as of equal value, with the Pearl it self? Why
now, if we were Justified by Faith, as it is a work, or an act of ours, or any
thing, let it be called by what name it will; as it is in us; would it
therefore Justify us, as it is in us? Because of its taking of an incomparable,
invaluable gift; must it be equal with the gift it self?

Therefore, though Scripture speaks so much of Faith as it does; and of being
Justified by Faith; yet, let Faith lie low before Christ. For, It is not our
taking, If it were the most perfect act, it could be supposed; But it is not
so: But we have Reason to cry out, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.

But if it were so; It were nothing at all in the case. As you know, the most
perfect, and grateful, and delightful Receiving of a gift, can no way answer or
stand in account with the gift it self.

Now therefore, this I desire should be Imprinted upon our spirits; both to
take down all imagination of our selves; and also to give Consolation, in many
of the Anguishes, and Agonies of Conscience, that come upon Believers through
the weakness of their Faith, Romans 5. 17. They which receive (says the Apostle)
abundance of Grace. Now, can any of us suppose, that the Receiving abundance of
Grace should be any way equal to the abundance of Grace it self?

And so, in the first Chapter of John; says the Evangelist there; He came unto
his own; and his own received him not. But to as many as received him, ver. 12.
Now I would desire to ask you, whether you think, that the receiving of him,
(that is, of Christ) whether it be any way matchable, or can countervail the
Excellency of Christ himself? Or whether it can come near, in any of the
virtues, or the Powers of Jesus Christ, to Adoption, or Justification?
therefore it is most evidently cleared, that it is not the worth of Faith, or
the Excellency of Faith, or the Activity, or Applicatoriness of Faith: But it
is wholly in that Great, and Excellent, and Infinite Person, whom we receive by
Faith; there is the whole of the thing.

And therefore, If you ask, where is our Riches, where is our Righteteousness,
where is our Strength?

It is evident, it is not in our receiving; But in him whom we receive. It is
not in our receiving; but in the abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of
Righteousness, that we receive, together with the receiving of Christ himself;
and no otherwise. Not by receiving of it, and going away with it from Christ,
and saying, we have it now: But by keeping close to him, as our Sun, and as our
Fountain; the Sun of Righteousness, and Fountain of Righteousness; keeping
close to him: And so that Righteousness of his, overflows, and runs out, upon
us; and then, as I said, our Consolation depends upon it. For, O! How do we
find our hand to shake?

A Paralytick hand, a Palsy hand it is that the best of us have. And if we
depend upon that, the hold that we take; certainly, this Rich Righteousness;
this Incomparable Rich Pearl will fall out of our hand. Do but consider how our
hand shakes in all our layings hold on Christ. But indeed it is the Jewel it
self that will be ours; that is pleased to be ours. That is, Jesus Christ is
pleased to be ours, and though our hand shakes in the taking of him; yet it
cannot shake, or Palsy (as I may so express) the love of Christ, in giving
himself: He is constant and Invariable in that. Where he loves a Soul, he loves
him to the End. As it is said peculiarly of Christ, in that of John; when he
was about to dye; being about to depart out of the world, having loved his own,
which were in the world, he loved them to the end. Chap. 13. 1.

Now if you consider how they behave themselves, Pray do but Remember; I say,
how these Own behaved themselves, at that time, when he was going out of the
world: They left him; they fled from him; they forsook him: And Peter that
pretended highest, denied him most shamefully.

Now, I say, if it had depended upon their Faith; they had certainly lost
Christ. But having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto
the end: So, though our Faith is never so weak, never so imperfect; yet he that
has said, I have given my self for them, and loved them; He holds them fast to
his own Gift, and within his own Gift: though they would ten thousand times,
(as I may so express it) let him go, if it depended upon their Faith.

Now in all these things, I humbly desire to call God to witness, that I do not
speak for expression-sake, or to set out a thing with all the advantage I can;
But really, as Scripture gives evidence, and as I hope, I am persuaded of the
truth of the thing in my own heart, by the assistance of the Divine spirit.
Neither to manage a Controversy, or any thing of that; But that it is the
necessity of our Case, that it should be thus; Or else we are lost and undone,
though never so much were attributed to Faith; Because our Faith is such a
Cripple, such a Lame hand, and foot in taking Christ, and coming to him; that
we should certainly lose him, if he did not resolve to make good his own Gift
of himself to us. And then,

In the Third Place; I argue, that it cannot be in Faith it self; Because then
Christ should dye to bring in something more imperfect, than the first
Righteousness that was given to man. Christ should dye to bring in something
more imperfect; and yet still it should be our own, and we should glory in it,
even as our first Righteousness. For now, when God made man; he made him
perfect (as the Scripture expresses) he made him in his own image, in his own
Righteousness, knowledge, and in true holiness. And there was a Perfection;
there was no blemish, as to the Creation of God, and so far as it could be in a
Creature. Why now, God, in his infinite wisdom, in the Abyss and unfathomable
depth of his own wisdom and understanding; He leaves man to fall; And all men,
as the Apostle argues, Romans 3. They have sinned, and fallen short of the Glory
of God. And what is it that follows from this?

It therefore follows (says the Apostle) that there can be no Glorying before
God, ver. 27. Where is boasting then? It is Excluded: By what Law? Of works?
No; But by the Law of Faith, Boasting is Excluded. Now I say, if works that
were perfect, were excluded, because they would be looked upon as our own
merit; and Faith is brought in; and if that should be brought in, as our own;
and that should Justify us, as our own Faith: Why then it would be a more
imperfect thing than the first Righteousness.

For, take Faith as it is in us; it is more imperfect than the first knowledge,
Righteousness, and true Holiness, in which God created man; and yet it should
be our own; and boasting should arise from this, that we have believed. Nay, if
it were our believing; then it were a more imperfect thing, I say, that is
brought in; and boasting would not be excluded by this Law of Faith. And
therefore it is very evident, that Faith is not the thing that Justifveth; but
only that which Faith receives; that is, the Righteousness of God in Jesus
Christ, is the only thing that Justifies. And this I desire should be
imprinted upon our ^houghts, upon our hearts, to this great end and purpose,
that we may always lie low before God; and that we may say, we will boast in
him all the day long, Living and Dying; and were we but able to be cut off from
every thing in our selves, and to lay fast hold upon God and Christ; and to
have our whole in him; our whole in God, our whole in Christ; This is the true
life of Faith, the true Excellency of Faith, to have nothing at all in all in
ourselves; as I shall speak further to you.

Therefore I go on to the Fourth Particular; And that is to affirm this, That
it cannot be by Faith, as any thing of it self; because the Righteousness of
the Law, that was given man in his Creation, was as free a Gift as Faith it
self is now.

If any one should say, But herein is a difference; The Work of Righteousness
in the first Creation, and the Habits of it, they were our own; But Faith is a
free gift.

I say, There is no difference in this; for Faith is no more a free gift, than
the Righteousness that Adam had at first was a free gift.

In confess indeed, there was a becomingness, that the Creator should make his
Work perfect: But it was Grace, free Grace, that gave to Man at first his
Being, and that gave to Man all the Accomplishments of his Being. And therefore
there is not so great difference in that.

But herein is the great difference, That now all that we have is in God, and
by him, and from him alone; and it is never separated from him. I look upon
this to be the great difference between Adam in his first Estate, and in the
Creation of Angels; and a sinner now in Christ, reconciled to God; that we have
all in Christ, and never out of him; whereas before, we had all in our selves.

If any man should say, I Will take the Righteousness of Christ, and say, Here
I Will take my Portion; it is given in; and it is out of God, and out of Christ;
it is in me: This would presently be a broken Cistern, or it would dry up of it
self; it would fail, or let out that precious thing committed to it. It would
certainly do so; and therefore here is our great security, that we are never out
of God and Christ, as is evident (throughout Eternity) by the 17 th of John:
That they all may be one, As thou, Father, art in me, that they also may be one
in us. And the glory which thou have given me, I have given them, etc. And so
Christ is even in them; and his Righteousness, and his Glory, and his
Perfection, are always in himself, and in a Communication unto them, and they
in Union with him, and in that Communication.

If this be not truly the sense, and the Spirit of the Gospel, I must freely
acknowledge, I am not in any capacity to speak of these things. For there is
nothing more evident to me than this, That our whole Salvation, according to
the Gospel, does no more stir out of God and Christ, than (to speak of a thing
that we know) we see now the Beams of the Sun, and the Light of the Sun stir
out of the Sun, but all is in the Sun. For, if any one should go to say, this
Room or Place is full of Light, or full of the Beams of the Sun; we'll
presently shut up all the Avenues between us and the Sun; and we'll have the
Light as our own; you know how presently the place would be dark, and there
would be no remainder of Light at all in it, because the Sun is shut out.

So now, and to Eternity; if you could shut out God and Christ, the Eternal
fountain of Righteousness from any Soul; that Soul would be immediately dark as
to the state of Grace; and so grow darker and darker, to the darkness of Hell.
And now, in the fifth Place,

If the Righteousness of Faith were a Righteousness only because it is freely
given; why then, Love and Repentance, and Obedience, they are all freely given,
even as Faith: And yet for all this, Scripture never speaks of them as
Justifying.

And therefore I come to the last thing, to show you wherein Faith Justifies;
It is only in this; that by the most simple and abstracted, and the most naked
Apprehension of the thing that can be; It has nothing, but what it is made to
receive, in this great point of Justification. I say, it is made to receive,
and to do nothing but to receive: It is made to depend, and to do nothing but
to depend; To trust, and to do nothing but trust.

I do acknowledge, there is a great virtue of Faith outward; but this is that
Immanent act of Faith (As I may so speak) as Divines call those Immanent acts
of God, in the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, that do not go out of Himself.
So I say, that Immanent act of Faith that is betwixt Christ and the Soul: It is
to trust, and only to trust; to depend, and only to depend; and to receive,
and only to receive. And, as for Faith; It has nothing, It is nothing, but
only this Receipt. So it is the most perfect dependence that Faith has upon
Christ. I will trust, and not be afraid.

In that Isa. 12. 2. And in that day thou shall say, O Lord, I will praise
thee: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou
comfortest me. Behold, God is my Salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid.

Here therefore is the great Excellency of Faith; the meet Excellency of Faith;
not in it self; but only that it wholly depends; It is made, and fitted by
God, on purpose wholly to depend.

I would come now to the second thing that I proposed; which I shall very
briefly represent to you.

For, if Faith it self can do nothing; It is certain then, that the works of
Faith can do nothing.

And therefore that great objection that is made against this, out of the 2d of
James: that Faith which has not works is Dead, and cannot Justify.

It is nothing at all to this Great Point: But only this it is indeed; to show
us, that if any man has Faith in Christ; this Faith shall appear not to be an
Idle, and a Dead Faith; But it shall every way be active, from the Power it
receives from Christ, to walk in all ways of obedience: to Render up the Soul
entirely, in the Love of God ( according to the present state, I mean) with
sincerity and uprightness. But it is not to this great point. For, it is very
plain, when two things are spoken of in Scripture; If there be a higher, and a
Lower; the Lower must be always subordinated to the higher; that, I look upon
to be a stable and unchangeable Rule. Now we are said to be Justified by a
Faith that is not without works, and yet without works we are Justified; and in
other places we are said to be Justified in God. In the Lord shall all the seed
of Israel be Justified, and shall Glory. And Jehovah is our Righteousness; And
the Righteousness of God. Now I say, that which is infinitely above Faith; As
we will all grant; God, and the Righteousness of God, Christ, and the
Righteousness of Christ are far above Faith. Why then, though sometimes we are
said to be Justified by Faith; and the Faith by which we are Justified, is said
to have works. Yet certainly the, Righteousness of God, and of Christ, must
infinitely take place of these; because they are so far above, in the
Transcendency and Infiniteness of their own nature. So that it can never be,
that the Righteousness of God, and of Christ can be brought down. Therefore we
are said sometimes to be Justified by Faith; But it is very plain, that Faith,
in its Justifying Power, it must be brought up to God and Christ. And there is
all that is to be said of it; that it takes hold of God, and Christ. That Is the
whole of it; it takes hold of God, and Christ.

Therefore indeed, I cannot but think of that expression; though I don't say,
it will hold in this. Solomon says the Spider is very wise, because it takes
hold with its hands; and is in Kings Palaces. The Spider seems a base Creature:
yet notwithstanding the baseness and poisonousness of its nature; yet in this,
it prefers and advances it self; because it takes hold with its hands and is in
Kings Palaces.

So I say, in regard of us, who are poisoned with sin and Corruption; yet Faith
takes hold with its hand; and it is in the Righteousness of God, and in the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Now still, if you look upon us in our selves; or
look upon Faith in it self; Alas! What can it do? only it can take hold of the
Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. And therefore I do
acknowledge, that Faith is of great power and virtue. The 11 Chapter to the
Hebrews makes evident, as well as the 2d of James.

Therefore I wonder, that men look so disproportionably: The great things there
ascribed to Faith all along, in the 11 th of Heb. make out the very same thing;
So that the Apostle James did not contradict the Apostle Paul, nor the Apostle
Paul the Apostle James, both of them speaking by the spirit of God; and
therefore I say, Faith indeed is of great Holiness, and of great operation, but
it takes hold of Christ only by way of Receipt and dependence; and so we are
alone Justified by it. I would fain clear one particular more; that you may be
very absolute in this great point, wherein the Excellency of Faith lies. And
that is,

You may say still; why, Faith is a great thing indeed: And so far as it is
ours, we may look upon it as a great thing; if it can take hold of God, and of
Christ, and of the Righteousness of God, and of Jesus Christ. What is like it
in the whole world, if it can do this?

Therefore, though I acknowledge all that Scripture has spoken by way of
Commendation of Faith; yet I must humble Faith (as I may so express it) before
you, as to this very particular. For, Faith could no more take God, or Christ;
or the Righteousness of God, or of Christ; than any of us can span the whole
Heaven, or take the whole Heaven into our hands. It is nothing but only this
wherein Faith excels, that God, and Christ give themselves, with infinite
Riches of Grace. And Christ gives himself; he gives himself to Faith.

This is that, that I positively affirm; that Faith has no more Power to take
hold of God, and Christ; than (as I said before) any one of us can take that
great Globe of the Sun into our hands.

But God gives himself, and Jesus Christ gives himself, by a free and absolute
will. And when he gives himself, he draws out by himself such a turn of the
Soul, back unto himself; that it causes the Soul by Faith to twist about him.
He draws out himself so to it, that by Faith it Returns with such a twist of
the heart to himself, that it never uncloses any more; that is the great and
mighty Power of God and Christ, and of the Righteousness of Christ. Christ
becoming wisdom and Righteousness to the Soul, draws out this Twisting of the
Soul about him; which the Scripture calls Faith; This laying hold upon him;
this (as the Scripture calls it) is Leaning upon him; and Rolling of our selves
upon him. Let no man despise these Expressions, seeing the Spirit of God has
sanctified them; It is Just as the Sun; it calls out the Eye, and the motions
of the Eye, to Twist about it, and to unite with it, by seeing: In the very
same manner; when Christ gives himself; then he calls out this Faith, which is
a Twist, and a hand of the Soul upon Christ, and about him. Now, if Christ did
not give himself, and if God did not give himself; it were utterly impossible
that Faith should lay hold.

Nay, though there is this Proposition of the Gospel every where held out;
whoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have Eternal life. Alas! Men do
no more stir to this Proposition, than a stone flies up to the Sun, because the
Sun shines upon it with its Beams. So I say, you may see plainly, that Men
don't stir to Christ, but when God draws near, and gives Christ; and Christ
draws near, and gives himself; then it is, that the Soul is drawn out to Christ
again, and feels the coming of Christ, and the approach of Christ to it; and
then turns it self toward him; and then it catches about him; and then it
begins to say, My Lord, and my God, as Thomas did, when he put his finger into
the wounds that had been made in Christ upon the Cross. This, I say, we should
seriously consider; and to know this, if any of our Souls have been drawn to
Christ; O know! That they had for ever layn still, and sunk as a stone, if
Christ had not come, and given himself to the Soul. I might give you many
expressions to Explain this. To us a Child is given, (as Isaiah speaks, Chap.
9. 6.) to whoever it is; as he was given to the world of Elect in General, so
he is given in particular to every soul. Who loved me, and gave himself for me.
And so, as John speaks concerning love: We love him, because he first loved us.
So we apprehend him, because he first apprehended us; As I have shown you out
of Phil. 3. 12. If that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of
Christ Jesus. A man would never apprehend Christ, if he were not first
apprehended by him. So says the Church in the Song of Solomon; My Beloved is
mine, and I am his. First, he is mine; and then I am his. We should never come
to be Christ's; if Christ did not please to come, and to be our Husband.

This certainly is the true freeness of the Grace of God. And, if you should
say, what necessity is there, that Christ should thus draw out Faith? What need
of Faith at all?

I Will give you but a threefold Account, why there must be this Faith,
notwithstanding it does no more; and though it is no more in the great point of
Righteousness and Justification; yet still it is most necessary it should be,
upon a four fold account.

The First Account is, 1st. Faith is necessary, as it is that Joining, uniting
act of the Soul, by way of Return to Christ giving himself to it, receiving
him, and possessing it self of Christ, and of his Righteousness; For as in our
Law, though the foundation of the Title lie elsewhere, yet the Consummating of
the Right is by Livery and Seisin; as they speak; and though the Espousal of a
mean person to a Prince, is by his free Love, yet the Consummation of the
marriage is by her consent, and acceptance Consummate; so though Christ and his
Righteousness are free gift, yet Faith is necessary for our acceptance and till
that be, Christ is not ours in Full sense of the Gospel. It is true, Faith is
chosen, and singled out, as that, which as it turns to Christ and his
Righteousness, most Diaphanously and most clearly, as through a thinnest
Transparency, shows the Righteousness of Christ flowing from himself, above
what Love, Repentance or any other graces or gracious actions can do, as being
only, as I have said, Dependence, Receiving, Trusting; yet this Faith, as
taking Christ and uniting to him, is more then manifestation; it is
Consummative of our Title; Christ ours, and we his: Christ is wisdom to us in
this wise Grace of Faith, and thus as in a Consummate Title we are said to be
Justified by Faith. Faith is imputed to Righteousness; but Christ our wisdom,
is also our Righteousness in highest Gospel truth.

The second account is, 2dly, Else it would not be for the happiness and good
of that Soul that has Christ. It cannot be that Christ should be a Savior,
and that the Soul should not know it. Therefore, I say, it is necessary it
should be throughout the Soul made known by Faith. I confess, there is a time,
and a long time, even from Creation, till the Soul is called home to Christ,
that it does not know it, till the time of bringing home to Christ. But I say,
it cannot be throughout so; For then men should be saved by Christ, and never
know that they are saved by Christ. Then Christ would be no more the Savior of
his people, than he is the Savior of stones, or insensible Rocks.

We must therefore come to have a feeling, and knowing, that Jesus Christ is
ours; Or else we could not receive his salvation. How should we be the better
within, if we did not know Christ? An understanding and Intellectual Being,
must have such a knowledge of Faith, to know Christ. And therefore, as the
Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. I count all things but loss for the Excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. I must know him. Not that this Contributes
any thing to our happiness, but only the feeling, and enjoying that happiness:
That happiness is only from God. But, as you know, a blind man is never the
better in point of Light, and sight, though the Sun be never so Glorious. Every
one that sees the Son, and believes in him. We must see him; or else, we
could not know he is ours; we could have no Enjoyment of him; our Souls would
be still, like unsensible Rocks and Marbles, if there were not this sense by
Faith, and the knowledge of Christ by believing. And therefore; it is a very
great truth, that Faith is a manifestation to us, and within us, that Christ is
ours. When our Souls receive the touches of his Love and grace upon us, and we
come to know and find the sweetness; to taste that the Lord is Gracious, and to
know what a Pearl we have, in some measure; and that we find Christ is ours,
and has given himself for us.

In the third place; there could not else be a manifestatory Glory. It is true;
Christ is glorious, as a Savior* But we could not Glorify him, if we did not
know by Faith that he is such a Savior. This is that, that the soul makes its
Boast in God by; this draws it to Glory in Christ, and to give all the Glory it
can do to him; Because it finds it is saved by him, and him alone. Now it is
very Evident, God had no need of Glory from Angels, nor from men, to manifest
his Glory by them. But it pleased the wisdom and Grace of God, to declare his
infinite Being, before such Beings as Angels and men fitted with understandings
to behold it. Why so, Christ had no need of our Glorifying of him; But yet it
is very Evident, that he is pleased to be Glorified by us; and that we Glorify
him, by acknowledging all our salvation from him. And herein is Faith of great
use; It gives Glory, as the Apostle speaks, Abraham, was strong in Faith,
giving Glory to God, Romans 4. So Faith gives Glory to the Righteousness and
Freeness of the Grace of God in Jesus Christ. And then,

In the Fourth place; it is also necessary, upon this Account; (for, I am far
(in all this discourse) from that which is truly called Antinomianism, or
Libertinism; I say as Faith looks outward, and from Christ, into holy Action,
the knowledge that Faith gives is serviceable, in the hand of Christ to all
holiness, and purification of Life: To live to him; to live and to walk by
Faith; to be every way self-Resigning according to that whole 11th Chapter of
the Epistle to the Hebrews.

And thus I have endeavored, with all briefness, to set out the Excellent
nature of Faith.

I shall but make one short Application of it; And that is, to stir up all our
hearts, in looking up to God, according to that great prayer Ephesians. 3. 14, 15,
16. verses. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of whom the whole family in Heaven and Earth is named, that he would
grant you according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might,
by his spirit in the inner man. To what End?

That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. O look up to this! You see how
Faith is indeed always called up by Christ, when he gives himself to any Soul;
when he comes to dwell in any Soul, Faith must receive him; it must embrace
him; it must depend wholly upon him.

Now therefore, O! That our hearts may be strengthened by his Spirit in the
Inner man. Alas! Our Inner man, you may see plainly by all that I have said, is
very weak and unfaithful; And it is confirmed by this expression of the
Apostle, how the Inner man would never draw in Christ; it would never hold him,
if it came to him. Our Inner man is such a false thing to the Great things of
our Eternal salvation; it is such a feeble weak thing, it would never be able
to hold Christ. But the Spirit strengthens the Inner man, That Christ may dwell
in our hearts by Faith. Else, (I say) it could never (if you would give me
leave to use such a plain word as that) fetch in Christ. And if he came, it
would never hold him. Our Inner man must be strengthened by the Spirit of
Christ; that Christ may dwell in us. And then, we go forward, to be rooted and
grounded in the love of Christ; and to Comprehend that love of Christ which
passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all the fullness of God.

I hope, there is nothing that I have spoken, that can Justly offend any man's
mind: for, it is fully to the sense of Scripture, and of Scripture Reason, and
it excludes all manner of looseness and Libertinism of life.

For, Christ is certainly sanctification, to every one, to whom he is
Justification; he gives the power of Holiness. And Faith is made serviceable.
As I told you, the immanent acts, are those whereby it stays within, and has
Communion with Christ; wherein it has nothing but to depend and trust in him.
But then,

It works outward, as they say of the works of God, Ad Extra. The Excellent
acts of the Father, Son, and Spirit; they go out of themselves. So Faith goes
out to all the works of obedience.

And therefore, if you would know what Faith is, when it works outward; I would
propose to you, to Read that Chapter, Heb. 11. How greatly Faith works outward.
But Christ still is the Author and finisher. And when it comes to Christ, it
has nothing to do, but to trust, and depend, and receive.

And O! therefore, let us all bow our knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that he would grant us, according to the Riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with might, by his spirit in the Inner man.

We can never have such a thing as Faith, if the Riches of Glory does not come
in with it, and if the spirit of Christ does not come in with it; And indeed,
where the spirit of Christ comes, he comes. And so Christ and the spirit
Elicits, (as they call it) and draws, and Brings the Soul to clasp about him,
to lay hold upon him. He brings the Soul thus near to him, Just as the Load
stone fetches in the Iron, and calls it to it self. And so when Christ comes
near to the Soul, He draws it near to himself, etc.

THE FAITH BY WHICH We are Justified, etc.
The Fifth Sermon.
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.


FRom what I have discoursed in the last Sermon, That we are Justified by
Faith, in such a sense only, as that Nothing can be attributed to Faith, but
only to Christ, Two Objections may arise, which I would answer, before I pass
on to the main Point I now intend.

Object. 1. What then is it (may it be said) in Faith, upon which Justification
is attributed to Faith rather then to any other Grace?

Answ. I Answer; it is like taking possession, the having Livery and Seizin in
an Estate become ours, or like the consent of a mean person in Marriage to a
Prince.

Or, indeed, to speak yet more plain to our apprehension; if any one will give
us a Gift; before we come to be really invested in that Gift; we must take it,
and have it in possession. And we have not a true Title to it else; tho it does
not depend upon our taking; But it is only a Consummative and Perfecting thing,
that we take it into our possession; we accept it from the giver, as his gift,
and we take it into possession, as our own.

And thus I say it is, and that we are Justified by Faith And it seems to me,
(except any one shall show me wherein I am in a mistake in thus saying) I shall
conclude it to be the very sense of the Spirit of God, in all those
Expressions, that we are Justified by Faith, and live by Faith: These things, I
say, show to us the worthlessness of Faith in it self; And yet that it is
Consummative and a Consummation of our Title to Christ, and to his
Righteousness.

I would only first answer one more seeming great objection against this
representation of Faith I have given, as if it were only the Imprint of
Christ's gift of himself and his Righteousness to the Soul; why is it then so
often said, Repent and believe the Gospel; And whoever believes in him, etc.
And we are called on as if it were our act, to believe?

Now, to this, I Answer, that it is true; we are so: Though I am fully, by the
grace of God, of that Judgment, that I have declared to you, concerning the
nature of Faith: And that it is Christ, Imprinting his gift the gift of his
Righteousness and of himself upon us. And yet for all that; I think my self
bound, in all the Discourses of this grace of Faith to move you; to persuade
you; to Exhort you to receive, to press you to Believe in Jesus Christ: Because
this is the Rational way that God does deal with those, as I have said, he
gives understanding, and Rationality to; and because this is that Ordinance of
God and for great and wise Reasons, both to his Servants, whom he draws thus to
believe by the obedience (...) Faith to the preaching of the Gospel: And in
regard of those, that do not believe, That he may Justify and vindicate
himself, that he has gone that way, which is proper unto the Soul of man: He
has drawn with the Cords of a man, and with the Bands of his Love, in offering
Christ to them.

I now come to what I proposed in the next place; To show you the great
assu^nce of Faith; the assurance of it, from these words of our Lord; They have
known. They have known; And they have surely known. And yet, when it comes to
be Explained, what this knowledge is; It comes to this; it is Believing. For,
Pray observe the course of the words, Jo. 17. 7. They have known. To know, is
of great Certainty, and of great Assurance. And again, in the latter part of
the verese. They have known surely, that I came out from thee; and they have
believed that thou did send me. They have known surely; And yet when it comes
to the issue; they have believed. Therefore I shall endeavor, I say, to make
out to you the great Assurance of Faith. And I shall propose these four kinds
of assurance that Faith has. And there are Scriptures very full, for each of
them. I Will lay them first, before you, together.

The first assurance of Faith, is the assurance of understanding. So you find,
Col. 2. 2. That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love,
and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, in the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the father, and of Christ.

There Is the first assurance of Faith; the assurance of understanding; when all
the great truths of the Gospel that men are ready to say, how do you prove them?

How will you make them out, either by sense, or by Reason? How shall we know
that these things are indeed true?

Why now, when Christ and his Spirit do fix these truths upon Souls; they have
Riches of the full assurance of understanding.

The second full assurance of Faith, it is in that great Point, of Pardon of
sin, and peace of Conscience by Jesus Christ.

For, if a man comes, and says to another, (As you know, men are ready to do)
you talk at a strange Rate: Do you know that your sins are pardoned? Do you
know, that God, and Christ have Done this? and that you shall be saved from
wrath for ever?

Observe now what the Apostle says to this, in Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near
with a true heart. You know, it is a phrase in our English; such a man, when we
do speak of him, as fearful, or a person of no valor; we say, he is a
false-hearted man. And that man that is Resolved and valiant, and great in
Prowess; we say, he is a man of a true heart, of a true valor.

Now whereas, some are apt to think, that every man should stand trembling, and
doubting, and say, I don't know whether my sins are pardoned, or not; I dare
not be so bold or presumptuous as once to say, I am sure that I am freed from
wrath to come.

Why now (says the Apostle) Let us draw near with a true heart, having our
heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water.
So here is a second great assurance of Faith.

A Third assurance of Faith, is in this; O, what shall become of me for ever?
What shall become of me when I dye? Where will be my dwelling? Where will be my
Reception, my Receptacle for ever, when I go out of the world?

Can I hope for such a state, as the Scripture Describes Heaven to be? Can I
bear up in those hopes?

Why then, Consider what the Apostle says, Heb. 6. latter part of the 11 ver.
We, desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end.

So here you see is another assurance; the full assurance of hope concerning
our condition. Hope is the proper grace that the Gospel insists upon, as to the
assurance of Eternity.

Now, there is a fourth; In these three places I desire you to Remember, that
the word is one, and the same in the Greek in every one of them: It is
Plerophoria; or full-sail-assurance.

There is a fourth assurance (which is very necessary to be considered) and
that is the assurance of acting suitable, and agreeable to our Faith, when a
man dares venture; when he dares Embarque, and engage his action, upon this
very foundation of Faith.

Now here (for, I would deal very clearly and faithfully in these points, and
not pretend to any thing of proof, above what really is written) there is the
Tantamount of it; but there is not the very word Plerophoria, or full assurance
of Faith But, I say, very near to that very thing.

The 2. These. 1. 10. 11, 12. Says the Apostle (speaking with great
Earnestness) wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count
you worthy of his calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his grace; and
the work of Faith with power. The good pleasure of his grace to be fulfilled;
and the work of Faith to be fulfilled. Plerose, a word that bears part with the
same word that Plerophoria. For there is the fullness. But then, in the full
assurance signified by Plerophoria; there is the carrying of the sail: which
signifies a sail that has a full Gale upon it; and so carries on the vessel
with a mighty swiftness. And here the fullness is signified, and the mighty Gale
also, tho there be not the word; that he would fulfill the Work of Faith with
Power. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and you
in him, according to the Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Now
therefore, as I have laid before you the four full Assurances of Faith; the
great Confidences and Assurances of Faith; so I would show you what there is to
bear up these great Assurances of Faith. For, It is not an ordinary Power that
can bear up a Man, that has nothing of it at all in himself, to bear up, I
say, in this full assurance of understanding. That, whereas men make such a do,
to prove the Truth of the Religion, and Christianity of the Gospel: If a Man
comes in by Faith, and says, I cannot Reason; I cannot Dispute; I can not
Argue; I cannot talk like a Learned Person, concerning these things. But,
blessed be God, I can do this; I can Believe.

So another comes, and says, O! I could never get such a thing as this; the
hopes of the Favor and Love of God in Christ; and the Pardon of my Sins.

But when a Man comes under the mighty Power of Grace; to be filled with the
Assurance of this by mighty Power; he is able to say, in some measure, I
believe these things, Lord Help my unbelief.

And sometimes God raises up his Servants to a Triumphant Assurance, even at
the time of Dying, when they are in the greatest Agonies of Body; yet they can
say, I am sure my Redeemer Lives.

And then, for the state beyond the Line, beyond this Life; Who can tell this?
Flesh and Blood is ready to say, what there is in another World; who has gone,
and brought certain Accounts and Intelligences what the state of the other
World is?

O! The full Assurance of Faith and Hope; it says, I am sure of an Inheritance
Incorruptible, and that fades not away: Tho I cannot tell you, what it is; Yet
I know I shall be like my Lord, for I shall see him as he is. And then,

In the last place; says a man, what, will you venture your selves? Will you
venture to lose all that you might Enjoy here in this World? and to pin your
selves to a strict way of Walking? Will you venture to deny your selves in your
Pleasures, in your Enjoyments here? You must lay down Estate, and Life; and
leave all the dearness of Relations: Will you venture to do such a thing as
this?

O! says the Soul; if I have but the good pleasure of my God, and the Work of
Faith fulfilled in me with Power; I do not care how God calls me out, to
glorify the Name of God, and of Christ Jesus.

I Will begin to lay down the Account of all this to you; and that I shall do
very briefly. There is but one place of Scripture, to which I refer; to show
you what it is that bears up Faith in all these Things: And it is that, 1 John
5. 4. etc. And I desire, that you would please to set a Remark: Every person
that hears, and that does seriously desire to wait upon God in this Discourse;
That you would set a Remark upon that Scripture I name to you, in the four
Assurances of Faith, Whosoever is born of God, says the Apostle, overcomes
the World: And this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith.
Who is he that overcomes the World, but he that believes that Jesus is the
Son of God? O! But may the Soul say; Here Is the Difficulty; How shall I do to
Believe this, That Jesus Christ is the Son of God; That he came forth from God;
and that God did send him? Why, says the Apostle: This is he that came by
Water and Blood, even Jesus Christ; not by Water, but by Water and Blood. And
it is the Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth. For there
are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Spirit; And these: three are one. And there are three that bear witness on
Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood; if you receive the witness of
Men, the witness of God is greater.

Now therefore, Here is the thing that I shall endeavor to make out to you;
That Faith, in all these Assurances, is born up by those three, That bear
witness in Heaven; Principally, and Supremely, The Father, the Word, and the
Spirit. And, by the Three, that bear witness on Earth; the Water, and the
Blood, and the Spirit. And indeed, the Undertaking is very large, and very
great, to speak of the things according to their Weight, according to their
worth. Only, I desire you to take notice, before I go on; That it is very
Evident, the Apostle is speaking of the Fulfilling the Work of Faith, to
overcome the World; and to give the Soul Victory through Christ: For, upon
this occasion All this comes on, What is it overcomes the World, but only our
Faith? And so he goes on to the great Testimony, and the great Operations in
those that are Christ's, and by which Faith is born up; If we receive the
witness of Men, the witness of God is greater. It is not only greater in Value,
but in this, that it can enter into the Hearts, into the Consciences, into the
Assurances of his Servants.

I begin therefore with the First of these; And I shall show you, in every
respect, how the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; and the Water, and the
Blood do VVitness.

First therefore, concerning the full Assurance of understanding; Concerning
Jesus Christ, in the first place; And then, concerning all the Truths of the
Gospel, in the second place; And I desire you to remember a distinction I gave
you the last day; I told you, there are immanent Acts of Faith, as they say;
those that remain and stay within; that is the meaning of the Word: There are
Acts then, and Motions of Faith, when Faith stays within, in that great point
of taking Christ. And then, There are Truths of the Gospel that are Ad Extra,
as they say; or without, that do not immediately concern that great point of
the Redemption of Christ, but flow from it.

No I Will make this plain to you, by setting two points of Scripture before you;
of which Faith has an assurance: But one is like Faith staying at home, and
within it self, and within Christ, in the great point of Redemption and
Justification.

As Now, Here Is this great Truth, That Jesus Christ came into the World, to
save the chief of Sinners: Sinners, of whom every one may say, I am chief.

Now when Faith Acts upon this Truth; Jesus Christ came to save sinners, of
whom I am chief. And so, That he shed his Blood for sinners, and gave himself a
Sacrifice and an Atonement: All these are Truths properly within Faith and
Christ: And when the Soul is upon them, it is at home with it self; And Faith
is also at home with Christ, and with the Soul in them. But now, here is another
great Truth; That whoever it is that does not Cut off his Right Hand, or Pull
out his Right Eye, and cut off his Right Foot; he shall be cast into Hell,
where their Worm dies not, and their Fire is not quenched.

Now this is a great Truth of Christ: And Faith has assurance of this Truth.
But yet, when it acts upon this Truth; (Pray observe) it does not stay within,
properly with Christ, and within it self, in the point of Believing: But it
goes out, to a Truth that lies without, as to the great point of Justification.
So that, if you say, wherein is Faith Justifying Faith, in Relation to Truth?
(I desire that I may be understood) I say, when it is asked wherein is Faith
Justifying Faith, as to the point of Truth?

It is not in believing that whosoever does not cut off his Right hand, or
pluck out his right Eye, shall be cast into Darkness. It is true; this always
is together with Justifying Faith: But it is not that, wherein Faith properly
Justifies. But all the Truths concerning the Blood and Righteousness of Christ;
they are Truths that Faith acts upon, when it is in the great point of
Justification, as it is acted by Christ and his Spirit; Now, this being not
many times well Considered, It makes a great Confusion in the point of
Justifying Faith.

For, though it is true; It is said (and I desire it may be carefully
remembered; that no one may any way take offense; or mention what I say, to give
offense) I say, that that Truth, that a man that does not cut off his hand, or
pluck out his Right Eye (which means any Lust) shall be cast into Hell; is
never separated from true Justifying Faith. But I say again, that Faith acting
upon that Truth; does not Justify; But acting upon the great Truth, wherein
Jesus Christ is held forth as a sacrifice, a propitiation, a Mediator, an
Intercessor and Redeemer.

But yet this is certainly true; that the Father, Son, and Spirit, give a
mighty power to these great Truths, and to every Truth that is delivered in the
Gospel, but especially with this great Principal Truth, that Jesus is the Son
of God, and has laid down his life for sinners.

For, you see very plainly in this place that I have quoted to you; Pray,
Consider it, who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God?

Faith is therefore in its Immanent action, when it is upon this point, that
Jesus is the Son of God, and gave himself for Sinners. This is the Immanent
Truth, that Faith fixes upon.

But then, when it comes to that Truth, that without Holiness, no man shall see
the Lord, that can never be separated from this Truth, that Jesus is the Son of
God; when Faith acts upon that Truth, or any like it; Without Holiness no man
shall see the Lord; It does not act like Justifying Faith, strictly taken in
that point of believing; Because Justification flows only from the
Righteousness, from the Blood, from the Obedience, from the Redemption of Jesus
Christ; And therefore, to Find a mighty power, To find the Soul Impregnated and
filled out, in all the Truths that concern Jesus Christ, and in all the other
great Truths of the Gospel, that Christ has spoken; Here Is the strength, and
the assurance of Faith; And it flows from God, in and through Christ. For,
Jesus Christ is the great and Principal Actor in the Soul's Receiving all
Truth: I say, the great and the principal Actor. As you may find, the stability
of Faith, the great Balance and Poize of Faith, that keeps it steady and even,
Heb. 13. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day for ever. Be not
carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines: Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day for ever: It is he that is the Alpha, and Omega; As he
says himself. The Truth; the way, the Truth and the Life. He is (the) Truth.
And the Son of the Father in Truth. And Truth came by Jesus Christ.

But I would a little further clear to you this distinction of the Immanent
acts of Faith; and show you whence I take the word You know, in that great
mystery of the Father, Son, and Spirit; Divines, when they treat of it; they
say, that those actions between the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit
themselves, and no Created Bing comes between; they call them, Immanent actions
of the Father, the Word, and the Spirit. As the Father begat and knows the
Son; so the Son knows the Father, and that he is begotten of him. The holy
Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son: And the holy Spirit knows, and
Glorifieth in every thing the Father, and the Son, as proceeding from them.
Now, while they are acting within in the Divine Being, the Father, the Son, and
Spirit, one with another; Those are called Immanent acts.

But when they go outward, either to Angels, or men, or any of the Creatures;
then they are called extra-acts; Or ad extra, or Transient acts; because they
go out from the Divine being to the Creature.

I make use of it, to explain the Immanent acts of Faith: The Immanent acts of
Faith, are upon Christ's Righteousness, and Blood; and not upon the Points of
Repentance, or obedience, or Love, or self Resignation to Christ; But wholly,
and solely in that point of Pardon of sin, Peace of Conscience, and deliverance
from wrath to come.

But, as I said before; Take any of the great Truths of Scripture; and they are
never separated from that Justifying Faith. All the actions of Creation and
Government of Providence; are never separated from the Divine Being, the
Father, Word, and Spirit: Creation and Providence, you know are attributed to
them all. And, I am persuaded, that this may much help your thoughts: Because
men discourse promiscuously; As if we were as well Justified by love to Christ,
and by mortifying a Lust, as by taking hold of the sacrifice and Ransom of
Jesus Christ; and as if one Truth were as essential to Justifying Faith, as
another; Now, I acknowledge, they are never separated: (To take off all Scandal
and offense from men.) And yet I say, there is an Immanence in the act of Faith,
when it is acting upon Jesus Christ.

I come now to the Second Point, that I would be something more large in; And
that is, concerning full assurance of Faith, in point of Conscience, or the
peace of Conscience, and the Pardon of Sin, and the assurance that God is ours.

Now, if I could here make out to you, how that Assurance comes into the Soul;
and how it is born up by Christ, and by the Father, and by the Spirit; I should
think it were to great Edification. I say, if I were in any measure able to
make it out, according to the Excellency of the thing; I shall therefore go as
far as the Lord shall please to assist by his Spirit in it.

Therefore, the first thing that I shall say to you, by which a man comes to
have an Assurance of the Pardon and Forgiveness of his Sins (I shall speak it
in the very Scripture Language.) It is,

First of all, By an immediate Voice of the Blood; I say, by an immediate Voice
of the Blood. And then,

I shall show you, it is by the Voice of the Water from Christ. And then,

In the Third piace, By the Spirit. And then,

In the Fourth place, that the Father from Heaven comes, and Ratifies and
Assures this Testimony of the Son, and of the Spirit, in the Blood and in the
Water; First, I say, it proceeds immediately. (For I would speak of the things
in the Order of Nature) from the Blood. For nothing does so immediately speak
Peace to a Sinner, as the Blood of Jesus Christ, the Sufferings of Christ. And
therefore, so many things are spoken of Christ; of his Sacrifice, and of his
Death, and of his Sufferings; I may give you many places of Scripture that put
most upon the Blood of his Sacrifice, as to our Sense and Apprehension, than
upon any thing: I say, upon the Blood of Christ: How much more shall the Blood
Offered by the Eternal Spirit. (you know, Heb. 9) And the blood of Sprinkling
that speaks better things than that of Abel, c. 12. And Heb. 10 24. Having
boldness by the blood of Jesus, to enter into the Holiest. It is put upon the
blood, the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. The blood of Christ
cleanses from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1. Who loved us, and washed in his
blood, Rev. 1. and Rev. c. 7. They have washed their robes white in the blood
of the Lamb, And so the Apostle speaks proportionably in this 1 John 5. There
are Three that bear witness in Heaven; the Father, the Word and the Spirit.
And then there is the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. The Blood, it has an
immediate Voice. And this is he (says the Apostle) that came by water and by
blood, not by water only: Pray observe that: it puts an Emphasis upon the
Blood. Not by Water only, but by Water and Blood. So I say, whenever our
Souls come indeed to have the Assurance of the Pardon of Sin, and of Peace with
God; it is by Blood: The Blood of Jesus, which is carried into the Holy Place
not made with hands. We are Purged by the Blood Offered by the Eternal Spirit:
We have Confidence by the Blood of Jesus.

O! therefore, when Christ is pleased to send out the mighty Effluxes the
Efluviums of his blood; when he sends them out, and draws and twists and brings
back the Conscience, and the Heart upon the Blood of Christ, when he is pleased
to do thus; Those strong Acts upon the blood of Christ, they do as it were
Recoil and come back upon the Soul, and upon the Conscience, with the assurance
of the pardon of sin in that blood. Therefore, blessed is he that hears the
voice of the blood of Christ; that hears in his own Conscience, the blood of
sprinkling, speaking better things, than that of Abel.

And this is the first thing. Because I treat as briefly as I can of it; I come
to the second thing, and that is,

To give you an account of the forgiveness of sins, comeing in by the Water.

Now, I confess, I shall give somewhat another Interpretation, than I have
known given concerning Water. For, I look upon the water, not as some would,
very Chilly and Coldly understand it of Baptism: except that spiritual Baptism
of the Gospel, which I always desire to magnify; or that it is merely
Sanctification, which the Generality of Interpreters give it to be: But by
water, I understand the very obedience and Righteousness of Christ separated
from his sufferings: That great obedience, which was like a River Pure as
Crystal that ran through the whole obedience of Jesus Christ, from the very
beginning to the end.

And the Reason why I take it so, and not to be sanctification, is this;
because, says the Apostle, in this 5 Chapter of the 1st Epistle of John. This
is he that came by water, and by blood. Not by water only, but by water and
blood. He came himself by water, and by blood: He himself came. This [He] take
notice of him; He came by water, and he came by blood He came by the water of a
pure and perfect Righteousness; in which, there was nothing at all of
Imperfection, or soil, or the least of blemish; He came by this water. And so
you find the obedience of Christ is often mentioned in Scripture, I shall give
you that place for all, Romans 5. v. 18. Says the Apostle there; By the
obedience, He speaks often of the obedience of Christ. But by the obedience of
one shall many be made Righteous, ver. 19 And by the Righteousness of one; The
offense of one; and the Righteousness of one; The Disobedience of one; and the
obedience of one.

So, Obedience and Righteousness, they are of one and the same import. And the
comeing by water, I say, is comeing by the perfect obedience, Righteousness of
the whole nature, and action, and performance of Jesus Christ.

Now therefore, when the Soul is saluted (as I may so express it) by Christ,
with this obedience in his hand; when he comes, says Christ to the Soul, I
have obeyed; I have fulfilled all Righteousness; I have done always the things
pleasing in the sight of my Father; there was no guile found in my mouth; there
was no sin found in me; without sin, in the midst of all the Temptations that
ever could be Congregated upon me.

Here therefore, take this obedience of mine; and let it stand against thy
disobedience; against thy many sins; thy many provocations and Transgressions;
I have come by purest water. And so there shall be a fountain opened for sin
and for uncleanness. Zech. 13. 1. And he leads them to the Fountains of living
water, in his own Righteousness, in his own obedience. And having the heart
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and the Body washed with pure water; That
is, not of sanctification as we might be very apt to understand it: I say, not
principally; I never exclude sanctification; but not principally. But that
purity of the obedience of Christ, by which we are made the Righteousness of
God through him. And when this water speaks in this sense, that I have now laid
down to you; It gives that great assurance against the fear of Hell, wrath and
Eternal condemnation, for we are Righteous by it. The second thing (in which I
will be very brief) is, the spirit that gives witness.

You know, that is a general allowed Doctrine, that the Spirit of God seals up
to the day of Redemption. It is the Earnest of it in the assurance of the
pardon of sin, in the witness of absolution that it gives; It is the Spirit of
Adoption and the Spirit of promise. After ye believed, ye were sealed with that
holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our Inheritance; The Spirit it
self bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the children of God. And hence
arises the great assurance of Faith. O! When a man can find the word of the
Spirit within that word in his own Soul, that his iniquities are pardoned, and
his sins forgiven; The Spirit is a mighty witness: For the Spirit is Truth. He
is able to spread his witness throughout the whole Soul; to seal up the whole
Soul to himself. But then, the last thing that I will speak of, is this; There
comes in that mighty Authoritative and original act of the Father; saying, I
have forgiven thy iniquity, I have pardoned thy sin. And I look upon it to be
conveyed, especially in that voice that we have in the three Evangelists, Matt.
17. v. 5. There came a voice from Heaven: And, as the Apostle Peter says, from
the Excellent Majesty, saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. That is, I have accepted him for a Ransom; I have accepted his
obedience; I have freely forgiven iniquity for his sake; for he is my self; he
is my Son; he is mine; and therefore I do it freely; and yet I do it for his
sake; Because he has given a Recompense, a satisfaction to Justice. And so the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 1. 5. Who has made us accepted in the beloved. And, in whom
we have redemption in his blood, the forgiveness of sins. And so it is said by
Jesus Christ; The Father loves me; And whatsoever ye ask in my Name, the
Father will do it for you. There comes in the great Evidence, Testimony, and
Assurance of the Fathers free acceptance and free absolution through him.

To close therefore thus much as I have begun to say, from these words, in
brief application.

This first Application is this; That you would seriously consider, whether you
have Faith or not?

You may say, How shall I know? Why consider it, as I have now represented it
to you: It is a mighty Power from Christ; it is a mighty power from his Spirit
in all the Truths of God; Especially, those Truths that concern Jesus Christ.
But just as I opened to you in the beginning of this Discourse; That Faith, it
is a new Understanding to us: We have as Men (you know) an understanding,
endued with Reason. And therefore, we all say, let me hear Reason, and then
I Will be persuaded: And every Wise Man, whenever he speaks, he endeavors to
speak Reason; Therefore God has given to man such a thing as he calls Reason:
He has Endued the Understanding with that great Principle of Reason. And, if a
Man be a Natural; you know that is a man in whom Reason cannot act; because
some of the Organs of the Body are not prepared to let Reason have its course;
It Is plain that is the meaning of men being Naturals.

It may be, you may think, they have not so good a Soul; but that is a mistake:
Only there are not Organs fit for the working of Reason; And therefore you
know, when we look upon such a one, we look upon it as a vain thing, to
Discourse with such a one; because we know he has no Reason: Or a Mad ^an; it
is but loss of time to Discourse Reason to him; because there is such a
Disturbance, and such a kind of jumble in the Brain that Reason cannot have its
course.

So I say, if we would consider, a Man, in Gospel sense, he is just like a mere
Natural, or like a Madman, or like a very Brute, if he has not a Light of
Faith: For, Faith is a New Light, and a New Understanding. And therefore it is
very observable, 2 These. 3. 2. That we may be delivered (says the Apostle)
from unreasonable and wicked men: For all men have not faith. If a Man be
unreasonable, you can have no place in him by the powers of Reason. Now (says
the Apostle) I look upon a man in Gospel-sense, just like a Natural, or like a
Madman; or like a very Brute, if he has not a Light of Faith, he is an
unreasonable Person, when he has not Faith; For, all men (says he) have not
Faith.

And the word that is used in the Origninal, is (...). It is very well known
among the Learned, to be a word proper to Philosophy; They say, if a Man has
not the Powers of Reason, or does not speak according to them; he is an absurd
man, or an unreasonable Man; he is a Man that has no Topics; Now, says the
Apostle, he is an unreasonable Man; he has no Topics with him: And why?
because he has no Faith.

So I say, a Man without Faith, is a Man without Gospel Topics: You cannot
speak to him upon the Topics of Jesus Christ, with any Acceptance; because he
has not Faith.

O! Therefore, Let us consider, how sweet is the Discourse of Christ to us? How
impressive upon us? How do our Souls go out to him, and act upon him? As you
know, the mind of man, even in worldly things, is acting according to Reason,
and all the Powers of Reason; So we should be always Acting upon the Gospel,
and upon Christ especially, by all the Powers of Faith. And therefore this I
would desire you, to mind in the immanent Truths; in those Truths wherein Faith
is in its immanent Acts, principally upon Christ, and Righteousness in him, and
Pardon of sin in his Blood. O! consider, how your Souls are Acted to him: And
so go from thence to All Truth; for there is no separation, as I have shown you:
The same Omnipotency of God that is in the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit
is that strength that went out, and Created this World, Acts ad extra, or
without the Father, Son and Spirit: Why, so the Faith, which in its immanent
Acts stays upon Christ and his Blood, it also passes and goes out upon all the
Truths of Holiness and Obedience. But then,

The second thing (with which I would conclude) is this; That you mind these
mighty Powers that Act Faith: O! mind all the greatness of the Blood, and of
the Water; and the Witness of the Father, and the Word, and the Spirit. It is a
great Scripture that I led you to the last day, and (with which I Will close
(...) Discourse,) which shows you, that the mighty Power of Faith is from God,
and from Christ, Ephesians. 3. 14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven amd Earth is Named;
That he would grant unto you, according to the riches of his Glory, to be
strengthened with Might, by his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell
in your Hearts by Faith. Here you have the Father, the Word, and the Spirit
joined in this great Power of Faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in Love
(that is, in the Love of Jesus Christ) may be able to comprehend. In your Love
to him, I understand that first groundedness in Love to Christ; A Love that
constrains us to live to him that dyed for us, and then, may be able to
comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth and length, and height; And to
know the love of Christ, which passes Knowledge. O! That great Mystery of the
Gospel; And part^cularly, that we may know the love of Christ, which passes
Knowldg; And hereby we may come to be filled with all the fullness of God.

O! who is able to bring this great work into our Hearts? Why, the Apostle
therefore concludes. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according to the Power that works in us; It is he
that works in us; Pray take notice of that; Rememember that he works above all
that we ask or think: And yet it is a Power works in us; that we may find, and
see it, and have experience of it: Unto him be Glory (says he) in the Church
by Jesus Christ, throughout all Ages, World without end. Amen.

The End of the fifth Sermon.
THE FAITH BY WHICH We are Justified, etc.
The Sixth Sermon.
Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.


FRom these words, I have pitched upon that great point and Doctrine of
Justifying Faith: Or, of that Faith by which we are Justified.

And this Faith, it eyes Christ, in a Peculiar manner. As I proved from John
17. 7, 8. Far, they have known (concerning me) that all things whatsoever thou
have given me, are of thee.

For, I have given unto them the words, which thou gave me; and they have
received them, (as so given unto me) and have known surely, that I came out
from thee, and they have believed that thou did send me.

So here is a Constant Eye of Faith upon Christ. As I told you, there had never
been such a Notion of Faith, in Scripture-sense, in Gospel sense, if it had not
been for Christ; if he the Mediator had not been given.

I have spoken of it, as it is Faith, by which we are justified, And the
Grounds why it is Faith, that justifies here meant: (which I had not, mentioned
before to you, but rather depended upon other Scriptures for) I shall give you
now, viz. Why this Faith or believing is to be understood of the Faith that
justifies. Even out of that John 17. 7, 8. And the Reason I give for it, is,
because it is the Faith upon which Christ intercedes: Pray, observe it, Christ
Intercedes for believers, upon the Faith that believers know surely, and
believe, concerning Jesus Christ. For, in the very next words, you may observe
it. I pray for them (says he) I pray not for the world. So he intercedes for
them; They have known, and believed, that Christ did surely come forth from
God; and that all things of Christ are Divine, infinitely Divine; Originally
Divine. Now therefore, upon whatsoever Christ intercedes; (Pray, Consider) In
the very same line our foundation for Righteousness and acceptance through
Christ, rests: His justifying Righteousness and Redemption, and his
intercession run all upon one line together; That Is a plain point; they go
together. I Will give you but two places of Scripture, because I would not
prevent my self, in what I have especially to discourse of. One is, Heb. 9.

It is plain by all Scripture, that the blood of Christ is that great price of
our Redemption; And that we are justified freely by the Grace of God, God
Setting forth Christ, as a Propitiaton through Faith in his blood. Now you
shall find that Christ entered by his blood into Heaven. Heb. 9. 12. But by his
own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us. Christ intercedes now in Heaven, and in the Holy place; into
that Holy place made without hands, He entered to interceed. And again, ver. 24.
Christ entered not into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures
of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for
us. So that he intercedes plainly upon his blood; For where he intercedes he
entered by his blood. And in 1 John 2. 1. You also have the advocateship, and
the Propitiation of Christ Joined together. My little children, these things
write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father (viz.) Jesus Christ the Righteous; And he is the Propitiation for
our Sins, etc.

Therefore this is the clear ground I bottom this Truth upon: Upon what Christ
intercedes, That is certainly Justifying. Now he intercedes upon the Faith of
Believers. I pray for them, I pray not for the World* viz. For them who know
surely, and believe in me.

I have endeavored to open Faith also to you so, that you may have a right
understanding, that Faith does not Justify, as it is an Act of ours, or a Grace
in us, or any thing in us; but only by its receiving the Righteousness of
Christ.

I came to speak of the Assurance of Faith. They have known: And they have
surely known: And they have believed that thou did send me. Knowledge, or as
the Learned speak, and the great Men of Reason call it, Science, is the highest
degree of Understanding.

Now this our Lord attributes to Faith, in that John 17. They have known. For,
Christ did not come meanly down, when he had said, They have known, and then
said, They believed. But Faith is a furely knowing.

And therefore I proposed in the last Discourse, to speak of the Assurance of
Faith, as it is a full Assurance of Understanding; as I opened to you from Col.
2. 2.

2. A full assurance of Faith, in the Pardon and Forgiveness of Sin: As I
opened to you from, Heb. 10. 22.

3. A full assurance of Hope. That, I did not speak to before.

But this, of all things, is most generally agreed, That the Servants of Christ
may come to a full Assurance of Hope; No one will deny that to a Christian,
that he should have a full Assurance of Hope now, and when he comes to Die, I
say, of hope. Men will say, you may may hope; but you must not take upon you to
be Assured beyond Hope.

Now, indeed, Full Assurance of Hope is a very great Assurance, is a very great
and excellent kind of Assurance. I might give you several Scriptures that speak
of this: As, 1. Pet. 1. 3. He calls it a Living Hope. Blessed be the God, and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us again unto a living hope.
We Translate it, a lively Hope; But, if Living, will Agrandize the thing, and
make it more Emphatical, the Original is, a living Hope, A hope that does not
die, when we die; that does not die, when our Spirits are Languid, and our Eyes
are ready to close, and all the Terrors of Death are about us; yet this Hope
will survive.

So the Apostle calls it; A good Hope through Grace; and a Hope that makes not
ashamed; That Is another Expression.

And now, this great Assurance of Hope; you shall see on whom, or wherein the
Apostle places it, Col. 1. 27. last words of that verse, which is Christ in you
the Hope of Glory. So as I have showed you all along, Faith is wholly depending
upon Christ; And all its Power and Excellency is in Christ.

Now, can you have a fuller Expression, That the full assurance of Hope; in
Christ? Christ in you the hope of Glory. It is he himself that bears up this
Hope; Alas! This Hope could no more Live, than the Hope of the Hypocrite (as
Job calls it) that is but like a Spiders Web; And that is but like a Stream cut
off by the Drought of Summer, So would Hope be: But Christ is in his Servants
the Hope of Glory, therefore their Hope Lives.

But because I have designed otherwise the Discourse at this time; and that
another great point is before us, I shall Address my self wholly to that: And
that is,

The Assurance of Holy Action: The full Assurance. Which I grounded, in a
former Discourse (upon the Generals I was to lay down) upon that of the
Apostle, in the 2 These. 1. 11. Wherefore also we Pray always for you, that our
God would count you worthy of his calling, and fulfill, that he would give you
(a Plerophoria) all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of Faith
with Power, that the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be Glorified in you, and
ye in him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Here every one may see plainly, that here is a mighty work of God, through the
Heart, into the Lives and Conversations of his People, and that it is carried
on with a full sail by God.

And then, as I told you in the 11th to the Heb. the Apostle goes throughout
that Chapter, upon the Action of Faith. And therefore, if any one would Expound
(as I said to you) that in the 2d of James; A man is Justified not by Faith
only, but by works, He should compare it with this, of the Apostle, in the 11th
to the Hebrews. For there are the works of Faith Recorded and Recollected all
along; By which the Elders obtained a good report, a great Fame, a great Renown.

Therefore, for the opening of this to you, because indeed, it is a difficult
point; and that which seems to shake all that I have spoken of our being
Justified, not by Faith, as a work, but only as Christ chooses to Unite the
Soul to himself; and so to Communicate his Righteousness, his Obedience, and
the Value and Merit of his Sufferings by Faith; for when the Apostle James,
shall lay down in such express terms, that a Man is Justified, not by Faith
only, but by Works, and shall Discourse it so, as he has done, in that James
2. 14. to the very end of that Chapter; It looks like a very great Objection;
And the Enemies of Free Grace, and of the Justifying Grace of God, by his own
Righteousness, in Jesus Christ make that Chapter (as I may say) the Top-gallant
of all their Discourse: It is the great and mighty Fort, to which they retire,
upon all occasions. Therefore these three Heads of Discourse, I hope, within
the limits of Time that is alloted, tho it may seem something strait, to make
out to you.

First of all; I would lay down to you, what are properly the works of Faith.

Secondly, I would show you how the works of Faith are Dependent upon Christ,
and upon his Righteousness. And then,

Thirdly, I would clear to you, how the Apostle James Discourses so much of
Works, and that Faith only can do us no good; To clear that to you; and so to
conclude with a brief Application of it.

I begin with the first, and that is to show you the Works of Faith in
general; and I shall do little more than point and direct your Thoughts to
these great concernments; because there will not be opportunity to handle them
so fully and at large.

The first kind of the Works of Faith is this.

Those Acts of Faith, which do immediately concern our Receiving of Jesus
Christ, and the taking of himself, and his Righteousness.

These (as I told you) might be called the immanent Acts of Faith; Those
nearest, closest, privatest Acts of Faith between Christ and the Soul; betwixt
Christ himself, and the Soul it self. For, I look upon it thus; and I desire
you to mind it.

Whatever Faith is not the Faith of God's Elect, of God's Operation; A Faith of
the Operation of God, it certainly misses in this first Act; Pray consider, in
this first Act of taking Christ: It is certain, the first Activity of Faith is
in Uniting to Christ; in taking him for our Head, for our Husband; in laying
hold upon his Righteousness, as in a Reflex Returning Act of the Soul, its
taking, receiving, Christ giving himself.

Now, a false Faith misses here; it does not take Christ; It thinks, it takes
him, and does not take him. It is but Faith in a Dream, as the Prophet speaks;
The Hungry Man dreams that he Eats, and he awakes, and behold, he is Empty; and
he Dreams he Drinks, and wakes, and finds himself scorched with thirst.

So a Man Dreams he takes Christ, but he misses him; And lo, nothing is in his
hand; I shall presently speak, how far we may Judge by the Action of Faith,
whether we have been right in the first Act; But there has been, as they say,
an Error in the Foundation; an Error in the first Concoction, as Physicians
speak, and cannot be mended: So there has been an Error in taking Christ; and
Error in the Foundation becomes Error in the whole course of a Man's Building. A
man says, he has taken Christ, and lives under the Power of his Lusts, and the
Power of the World, Because he never look Christ aright.

Men will say, Here you are mistaken in your Profession; That you cannot live
Holily, which your Profession binds you to.

But I say, if the thing were but well traced, and enquired into, it would be
found, here was the great miss, that your first Action flew off, and did not
rightly take Christ.

The 2d Chapter of John, is a Scripture that will clear this, that a Man may
take Christ by a false Action, and lose him in the very first Rudiments, and
the first beginnings by a mistake.

As now, it is in Nature, in the forming of an Embrio in the Womb; If there be
a false formation, a monstrous formation in the Womb, there is an irregularity
all along the Life. So, if Faith be mistaken in its first Act, in supposing it
takes Christ, and does not; that Error cannot be mended. The Latter Errors may
be more apparent than the first, but the first is the cause of all, John 2. 23,
24, 25. Now when he was in Jernsalem at the Passover, in the Feast Day, many
believed in his name, when they saw the Miracles that he did. One would have
thought this was true Faith (as the great Men of Reason say) because they were
brought over to believe, by seeing the Miracles of Christ. But Jesus did not
commit himself unto them, because he knew all men; And needed not that any
should Testify of man, for he knew what was in man. If he did not commit
himself to them, we may very well understand, he did not Unite himself to them:
He knew it was not that Faith, to which he United himself and his
Righteousness. Christ does not commit himself to a Faith, that is not indeed,
as I said before, a Faith of God's Elect, and the like precious Faith, and that
is not given by that Divine Lot of Grace, as the Expression is, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
that I have formerly spoken to you of; To them who have obtained by Lot, by
this Divine Lot like precious Faith with us, according to the Righteousness of
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. I know we cannot look into this, but by the
Divine Spirit, and by feeling the twistings of the Soul about Christ, through
that great Opperation of God upon us: But this we may see plainly, Christ did
not commit himself to them; So he does not commit his Righteousness, his
Propitiation, his Redemption; he does not commit it, but where he sees a Faith,
which he himself has given, that is indeed, of the true and excellent Alloy;
For, he knows at the very first: He sees many that pretend to Believe, and that
think they Believe; but he knows very well where their Faith is wrong, and
where it loses that great Prize, that Pearl of Price that it is to obtain: He
himself not committing or giving himself, knows a true Action of Faith in
Receiving him will not follow; for that is the first Action of Faith to Receive
Christ giving himself.

The Second kind of the Actions of Faith, they are those, that though they are
not immediately as the first Acts of taking of Christ by Faith; yet they
immediately Result, and Rise up; When any Man has taken Christ, there are some
Actions that do immediately Result, and Arise; They bear the Hiew, they carry
the Complexion they have upon them the Lineaments of the Death, of the Dying of
our Lord Jesus Christ; They have such peculiar Respects to his Blood, to his
Death, to his Redemption.

I would instance in two of these we find in Scripture-Saints. And then I shall
draw out in brief Expressions, the general Actions of Christians, according to
their pattern.

The first is that in the 11 Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews; it is said
of Moses, v. 28. Through Faith he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of
Blood, lest he that destroyed the first born, should touch them.

This he did by faith; God commanded him indeed to keep the Passover: But Moses
had an Eye upon the Redemption of Christ in it; And by Faith he kept the
Passover.

So every Act of the Soul, by which it makes Recourse to Christ upon all
occasions, after it has taken him; it is like keeping the Passover; Every Act,
I say, wherein we do especially depend upon the Blood of Christ, and make close
Recourse, and Application to it; it is an Action Resulting from true, saving,
Justifying faith; that true faith, by which we are Saved and Justified: For, so
indeed, I observe; tho we call it Justifying faith, the Scripture never calls
it so; But the faith by which we are Justified: To make good that point that I
have always pressed upon you; that we are not Justified by Faith, as an Act;
But, we are Justified only as the Righteousness of Christ is given to it, for
that Righteousness alone is our Justification.

But this I say, there are Acts of the Soul, by which it does make recourse to
Christ, and to his Blood.

Another Example; and I choose to give it you, because it is Seated in that of
the Apostle James, that is made the great Objection against the faith by which
we are Justified, through the Righteousness and Propitiation of Christ, James
2. 21. says the Apostle, Was not Abraham our Father, Justified by works, when
he had offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? See thou how faith wrought with
his Works, and by works was faith made perfect?

Now this is the thing that I observe to you; The Offering of Isaac, it was as
great a Conversant Act about the Death, Blood and S^crifice of Christ, as any
could possibly be represented in Scripture to us. For, there could not be a
greater Type and Representation of the Father giving his Son to Die for
Sinners, and to become a Sacrifice for them, than that of Abraham, the
Affectionate Father of Isaac, Offering up his Son Isaac. Therefore the Apostle
uses this for an Argument of a Working faith. This was a Work of Faith indeed;
it was not a work of Faith, taking Christ; but it was a work of Faith,
conversant about the Death and Sacrifice of Christ. And therefore the Apostle
is express in it, See thou how Faith wrought with his works? This was a great
act, in which Faith wrought mightily, when Abraham offered up Isaac. But 'twas
not so properly a work of Moral obedience, as the work of Faith in Christ, if
we Consider the Greatness and excellency of it, and the Eye it had to Christ,
though it was a high act of obedience of self Resigning also.

So I say there are many acts, which are Conversant about taking Christ, and
yet are not taking him, as when a man lays himself low before Christ, after
his taking Christ, and pl^es his whole hope and Expectation in the Blood of
Christ. When Man, in Prayer, lifts up his Soul to God, through the Sacrifice of
Jesus Christ; here is an Act of Faith.

Now these Acts of Faith, they are not taking of Christ; but they are
Conversant about Jesus Christ, and his Redemption taken; and many such there
are.

The Third kind of the works of Faith is, when Faith goes out into the Noble
and Heroic Acts, that are more extraordinary in Believers, like to the Dying
of Christ, and the way of Justifying Sinners, that God has taken, by the Death
of Christ: When they in their kind, and in their Degree, bear an Image of that
extraordinary.

These I look upon to be the works peculiarly of Faith. So in the 2d of James,
Abraham's Offering Isaac; which was an extraordinary Act; if you look upon it in
the way of Obedience, and such a one, as could not be accounted for, according
to the Rules or Standards of Reason.

What! should Abraham Receive from God, an only Son, and then go and Sacrifice
him to God, and be satisfied, and Resigned in doing of it? O how was this above
the Power, beyond the compass of all the Ordinary Actions of Men! Any one that
should have come to look upon him, and see him prepare to do it, would think,
he was so far from being Obedient to God, that they would look upon him, as a
most Frenzick, Distracted Man, that had lost all Understanding, and all the
Affections of a Father, or, as a cruel and wicked person. But Faith fetch^d its
Compass round about the whole Consideration of the thing, and Transcended all
the ordinary Rules, by which Men proceed in their Actions, as seeing God giving
Christ his only Son in it. And so Rahab; she was Justified, by sending the
Spies another way: This was a great Act of Faith: And yet, if it be looked upon
(according as I have several times mentioned) by the Eye of Reason; it was a
berraying her own Country. Therefore I say, extraordinary, and unaccountable
Acts, many times, God calls his Servants to, by Faith. When Men come to suffer,
and to lose their Estates, to lose all the Enjoyments of their Families, upon
the Account of a Principle of the Gospel; either in Truth of Doctrine, or in
Purity of Worship; a Man would be ready to think, as of the Martyrs in Queen
Mary's Days, they did not understand at all, what they did, when they laid down
their Lives, upon the denial of that Idolatrous Principle, of Jesus Christ,
being himself, Bodily (as they understand it) in the Sacrament.

And so, all along, in Heb. 11. the Heroic Actions of Christians, of the
Servants of God, are instanced in, as I have instanced heretofore to you, in
Moses: Men would have thought him one of the foolishest, and softest Men in the
World, when he should refuse to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, v. 28.
And that he should esteem the Reproach of Christ's greater riches, than the
Treasures of Egypt; These are extraordinary Acts of Faith, as I have said to
you. If it had been any of our Cases at this day, to have Refused to be called
the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; How many Appearances, Plausible Appearances of
Reason should we have to taken up? As, that we might be serviceable to the
People of God! That we might have done a great deal of good to the Oppressed,
Afflicted Israel! But Moses's Faith, it fetched a compass (as I say) far above
all the general Rules men go by; and saw that it was his Duty to do so; and to
Esteem the Reproach of Christ greater riches, than the Treasures of Egypt.

Now, when God does lift up his Servants, and enlarge them beyond the Line of
all the Reason that is in the World, Therein are Peculiarly the Actions of
Faith, the great work's of Faith are found there; so there are many Cases in
which he works so now in the Souls of his People.

The fourth, and last kind of the Actions of Faith are, in walking by those
general agreed Rules of Holiness, according to the Commandments of God, which
are given us in the word of God, both of the Old, and New Testament; they are
truly to be called the works of Faith also, when men walk in the Commandments
of God; Purifying themselves, even as God is pure; being Holy in all manner of
Conversation. These are properly the works and Actions of Faith also; So I have
represented them to you each in their Degree.

The first great Act of Faith, is to Unite with Christ; and he that misses in
that, misses in all the rest.

The Second kind is of those Acts, that Result from our continual Application
to Christ, and his Blood. And then,

Thirdly, the great and Extraordinary Actions God calls his Servants to, when
all the world thinks them Mad, and Obstinate, and the most unreasonable men in
the world to do so. And yet Faith, by that Compass that is given to it, it sees
clearly through all. And then,

Lastly, Those stated Rules of Holiness, I need not show; because every one
knows the proper works of Faith, are guided thereby also, and the power flows
from Jesus Christ by Faith.

I come therefore to the Second thing: And that is, the great interest Jesus
Christ has in all the great works of Faith; and that truly, Christ is the
Author, as well as Finisher, as the Apostle calls him, Heb. 12. 2. after he had
set forth all the great Examples. Having so great a cloud of Witnesses, (v. 1.)
Let us lay aside every weight, etc. Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher
of our Faith. All the Actions of Faith, they are by Jesus Christ the Alpha, and
the Omega of all, the Beginning and the End of all. And that I would briefly
represent to you in these four things.

The first is this; Because he has Purchased these Actions of Faith for
Believers; or else they could never have done them, if he had not purchased,
that they should do them.

We indeed are called to all the Actions of faith, as our Duty; I acknowledge
it; But it is Jesus Christ that has Redeemed us to those Holy Actions; or else
we could never have done them. There are abundant Scriptures that prove this
plainly to you. The 2d Chap. of the Epist. to Titus (for I can but just name,
and intimate them to you) Tit. 2. 14. says the Apostle, Who gave himself for
us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar People, Zealous of good works. All the good works of faith, there is a
Purchase of Christ upon them; Or else, they could never have been performed by
any of his Saints. And so in the 1 Pet. 1. 18. Ye are redeemed from a vain
Conversation, by the Blood of Christ; That vain conversation, received by
Tradition from your Fathers The Tradition of evil works passes uncontrolled,
unquestioned from hand to hand; and no body but by faith disputes it, if it
comes by Tradition. As you know, the things that are but in fashion, They run
through, not only those that make no profession of the Gospel, but those that
make a profession, so Tradition runs through All. Now, how shall we be Redeemed
from this? There is no way to be Redeemed from the common Evils that are done
in the world; but by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ. And then,

In the Second place, as I began to say, Christ is the great Principle of them.
How can you walk in the ways of Holiness? No way, but by Jesus Christ, being
within us, the Principle of those Holy Actions; And therefore, tho I say, it is
our Duty, and we are condemned indeed, most righteously in not Answering our
Duty; Yet still, we cannot do the Holy Actions required of us, but under a
Purchase, under a Price. Ye are bought with a Price; therefore glorify God, as
the Apostle says. And so we must have that mighty Principle. I can do all
things (says the Apostle) through Christ that strengthens me. And in John 15.
Our Lord shows plainly, that he is the Principle, Without me (says he, v. 5.)
ye can do nothing. He had compared himself to the Vine; and Believers to the
Branches. Now, as the branch can do nothing without the Vine (you know it
cannot) so our Souls can do nothing without Christ: He is the great Principle
of it. And then,

In the Third place; They are washed in the Blood of Jesus Christ; And they are
all made up in their Imperfections, by the great Perfection of the
Righteousness and Holiness of our Lord Jesus Christ, this must necessarily be
considered.

Take that Action of Abraham; as the Apostle speaks, he was Justified by the
Offering of Isaac.

Naw, I say, That very Offering of Isaac was, as it was Abraham's Act, washed
in the Blood of Jesus; or else it had never been Accepted. There were (tho we
cannot trace them; yet God understands them) such Corruptions adhering to this
Holy Action of Abraham; that if it had not been washed in the Blood of Christ,
it could not have stood before him.

Rahab sending away the Spies, It was washed in the Blood of Christ.

Moses keeping the Passover; and refusing to be called the Son of Pharaoh's
Daughter; all these, they were washed in the Blood of Jesus; or they could not
have stood before God.

All the Repentance, all the Holy Actions of the Best, and most eminent of
Christians; they are washed in the Blood of Christ, that they may be accepted:
And wherein they are found Light, they are made up by the Righteousness of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled; So I understand
that in Romans 8. 4. It is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit; That is, by Jesus Christ; as the Apostle had said, He
condemns sin in the flesh, viz. His Flesh, his Sacrifice. And so the
Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, By all those that walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. And the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, it makes free from the Law of sin and Death. What is the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus? But that perfect Righteousness, and that
perfect obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, even to the Sacrificing himself.

The fourth and last thing, in which I would show you, that Jesus Christ is
supremely to be considered by every Believer, as the foundation of all his
Holiness, and the Acceptance of it, is this.

That Jesus Christ is He, through whom alone, and through whose perfect
Holinest, God accounts us Holy.

This, I confess, is a Point that is not generally spoken of; And it may seem
to be something singular; But I am fully persuaded of it, That we do not only
stand before God, by Imputative Righteousness, But we stand before him by
imputative Holiness also; That is, not as i^ there were no Holiness Inherent
and Real in the Saints of Christ, But their Holiness could not be counted
Holiness, if it were not for the Holiness of Jesus Christ.

I will not stand much upon it; because I know it is a singular Apprehension:
Yet I would give you two Scriptures that do strongly persuade me that this is
the very case, Till we are brought into the Perfection of Holiness, at the
State of the Resurrection of the Dead: which (as I have formerly told you) is
either when Spirits go out of the Body; or when all the Saints shall appear in
the Resurrection; then shall they be in a perfection of Inherent Holiness. But
while we are here in the World; we are not in a state of Perfect Inherent
inward Holiness. And therefore Christ in that (that is the first Scripture that
enclines me to this Apprehension) 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sactification, and Redemption. Christ is as truly made to us
Sactification, as he is made Redemption, or as he is made Righteousness or
Wisdom, in our first being brought home to God; Therefore, I say, if he not our
Sanctification; our Sanctification could not be looked upon, as Sanctification,
if it were not made Acceptable by the Holiness of Jesus Christ.

Another Scripture is that in the 7th to the Romans: Says the Apostle, We
bring forth Fruit unto Death in our selves; He is speaking of Sanctification in
Believers; We bring forth Fruit unto Death, In our selves: But when we are
Married unto another, even to him who is raised from the Dead; we bring forth
Fruit unto God. We cannot bring forth Fruit unto God (which is certainly meant
of Sanctification) any other way, but by being Married to another, even to him
who is raised from the Dead; because the Resurrection of the Dead (in all sense
of Scripture) is the Perfection of Holiness. Till we therefore are in the State
of being risen from the Dead, being in Spirits separated, (as I have spoken) or
in Bodies of Glory, we cannot bring forth Fruit unto God; but we bring forth
Fruit unto Death, if we are not in Christ the great Husband, who is risen from
the Dead. All our Holiness is made Perfect by his Holiness.

But then he brings us into that Perfection, that every Saint is indeed
perfectly Holy, in the state of Spirit, and state of a Body of Glory given to
that Spirit, that went out of the Body long (it may be) before, accordlng to
the several times in which the Saints of Christ have Dyed.

I come now to the Third and Last thing, which I proposed in this Discourse:
And that is,

To show you what the Sense of the Apostle James is; for it seems to run very
Counter to all the Doctrine of Free Justification by Faith, and not by Works. It
seems a wonderful thing, that the Spirit of God, after it had said so much by
Paul, of being Justified by Faith, without Works; That the Spirit of God, I
say, should send out so great a Minister of the Gospel, as the Apostle James
was, to lay down a Position so contrary as it seems to be to Paul; That a Man
is not Justified by Faithly, but by Works; And to make so great an Appearance
against that Truh, that great Truth of the Gospel, and to give occasion to so
many Enemies of the Free Grace of God; and to so many Devines, and strange kind
of Representations of this great Truth, by Men in all Ages, bearing up
themselves, upon the Authority of such a place of Scripture as this is.

Now therefore, by way of Answer to it, I shall not be long, although the thing
requires indeed a great deal of Thought and Consideration. And I hope, God will
enable me to give it in sum, tho I cannot speak so large of it.

The first thing I desire you to consider, is; That certainly, upon this great
Point, I am very clear in it; We are called to Consider, that if we speak
indeed strictly, and downright to the Point; a Man is no more Justified by
Faith, as it is a Grace, or an Act, or a Work, or whatsoever you call it, in it
self; I say, no more Justified by it, than he is by Works.

Certainly, God would have us fetch about every way, and consider how this can
be, that the Apostle James can seem so to Contradict the Apostle Paul.

Now, The first thing that offers it self to us, is, That a man is not indeed
Justified by Faith, upon any Merit, Excellency, or Worth, or Desert that is in
Faith it self: As I told you, if Faith should pretend to it, it would be
thrown, like Lucifer, out of Heaven: And therefore, it is not by Faith in it
self. And then,

Secondly, I do believe, that in the same sense, wherein Faith is said to be
Justifying, in dependence upon the Righteousness of Christ, in the same sense,
Works may be said to Justify, in dependence upon Faith.

Pray observe what I say: I say, Faith Justifies in dependence upon Christ; And
works may be said to Justify in dependence upon Faith. For, in the same degree,
wherein Faith stands to Christ for Righteousness, in the same degree may works
stand to Faith, in the matter of Justification.

So that works depend upon Faith, and that depends wholly upon the
Righteousness of Christ. And if this be seriously considered, it will clear to
you, what else might seem a very great doubt.

Now therefore, to lay down plainly my sense of the Apostles scope, of being
Justified by Works, and not by Faith only; There are these three senses, in
which it may be understood: And I shall make out every one to you, by plain
Expressions of the Apostle James; and yet very briefly, Leaving it especially,
to your own Meditation and Thoughts upon it.

The first is this; That wherever a Man is supposed by the Apostle James, to be
Justified by Works, and not by Faith only; it is, because Faith and Works have
a kind of Hypostatical Union, a Personal Union. So, that to say Faith, and
Works, is to say no more than to say, whole Faith, entire Faith. For, if Faith
have not works, it is false Faith; it is Counterfeit Faith; it is not whole,
entire, true Faith.

And therefore, the Apostle means nothing more by it, than only that; if you
would know what Faith you are Justified by; it is Faith that has a Mighty
Power of Operation, or Work: And therefore I understand no more by the Apostle
James, speaking of Works joined with Faith, than the Apostle Paul said, The
work of Faith with Power. Faith has a mighty Power of working: By Faith they
did so, and so, all along, Heb 11. This is through Faith; a mighty operating,
working faith. And when Jesus Christ gives himself, he always gives an
operating Faith, so he gives himself only to a Faith, that he knows has mighty
Power and Principles of Operation; It is, because it is true Faith, whole
Faith, entire Faith, the Faith of God's giving, like precious Faith.

As, you know, in a Jewel; if it be only a counterfeit, it wants some of the
essential Excellencies of a Jewel; As if a Man should think to be made Rich by
a false Jewel; it is a false counterfeit appearance; though it may have some
appearance of a true Stone, yet it wants the true Exccellency and Value of it.

So the Apostle Discourses, and shows, what a true, real, working, justifying,
operating Faith is, James 2. 16. If a Brother or Sister be naked, and destitute
of daily food, and one of you say unto him, Depart in peace; be ye warmed, and
filled; notwithstanding you give them not those things which are needful for
the body: You know this is a false Charity. And so it is a false faith, that
pretends to believe in Christ, and cannot act suitably. And again. he faith, As
the Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also.

Now, if we should make a dead Man set his hand to a Writing, you know that
Writing is of no value; though you may guide the Hand of the dead Man to write
so and so, while you guide the Hand; because he is a Man without Spirit; He has
not the Spirit of a Man.

And so Faith, if it has not all the Graces, and Actions suitable to it, it is
but a dead Faith. It is dead, as the Apostle says; and it is but the faith of
Devils. It is not a perfect faith; it has not truly the Nature of faith; It is
not (as I may) the whole Person of faith.

This is the first Sense the Apostle aimed, and drove at; to distinguish true
faith from a mere formal, professionary faith; saying, as Men do, I believe in
one God, the father Almighty; And so, you know, they go on. Now, a mere
Profession of Faith, without the power of Faith in a Man's Soul, It is but the
counterfeit Image of faith, and not faith it self; So James says, Thou
believe there is one God, etc.

In this second place; This indeed, is the way that God does generally
demonstrate, and manifest the Truth of faith to the Souls of Believers, and to
the Observation of others.

And, so it is true, That faith cannot demonstrate it self, either to a
Believer's Soul; or (in ordinary and general speaking) it cannot manifest it
self, except it have Works.

And so, that Sense that some Interpreters give of this Discourse of the
Apostle here, is, That one Faith justifies before God, and the other justifies
before Men; that is, Faith in its Works, justifies before Men; But faith alone,
taking Christ and his Righteousness, before God; though it is always a faith,
that has within it self such a power of Action, as to demonstrate it self to
Men, or else it is but a dead Faith: And a vain Man it is, that looks upon a
faith to be faith, that has not this mighty Operation. And so the Apostle
says, Faith wrought with Works: He does not say, His works were alone, but
faith wrought with them. That Is the second Sense. It manifests, and
demonstrates it self before Men to be Faith. It is that, that justifies before
a Man's own Conscience, concerning the truth of Faith; and before Men,
concerning that real Operation of God upon faith in the Soul.

Now, to this, the Apostle seems to speak very plainly, in the 18. verse; Yea,
a man may say, Thou have faith, and I have works; show me thy faith without thy
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works. You know, this plainly
speaks, that faith justifies it self before Men, to be true faith, when it
shows it self in Operations suitable to the Nature, and to the Excellency of
faith. But, if a Man have no works; if a Man says, I believe in Christ and be a
Swearer, a Drunkard, an impure Person; every way unrighteous, and unsuitable to
the Commands of God; how can such a Man show his faith? There must be an
agreeableness and suitabless of Conversation, and Action: And see thou how
faith wrought? It was visible to Men. And then,

The third and last Sense, is,

That faith is daily perfecting it self in holy Action, till it comes to that
Perfection (as I have spoken before, and several times, upon the 3 d. of
Philippians) till it comes to the Perfection of the Resurrection of the dead.
And so it fufills the Scripture, as the Apostle speaks.

That is, That whereas it was said before of Abraham, He believed God, and it
was imputed to him for Righteousness, long before he offered Isaac. There was
not a staying of his Justification, till he had offered Isaac; but he was
justified before he offered Isaac.

But yet faith perfects it self, and fulfils the Scripture daily, going on from
Grace to Grace, from Strength to Strength; from Degree to Degree, till it
appears before God perfect. And so the Apostle says, By works was faith made
perfect.

And this is suitable to the 2 These. 1. 11. that I named several times; That
God would fulfill all the pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with
power; That the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye
in him. Here you see it is very plain, That the fulfilling of the good Pleasure
of the Grace of God, it demonstrates the Truth of Faith, and glorifies the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ in Believers, and Believers in him; according to the
Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Methinks, this very Expression, it should silence all the Enemies of the Free
Grace of God, and of Justification by Free Grace. For, here is as highly spoken
of the working of Faith, as all the Understanding of Man can possibly reach to;
either to conceive, or to express.

What can be greater, than the Glorifying the Name of the Lord Jesus in
Believers, and Believers being Glorified in him? And yet, all this thrown off
quite, from any thing of Man, or Redundancy, by way of Glory, upon Man. It is
said, According to the Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

I shall now close these Things, that I have spoken thus narrowly to you (I
hope God will enlarge them in your Hearts,) in these three brief Applications,
and so conclude.

The first is this;

That you would consider the infinite Wisdom of Scripture; Indeed, there is
nothing so admirable as these two Things in Scripture, to cut off all occasion,
to turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness; and yet to set out the Grace of
God, at its full Height and Excellency. O do but take these Two Things along,
which can never divide nor deceive!

1. All is Grace. And yet. 2. Grace is mighty in its Operation.
And indeed, though we have reason to lie low, because Grace as in us seems so
short and narrow in its Operation; Yet these are two Things that can never be
disjoined, They are one within another; It is the Grace of God that brings
forth the Holiness, and keeps it in Union, to Christ, even throughout the whole
Course of a Christians Life; and even indeed throughout Eternity it self: Grace
keeps us in the way of Holiness, and new Obedience. O therefore, let us not
turn the Grace of God into Wantonness; And yet, let us be continually admiring,
and adoring free Grace.

Let us be great Professors of free Grace; but, Professors of it, in the
Holiness and Purity of it. And then,

In the second place; it teaches us still, never to forsake that Fundamental
Point of all our Interest; of all our Hope, of all the Holiness that ever we
had, or can have; If we have any at all, we have it from Jesus Christ: He is
the Alpha, and the Omega: He is the Author and Finisher; He is the Beginning
and End; He is the First and Last; All in All.

And therefore, whenever we desire to be Holy; O go to Christ, the Redeemer and
Finisher of Holiness! Whenever we complain of Corruption, go to him that is
able to Redeem from all Iniquity: Whenever we are like to be drawn to vain
Tradition, go out to the Precious Blood of Jesus Christ, who alone can set us
free from the Power of it.

Lastly, I beseech you, expect, that there will indeed be a greater State of
Holiness, when that Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ shall come into
Succession. And, don't think it a long time, because you see no more Holiness
yet.

I would only desire you to consider one place of Scripture (and with that I
will conclude) On what a sudden God will do this great Thing. The 2 Cor. 10 4,
5, 7. For the Weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to
pulling down of strong holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and bringing into Captivity
every thought to the Obedience of Christ; And having in a readiness, to revenge
all Disobedience, when your Obedience is fulfilled.

Herein the Gospel, in the Apostles Days, for a little time, gave a Spetimen,
and appearance of it self; Just like some of the great Conquerors, that we read
of in the World; either Alexander, or Julius Caesar, or Soliman among the
Turks; They passed through the World (as it were) and all lay at their feet:
They brought every thing down; As the Scripture speaks; they heaped dust, and
took every City, and derided every strong Hold, Hab. 1. 10.

As now, the way of Bombing, you know, Men go suddenly through their
Undertaking; In the same manner, and much more, shall the Gospel, when once it
comes to play its Artillery (as I may so speak) through the World; it will open
its Magazeen, and carry every thing in the World before it, though they are
never so strong; and bring every thought, and all into Captivity: And it has
in a readiness to revenge all Disobedience; If there be any thing that yields
not; it has a mighty power to Revenge, to bring every thing under.

And it only stays for this; Till the Obedience of Saints be fulfilled. Some
may say, If we were but more Righteous.

God will make us more Righteous, when this time of the Grace of his Gospel
shall begin, he will then fulfill in our Obedience.

FINIS

