A Sober Enquiry, Whether it be Lawful for SUBJECTS WITHOUT ROYAL AUTHORITY To
take up ARMS IN DEFENSE OF THE Protestant Religion, To Prevent POPERY.

LONDON: Printed for A. Banks. 1684.

To the most Noble Colonel, Colonel EDWARD MANSEL, one of the worthy Members of
the most Honorable and Loyal SOCIETY at the White Horse Tavern in
Fullers-Rents near Greys-Inn.
SIR,
AS the overflowing of Nilus does continually leave many Seeds and Spawns of
Monsters behind it, so the late Inundation of Schism in this Nation, has left
many prodigious and monstrous Principles with us; amongst the rest, That it is
lawful for Subjects to take up Arms against their Prince in Defense of
Religion, or to prevent Popery. And this Doctrine I must tell you, Sir, is
become so Epidemical, that many of the Religionists have adopted it into the
Family of their Faith. I have here in transitu, tanquam Viator Hermulas, made
some Reflections upon their pernicious Theorem: The Colors, I must confess,
are laid in Water, but some better Artists hereafter may lay them in Oil.
Howsoever I do appeal to your Noble self, whose single Opinion (in point of
Loyalty) I more value, than the Judgment of the most advanced Heads. I know,
Sir, you carry an Antidote in your Ears, and a Counterpest in your Breast,
against the Poison and Contagion of these Principles. Your innate Loyalty has
taught you even from your Cradle to bear Arms in defense of your Prince. I am
sure your Religion (which you profess) cannot suffer you to take up Arms
against your Sovereign; the first has made you gracious to your Prince, the
other Renowned to all Posterity.; your Piety has signallized your Loyalty, and
both have rendered you Illustrious. Sir, with much Humility I beg your Pardon,
and do rest

Your most Faithful, most Obedient Servant and Countryman, Ap William, d'
Bretaine.

SIR,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I have read, and soberly considered the Papers,
which you were pleased to send unto me. The Discourse is strong and Masculine;
but I must beg your Pardon, if I cannot obtain so much favor of my Reason as
to agree with you, That it is Lawful for Subjects in a Monarchical State, as
England is, to take up Arms for Religion, or in defense of it, without warrant
and Authority from the King.

Sir, this Assertion of yours is so horrid and pernicious in consequence, and
so fatal to all Kings and Princes, and to Religion it self, that I must tell
you, it is,

1. Contrary to the Doctrine delivered to us in the sacred Scriptures. 2.
Contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom. 3. Against the Judgment of the most Pious
and Learned men in all Ages.
1. It Is contrary to the Doctrine delivered in the Scriptures, which teach us,
the Sword belongs only to the King, and to them that are sent by him, Romans
13. 1 Pet. chap. 6. ver. 13, 14. And that we should be subject, not only for
Wrath, but also for Conscience Sake, because the Powers that be, are ordained
of God; whosoever therefore, says St. Paul, resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God; and they which resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.
In the words of St. Paul there is a remarkable Opposition between Subjection
and Resistance; (...), and (...), implying, that all military (...), whether
Defensive or Offensive, if it be against the Superior Power, which God has set
over us, is forbidden. But this has been so excellently discoursed of by many
learned persons, that I shall not give you further Trouble herein; yet there is
one Objection which you make your Achilles, which I shall endeavor to answer,
and that is 1 Pet. c. 2. v. 13. Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man,
whether it be to the King, as Supreme: from whence you conclude, that the King
is the Ordinance of man, and deriveth his power from the People, and in case of
breach of Trust, its lawful for them to take up Arms against him.

Ans. 1. The Original is (...), etc. Submit, or be subordinate to every
Ordinance amongst men, etc. For Ajectives in ((...)) do not denote efficiency
in the Subject, but its passivitive; so that it is not meant of any Ordinance
created by man, but established in, or amongst men.

2. There is a signal Character in that very Text, that keeps it from
concluding the Supreme Power to be Originally in the People, not only by
calling the King Supreme, such as in St. Paul's Divinity, Romans 13. are affirmed
to be ordained of God, and so no human Ordinance: but also by distinguishing
the Governors, v. 14. from the King or Supreme, v. 13. by this, that the
Governors are sent by (i. e. have Commission from) the King; which might in
the like manner be also affirmed of the King, that he were sent by the people,
if he were the Creature or Creation of them, but is not so much as intimated by
the Apostle: But on the contrary, Supremacy affixt to him, and Subjection to be
paid to him (not for the people, but for the Lords sake) as Subordination to,
and Mission from the King, is affirmed of all other Magistrates.

3. It Is contrary to the Laws of this Kingdom for Subjects to take up Arms upon
any pretense whatsoever, without Warrant and Authority of the King.

1. Because the King is the only and Supreme Governor in all Cases, 1 Eliz. c.
1. 5 Eliz. c. 1.

2. The King is an absolute Monarch, lib. 5. de Jure Regis Ecclesiastico,
Cassannus in Catal. Glor. Mundi.

3. The Kings Crown is an Emperial Crown, 28 H. 8. c. 7. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 1 Jacob.
c. 1.

If so, then the Supreme Power is in the King, and by consequence the sole
power of making war is in him.

In the Parliament 7 E. 1. it was declared by the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and
Commonalty of the Realm, That it belongs to the King and his Royal Seignory
strictly to defend force of Armor, and all other force against the Kings Peace
where it shall please him, and to punish them that shall do contrary to the Law
and Usage of the Realm, and hereunto they are bound to aid their Sovereign Lord
at all seasons, when need shall be; Old Mag. Char. fol. 156. Lamb. fol. 135.
Inst. par. 1. fol. 75.

All Commissions to levy men for the War, are awarded by the King, 4 and 5
Philip and Mary c. 3.

His Majesty's Subjects, according to their bounden Duties, ought to serve the
King in his Wars, 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 2. 11 H. 7. c. 1. lib. 7. Calvin's Case.

The people without the King, cannot make a War, but the King without the
people can; 19 E. 4. 6. Fitz. Abridg. Tit. Jurisdiction plac. ultimo.

The King ows a Protection to his people, and is the Conservator of the Law, 8
H. 7. fol. 1. If the King has not Jus gladii, how can he protect the Laws, or
his People? If there should be an Invasion ab extra, or an Insurrection ad
intra in this Kingdom, if the Jus gladii were not in the King, who should
defend the Kingdom? If it be in the people (as you would have it) then all have
an equal Right to command, and so for want of a good accord amongst them (as
they will rarely agree to reason) the Kingdom would be lost.

Therefore the Posse Regni by the Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom, does
solely belong unto the King, F. N. B. 113. Glanvil lib. 1. c. 2. lib. 14. c. 1.
Bracton lib. 3. fol. 118. and by the Statutes of 13 Car. 2. c. 6. 14 Car. 2. c.
3. the Jus gladii is settled, and declared to be solely in the King.

Therefore if Subjects, upon any pretense whatsoever, shall take up Arms,
without the Authority of the King, it is high Treason by the Common Law, and by
the Statute, 25 E. 3. for they usurp Royal Authority, and it is a Machination
and Compassing of the Kings Death, and a levying of War against his sacred
Person and Authority.

It was resolved by all the Judges of England in the reign of Henry the Eight,
That an Insurrection against the Statute of Laborers for the inhansing of
Sallaries and Wages, was a levying of War against the King, because it was
against the King and his Laws, and so in destruction of the King; and for that
the Offenders took upon them the Reformation thereof, which Subjects by
gathering of power ought not to do; Inst. part. 3. fol. 10. The Imperial Law
does assert the same: Ad Legem Ju. Majestatis Leg 3. eadem lege tenetur, and
qui injussu Principis bellum gesserit, detectum habuerit, exercitum
comparaverit, its Treason without the Command of the Prince, to make War, levy
men, or raise an Army. And Codex armorum usus inscio Principe interdictus est:
Nulli prorsus nobis inscitiis atque inconsultis quorumlibet armorum movendorum
copia tribuatur; It Is not lawful for any, without our Authority, to take up
Arms. These are the words of the Emperors, Valentinian and Valens, and Codex de
re militari, Leg. 13. Nemo miles: Nemo miles vel sibi vacet, vel aliena
obsequia sine nutu Principali peragere audeat. And Bodin does tell us the same
de Repub. lib. 1. c. 10. n. 155, 156. fol. 244. Edit. Latin. Ursell. Anno 1601.

2. It Is not lawful for Subjects in the Realm of England to take up Arms for
Religion, either to reform it, or to take away that established, or to
introduce a new one without Warrant or Authority of the King. Because,

1. The King is the Supreme Head of the Church of England, 26. H. 8. c. 1. 2 E.
6. c. 2. And at a Convocation holden Anno 22 H. 8. by a public Instrument made
by all the Bishops and whole Clergy of England, the King was acknowledged to be
Supreme Head of the Church of England; Inst. part. 3. fol. 121.

2. All Ecclesiastical Authority and Jurisdiction in this Kingdom are
originally derived from the King, lib. 5. De Jure Regis Ecclesiastico; he has
power within his Dominions to declare what are Articles of Faith, according to
Scriptrue, to make Laws for the Government of the Church, to appoint forms of
Worship and Discipline; and he has power to make Orders and Constitutions for
the Government of the Clergy, as it was resolved by all the Judges of England,
2 Feb. 2 Jac. Croke part 2. fol. 37. Moors Rep. 755. And these Rights and
powers of the King are inherent in him, as Essential Flowers of the Crown, and
as ancient as the Crown it self.

For Subjects to raise Arms in opposition of any of these Powers, or against
the Laws and Constitutions to that purpose by the King made, it is High Treason
within the Statute of 25 E. 3. for the Church and Commonwealth make but one
Monarchy; therefore they which take up Arms against the Ecclesiastical Power of
the King, take up Arms against the Monarchy, and so against the Monarch. And I
must tell, you, Sir, That originally there was no difference between Church and
State, as to Jurisdiction, until Christian Monarchs divided Jurisdictions, and
delegated Civil and Ecclesiastical persons to take Conusance, and judge of
Causes separate: And those Jurisdictions are called Civil and Ecclesiastical,
in respect of the Delegates only, and not in respect of the Cases whereof they
take Conusance, and judge. And the same persons which ratione Ligeantiae, are
Members of the Commonwealth, ratione Fidei, are Members of the Church.

Sir Edward Coke (that great Oracle of the Law) says, If Subjects take up
Arms, to alter Religion established within the Realm, or the Laws, or to any
other end, pretending Reformation of their own heads, without Authority from
the King, this is a levying of War against the King; because they take upon
them Royal Authority, which is against the King, and per Consequence it is High
Treason, Inst. part. 3. fol. 9.

Sir John Old castle of Cowling in the County of Kent, in Parliament was
adjudged a Traitor, for that he and others to the number of twenty men called
Lollards, did conspire to subvert the State of the Clergy, Rot. part. 5 H. 5.
n. 11.

In Queen Mary's time Sir Nicholas Throgmorton conspired with Sir Thomas Wyat
to levy War within the Realm for alteration in Religion; he joined not with him
in the execution of this Conspiracy, yet both adjudged Traitors by the Common
Law, before the Declaration of the Stat. 25. E. 3. Die fol. 98.

1 Jac. The Lord Gray and other Conspirators met, and conspired to make an
Insurrection, whereby they designed to seize the King into their power, until
he should grant them a Pardon of all Treasons, a Tolleration of the Exercise of
the Popish Religion, etc. They were indicted for Compassing the Kings Death;
the Lord Gray was tried by his Peers, and had Judgment to be drawn, hanged and
quartered.

In the Fifthty first of Henry the third, it was declared by Parliament, that
for Subjects to associate or enter into any Covenant to reform Church or State,
without the consent of the King, was High Treason by the Fundamental Laws of
this Nation, and entered upon the Roll, Nullo contradicente. Rot. part 51 H. 3.
n. 8.

If the end of raising Arms be to overthrow any Statute, any part of the Law,
and settled Government in Church or State, this is war against the King, and
High Treason.

In that great Insurrection of the Villains and meaner people in King Richard
the Second's time; they took an Oath, Quod Regi and Communibus fidelitatem
servarent, to be true to the King and Commons, and that they would take nothing
but what they paid for, punished all Theft with Death; here was no intendment
against the person of the King; the intent was to establish the Laws of
Villenage and Servitude: this in Parliament, 5 R. 2. is declared to be Treason
against the King, 5 R. 2. part 1. n. 31, 32.

In the Eighth year of Henry the Eight, William Bell, and Thomas Lacy in the
County of Kent, conspired with Thomas Cheyney, called the Hermit of the Queen
of Faires, to overthrow the Laws and Customs of the Realm; and for the
effecting of it, they with 200 more met together, and concluded upon a Course
of raising greater Forces in the said County of Kent; this was adjudged
Treason: It Is the same offense by force of Arms to conspire to overthrow the
Ecclesiastical Laws and Government of the Church.

Richard Bradshaw, and Robert Burton, and others of Oxfordshire, conspired and
agreed to assemble themselves with so many men as they could procure at
Enslowhill in that County, and there to rise, and from thence to go from
Gentleman's house to Gentleman's house, and to cast down Enclosures as well for
enlargement of Highways, as of Errable Lands; and they agreed to get Armor
and Artillary at the Lord Norris's house, and to bear them in going from
Gentleman's house to Gentleman's house for the end aforesaid, and to that purpose
persuaded diverse others; and all this was confessed by the Offenders, for which
Bradshaw and Burton were attainted of High Treason, P. 39 Eliz. by all the
Judges of England.

If it be Treason to conspire and agree to assemble to cast down Enclosures,
certainly it must be Treason to conspire and consult by power of Arms, without
Royal Authority, to cast down the Enclosures of the Church (which is Hortus
inclusus) and fenced with so many excellent Laws to defend it against the
Ravage of the Beasts of Ephesus, and the Fury of unreasonable men.

For Subjects to take up Arms to remove evil Counselors from the King, it is
High Treason, as it was adjudged in the Case of the Earl of Essex; what then is
the Offense by force of Arms to remove the sacred Oracles of the Church, and to
pull down the Pillars of it?

So that it does demonstratively appear, that the sole power of the Sword is in
the King; for to suppose that another has right to bear the Sword, besides the
Sovereign, is to suppose, that the Sovereign has an equal, which is a
Contradiction to the notion of Sovereignty, and that in the same Government
there may be two Sovereign Powers.

3. In the next place we shall consider whether this Doctrine of taking up Arms
for Religion, or in defense of it, or to prevent any other from settling, or
upon any other godly pretense, without Authority from the King, be warranted by
the Judgment of the most Learned and Pious men in all Ages, That it is not
lawful for Subjects, without Warrant from their King, to take up Arms for
Religion, or defense of it, or upon any other godly pretense whatsoever.

Tertullian in his Apologeticks c. 30, 33, 37. tells us, That the Ancient
Christians in his time, although having an Heathen and persecuting Emperor, did
honor him, as chosen of God, and second from God, and first after God; and did
choose rather to suffer, than to make resistance by force of Arms, although they
lacked not number and strength to do it.

The like Example we have in that renowned Thebaean Legion of 6666 Christian
Soldiers called Agaunenses from the place of their Suffering, who, without
making resistance as they had strength to have done, suffered themselves rather
to be slain for their Christian Profession, by the Officers of Maximinian the
Emperor, Executors of his cruel Commandment against them: This fell out in the
18. year of Dioclesian, as Ado Viennensis writes in his Chronicle, which was
in the year of God 297. as Cardinal Baronius reckons in his Annals; and of
that pious and Christian Resolution Venantius Fortunatus an ancient Bishop of
Poictiers has left unto us a noble Eulogium, as you may see in Bibliotheca
Patr. Tom. 8. Edit. 4. fol. 741.

Gregory Nazianzen in his first Oration, speaking of the Persecution by Julian
the Apostate, where the Christians were more in number, and stronger in power
to have made open Resistance, if they had in their Consciences found it
agreeable to their Christian Profession, declares plainly, that they had no
other remedy against that Persecution, but patient Suffering for Christ, with
gloriation in Christ.

St. Ambrose having received commandment to deliver the sacred Houses or
Churches to be possessed by the Arrians, declared what he thought convenient to
be done in such a case, to wit, neither to obey in that which he could not
perform with a good Conscience, nor yet to resist by force of Arms. His words
to the people (Concione tertia contra Auxentium) are these; Quid ergo
turbamini? volens nunquam vos deseram, coactus repugnare non novi: dolere
potero, potero flere, potero gemore, adversus arma, milites, Gothosque
lachrimae meae arma sunt, talia munimenta sunt Sacerdotis, aliter debeo, nec
possum resistere: Why then are ye troubled? I shall never willingly leave you:
If I be compelled, I cannot gainstand; I may be sorry, I may weep, I may sigh,
against Arms, Soldiers, the Goths also, my Tears are Arms; for such are the
Guards of a Priest: otherwise I neither ought, nor may resist. And in the
second Book of his Epistles, 14 Epist. to his Sister Marcellina, speaking to
the same purpose, he says, Non ego me vallabo circumfusione populorum,
rogamus, Auguste, non pugnamus -- tradere Basilicam non possum, sed repugnare
non debeo: I shall not fortify my self with a multitude of people about me --
We beseech, O Emperor, we fight not -- I may not deliver the Church, but I
ought not to make resistance.

Such also was the Doctrine and Practice of many other great Lights which
shined in the days of Julian the Apostate, and in the days of the Arrian
Emperors, and Gothic Arrian Kings.

St. Augustine writing of a lawful War, acknowledges that only to be lawful,
which has Authority from the Prince; Interest enim quibus causis, quibusque
Authoribus homines gerenda bella suscipiant, ordo tamen ille naturalis
mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit, ut suscipiendi belli Authoritas atque
Consilium penes Principem sit. Aug. lib. 22. contra Faustum, c. 75. For it is
much to be regarded, says he, for what Causes, and by whose Authority men
undertake Wars, but that natural order which is accommodated to the peace of
mortal men, require this, That the Authority and Counsel of undertaking War, be
in the power of the Prince.

Doctor Bilson says, In making of War, the person must be respected as well as
the Cause; be the Cause never so just, if the Person be not authorized by God
to draw the Sword, they be not just or lawful Wars. Private men may not venture
on Wars, unless they be directly warranted by him that has the Warrant from
God. Dr. Bilson in his Book entitled, The true Difference betwixt Christian
Subjection, and Unchristian Rebellion; Printed at Oxford 1585. fol. 380.

He shows, that the Subjects of England have no lawful Authority or Warrant
to draw the Sword without the consent of the Prince. fol. 518.

Peter Martyr says, That it is certain, that wars may not be made without the
Authority of the Prince. Loc. Com. class. 4. c. 16.. 2.

Calvin, a person of no mean esteem with you, in the 4th Book of his
Institutes, in the last Chapter of that Book, disputes the Question at large,
and by many strong Arguments concludes, That it is no ways Lawful for Subjects
to resist their Prince by force of Arms, whether the Prince be Godly and Just,
or Ungodly and Unjust in his Conversation, and commands, that nothing remains
to Subjects in such a case, but to obey or suffer.

The same Doctrine also is delivered by Hugo Grotius in his first Book de Jure
Belli and Pacis, chapter 4. To. Gerherd in the 6. Tom. of his Common Places in his
Treatise de Magistratu Politico n. 483. where he discourses learnedly of this
matter: Albericus Gentilis in his Regal Disputations, Disput. 3. de Vi Civium
in Reg^m semper injusta. Jo. Bishop of Rochester in his Book written against
Bellarmine, de Potestate Papae in rebus Temporalibus lib. 1. c 8. M. Antonius
de Dominis, in his Book called Ostensio Errorum Francisci Suarez. c. 6.. 27.

If the Authority of these persons, who made so great Figures in the World for
their Piety and Learning, cannot convince you of your Error, I know not what
will.

But, Sir, I must tell you, let your Pretenses be never so firm and religious,
and that you act according to the Dictates of your Conscience, to secure
Religion against Papacy, and to reduce the Church of England to the primitive
Purity, if you take up Arms to effect it, without Royal Authority, it is High
Treason. Obedience to your Sovereign Prince and his Laws, is part of your Duty
toward God: And Conscience is not your Rule, but your Guide, and so far only
can Conscience justify your Actions, as it is justified by God, and his sacred
Word. Subm^ssion to your Prince is your Duty, and confidence in his Goodness
will be your Prudence. So I take my leave and rest,

Sir, Your Humble Servant, Ap William d' Bretaine.

FINIS.

