The following Proposals for, and Accounts of, a National Land-Bank having been
Printed at London. Its proveable many Gentlemen who would have Subscribed
thereto, by Reason of the distance of their dwelling from thence have heard
nothing, or had but an Imperfect account of it; for informing whom, true Copies
of several of Mr Brisco's Papers are herewith Reprinted, in order to be
dispersed in several Counties.
The Freehold Estates of England, or England it self the best fund or security
AFTER so many assurances given by some persons to furnish the Freeholders of
England with Money, upon the Securities of their Estates, one would have
thought no Landed-Man in the Kingdom could have remained under any Difficulty
to raise Money for supplying his Occasions, or to clear off his Encumbrances,
and that Leases of Ejectment, and Sub-poena's in Chancery to fore-close
Equities of Redemption, would have been out of Date; but notwithstanding all
that has been promised, we find the Freeholders under as bad if not worse
Circumstances than ever. The Bank of England, who have caused many
Advertisments to be inserted in the Gazzetes, of furnishing the Freeholders
with Money at 5 l. per cent. per Annum, not meeting with one Title in an
hundred that will please them, have turned the Current of their Business
another way, and are setting up Banks in Foreign Countries, leaving the poor
Freeholders to shift for themselves.

The Orphans Bank have set out an Order to lend Money upon a deposite of Gold
or Silver, and to discount Bills of Exchange at 3. l. per Cent. per Annum, but
mention no^ one word of lending Money on Land-Security.

In fine, tho all make use of that pleasing and popular Argument, of easing the
Freeholders, and raising the Value of Land, yet not one step has been taken
therein, nor must we expect ever will, so long as the Management is in private
Hands, and not by Persons appointed either by the public, or by the
Freeholders themselves; but all that has been said or promised (if one may
have leave to judge by Men's Actions) seems only a pretense, without the least
Reality or Purpose to perform the same. Now when the Revenue of the Excise, the
Annual Income settled on the Orphans, the Lottery-Tickets, the Annuities for
lives, and indeed almost any thing that has but the face of a Security, although
depending on Contingencies, are made use of for Funds whereupon to issue out
Bills, and have some of them actual Credit for three times more than the real
Value, it cannot but seem strange to any considering Man, that the Freehold
Estates of England or rather England it self, which all must acknowledge to be
the very Basis of those Funds should be disregarded; and the issuing out Bills
on Land-Security for a far less Sum than the Value, should be rediculed, and
made a Jest of; yet some People have had so little Sense as to pass their
Censures on my Proposals to the Parliament, for issuing out Bills of Credit on
Land-Security; and the Bill which was brought in by Mr. Brockman this last
Session by Order of the Honorable the House of Commons, entitled, An Act for
the improvement of the Freehold Estates of England, and the encouragement of
Trade, and which was referred to a Committee who made a considerable Progress
therein, was by some Persons opposed, for no other Reason as I could ever hear
of, but because it would have been prejudicial to their particular Interests. I
did therefore once design to have Printed a Breviate of the said Bill, that all
Persons might have seen whether the same was reasonable or practicable; but
upon farther Consideration I forbore it, finding too many led more by Humor
than Reason, and that they will not believe any thing possible to be done,
until they see it effected. I shall therefore (being encouraged so to do by
several Persons of great Worth) reduce the same into practice, and to lay the
Foundation of a National Bank (and probably the greatest Bank in the World) so
far as it is capable of being done, without the Assistance of an Act of
Parliament; still submitting the same to such Regulations, Alterations, or
Amendments, as the great Council of the Kingdom shall in their Wisdom at any
time hereafter think needful to make.

Some perhaps who are desirous to keep the Freeholders Necks still under the
Servile Yoke of 6 l. per Cent. per Annum Interest, besides other Charges, which
with the Taxes has eaten up several of their Estates, may make trivial
Objections against these my Proposals, and demand where will the Money be found
to answer the Bills of Credit? But I do not think my self obliged to acquaint
every impertinent Querist with the Methods I have to propose for raising a Fund
of Money: it is sufficient I have hitherto born the whole Charge of prosecuting
this Business, which when accomplished will be so greatly for the Freeholders
Advantage, and will more than double the Value of their Estates. All that I
desire of the Freeholders is, that they will enable me to do it by subscribing,
and settling their Estates in Trust upon credible and substantial Persons of
their own naming, and to choose some from among themselves to put in practice
those Methods I have to lay before them, so far forth as they shall appear
agreeable to Reason and no farther.

Proposals for Subscriptions for a National Land Bank.
THat Books shall be laid open on Tuesday the 11 th of this instant June, at
the Chambers of Thomas Gooding Sergeant at Law, in Field-Court in Grayes-Inn.
At Philip Neave Esquire; his Chambers, the second Staircase of the Paper-Buildings
in the Inner Temple. At Lawrence Braddon Esquire; his Chambers. Number 4. the
second Staircase in the new Square at Lincolns Inn. At the house of Robert
West, Esquire; the Corner of Buckingham-Court near Scotland-yard. At Mr, John
Smith's in Exchange-Allay: And at Mr Humphrey Hackshaw's in Lothbury near the
Royal Exchange in London. Where any Persons by themselves or others, may
Subscribe Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, whether Freehold Copyhold, or
Lease-hold, to what yearly Value they please, to be settled upon such Trustees
as shall be chosen by the Subscribers, for Funds to issue out Bills of Credit
upon the security of such Estates. That an account shall be published in Print
every Month of the yearly value of the Estates Subscribed. That so soon as
100000 l. per Annum shall be subscribed, a list of the Subscribers shall be
Printed Alphabetically, with the several yearly Values by them and each of them
Subscribed, and timely Notice given to the several Subscribers, to meet
together in some public place within the Cities of London or Westminster, to
choose by the Majority of Votes, such and so many credible Persons as they or
the Major part of them shall think fit to be Trustees of all the Estates to be
settled on such Trustees in Trust for the aforesaid Purposes. That the
Subscribers shall at the same time choose by the Majority of Votes, such and so
many to be Directors or Managers, and also one or more Treasurer or Treasurers
of the said intended Land-Bank, to be continued in their respective Offices for
so long time as the Subscribers or Major part of them shall think fit, and no
longer. That each Subscriber shall have one Vote in the Election of Trustees,
Managers and Treasurers, for each 50 l. per Annum, by him or her subscribed.
That any Person or Persons who shall settle his or their Estate or Estates upon
the said Trustees, shall at any time after such Settlement of such Estate or
Estates, have in Money or Bills of Credit, to the Value of three fourth parts
of his or their Estate or Estates so settled, he or they paying to the said
Directors or Managers Two Pence per Cent, per Diem, being 3 l. 0 s. 10 d. per
Cent. per Annum, for Interest and all other Charges whatsoever, and no more;
and may also repay to the said Directors or Managers all or any part of the
same, at any time or times whenever, and as it shall best suit with his or
their Convenience to repay the same; but no Man's Estate is to stand or be
engaged for any other or greater Sum than what he himself shall actually
receive and be indebted for.
* The Proposer doubts not but he shall be able to reduce the Interest which
the Freeholders is to pay to less than 3 l. per Cent. per Annum, as will appear
by the Conditions in the Subscription-Books, to which all Persons for farther
Satisfaction are referred.

JOHN BRISCOE

An Account of the National Land-Bank.
I HAVE in my Treatise, Entitled, A Discourse on the Late Fund, etc. shown
That Trade is the Medium of Riches; and Money the Medium of Trade: That as no
Nation can grow rich without Trade, so Trade cannot be carried on without
Money: That what any Nation appoints to be the Medium of their Trade, the same
is the Money of that Nation* That Money ought to carry or convey along with it
an intrisick Value, that the Receiver may be no Loser thereby: That Gold and
Silver being made the medium of our Trade, if we have not a Sufficiency of
those Commodities, our Trade will be at a Stand for want of Money to carry it
on, except some other Medium be established, or such Defect supplied by Credit:
That wheresoever a Credit is given, if there be not a Valuable Fund to answer
it, such Credit is unsecure: That we have not Money enough in England to
maintain our Trade, and are forced to extend our Credit to supply that Defect:
That our Credit for want of a certain Fund has been generally unsafe, and many
by that means have been great Losers, and not a few ruined: That this Scarcity
of Money, occasions High Interest. That High interest is ruinous to Trade, and
fatal to Landed-men, and will bring down the Value of their Estates: That we
are under a necessity to create some new Species of Money, our present Species
being debased and melted down; or to establish some secure Fund of Credit to
supply the Want of Money, or else we must expect a Decay of our Trade.

I Proposed to the Honorable House of Commons the last Session of Parliament,
a Method to make the Lands of England, or rather England it self, a Medium of
Trade and Commerce as it conveys an intrinsic Value, or a Fund of Credit as it
is the most undoubted Security; showing how it was easily reducible to
Practice, and might be rendered, either way, as useful in Trade and Commerce, as
Gold or Silver: I showed the many Advantages that the whole Nation would reap,
if my said proposals passed into an act, viz. That his Majesty would more
easily, and upon better Terms, be supplied with Money: That it will increase
our Trade, enrich the Nation, encourage Handicrafts and Artificers, and employ
Thousands who are in a starving Condition: That it will double Gentlemen's
yearly Estates; enable such whose Estates are mortgaged to clear their
Encumbrances, and with ease to raise Portions for their Children, and that it
will undoubtedly bring Land to 40 Years Purchase; with several other advantages
too tedious to enumerate: and do therefore for brevity sake, refer those who
desire farther Satisfaction, to my fore mentioned Book, or to a late printed
paper published by Dr. Barbone, entitled, An Account of the Land-Bank, which
the Author has mostly collected out of my Writings: But the immediate Supply
for support of the War, and consequently of the Government, with some other
things interveening toward the Close of the Sessions, post-poned the Bill,
that it did not pass through the House, which I hope notwithstanding to see
effected the next Sessions of Parliament.

I shall however in the mean time (for the benefit and Advantage of the Landed
Men) endeavor with their Assistance, to reduce the same into practice, so far
as it is capable of being done without an Act of Parliament, and to turn their
Estates into a Living Stock, by making them as serviceable as so much ready
Money: But because it will be very difficult to effect the same, if the
Managment be in such private hands, whose Interests are separate and distinct
from Freeholders, and who will therefore most certainly prefer their own private
Advantage, before the public Good; I propose That (till the Parliament shall
otherwise order and direct) the whole Trust and Government of this intended
National Land-Bank, shall be in the hands of such whom the Landed-Men
themselves shall nominate and appoint; and from whom they may expect just and
candid Dealing: But I must make it my Request, that Gentlemen (for their own
Good) will not be too inquisitive into my Methods of managment, till they shall
put me into a Capacity, by a competent number of Subscriptions, to reduce the
same into practice; which I think I may reasonably desire, since they will not
be at a Penny Charge, nor under the least Obligation to settle their Estates,
unless after they shall have chosen the Trustees and Directors, they shall
approve of the Methods I shall then propose, and shall thereupon settle their
Estates in Trust, upon the said Trustees for the foresaid purposes: And the
rather, because some Persons have lately attempted to raise a Bank upon the
Foundation of my forementioned Book, only with this Difference; that whereas I
have proposed, That the Landed-Men whose Estates must be the the Fund, may have
Money for 3 l. 0 s. 10 d. per Cent per Annum Interest, and have the Government
and Profit of the Bank, and consequently the Managment of their own Estates:
The said Gentlemen have proposed to lend Money to the Land-Men, whose Estates
also are to be the Fund, for 3 l. 10 s. per cent, per annum, and to invest the
Government and profits of their Bank in the Subscribers of 100000 l. in Money;
and therefore I must expect they will not fail to put in practice any Method I
shall propose, which may be a Furtherance to them in their said Design.

I understand some Gentlemen are offended at a passage in my late printed paper
of Proposals, being an Answer to a Question, which I supposed some, who are
Enemies to this my Design, might make, viz. Where will the Money be found to
answer the Bills of Credit? To which I replied; That I do not think my self
obliged to acquaint every Impertinent Querist, with the Methods I have to
propose for raising a Fund of Money. Now had this Reply been applicable to the
Freeholders, it had been a just ground of Exception; but since it refers to
these only, who may make trivial Objections, and start such Queries, on purpose
to baffle my proposals, and thereby to deprive the Freeholders of those
Advantages, which otherwise they may enjoy, (as the words joined with those
preceding can admit of no other Construction) I hope there is no reason for
any Freeholder to be displeased with the Expression. I shall only say, That I
shall be always ready to impart to the Freeholders any thing that may be for
their Interest; but do not think it is consistent with prudence for the
foresaid Reason, to discover my Methods of raising Money, till time shall have
so ripened things, that I may at the same time be ready to put my propsals into
execution. So far I dare venture to say, that I can demonstrate to any
Gentleman, That Money cannot be wanting, and that I have Methods to propose for
raising Money that will in all probability bring in Far greater Sums, than will
be needful.

Having therefore engaged my self, with much Pains, Charge and Trouble, to
support and advance the Freeholders Interest, I cannot doubt, for their own
Good, they will not insist upon the Nicety of words; but rather well consider
my proposals, of which I present them with the following Abstract, which I
desire notwithstanding may be submitted to such Regulations or Amendments, as
the Great Council of the Kingdom shall in their Wisdom at any time hereafter
think needful to make.

PROPOSALS for a National Land-Bank.
THAT whereas Books were laid open the 11 th. of this instant June, at Thomas
Gooding, Sergeant at Law, his Chambers in Gray's Inn. At Philip Neve Esquire; his
Chamber, the second Staircase of the Paper Buildings in the Inner Temple. At
Lawrence Braddon Esquire; his Chamber, Number 4. the second Stair case in the New
Square at Lincoln's Inn. At the House of Robert West Esquire; the Corner of
Buckingham-Court near Scotland Yard. At Mr. John Smith's in Exchange-Alley: And
at Mr. Humphrey Hackshaw's in Loth^ury near the Royal Exchange in London: Where
any person by themselves, or others, may subscribe Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments, whether Freehold Copyhold, or Lease-hold, to what Yearly Value
they please, to be settled upon such Trustees, as shall be chosen by the
Subscribers, for a Fund to issue out Bills of Credit upon the Security of such
Estates. That an Account shall be published every Month of the Yearly Value of
the Estates subscribed. That when 100000 l. per annum shall be subscribed, a
List of the Subscribers shall be printed alphabetically with the several Yearly
Values by them subscribed, and timely notice given them to meet together in
some public Place within the Cities of London or Westminster, to choose by the
Majority of Votes, such, and so many credible Persons as the major Part of them
so met together shall think fit, to be Trustees of all Estates, to be settled
on such Trustees in Trust, for the foresaid Purposes. That the said Subscribers
shall at the same time in like manner, choose such and so many, to be Directors
or Managers, and one or more Treasurer or Treasurers of the said intended
National Land-Bank, to be continued in their respective Offices for so long
time as the major part of the Subscribers shall t^ink fit, and no longer. That
every Subscriber shall have one Vote in the Election of Trustees, Managers, and
Treasurers, for each 50 l. per annum by him or her subscribed. That the
Directors, or major Part of them, shall appoint Council to examine the Titles of
Estates, and Secretaries Book-keepers, or other under Officers, and agree upon
Rules Orders, and Methodes for the better Management of the said intended
Land-Bank, That the profit of the Bank shall be divided among the Subscribers
in proportion to their several Subscriptions, That any person who settles his
Estate, may at any time after such Settlement, have three fourth parts of the
Value of such Estates in Money, or Bills of Credit, paying to the Directors or
Managers 2 d. per cent per diem, being 3 l. 0 s. 10 l. per cent, per annum for
Interest and all other Charges, and no more; and may repay all, or any part of
the same, at any time, as it shall best suit with his Convenience, That the
Interest is to be paid every 25 th Day of March, and 29 th Day of September, or
within one Month after. That no person who shall settle his Estate on the said
Trustees for the foresaid Uses, nor the Estate of such Persons, shall be
chargeable for more Money than what he himself shall take up of the Directors.
That the Subscribers shall have public notice to meet once every six Months,
and in default of such notice, any five Persons interessed* may summon a
General-meeting of all the Persons interessed, where they may displace any
Director, Manager,, Treasurer, or other Officer, and choose others in his or
their place or places.
Note, that any subscriber may have up his Deed of Settlement at any time upon
demand, upon his Payment of principal and Interest due upon his Estate,

A Book of Subscriptions is since laid open at Mr. Nicholas Hayward's Public
Nottary in Thredneedle street behind the Royal Exchange.

JOHN BRISCOE.

To the LORDS Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
May it please Your Honors
THE last Sessions of Parliament, I presented You with Proposals for setting up
a National Land-Bank, and in order thereunto a Bill was brought in, by order of
the Honorable the House of Commons, and was referred to a Committee, who made
a considerable Progress therein: But the Bill not passing through the House,
for want of Time, I did not intend to put my Proposals in practice until the
next Sessions of Parliament, fearing it might be looked upon as a Disrespect to
Your Honors (wherein I have always been very cautious of offending) to begin a
Business of so great Importance, before I had an Authority from Your Honors
for my so doing: But some Gentlemen who pretended they could not understand my
Scheme, while the Bill was depending before the House of Commons, have formed
the Model of a Bank out of the Book I presented to Your Honors; only, to make
it look like a Novelty, have spoiled my Design by some alterations of their
own.

It is doubtless a Duty incumbent upon all the Subjects (as I mentioned in my
Treatise, Entitled A Discourse of the late Funds, which I presented to both
Houses of Parliament) to propose to Your Honors whatsoever may occur to any of
them for the Service of the Public, and whosoever spends his Time and Estate
in so doing presumes he is safe, and under Your Honors Protection: if not, it
will certainly be a Bar to all future Ingenuity, and will for ever discourage
Persons from offering any thing to Your Honors that may tend to the Good of
the Nation. But I am well satisfied Your Honors will not countenance any, who
shall go about to deprive me of the Fruit of my Industry; and therefore tho I
have been often told, that the Persons who are engaged in setting up a Bank in
opposition to me, will certainly bear me down by an Interest too powerful for
me to withstand, yet I think my self secure in Your Honors Justice and
Impartiality, and in assurance thereof I shall (God willing) proceed upon what
I have undertaken, not doubting but with Your Honors Assistance to surmount
all those Difficulties, which the Ignorance of some, and Envy of others, may
lay in my way. I beg leave to subscribe my self.

Your Honors most Humble and most obedient Servant, John Briscoe

Advice to the Freeholder.
THose who have made an Estimate of the Yearly Estates and Money of the
Kingdom, have computed the former to be worth above 300 Millions, and the
latter not above 5 Millions in value; and yet it is most certain and apparent,
That those who have the 5 Millions, have more Credit, and are of greater
account than those who are the Owners and Proprietors of the 300 Millions, and
the Landed-Men are Servants to the Monied-men, so far as the Borrower may be
said to be a Servant to the Lender. Now forasmuch as this is most undoubtedly
true, and Matter of Fact, I shall endeavor (with as much Brevity as I can) to
show the Freeholder. From whence this great Inequality arises. The
Unreasonableness of this Inequality. And Propose Proper Expedients to remedy it.


The First and Principal Reason of this great Inequality, proceeds from a
mistake in making Gold and Silver the only Medium of our Trade and Commerce;
and consequently a Living Stock to the Owners thereof, while the Land of
England is a Dead Stock to the Proprietors: For tho a Gentleman may have a
considerable Estate in Land, yet he receives no Profit or Advantage thereby,
but the bare accruing Income of such Estate, and if he wants 2000 or 3000 l.
although he have an Estate in Land worth 20000 l. yet he cannot be supplied out of
his own Estate, but is forced to borrow of others at high Interest and with no
small expense of Time and Money, in examining his Title, drawing Writings, etc.
which eats into the very heart and Bowels of his Estate. And for this Reason
Gentlemen whose Estates are in Land, have but little (if any) Credit for their
Estates, being (as has been observed) a Dead Stock, upon which they cannot
raise Money, but with great Charge and Difficulty, none care to trust them,
because it does not appear how they shall be paid: For suppose a Gentleman be
superlatively honest, and willing to discharge his Obligations, yet the Nature
of his Estate (if it be in Land) is such, that if his Debts are greater than
his yearly Income will discharge, he is incapable of paying them, unless he
engages his Land, which besides the Charge, does often terminate in the ruin of
him and his Estate.

Another Reason of this Inequality, is the different Tempers of the Landed and
the Monied-Men occasioned in some Measure, from the different Circumstances of
their Estates; for Gold and Silver, tho living-Stocks, yet lying in the Chest,
are dead Estates: being no longer profitable than when they are circulating,
which puts the Monied-Men upon Exercising their Wits, making them sharp and
quick-sighted, and ready to lay hold of any Thing that offers which may tend to
their Advantage. For Instance, when the Parliament passed an Act, granting a
Bank to the Subscribers of 1200000 l. no sooner were the Books laid open to
receive Subscriptions, but the same was filled up in 10 or 12 Days space; not a
Fund is settled by Parliament, but if a Million or more in Money be wanting, it
is presently raised, and paid in by the Monied-Men upon the least
Encouragement, and without asking many Questions: by which Means, several of
them have raised considerable Estates since the War began. On the other Hand,
the Landed Men living commonly remote from, and consequently being Strangers to
Business, are contented with the Product of their Land, and if they can keep
both Ends together they think they do well, and take little or no care of
farther Improvements; which makes them commonly regardless of, and deaf unto
all Proposals that are made for the advancing their Estates. And tho they ought
not to be blamed for a prudent Cautiousness, how they embarass themselves, or
their Estates with Things they do not understand, being sensible how difficult
it is to get clear when they are once encumbered; yet I think such again are
very much wanting to themselves who reject every Offer that is made them for
their Advantage, without examining whether it be reasonable, or whether they
may safely close with it.

Having briefly enquired into the Causes, I shall proceed to show the
Unreasonableness of this Inequality, which I will do by a plain and familiar
Instance or Example.

Suppose then A has an Ingot of Gold worth 1000 l. B has a Bar of Silver
worth as much, and C has 100 Acres of Land of the like value; the Gold or
Silver in one entire piece is useless, and will yield no Profit or Advantage to
A or B, while the 100 Acres of Land which C has in one entire piece or parcel
yield him Pasture for Cattle, Timber, Firewood, etc. without any Charge
bestowed upon it. Now what Rational Man will not prefer the 100 Acres of Land
before the Gold or Silver, which will produce more Profit to the Proprietor
than 10000 such Bars or Ingots? the one being a living, the other dead
Estates. And therefore any Person who knew not to what uses Gold and Silver are
converted, would doubtless believe C to be out of his Senses, to borrow of A or
B one half of the said Gold, or Silver, and to make over his 100 Acres of Land
for Security to restore the same, and to give 30 l. per Annum for the use of
it, besides other Charges; and yet this is the constant and daily practice of
all such, who take up Money upon the Security of their Estates. Now if we
examine into the Reason thereof, it is no more than this: The Legislative Power
has made Gold and Silver to be the only Medium of Trade and Commerce, and has
thereby turned those which before were dead Commodities into living Stocks,
which for the greater Convenience of Trade are carried to the Mint, where they
are divided into several needful Parts, and the Stamp of Authority impressed
upon them; While the Land which is a living Estate, for want of being made a
Medium of Trade and Commerce as Gold and Silver are, remains a dead Stock, to
the great Damage of the Ownners and Proprietors.

To Remedy which I proposed to the honorable House of Commons the last
Sessions of Parliament, to make Land, as well as Gold and Silver, a Medium of
Trade and Commerce, and offered several Reasons for the same; showing how Land
may in all respects be made as useful as Gold or Silver for such Purposes, but
foreseeing I should meet with very great Difficulties to get an Act for making
Land a Medium of Trade, I thereupon applied my self to make it a Fund of
Credit, which was the purport of the Bill that was under the Consideration of
the House of Commons, and is the Design of my present Proposals.

To accomplish which I have proposed, that since no single Man's Estate is a
Fund sufficient for a Bank,

1. That Gentlemen may subscribe their Estates to the Value of 100000 l. per
annum at least, by which Subscriptions they oblige neither themselves nor their
Estates. 2. That when such yearly Value is Subscribed, the major Part of the
Subscribers should meet together to choose Trustees, Directors, etc, whom they
may also displace at pleasure. 3. That when the Trustees and Directors shall be
chosen, the Methods of Managment shall be declared, which if approved of, such
Subscribers as please may settle their Estates upon the Trustees of their own
choosing; and those who shall not settle their Estates, will be at no Charge
nor Trouble, but writing their Names, and meeting once to choose Trustees,
Directors, etc. 4. That no Estate which shall be settled shall be chargeable
for more than what the Party settling it shall take up of the Bank. 5. That any
Person who shall settle his Estate, may have up his Deed of Settlement on
demand, if nothing be owing upon it, or upon Payment of what is due to the
Bank. 6: That the Profits of the Bank shall be divided among all the
Subscribers in proportion to their several Subscriptions. 7. That any
Subscriber after the Settlement of his Estate, may have at any time 3 fourth
Parts of the Value of his Estate at 3 l. 0 s 10 d. per cent. per annum, and pay
in all, or any Part of the same whenever he pleases. 8. That the Interest
paid by the Subscribers to the Bank, being part of the Profits of the Bank,
such Subscribers who pay Interest to the Bank, will have their proportionable
Part of the Interest paid them back again, which they paid into the Bank.
I might say much of the Advantages that will arise to landed-Men by this
proposed Method. But it may suffice to say, they will be accommodated with
Money at easy Interest for the supply of their Occasions, and tho their Estates
are not made a Medium of Trade, yet they will be a secure and certain Fund, and
will consequently raise them such a Credit, which without this Method it is
impossible they should ever attain unto: for tho a ^r^desman may scruple to
take a Gentleman's Note for 1000 l. tho he knows the Gentleman is worth 1000 l.
per annum, because he knows the difficulty Gentlemen meet with to raise such a
Sum out of their Estates, yet none will question his Bill for 5 times such a
Sum, when he is satisfied he has an Estate settled, upon which he may have
15000 l. at an Hour's warning; it being an undoubted Truth, that none have so
much Credit as those who stand in least need of it; and therefore it was well
observed by the Poet. Quantum quisque sua nummorum servat in Arca
Tantum habet and fidei.


There being therefore so small a Matter required of the landed Men, as only to
subscribe their Names, and to meet once to choose Trustees, Managers, etc. by
which (as has been already said) they are put to no charge, nor lay themselves
nor their Estates under any Obligation by such their Subscriptions; and since
they are likely to receive so great Advantage by these Proposals I hope they
will expedite the filling up the proposed Fund of 100000 l. per annum, by their
ready Subscribing. However their being Estates already subscribed to a Million
Value. I fully determine to give the Subscribers notice in the printed
Newspapers, to meet the 10 th of September next at farthest, to choose
Trustees, Directors, etc. to whom I shall then Communicate my Methods of
Management, and doubt not but to convince the World that there is no such great
Difficulty in raising Money to perform what I have proposed, as some who are
Enemies to my Proposal, would suggest.

J. B.

An ACCOUNT of the Value of the Estates in the Several Counties subscribed
toward the FUND for a NATIONAL LAND-BANK, from Thursday the 11 th of June, to
Saturday the 27 th of July, 1695.
THe Books of Subscription for a Fund for a National Land-Bank being laid open
the 11 th of Jun^ at Night, and the proposals mentioning, that an Account shall
be published every Month, of the yearly Value of the Estates subscribed: It is
thought fit to print and publish the same the first and third Mondays in every
Month, until one hundred thousand pounds per annum, or two Millions in Value,
shall be subscribed, of which there are Subscriptions for fifty one thousand
four hundred and thirty eight pounds per annum, to the Value of about one
Million, in the several Counties following, viz.

l. per annum. Bedford 575 Berks 118 Buckingham 590 Cambridge 850 Cheshire 1800
Cornwall 850 Cumberland Derby 155 Devon 2030 Dorset Durham 1171 Essex 4755
Gloucester 793 Hantshire 850 Hereford 1021 Hertford 490 Huntington 1065 Kent
3911 Lancashire, 50 Leicester 420 Lincoln 2335 London and Middles. 10173
Monmouth 686 Norfolk 2642 Northampton 1400 Nottingham 240 Northumberland 1180
Oxon 550 Rutland Salop 600 Somerset 300 Stafford 1530 Suffolk 300 Sussex 515
Surry 1275 Warwick Westmoreland 22 Wiltshire 240 Worcester 210 Yorkshire 4001
Anglesey Brecon 1000 Cardigan Carmarthen Carnarven 15 Denbigh 686 Flint 24
Glamorgan Merioneth Mountgomery Pembrook 20 Radnor 51438

Note, That any Gentleman, though never so remote, may, pursuant to the
Proposals, authorize another to subscribe his Estate.

JOHN BRISCOE.

The Subscription-Books continue to ly open at Thomas Gooding, Sergeant at Law,
his Chambers in Gray's Inn: At Philip Neave Esquire; his Chambers, the second Stair
case Paper-Buildings in the Inner Temple: At Lawrence Braddon Esquire; his
Chambers, Number 4. the Second Staircase at the New Square at Lincoln's Inn: At
the House of Robert West Esquire; the Corner of Buckingham-Court near
Scotland-yard: At Mr. John Smith's in Exchange Alley: at Mr Humphreys
Hackshaw's in Lothbury near the Royal Exchange; and at Mr. Nicholas Hayward's
Public Notary in Thread-needle-street behind the Royal Exchange, And at Mr.
Samuel Briggs Scrivener in Guildhall-yard London.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by George Mosman, by order of JOSEPH BLAKE of LONDON,
then resideing there, 1695.


