PROPOSALS for raising Money for the NATIONAL LAND-BANK.
I Have been very often earnestly importuned by diverse Persons, to permit them
to subscribe a Sum of Money to the National Land-Bank, in lieu of Land, which I
did not then think proper or convenient to accept of: But since the said Bank
is designed for a General and extensive Good, and several Persons still
renewing their Solicitations to subscribe Money to the said Bank; that none
therefore may be excluded from taking part of the many Advantages that will
arise thereby; and in regard it may be a means to unite the Owners of Land and
Money in point of Interest, it is thought necessary to receive Subscriptions
for a Million of Money on the following Terms and Conditions, still reserving
to my self what I have yet to offer for raising any farther Fund of Money or
Credit that may be needful for the said Bank.

That any Persons may subscribe what Sum of Money they please in the present
Subscription-Books, until the Value of one Million in Money shall be subscribed.

That every fifteen hundred Pounds in Money that shall be subscribed, shall be
esteemed equal to two thousand Pounds in Land, the same being the full Value
for which such Land may be engaged, and shall have an equal Vote in all
Elections with one hundred Pounds per annum, or two thousand Pounds worth of
Land, and in like proportion for a greater or less Sum.

That the whole Million to be subscribed shall be paid in specie, in manner as
is herein after appointed.

That each Subscriber, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall
pay to the Treasurer or Treasurers of the National Land-Bank, to be hereafter
chosen, one tenth part of his or her said Subscription-Money on the 29th Day of
September next, or within ten Days after; one other tenth part on the five and
twentieth Day of December next, or within ten Days after; and the like tenth
part on the five and twentieth Day of March th^n next following, or within ten
Days after; and so to continue the like Paiments quarterly, upon the four most
usual Feast-days or Terms of the Year successively, or within ten Days after
each and every such Feast Day or Days of Payment, until all and every the said
tenth Pa^ts shall be paid to the Treasurer or Treasurers of the Bank in manner
aforesaid.

That all and every the Subscribers, their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall receive from the Treasurer or Treasurers of the said Bank, after
the rate of 3 l. per cent. per annum, for all the Money they shall from time to
time pay into the said Bank, pursuant to their (...) part of the Profi^s or the
Bank: The said 3 l. per cent. per annum to be paid them in two equal Paiments,
(...) upon the 25th Day of March, and 29th Day of September every Year.

That each and every Subscriber shall receive his or their Part or Propo^tion
of the Profits of the Bank for the whole Sum by them subscribed, the same to be
comp^ted from the time they shall pay their first tenth Part or quarterly
Payment.

That if any Subscriber shall fail to pay his first tenth Part or quarterly
Payment upon the 29th Day of September next, or within ten Days after, such
Subscriber's Subscription shall be void.

That the said Bank may be a safe Repository for the Money of all Widows and
Orphans, it is thought sit likewise to publish, That all such Money of Widows
or Orphans which shall not be subscribed toward the raising the aforesaid Sum
of ten hundred thousand Pounds, shall at any time (upon Application first to be
made to the Directors) be received into the Bank, who will pay them after the
rate of 3 l. per cent. per annum, for interest, and their Principal Money on
Demand.

7th August, 1695. John Briscoe.

The Subscription-Books lie open at Thomas Gooding, Sergeant at Law, his
Chambers in Gray's Inn: At Philip Nev^ Esquire his Chambers, the second Staircase
of the Paper-Buildings in the Inner Temple: At Lawrence Braddon Esquire his
Chambers, Number 4. the second Staircase in the New Square at Lincoln's Inn: At
the House of Robert West Esquire the Corner of Buc(...) Humfry Hackshaw's in
Lothbury near the Royal Exchange: At Mr. Nicholas Hayward Public Notary in
Threadneedle-street behind the Royal Exchange; at Mr. Samuel Briggs Scrivener
in Guildhallyard: And from half an Hour past twelve to half an Hour past two
every Day at Noon, at Garraway's, Jonathan's, and Barbados Coffee-houses in
Exchange-Alley: At Batson's and Bridges Coffee-houses in Cornhill; and at the
Amsterdam-Coffee-house behind the Royal Exchange, London.

London, Printed by John Darby in St. Bartholomew-Close; where is sold Mr.
Briscoe's Book, entitled, A Discourse on the late Funds, with Proposals for
the Improvement of the Freehold-Estates, and Encouragement of Trade. Price 18 d.


