Seasonable Reflections, On a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A HISTORY OF Passive
Obedience Since the REFORMATION: WHEREIN The true Notion of Passive Obedience
is Settled and Secured from the Malicious Interpretations of ill-designing Men.

Male dum recitas incipit esse tuum,

Mart. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Sign of the Peacock in St.
Pauls-Church-Yard, 1689-90.

REFLECTIONS ON THE History of Passive Obedience.
WHAT must we do, must we be always Reading and Writing? Will Pens and Presses
never give over? It was pleasant of late to see Men generously undertake the
Defense of the Protestant Religion, and the Vindication of the despised, and
almost ruined Church of England. They did it effectually, and they undertook it
by the best Principle, for the honor of God, and the safety of Religion; for
this they ventured their Credits, their Fortunes, their Lives; they knew they
had malicious Adversaries, and curious and prying into Secrets, and such as
would and must discover, who they were who durst speak against Error, when
supported by a King, and maintained by all the Art and Sophistry of Priest or
Jesuit, Yet they wrote, and certainly did well in writing; for they have
carried their cause, and showed to all the World upon what good grounds the
Protestant Religion stands, and how excellent is the Constitution of this
Church of England. Something must be owned to be due to their Labors for the
clear understanding that the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation have of the
Cheat and Mischief of Popery, and it may be from thence many who have been
unconcerned and indifferent for any Religion, have taken courage to act
heartily for Truth against Error, and perhaps thereby they have helped to give
a stop to the designs of some very ill-minded Men. In all this it must be
acknowledged that they have done very well, as became Divines and Scholars, Men
of Religion and Men of Knowledge.

Why now may they not take their rest and quiet? their Enemies are vanquished
and fled away, and one would think that there should be nothing left in this
Nation, but their Friends and Admirers. But it is not so, they have Enemies,
not open in the streets but sculking in Corners; such as will not, perhaps
cannot, or perhaps scorn to speak for Popery; but they have Malice; and can
envy the success of a Conqueror, throw dirt at him, or give a secret wound to
him. These now come from under their bulks and lurking holes. And since they
will do no good* resolve to do evil, and will be at the pains and cost of
writing and divulging of Tales or Stories, or Histories: to what purpose, or
what end they themselves dare not tell. But we must guess, that they have a
design to blacken some very good Men.

That is the reason (as far as we can guess) that a Book is lately sent abroad
entitled, The History of Passive Obedience since the Reformation. Certainly
never was any thing called History written to so little purpose, so little
instructive or pleasing. Why must so much pains be taken in the perusal of
Sermons, popular Discourses and lesser Tracts, to find out, and report to the
World what such and so many Men have said upon this Subject? They have writ
excellent things, and those many; but all of them it seems are insipid to the
palate of this Searcher; save their delicious touches of Passive Obedience.
This looks odly and seems to come from Spleen, Melancholy, or some
Hypochondriacal Affection; for at this time of the day, we have no need of
Passive Obedience, or any Discourses about it. God has delivered us from our
dangers, and the dismal miseries which hung over our heads, he has given us a
Deliverer, an excellent Prince, under whom our Laws, our Rights, our Fortunes,
our Lives, our Religion are all secure, and ascertained to us; we doubt not to
have Justice, and all that honestly our hearts can wish. He gives us
Parliaments, and leaves them to their Freedom; he sets over us upright Judges;
and allows us to have honest Juries. He will not be any other sort of King,
than what the Constitution of this Nation requires; who is one that can do no
wrong. And if he neither will nor can do wrong, but lets the Affairs and
Interests of his People be conducted in the methods of Justice and
Righteousness: here can be no suffering, but for evil deeds and as evil doers.
Here can be no hopes of the Crowns of Martyrs, and no use at all of Passive
Obedience. Why then does our Author drudg and m^yl; tire himself, and tire us,
that we may have before our Eyes, a whole History of Passive Obedience? He
knows the subject is sad, and melancholic, grievous to flesh and blood, and
but just tolerable to Reason fortified with the best Religion; it is the last
resort of the wretched, and perhaps the heaviest burden that ever God laid upon
Men. It is a Duty we grant it, but such a one as cannot always be practiced,
nor ought it at all times to be discoursed of; because it carries fire in its
tail, that which may heat and inflame the angry and froward.

The talking of this can never be seasonable, but when it is necessary; it is
to come out as Mahomets Banner does, to serve a turn, when all things else
fail. As long as we can serve God and Man too, there is no use of Passive
Obedience. And as long as there are fair hopes that our duties may not clash
one against the other, it is not good to move People to prepare themselves for
Sufferings. As long as we can obey, we must obey, and as long as we obey we
shall not suffer. But if a Prince will command things unjust, unreasonable,
against Law, against Conscience, against Religion, we can no longer obey him,
because we must obey God, and there we are under a calamity most deplorable,
that we must suffer by the rage and fury of Man, because we do our duty to God.
At such a time as this Passive Obedience becomes necessary, it ought to be
practiced, and it ought to be preached; for Men must know that it is their duty
rather to suffer than to obey, and they must resolve within themselves so to
do. Thus S. Irenaeus, S. Cyprian and S. Augustine* and all the chief Bishops of
the Primitive Church taught their people. And to the lasting honor of the
Church of England, her Divines have done the same, as our laborious Historian
has shown beyond contradiction or doubt: this was well done, but why are we
told all this?

Here we must stop awhile, and lament the misfortunes of the late King James.
Certainly never had any Prince worse Counselors before his Desertion, nor ever
had any worse Advocates since. His Counselors persuaded him to go on in ill
Designs, because the Preachers taught the People the duty of Passive Obedience;
that is, that he might do any ill thing, because the People out of Conscience
to God were moved to be willing to suffer. And here we have an Historian, or
Advocate, for the Cause of King James, who thinks to be friend him by telling
the World, that so many of the chief of the Clergy, for so long time together,
did preach Passive Obedience. Now it is as clear as the day, that there can be
no exercise of this Duty, nor ought there be any popular Exhortation to it, but
at such a time, when there is a very ill Prince, and a miserable People; what
then would our Author have? does he design to publish an everlasting blot upon
the memory of the late King James? does he design to tell the World, that he
was resolved to do mischief to his People? That nothing could correct or retain
him? That he would go on, tho the Pulpits sounded out Passive Obedience, and
his People were taught that there was no hope of Justice or Equity from him,
and that they must think of suffering and dying rather than obey him? This is
severe; it will furnish out a worse Character of King James than any of his
Adversaries have yet given him; it will justify the Recession of his People
from him, and show to Posterity how it came to pass that so easily and suddenly
he fell to the ground. For who can read all these so many Pleas, Advices,
Instructions, Exhortations to Passive Obedience, but he must reflect upon the
Causes and Reasons of them: and if he does so, he will be forced to think, that
at that time wicked Counsels governed, and lawless Violence prevailed, and that
the whole Nation was clouded with a dismal Appearance of Oppression,
Persecution, and Tyranny. For seeing that a Prince ruling by Law, and with
Justice, cannot be put off with any thing less than Active Obedience, and
nothing can exercise the Passive Obedience of Subjects but vile, and base, and
wicked Commands contrary to Law and Religion; we must either blame those
Preachers for amusing their Auditors with needless Thoughts of unjust
Sufferings, or we must blame the late King for giving too much cause for just
and reasonable fears of them. Now what can be said in his behalf to acquit him,
no Man has yet told us.

But our Historian has effectually vindicated the Preachers; he every where
commends them and their Writings; this he tells us was well said, that
excellently, that incomparably. He likes their Doctrine, and finds no fault in
the timing of it: and likely enough he had reason to believe the Doctrine as
proper to the Time in which it was delivered, as it was true in it self. If so,
the late King is again deserted by this Historian, as well as by the rest of
his People; and his Cause, like himself, falls to the ground; for why must he
do ill things, and why must he load his People with dreads of worse? Why did
not all this noise about Passive Obedience awaken him? Why did he not give stop
to his Proceedings when his People owned so loudly their fears of Mischief?
Could he think it a small thing to make his People miserable, or to be thought
one that would do so? All this was intimated by those Sermons and Tracts. From
thence he ought to have taken warning to desist, and his Counselors ought to
have persuaded him to it; for certainly popular Discourses about Passive
Obedience are as instructive to a Prince to move him from designs of doing ill,
as they are to the People to engage them to be willing to suffer wrong.

From hence I am forced to blame our Historian for perpetuating the Memory of
these Discourses: it were for the honor of the late King that they were
forgotten. Those excellent Divines would never have revived past Actions, or
the grievous sad Thoughts which they had, when they composed or delivered their
excellent Arguments and Persuasions for Passive Obedience.

They could wish from their Souls, that they never had occasion for them, tho
they are ready to morrow to write the same things upon the same grounds, which
with good reason they hope that they are not like to see as long as they live.

Why then does the Historian take pains to collect all these things together?
He can do no Service to the late King by it, and he does not seem to design the
Honor of the Preachers. It is hard to guess his meaning: but if he tempts out
an ill Thought, he must blame himself. He gives us nothing else to think, but
that he might be one of the Adepti, one of those who knew the Secret; for in
the late Times (they tell us) there was a Secret. The Ministers of State, they
say, who knew the Resolves of the Court to be harsh and severe, made it their
business to persuade Men to preach and talk up Passive Obedience; that what
could not be done by the Power of the King, might be gained by the easy
Submissions of the People. This was Machiavel to purpose. It is sad and
lamentable that so excellent a Doctrine should be abused by such designs of
naughty Men. If our Author was one of their Instruments, and knew what he did,
he can neither excuse himself to God nor Man. I will undertake for our
excellent Divines, whom he commends, and I and all others must do the same,
that they were never thought so base as to be trusted with the Knowledge of
such a pernicious Design. They out of Honesty and Sincerity preached against
Rebellion, and persuaded Men rather to suffer, than obey evil Commands; but
they would not for all the World that the innocent and conscientious should be
cheated of their Lives and Fortunes by any Discourses of theirs. Therefore when
it was proper, they preached up this Doctrine, but when it was not, they let it
alone; because they would not have the People to rebel, nor would they give
Encouragement to such as might be willing to oppress them: in both these things
they did their Duty both to the King and to the People. It had been well if
others would have done the same, and spoke as plainly to the King, as they did
to the People. But it was very ill done, if done at all, to persuade the King
that the People of England were so subdued by the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, grown so tame and easy that he might do what he would; pull down
and set up what Religion, what Law he pleased. It is certain that all the
Preachers in the World could never persuade them to this; for tho the People be
Loyal, and willing enough that the King should have his Dues, yet they were
never thought a Nation of Asses, fit only to bear Burdens. As they are not born
Slaves, and by the Constitution of the Nation ought not to be made Slaves, so
they have more Spirit and Wit than to suffer themselves to be cheated into
Slavery. Their Forefathers, for many Ages, have made a difference between the
King and his Counselors; tho they would suffer the one, yet they would not
suffer the other: and certainly the Men of this Age should not be thought so
dull as not to distinguish between Honoring the King, and Obeying Father Petre;
and that tho all the Protestant Preachers had talked of nothing else but
Passive Obedience. For Preachers can do no more than tell the People their
Duties, and they must* tell them all their Duties; but if they stretch beyond,
and require more than they ought, the People will find it out, and will not
part with their Rights for a Word, tho it sound never so well. But they did
their Duty, they preached Passive Obedience not Slavery; they would have Men to
be true to their King, but not false to their God, or false to their Country;
this was understood, and their Doctrine was received kindly, and practiced
faithfully.

Thence it came to pass that all Sorts and Orders of Men prepared themselves
for Suffering; some of all ranks actually did it: for, Nobles, Judges,
Magistrates, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, every where took up the Cross, and
chose rather to Suffer than to Obey, that is, do what by Law, and Reason, and
Conscience, they ought not to do. This was well.

But others went beyond these: for, tho they suffered much, yet they seem at
this day to be grieved that they did not suffer more: They had so fixed their
Thoughts upon the performance of this Duty, that with a Scrupulosity not to be
presidented, they take no pleasure in their Deliverance, because they have lost
the opportunity of dying for their Religion, to gratify no very commendable
Humor of their Prince.

These are very extraordinary effects of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and
such as may be accepted: but some Men will be satisfied with nothing; for our
Historian is angry, and it is likely the Politicians of the late King, his
Jusuits and his Priests, are angry too, inasmuch as their Expectances are not
answered; they have not all which they designed, and hoped for; the Nation is
not enslaved; they have it not in their power, to cast Church and State into a
new Model, and to give Laws to the People of England, as well as they did to
the late King.

This is cause enough to make Men angry, for they have lost a rich Booty, and
such Advantages as they are never like to get again; besides, they have lost
their Credit and Reputation, so as never before happened to Men of their
fineness in Sophistry and Contrivance, and that by a despised, clot pated
People, such as had no higher reach than to do their Duties to God and to their
King. Thus Righteousness (God be blessed) must sometimes triumph in this World;
Honesty and Probity have their Successes as well as Slight and Craft, and may
they always have so. But tho the Jesuit had cause to be angry at this, yet why
should our Historian? we know him not, and cannot guess what Designs he had,
nor how his Plots are defeated; but yet he is angry, and as much as if he had
lost a good Bishopric or a good Deanery.

He gives us a History, and sets a Preface before it, and a Conclusion at the
End of it: the Head and the Tail are his; he frowns and bites with the one, and
then he stings with the other. He tells us that he finds Passive Obedience much
in Writings, little in Practice; That we must acknowledge to our shame, that
this, with other Doctrines, are more illustrious in our Books than in our
Lives, (Preface p. 2.) But then in the seventh Page of his Preface he has a
long sharp biting Character of certain Persons, which is to be read one way,
and to be understood another; for tho it seems to say no ill, but to provide
for the Acquittal of all, yet it is so phrased, that according to the modern
Figure called Innuendo some Readers will find in it a very severe Reproof, and
others a mere Calumny. All this comes from Anger, and something worse; and it
shows that the design of our Historian was not to teach the Doctrine of the
Church in this point, what it was in it self, how it ought to be stated, by
whom it had been owned, and by what Arguments it had been proved, and who had
best cleared it from Objections, Mistakes, and Misapprehensions. This had been
a Work worthy of an Historian. But this was none of our Author's Business; they
are the Writers upon this Subject that have offended him; he would do them a
mischief, shoot at them in the dark, and wound them in secret: he would have
the World to think, that they and their Writings, their Lives and their Books,
do not agree: he desires nothing else but this, and seems resolved to have his
Point whether his Reader grant it or no. At the first Onset in his Preface, he
says it boldly, and says it with Advantage, That they ought to be ashamed it is
so. Then he gives us a large Catalogue of the Sayings of excellent Persons
transcribed out of their Books, but does not give us one Word of their Lives;
nor does he tell us, whether all of them are alike guilty, or only some: nor
does he give us any one Action of any one of their Lives to justify his
Reproof. This is certainly a gross dull way of calumniating; should another
imitate it, with that Indignation would he read, and despise the Author? For
suppose another should take for his Theme, Murder, or Adultery, or Drinking, or
Swearing, or Lying, and gather together out of his Writings, and out of all his
Friends, his Acquaintance or Neighbors Writings, and many others too, all they
have said against any one of them, suppose it be Lying only, and compose as
large a History as this; and then say in a stout scornful Preface, That we must
acknowledge to our shame, that a sense of the Sin of Lying is more illustrious
in our Books than in our Lives. Such a thing as this might be done; but when it
is done, it can tend to no other end, but to beget an Opinion in the Readers,
that such and such Writers, all of them, were a pack of lying Knaves.

Now this were basely done, our Author would think it so were it his own case.
Horace makes an instance of a like Treatment, and with Indignation says of the
Practice, that it was mere Canker and Venom: Hic nigrae succus Loliginis, haec
est
Aerugo mera.
Ser. Lib. 1. Sat. 4.

Had our Author annexed to his History the due Praises of those who had
performed their Duties, of which sort he might have found many amongst the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and amongst the Commons too; and then given us
the Grounds upon which he judged that others failed in theirs, he would have
deserved Thanks for his Remarks, as well as for his History; for then his Book
might have done good, by exciting some to repent for what was past, and others
to be more cautious for the future.

But to give a stop to this sort of Discourse, let Anger be gone, and all
unwarrantable Passion laid aside: I will now endeavor fairly to consider our
Author's Notion of Passive Obedience, and accept in it what is to be accepted,
and take the freedom to oppose what I judge not defensible. As for the Sayings
of our excellent Divines, I will not prejudice my Thoughts by the Reverence I
have for their Authority: I will not therefore consult their Words, lest I
should be tempted in the proceed of the Dispute to shelter my self under their
great Names; and so perhaps I may engage a whole Army to fight, when a single
Duel, or a small Skirmish, may put an end to the Action.

First then I and my Adversary must shake hands, we will agree as far as we
can; and where we cannot we must wrestle it out.

I will therefore grant several things that are in his Preface according as
they appear in the Pages: as page the 1st.

First, That the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, or Non-resistance of our lawful
Superiors has been a Doctrine founded in the holy Scriptures: and recommended
to the Christian World by the practices of our Savior's more immediate
followers, and that the Church of England has asserted the Principles of
obedience to Princes, as the best Ages of Christianity owned and practiced it.

Secondly, P. 2d. I will grant too, That it is the duty of every Christian
actively to obey his Superior, in things lawful ( so that the last word be duly
interpreted) and that it is the duty of every Christian in things unlawful to
suffer rather than obey. And I will grant further all that S. Paul says, Romans
13. 2. Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves* damnation.

Thirdly, P. 4th. I will grant too; That these Doctrines are not Apostolical
and such as ought to be preached in all the World. First, That Power is
originally in the body of the People. Secondly, That the foundation of all
Government is laid in Compact, etc.

Thus much we give, and that freely, and it is enough to satisfy any fair
Adversary. But yet I must tell him, That when he has all this, he has no reason
to censure, reproach and blacken the Lives and Actions of so many excellent
Persons: He has no ground from thence to disparage the late Revolution, or to
think himself able to wheedle us into an opinion that we have done ill, and
that we ought to repent much rather than give thanks to God or Man for the
happiness we enjoy. Certain it is, that when the effects and consequences of
those general Doctrines come to be seen in the practice of Men, as some may
slinch from their Duties, and do too little; so others may require more than
Duty, and expect too much. For the Interests of this World blinds as well on
one side, as on the other: and he that censures most boldly, is not always the
most just and impartial Man. Defeated Ambition can easily charge Ambition, and
worldly mindedness upon a prevalent Party; and Spite will throw out as freely,
and as goodly words as plain downright Honesty can.

Let us then consider these three things again: First, Obedience. Secondly,
Non-resistance. Thirdly, The Origination of Power; and see if we can frame
clear Notions of these, and find out the particular distinct Duties, which Men
must be obliged to, in consequence of them.

1. Then as to Obedience; It Is plain that this is due to Kings, to all that are
in Authority; and that by Laws, by Oaths, by the Laws of God, by the Laws of
Men; the public good, and the interests of Nations require it. Without this
there can be no Government, and the People have more need to be governed, than
a King can have to Govern; therefore they must obey not so much for wrath, out
of fear of punishment; but for their own sake, for Conscience sake, for God's
sake, and for their Countries sake. This is to be given frankly and fully; with
all cheerfulness, and upon all occasions, in all instances where it is
possible. Nothing can be pleaded in bar to it, but only want of Power. If the
Laws of God, or the Laws of the Country, which oblige us to obey our Kings,
make obedience in some instances morally impossible, then we must not obey,
because we cannot; for what we cannot lawfully do, we cannot do at all; But
where we are at our own disposal, not under previous necessary Obligation,
there public good, Law and Reason require us to obey without reserve, trick or
device. For we must do what we can to support Government, and to carry on the
ends for which Men are incorporated into Bodies Politic. Therefore in doubtful
matters we must obey, as far as ever we can, and never omit our Obedience, but
where the Cause is most clear and most urgent; there is no excuse, no exchange
to be made, but the Duty must be paid in kind. Suppose that a great part of the
People should take up a resolution not to do, but to suffer, a Prince would
have a very ill bargain, if he accept the one in exchange for the other. For
their sufferings can do him no good, and he and his People too may be undone
for want of their doings. He must have assistance to repress the Thief, the
Robber, the Murderer, to secure his People from Pyracies and Invasions.
Besides what a shame it is, that Princes should be so basely employed to find
Racks and Gibbets, and Halters, and Hangmen for their People: They have their
Power for nobler ends, to defend, to save, to do good, to give praise to them
that do good, Romans 13. 3. And when they execute wrath, they must do it upon the
Evil-doer, and that with this design, that they may save many, by taking off a
few: or else all their Executions are stark naught.

There cannot therefore be a bargain driven between King and People, of giving
and taking sufferings instead of doing, for Kings must be obeyed and the People
must obey; the one cannot punish, and the other cannot suffer, but upon account
of Transgression, and the Law declares the greatness of the fault, and the
extent of the Punishment.

But yet some are apt to think, that Subjects may be acquitted of their Duty to
their Prince by suffering as well as by doing; and when they have called the
one Passive Obedience, and the other Active, they say the Prince is obeyed, and
has his due, and ought to be satisfied. This seemed once to be a fundamental in
the Quakers Doctrine, who would take a Cudgelling, a Whipping, a slashing or
Imprisonment, with a great deal of satisfaction, whilst they would make
themselves a distinguished People from others, by unaccountable humors and
fancies, and tho they gave disturbance to their Neighbors and trouble to the
Government, yet they would think themselves good Subjects, and very much
obedient to the Prince only because they suffered. This was and is a gross
mistake; for they that suffer, suffer because they do not obey; the Prince, the
Judge, the Executioner, they themselves, all think they do not obey, for neither
would he punish, nor ought they to suffer, if they did obey. But because they
will not obey their Prince, he punishes, and they suffer. The Prince therefore
in this case has no manner of Obedience.

But let us consider further, tho we cannot barter with a Prince, and give him
Suffering instead of Doing, yet we may be obliged to suffer, and we may obey in
doing, and obey in suffering for so doing, and that Obedience may be called
Passive Obedience; tho in truth and reality all the Obedience which we perform
in this case is Active. For we obey one, and suffer from another; we obey God,
and suffer from Man, or we obey Man, and suffer from God. But because God has
commanded us not only to do our Duties, but likewise has commanded us in
certain cases not only to do, but to be ready to suffer for so doing; our
obedience to this Command of suffering has been called by some Passive
Obedience. Now this is Great and Noble, and speaks an excellency of Spirit,
which is most admirable, for Men to do well, and to continue in so doing,
whatever they suffer upon that account. But as it is Noble, so it is hard and
difficult. It is hard to be bound to confess Christ before Men that we may gain
Heaven, and at the same time to be forced to lose all that we have on Earth for
so confessing. This sets Body and Soul at variance, nay the Soul is confounded
in it self, whilst hopes and fears engage one another in a severe conflict, the
one would gain, and the other would not lose, the one pulls upwards, and the
other downwards; upon this account the thing is difficult. But yet we must
remember that for all the difficulty, it is very practicable, because it has
been always required, and always expected. No Philosopher would ever allow him
to be a good Man, who would flinch from his Duty upon the account of suffering.
To do so (they say) is slavish, and it is one of the Rules of the Pythagoreans,
that in the exercise of Virtue a Man must have nothing of the Slave in him,
(...) he must have no regard for any thing but his Duty. Hierocles p. 209.
Tully in the 2d of his Offices will not allow it possible for a Man to be just,
or honest, or good who fears either poverty, or pain, or banishment, or death
it self, so as to be warped from right by the fears of them, or by the hopes of
any advantages that are contrary to them. Horace, (that very easy Man, who can
never be thought by a Heathen to be an over-severe directer of (Conscience)
expects from his just and good Man, that he should bear up against Tyrant and
Rabble, and suffer all that their rage and fury can throw upon him; and yet not
veer in the least from his point, but go on in his Duty, steddily and firmly.

Justum and tenacem propositi virum,
Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni
Mente quatit solida.
This Principle of suffering in a good Cause for the sake of Virtue, Goodness,
and Righteousness; or of doing our Duties, notwithstanding that we must suffer,
lies so open and clear to the reason of mankind; that Men of worth and honor
in every Age, could not fail to practice it.

And we Christians are bound to the observance of this Duty, as others were
before, by the reason of the thing, as well as by precepts of Christianity.
Whatever principle a Man has, and whatever he accounts a Duty, if he will be
true and faithful, just and upright, it may sometime or other bring him under
suffering; and he must be content with it, because it is base and unworthy in
certain cases not to do it, it is a betraying of our Consciences, a forfeiture
of all the good opinion that we can have of our selves.

Now, if this be true, and this be called Passive Obedience; that must not be
looked upon as a peculiar of Christianity, or a new Doctrine introduced since
our Savior's days; much less can any particular Church appropriate the Rule to
it self, because it lies in common to all mankind, and has sometimes been
practiced by the little as well as by the great.

Some perhaps may have just cause to complain of false Casuists, and base
corrupters of the genuine sense of right Reason, and true Christianity; but
when they have done it, they have only reproved a gross fault, they must not
expect any great honor, for having had a right notion of a plain Truth.

If we would speak clearly, we must confess that our blessed Lord has not
heightened this Duty, for he can expect no more sufferings than what Pain, and
Beggary, and Death signify; but as a most gracious and tender Master he has
made all these much more easy and portable than ever they were before, and
that in several ways; As first by giving us most gracious Promises of Reward in
another World in case we are called to suffer, Matthew. 5. 9, 10, 11. Secondly,
By assuring us that assistances of God's grace come in to our help, whenever we
do suffer, Matthew. 10. 18, 19, Phil. 1. 29. Thirdly, By giving us such thoughts
of God as are most powerful to support us under all sufferings. For what can
dismay him, that will think with S. Peter, that he who suffers as a Christian,
or suffers according to the Will of God, he may commit the keeping of his Soul
to God in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 16, 19. These
things are beyond Philosophy, and they are mighty supports to all Christians,
who must suffer for well doing. These would acquit the justice of God, if he
had required sufferings as sufferings, and made them so necessary means of
Salvation, that he would accept of none into Heaven, but such as came thither
as Martyrs through a flaming fire, or a Sea of blood.

But God is not so fond of suffering, as to require them for their own sakes.
We are not bound like Baal's Priests to cut and flash our selves, that we may
please our God. We are not bound to move others to cut our Throats, or to
threaten to kill them, if they will not kill us, as S. Augustine tells the
Circumcellions did.

We ought not to give advantages and opportunities to wicked Men to execute
their wicked purposes upon us. In times of Persecution we are not bound to go
out of our Houses, and provoke an enraged multitude to throw us in the Fires,
or to the Lions. This rashness has been condemned by whole Councils; though at
some time we may and must leave Father, and Mother, and House and Land, and
Life it self for Christ's sake and for the Gospels, yet at other times we may
keep them as well. Tho the first Christians ( Acts 5. 41.) did rejoice, that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's Name; and as it is Heb.
10. 34. they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods. Yet they did as much
rejoice, and gave hearty thanks to God when they suffered neither.

We must suffer, when we are called to suffer; but we are not bound to call to
God to send sufferings upon us. We must take up the Cross, when it lies in our
way; but we are not bound to go out of our way to find one; and when we do take
it up, we must remember to follow Christ, who took it up when his hour was
come; before that he often withdrew and preserved himself from imminent dangers.
And at the very last he ceased not to pray to his Father, that the Cup might
pass from him. We are not to bring upon our selves needless sufferings, because
we are always bound to pray to God, that he would not lead us into temptations,
but that he would deliver us from evil; And we are always bound to believe
that God is both able and willing to deliver us, and that too at such times,
when we know not any particular means, by which deliverance should come to us,
1 Cor. 10. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Dan. 3. 17, 18.

We may and must suffer sometimes if it be the Will of God; and we may escape,
if God will find out the way, and then we must accept of the deliverance, and
we may as well please when we so escape, as when we suffer. It is not the
Suffering, but the Cause that makes the Martyr. If we suffer (...) Matthew. 10.
18. to give testimony to the World of our sincere faith in the Christian
Doctrine, we may hope to be accepted; If we suffer for Righteousness sake, we
have a promise to be happy; If we suffer for being true, just, or honest, we
may commit our Souls to God as to a faithful Creator; we do well, and are
satisfied in our own Consciences that we do so, not because we suffer, but
because we persevere in doing our Duties to the end.

Now if Men will call this Passive Obedience they may, for here is Obedience,
and here is Suffering; many advices and exhortations seem to move for this; and
it is certainly worthy of the best thoughts of the Divines to teach it, to
persuade the People to be ready upon occasion to practice it; it is in it self
excellent, praiseworthy, as the Apostle says, a Duty which God and right
Reason requires of us; our blessed Lord, and his Apostles both taught and
practiced it. All the Primitive Christians, who had the glory of being Martyrs
and Confessors, acted from an entire submission to it. All sorts of Men see
their Obligation for it; which Heathens derive from a sense they have of
Probity; Christians from Faithfulness, Simplicity and Sincerity. Kings as well
as Subjects are bound to the practice, when ever it can become their Duty, that
is, when ever their unhappy circumstances are such, that they must either
suffer, or do something which they account extremely base, wicked, or unjust.
This the glorious Martyr King Charles the First owned to be a truth, and sealed
it with the last drop of his Blood. The Duty is laid upon all; the Interests of
mankind require that it should, for without the observance of this Rule, all
would be base, and slavish, and degenerate; there would be nothing of Virtue,
or Praise, or Honor amongst Men.

But to leave this, there is another sense of Passive Obedience, as it is used
to signify a peculiar Duty of Subjects toward their own Prince; it is a Duty
which Princes do not owe to Princes, nor private Persons to private Persons;
for though they may suffer and die, each by the means of the other, yet the
sufferer is under no such Duty as can be called Passive Obedience; upon which
account the Duty meant by the word in this sense is quite a different thing
from what it was in the former. It comes in as a subsidiary Duty to supply the
place of another, which in certain cases we cannot do. It is that which Princes
take instead of Obedience, and as it comes from Subjects, it is sometimes
called Loyalty, and sometimes Submission, and sometimes Obedience, but with
such a distinctive mark before it, Passive Obedience, which speaks it not to be
that which is ordinarily meant by the Name, but a very different Thing;
sometimes it is explained as if it were no more than Non-resistance, and
sometimes as if it were a more excellent Duty.

But however it is named or explained, certainly there is a great Duty owing
from Subjects to Princes, and that not only to the good, but to the bad, not
only when they rule according to Law, and require nothing but what is just and
right: but when they go beyond Law, and Reason, and command some things which
are against Conscience and Religion, then they may be obeyed in all things
else, though they cannot be obeyed in such particular points, though the Prince
does not thereby lose his right, nor is the Subject less subject in all things
wherein he ought to be so. The Command of God is, that we are to be subject to
the Higher Powers; and a like Command is, that we are to profess Christ before
men. If the Prince will command us to deny him, we we cannot obey in that
point. But yet we may be subject in all things else; we may live peaceably and
quietly at home, if we be permitted to do so; we may give the Prince all those
dues which St. Paul reckons up* Romans 13. that is, Tribute, Custom, Fear, Honor.

We may love him, and trust him too, as long as he will be a Friend; but if he
will be an Enemy, we must love him, though we cannot trust him. We cannot
indeed do any thing that is base, and wicked, to gratify his humor, his rage
or fury; yet we may and should fight for him against all Enemies foreign and
domestic, to preserve his Person, and secure the good of our Country, when it
is not beyond all doubt that he employs us as Instruments of Injustice and
Wickedness.

Thus the Christians did under Julian; They served him against the Persians,
and they would have served him in any executions of Right and Justice; But they
would not have condemned the innocent, or cut the throats of the good, nor yet
have done any thing toward the subversion of Christian Religion, though Julian
himself had commanded them.

But where they cannot fight for, they are not to fight against; though they
cannot assist, yet they are not presently to oppose. Papinian the Lawyer would
rather die, than make a plausible Speech to defend a bad action of his Prince;
but yet as long as he had lived, he might have held his tongue, and said
nothing against it.

It is a Duty to cover the nakedness of a Father, and of a Prince; many things
may be ill done, and many should be born, and suffered patiently, many should
be allowed upon the considerations of humane frailty, passion and indiscretion;
what may be ill done may be repented of, and so ought to be pardoned and
forgotten.

Subjects pardon one another, and often beg the King's pardon, and so may very
well pardon their King too; because as he hopes better from them, they may hope
for better from him.

The common Offices which Charity requires from one private Christian to
another are certainly as well due to Kings; Subjects must look upon themselves
under Obligation to suffer long, and to be kind, not to behave themselves
unseemly, not to seek their own, not to be easily provoked, not to think evil;
to bear all things, to believe all things, to hope all things.

If these Duties were but well discharged toward Princes, all the rest that
can be truly comprehended under the name of Passive Obedience would be much
more easy.

Let Subjects do these sincerely and heartily, and stop a little and think;
they will soon find, that they must yield more, and give greater allowances to
Princes than to fellow subjects; because they are higher Powers, they are
ordained of God, they bear the Sword, they are to execute wrath upon them that
do evil; and they are to give Praise to them that do good. These things are of
high consideration, and they should beget in the minds of People a great Awe
and Veneration for the Persons of Princes; for infinite are the Advantages that
every single Man receives from the Administration of Justice, and the
Distribution of Rewards and Punishments. What if Praise and Wrath sometimes
mistake their way, and the first flies to the evil and the latter to the good?
This is no more than what God's own Thunder does, as far as we can understand.
The best Marks man may sometimes miss, and the worst hit the Mark. When we
undertake to vindicate God's Providence, we are forced to bring in extrinsick
Pleas; and when we have done all, we confess that we do not understand the
reason of Events; but we believe that all is well, because all comes from God.
If we did but use a little of like Submission when we examine the Actions of
Princes, in many Cases we may be content to say, that we do not understand;
thereby we shall show not only a Reverence to them, but a Reverence to God too:
they are but Men, and may often fail, and are always fallible; they do mistake,
but the cause of their Mistakes are mostly from Subjects; these design and
contrive one against another, and misrepresent, and the Prince hears from them,
and sees by them; and the Law provides Punishments for those Misrepresenters,
and acquits the Prince, because it seems impossible that one Man should find
out such a number of honest and good Men to supply all the Trusts which he is
to provide for, and never be cheated with one Knave; therefore if such a one
will crowd in, the Prince is abused, and it cannot be helped; but the Knave is
to be punished, and the Prince excused from blame.

Besides, The Work and Business of Princes is the hardest and most difficult
that any sort of Men upon Earth have; because they have so many to order, and
so many to defend; so many to reward, and so many to punish; so many that
expect from them, and so many that must be disappointed in their Expectations;
so many to deal withal that are false and base, and so many that are dull and
sluggish; so many Knaves and so many Fools. Upon these Accounts, and many
others innumerable, Princes ought to have all Favor, and all reasonable
Allowances in Miscarriages* all fair Abatements for Mistakes and Errors in the
choice of Ministers and Instruments that are to serve the Interests of the
Commonweal: For it is certain that all the Laws* Rules and Methods of
conducting public Affairs, which the Wisdom of Ancestors for thousands of
Years have found out, will not answer all the Behoofs of a Kingdom.

Old Rules are often laid aside, other Expedients found out, and new Laws made:
All the Prudence, and all the Wisdom in every Age, when best employed, is
little enough to keep Government steady, and the People in good order; to
repress the Outrages of the Factious at home, and give stop to the Contrivances
of ambitious Enemies abroad,

Princes therefore are to be supported, defended, excused, pleaded for, as long
as any plausible Pleas can be made for them: it is not enough that they are not
taxed, censured, reproached, calumniated, blackened; but there is great reason
that they should be gently treated, kindly dealt withal; the best Construction
and the fairest Interpretation is to be put upon the^^ Actions.

Law makes the Persons of Kings sacred, and their Actions are not to be
examined without great Respect and Veneration.

If Subjects suffer (not altogether according to Rule) loss of Goods, of
Honors, of Powers, they may and ought to bear it patiently, as long as they see
any thing like Reason for it, if they can but think that the Good of a Nation
requires it, that the Necessities of humane Affairs will have it, or that their
Sins against God call for it; they do well to indulge themselves in all such
meek and humbling Thoughts; thereby they will really practice two great Duties
of Fearing God, and honoring their King.

Thereby they show their Abhorrence of Plots and Conspiracies, of the Counsels
of the Factious and Seditious; that they have no part with those who would
overturn Kingdoms and States, Princes and People, Religion and Laws, to greaten
themselves, to advance Projects and Devices, Tricks and Humors of their own.

They show that they are good Men whilst they submit their private Concerns to
the public Good; and they show themselves to be good Subjects, seeing they in
reverence to their Prince bear all that which in reason can be thought
tolerable.

They that do this, do a great Duty, a thing very commendable in it self; it is
that which God requires, all that which the Interests of Princes can need, and
as much as the Good of a Kingdom can allow.

The excellent Divines of the Church of England have endeavored with all Care
and Attention to ingraft this upon the Hearts and Minds of their Auditors; and
they have had extraordinary effects of their Labors: for if all things be
fairly considered since the beginning of K. James's Reign, it may perhaps be
found, that no Nation in the World did ever deport themselves with greater
Submission, Resignation, and hearty Obedience toward a Prince, than this has
done. View the Actions of his Parliament, of the Nobility, Gentry, chief
Burghers; reflect upon their Fears and Jealousies; and let him that can,
challenge them for the least provoking Action, or neglect of their Duty, until
all things tended to confound him and them too, about the time of the fatal
Desertion. For what could the late King wish? what could he desire? Would he be
great and powerful? formidable to Enemies abroad, or Enemies at home? He had
all things at Pleasure; his Parliament gave him Moneys beyond Example largely;
his Nobility raised him Forces; the Commonalty readily offered their Lives to
serve him: he had Hands and Hearts and Purses of all Orders of Men at his
Command; each strove to outvy the other in Loyalty and Dutifulness. He had the
best opportunity that ever Man had to be great, if he could have been contented
to have been King of England, or would have considered that he was a King of
Englishmen. Why should he think his People to be Fools or Rascals, that they
would part with their Laws or Religion for an Humor, merely because he thought
that they might be as well without them? Their Forefathers had for many Ages
past labored hard to get their Laws fixed fairly and evenly betwixt Prince and
People, for the good of both. And their Religion, at the Reformation, had
singular Advantages to be cleansed from all the Corruptions which Folly and
Vanity had brought upon other Churches: and the Professors of it have in all
Times since been as industrious and curious to find out; and as free and
impartial to discover any thing that looked like Mistake or Error in the first
Settlement, as ever Men were. We have all that Christ and his Apostles taught;
all that the Primitive Fathers recommended as Christian Doctrine. We can part
with nothing (as the Papists own) because all we profess is pure and simple
Christianity; and if we would take in what they have superadded, we must submit
to a most heavy Burden of gross Cheats and Errors.

But yet the late King would try, he would make the Experiment whether we would
be willing to part with our Laws and our Religion: he would use his Art and
Policy to get them from us, and he has had the unhappy Fate of Projectors.

Upon this Account our Historian is not satisfied with what we have done or
suffered. He thinks himself concerned to lay before us so many Sayings of our
eminent Divines, on purpose to convince us, that we have not yet fulfilled all
the Measures of a Passive Obedience: he would have it thought, that we have
apostatised from the Doctrine of this Church; or, as he says, that this
Doctrine is more illustrious (...) our Books than in our Lives.

The Truth is, we are not hanged; the Northern Heresy is not yet extirpated;
we are not put into the condition of French Refugees, that we should be forced
to leave our Goods, and fly from our Country to save out Lives. Our Church is
preserved, and we are delivered from the Rage and Fury of petulant Enemies. We
bless God for this. If he be grieved, let him find out that Fool who is willing
to be hanged to gratify his Humor with a scurvy Sight, or to put him into a
better Mood. Neither can God nor Man please some Persons.

Passive Obedience is a Duty, but it is no further a Duty than God has made it
to be so; it is large enough of it self, it will not endure to be put upon the
Tenters; if you stretch it never so little, you will make that which is good in
it self to be stark naught: it is a Virtue as long as it stands upon its own
grounds; if it steps beyond those, it is no longer a Virtue, but a Fury.

We must Obey we confess, and submit to Suffering, as far as God and Reason
call for it; as far as public Good and the Constitution of the Government
requires it. But must we not only submit, but court Suffering? must we expose
our selves to it? run upon it? make it our care and business to find it?

A certain Divine has said, and Hand in Margin directs us to note it, That
Obedience we must pay, either active or passive; if we cannot do one we must the
other. But it was not his Mind that we should pay Sufferings just as we do
Money, go at a certain Time and Place and tender it, and then be sure to give
good Coin and full Tale. We may not pay, we may escape, we may get away from
mischief: our Savior has given us leave, when they persecute u^ in one City to
(...) into another.

Can any Man be so barbarous as to blame the French Refugees for following that
Rule of our Savior? They have fled out of the Dominions of their Prince, and
saved their Lives; and if they could, they would have saved their Fortunes ^oo,
and not paid him one Farthing of that Passive Obedience. Do they sin in this?
Are they disobedient for this?

Men submit to the Outrages of a Prince, and so they do to a Fever, or the
Plague; and tho they submit to God's Providence under those Calamities, yet
they use all fit and proper means to lessen, to abate them, and if possible to
be recovered from them.

In the utmost Extremities of Subjects, and highest Insults of Princes against
Religion and Right, many things may and ought to be done.

1. They may make their Defenses, and plead their Causes. Thus did S. Peter,
and thus did S. Paul, and thus did the Primitive Fathers when they could be
heard; and when they could not, they published their Apologies, and made the
People Judges between their Prince and them, by disclosing the merits of their
Cause to all the World. Our Savior himself encouraged them to this by promising
to give them a Mouth and Wisdom, which all their Adversaries could not gainsay.

He promised them too the best Advocate that can be, the Holy Spirit to speak
in them and for them; and that too when Rulers and Governors, Kings and Princes
should appear against them: Matt. x. 18. 20. Ye shall be brought before
Governors and Kings for my sake: Take no thought what ye shall speak, for it is
not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father.

Our Reverend Bishops, when of late they were brought before Judges, I think
for Christ's sake and the Gospel's sake, they did not wholly abandon themselves
to the Will of their Prince, nor so act as if they thought it Duty forthwith
either to do or to submit, either to pay him Active or Passive Obedience; for
when they could not do the first, they did what they could to avoid the second.
They stood upon the Defense, and used the best Mouths* and best Wisdoms, the
best Pleaders and Advocates in the Nation, to justify their Actions, to clear
up their Innocence. And tho that Vindication of themselves did more affect the
Interests of the late King than if they had raised up Arms against him: yet do
I not hear that any one of them has repented of it, nor do I see cause why he
should.

2. But then further, they may pray to God to find a way for their Deliverance.
All grant that Preces and Lachrymae, Prayers and Tears, are Weapons which the
Christian always may, and upon all occasions ought to use; but yet the
Stretchers of this Doctrine, ere they are aware, seem to extort these from us:
for if it be our Duty to give unto our Prince either so much in Active
Obedience, or in lieu of that, so much as is equivalent in his Opinion, of
Passive, we cannot pray to God for deliverance; because we cannot pray to God
to free us from giving to our Prince his Rights, or to deliver us from doing
our Duties.

3. We may accept of deliverance, and that in ways extraordinary without making
the strictest examination of all the niceties, doubts, scruples which may occur
in the case. Thus certainly St. Peter did in that remarkable action related,
Acts 12. He left his Chains, his Goal, his Guards, and followed his Deliverer;
tho he had all, and many more causes for scruple, than those which now adays
give so much trouble, and seem so insuperable. For

First, He was committed to Prison by his King; upon that account, he might
have thought it his Duty to obey in all things lawful, and patiently to submit
in the rest, or else according to the other way of expressing it, That what he
could not give to his Prince in Active obedience, he ought to make up in the
Passive.

Secondly, His King went in the way of Justice, and designed to bring him to a
Trial. Upon that he might have thought, that a secret withdrawing of himself
would disparage his Cause, and in the Opinion of others speak him guilty.

Thirdly. His King acted in behalf of the established Law, and Religion;
Josephus tells us, he was one who had a great zeal for the Jewish Constitution,
Polity and Worship. Upon that account St. Peter might think, that his King
acted from Conscience, according to his Duty, in prosecuting of him, and
therefore he was bound at the command of his King, to declare plainly and
openly, upon what grounds he a private person undertook to draw people off from
the settlement, and a long and most legally established Worship to a new one,
especially he could not but see, what himself taught, 1 Pet. 3. 15. That it is
the Duty of every Christian to be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks a reason of the hope that is in him.

Fourthly, The Case of his Guards, of the Keepers of the Prison-gates was most
deplorable, he could not but see that his escape would be charged and revenged
upon them: upon that he might think, that he ought not to do evil that good may
come of it; to save his own life, he ought not to give cause and reason for
executing of so many innocent Men.

Fifthly, There is another thing, which though much less, yet may give matter
of scruple; for what will not? that in this sudden flight, it is not likely
that he should pay his Jailer for Fees or Diet. Upon this account he might
think, that his Honesty would be questioned, and he would be accused of doing
wrong and defrauding another of his dues, and that other Christians who should
afterward be committed, would suffer hardship and ill usage for his sake, and
therefore he had better stay where he was, and give his Jailer, and his Prince,
and the Law, all they could require, and take from him; and so pay down a
complete Passive Obedience in full measure and tale by dying, to gratify his
Prince's humor; and expect the Reward of his Action from God.

This he might have thought; but he did not, for he followed his Deliverer out
of the Prison, and took care to make good his deliverance, by absconding for
near five years after, as Computers reckon it. Had he been under those strait
boundaries of Conscience in this case, which others think they are; Had he had
their Rules of Duty; could he have seen it to be his Duty to stay in Prison,
and suffer according to the will of his King; he could not have followed his
Deliverer, though he had been an Angel, Gal. 1. 8. and he could never have
prevailed upon himself to have believed, that an Angel of God would have moved
him to act contrary to his Duty.

He accepted of deliverance, and the whole Church that then was, blessed God
for it; and in like cases so may and ought others to do, and that without
penetrating into all the grounds of nicety and scruple, which Men seldom do,
but when they design to seem extraordinary; and then usually they refine upon
Morality, and set down Rules of Duty, which neither Humane Nature can bear, nor
Christianity requires, and for the most part they are against the good of
Societies, and do alike mischief to Kings as to Subjects.

Seeing then we are not by Gods Law so abandoned to the will and humor of a
Man, though he be our King, but that when he proceeds in Methods of doing wrong
and injury, of ruling by Power against Law; we may flee from him; we may plead
our Cause and Right against him; we may pray to God to give a stop to him; and
we may accept of deliverance from him. We must say that the modern Doctrine of
Passive Obedience is stretched beyond its bounds; for we are not obliged to
make it our business to give and pay him that, which he has no right to take;
we are not obliged to put our selves into his way, and give him opportunity to
cut our throats. We are not obliged not to move others to intercede for us, and
if they can with justice, to defend and preserve us; we are not obliged to
refuse a deliverance, if it comes to us.

But if Force prevails, and we are to be knocked down by Violence, against
Right and Justice, we must take care to fall as decently as we can, submitting
to God's Providence, and giving all respects to our King as far as our Case
will allow, if our Calamity comes from him. For this will bring credit to our
Memories, and to our Religion; and may do good to others who shall be in our
condition, by appeasing of wrath and displeasure, how unjustly soever conceived
against them or us.

I will end this Discourse with one Remark upon the Case of Isaac. He was a
noble instance of a very extraordinary Obedience: he submitted entirely to the
Will of his Father, and of his King; for Abraham was both to him: but yet the
Praise of that wondrous Action related Genesis 22. falls to the Father, and not to
the Son. Much is said of Abraham's Faith, and little of Isaac's Obedience:
whatever other Reasons there are for it, one is very obvious and plain, That it
might not be a President from whence Kings might measure their Rights, and
Subjects their Duties.

So much of Obedience, Active and Passive. The next thing to be treated of is
the Doctrine of Non-resistance. This our Historian tells us has been avowed by
the Church of England ever since the Reformation; Preachers and Writers, have
declared for it, and that with a great deal of warmth, and much advantage,
especially in latter days. Upon this Account he would have it thought, That Men
have swerved from their Principles, and that this Doctrine, as well as the
other, is more illustrious in Writings than in Lives. Now this Censure I
challenge to be very hard and unreasonable, because it does not appear, that
those Men who preached up Non-resistance before, have ever preached for
Resistance since; nor have they who persuaded others to Non-resistance resisted
themselves. The Preachers suffered in King James his Time all that he laid upon
them, and that with patience enough; and since his Descrtion* they have had no
Temptation to speak either of Resistance or Non-resistance: for the truth is,
that this is one of those sort of Doctrines, which is in the Text, but is not
yet got into the Creed; it may come into the Pulpit, and may be kept out of it:
it will neither do King nor People good, but when external Emergencies call for
it. In peaceable and quiet Times, when Law and Justice flourish, and there is
little complaining either in House or Street; if Preachers harangue upon
Non-resistance, they puzzle and confound the People, and give 'em ill Work, to
find out possible Causes of Resistance, and to examine the Grounds and Reasons
for Non-resistance. But when the People grow peevish and froward, quarrelling
and complaining against, daring and designing upon the Government; then the
Doctrine of Non-resistance, and S. Paul's Text for it, may be brought forth to
awe and scare them, to terrify and affrighten them, to allay their heat and
fury, and to bring them to a more discreet Temper, to the Exercise of Christian
Patience and Modesty* Upon this account many have much commended the Labors of
the Church of England Divines in the late Times of Contrasts and Oppositions,
of Plottings and Counter-plottings, because they did much good in supporting of
the Government, and for the restraining of the Madness of People, and toward
the prevention of Intestine Broils and Civil War.

But yet seeing the Preaching or not Preaching upon that Subject is matter of
Prudence, and depends upon times and seasons, and many by considerations, from
whence it may either do good or harm: it must be confessed that Sermons of that
sort were not every where received with the like favor and submission. Because
some feared that great Evil to the Kingdom and Nation might come from them,
inasmuch as they naturally tended not only to tame and subdue the People, by
allaying their zeal for their Civil Rights and Interests; but likewise they
might embolden evil Ministers and Counselors to set the King upon the
pernicious Project of making his advantage of the Subjects good nature and
easiness toward the subverting of their Religion, Laws, Rights, and the
enslaving of the whole People.

For that reason many said, that the Preachers were too warm and went beyond
their boundaries; for they ventured sometimes to treat upon matters that were
only to be concerted betwixt the King and his People in a Parliament; they did
not think that the Magna Charta was against the Law of God, tho it is not
altogether the same with Samuel's Declaration, 1 Samuel 8. They did not think
that God would damn Men for defending and securing in all just, and fair ways
those Rights which they have received from their Forefathers, by virtue of a
National Constitution, that has remained one and the same for some Hundreds of
years.

They observed, that there is but one Text declaring the damnation of Subjects
resisting; but there are Hundreds that threaten as highly Kings and Governors,
and Potentates who are injurious and oppressive of those that are under them.
Now if Charity govern Men in the choice of that Subject, and it be designed to
save the Souls of the People from damnation; they wished that there were
intermixed a little Charity toward the Souls of Kings, that they too might be
rescued from the damning sin of Oppression. And it was thrown our (with an
under Correction) that if Kings would venture against so many Texts upon Gods
pardon, to enlarge their Powers, the People might as well venture against one
to preserve their Rights.

Besides, it was somewhat sharply and angrily said by the Men who had been
entrusted in Parliaments and in the management of public Affairs, That seeing
the Clergy challenged spiritual Powers by virtue of the Text, and would not
allow Kings or Parliaments to limit, abridge, or straiten their Rights; They
might well leave the temporal Power to the Text too, which is the Law of the
Land, and the proper Interpreters of it, which is a Parliament; and not presume
dogmatically to determine against the use of that which at sometimes is the
only natural and necessary means to obtain and secure to themselves Right and
Justice.

Thus Men differed and spoke their thoughts freely concerning the usefulness
and effects of those Discourses, especially as to the point of Prudence in the
timing of them. But yet whatever they said, it is manifest that the Preachers
designed no base or mean thing, to betray their Country, their Religion, or
the Laws, to the arbitrary disposition of the King, whilst they persuaded to
Christian Patience and Submission, because the same Men that preached up
Non-resistance, did with Courage and Spirit enough in proper time and place
appear in the behalf of the Laws and the established Religion, both against
Popery, and against all unjust usurpation of the peoples Rights: and if at
other times they did any thing toward the correcting a tumultuous and
rebellious humor, to prevent Civil War and Confusion; the Nation has the
benefit of their labors, and all persons of Justice and Equity owe them due
thanks.

But yet our Historian is as angry, as if a Hare had crossed him in the way,
something has happened which he thought not of, and who can help that? He might
have thought better. They are in, and perhaps he is out; for that reason he
will think, that they have changed their Principles: Alas, this is gross
mistake. They did their duty in declaring to the people, that they ought not to
resist, but they never became Warrantees to the late King, that in case of
Wrong and Injury they would not. All the World knows, that it is good for a
Nation, that the People should think, that they ought not upon any pretense
whatsoever resist their King; so that the King does but at the same time
remember, that Oppression makes a wise Man mad, and that an injured people
always did, and always will endeavor to recover or secure their Rights, as
well against their King, as against their Neighbors.

He must have rare Skill in Language and Argument, who can prevail upon a
people to be willing to be Slaves, when they may, and ought to be free; or to
stand still and see their Goods taken from them, merely because another has a
mind to them. If they must lose in one kind, they expect to gain some other
way; for generally they are of Saint Peter's mind, when he said to our Savior,
Matthew. 19. 27. We have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have
therefore? The Question deserved an Answer, and upon it our Savior gave a most
gracious promise of advantages in this World, and in the other too.

Had we the like Promise in the Case of Submission or Non-resistance to
Princes, who will be Absolute and Arbitrary* Divines would have a better
Argument, and might expect better effects of their Discourses. But seeing the
Non-resisters have no promise of Pardon for their other sins, and so of
Salvation, the Non-resisters, who have forsaken all, must come to S. Peter's
Query, and ask, What shall we have therefore? And the Resisters who have saved
all, will hope to escape damnation as well for that sin, as for all the rest.

It must be confessed, that there are many and good arguments from Reason, from
Policy, from Law, from Scripture for Submission, or Non-resistance of Kings,
and that of bad as well as good, and in most cases too.

But when the main stress of the Assertion is laid upon one Text of St. Paul,
which threatens no less than damnation to the Offenders against that Point;
there must be great care taken to fix the true sense of the Text, or else Men
will deduce from thence very incredible things, which will easily be discovered
to be false; and so instead of recommending a Duty, they will blemish it, and
beget in the people a disgust to it. And who knows but some of the inferior
Clergy in the late times might offend in this kind; seeing it was generally
said that they had too great a regard for a busy Writer, who then presumed to
lay down monstrous and destructive Principles against the National
Constitution, and yet dared to challenge to himself the Title of being a gentle
Guide, or humble Hinter to those Gentlemen. Tho he and they did make great use
of that Text, yet both might be mistaken in the sense of it; it is not
unlikely, and it is possible that their mistakes in the event may have done
good to the Nation; for extravagant Discourse like harsh Physic many times
operates the quite contrary way from what was designed.

After all their noise and pudder, I must say, that I do not find that Men have
spoken clearly either the Nature of the Sin, or the Weight of the Punishment;
They do not tell us what Resistance signifies, nor yet who are the particular
and only Objects of a damning Resistance, nor yet lastly, whether Damnation in
the Text speaks nothing less than downright Hell and Eternity of Torments; for
many sins may be in their nature damnable, but they that have committed them,
need not presently be concluded certainly to be damned.

Denials, Refusals, Oppositions made against Opinions, Desires, Demands,
especially if others be solicited to join in with the Opposers, may in a large
sense be said to be Resistances; but yet such actions may be far enough from
being damning sins, or else many times woeful must be the condition of Privy
Counselors, of Parliament Men, Lords and Commons, and of Judges, who will not
allow of Kings Patents, which are against Law.

Suppose such a Case should have happened amongst us, which once was betwixt
Ahab and Naboth; must he that acted Naboth's part be damned for refusing to
part with or exchange his Inheritance?

Or suppose such another clownish Churl as Nabal, who sent the unmannerly
answer to David; or had it been to Saul, a King in possession; If in
consequence to that Answer, when the Commissioned Officers came against him, to
kill and spoil him, and all his, he had appealed to Law, and stood upon his
defense, till the matters were brought to a legal Trial, he might be said then
to have resisted; and therefore perhaps he might have deserved to have been
whipped for his sauciness; but it is somewhat too much to think that he must
needs be damned for it.

But David's case is much worse, when his Master sought his life, he listed
Soldiers, and seized upon strong Holds; and stood upon his defense in a way
that looks like open defiance, so far was he from submitting or surrendering
himself to Readiness Officers, or Saul himself; and after all we do not find that
he repented of this Sin, or begged God's pardon for it. What now, can we have
no hopes of God's mercy toward David? Must he for that resistance certainly be
damned; or if he had a particular Dispensation from God; yet I fear his
Soldiers had not; and their case must then be deplorable; for the reason and
justice of Gods proceedings in the case was the same always, and St. Paul's
Text does not seem to speak a new designment of God to raise the Interests of
Kings higher; and subject the People lower than they were before. Something
therefore for David's sake should be thought on, that the Text should be so
limited that we may have some hopes for him, and for his Soldiers too.

But yet we have a nearer Case that is piteous, and deserves some thoughts, and
that is the Case of George Walker poor Man, he is one of Solemon's wise Ones,
who by his wisdom has saved his City; He has done a brave Action, and all that
hear it, commend and admire it, excepting the late King's Soldiers, and perhaps
in their hearts they admire him too. But after all the praises and
commendations of the generality of Mankind, and those coming freely and
sincerely upon the supposition of true Interest, without design of daubing or
flattering the great and the proud: must (I say) this Man after all this be
thrown into Hell, and damned as one of the worst of Miscreants? Such judgments
as these will confound the genuine and most delightful Idea's that Men have of
God's Goodness, and Wisdom; they may serve perhaps to adorn a Discourse for
absolute Reprobation, or upon the excellency of damning for damnings sake,
without regard to Sin; but they can have little other use for glory to God, or
Man; for good of King or People.

These, and many other Cases ought to be well considered before we fix the
Sense of the Text; because, as in all Sciences, one Truth agrees with another;
so in the Interpretation of Scripture, every single Text that stands by it
self, must be expounded according to the Analogy of Faith, that is, the general
Agreement of the rest.

But Secondly, There is further Matter of Consideration about the Person that
is to have the Benefit of Non-resistance, it is many times very difficult to
discover who He is; and it would be hard, if upon a Mistake in that point, the
erring Person should be damned in the strict sense of the Word.

There is something that governs in human Affairs, beyond the Thoughts and
Imaginations of Men; the Wheel goes smoothly on, but of a sudden meets with a
rub, and the Carriage, perhaps, is overturned, the headless Multitude then
stare and wonder, and say the like was never seen before, and yet the like has
often happened. What seemed to be ruled is overruled, and then men seek for
their Rule, and know not where to find it: Thus men are almost fatally
confounded, they think and act contrary to one another, and yet each believes
himself in the right, and that he has strength and clearness of Reason on his
side. Its very possible that our Historian is still for King James, and thinks
him now as truly King of England as he was before: And it is very likely, that
I am for King William, and think him as truly, and as much King, as ever King
James was. We do not stand in the same light, we do not think of the same
things, and so we differ. And had we lived in many other Periods of time, it is
very likely that we might have differed too: Had we lived when Saul was made
King over Israel, I know not but he might have been against him, and I for him.
At Readiness death it is probable, that he might have been for Readiness Son
Ishbosheth, and I for David. At David's death, he might have been for Adonijah,
and I for Solomon: For Adonijahs Appearances are very taking, he was the eldest
Son then living of King David, he was a goodly Personage, and his Fathers
Darling. 1 Kings, 1* 6. Yet my Solomon reigned, and the People obeyed with a
very good Conscience; and that though he himself was somewhat suspicious of his
Title; for he did not trust to his Anointing by King David's order, but got
himself to be made King a second time, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22. But to go on, Let us
pass over the instances of Rehoboam and Jeroboam, of Zimri and Omri, and many
others who gave occasions to like difficulties. Suppose we had lived in the
days, when Jehu took possession of the Kingdom of Israel, it is very possible
that he might have been for Joram, or Joram's Son, or some of the Family of
Ahab; and it is as possible that I might have been for Jehu, he for a King
according to the modern Phrase, de jure; and I for a King de jure, and de facto
too. For he was a Conqueror, though not of the People (neither he, nor they ever
thought so) yet of the King he was; and so if the Cause of the War was just,
his Title was certainly good: Some think he was a Rebel, I am not concerned to
dispute that Point; but if he were, he came to the Throne in the same way that
Jeroboam did, who was the first beginner of that Kingdom, and so could transmit
to his Successors no more Title to the Regal Dignity than he had himself: Be
that as it will, let my Adversary be for Joram, or Joram's Son, and I for Jehu;
he has the Point of Loyalty to a late King on his side, and I the Point of
Loyalty to my God on my side; both great Pleas. But at such a time mine seems
(at least to me) to be the better; because there is something in Religion that
ties me faster to my God, than any thing else can tie another to his Prince:
Now if an Ahab or a Joram, will not only be disloyal to their God, but require
me, and use all the Tricks and Slights in the World to gain me, and the rest of
the People, to a like Disloyalty; if he will daringly and boldly trample upon
the Religion established by Law; if he will require absolute Obedience, and
Obedience without Reserve, and make his Will the Law, and me, without Law, or
pretense to Law, his Slave; Why must I in such a Case as this, be against my
God, and against my self, for one who has the Name of King, but has thrown away
from him all that which should, and all that which can speak him in the
Exercise of true Kingly Power over Israel.

I cannot tell, but some may think me in the wrong, for declaring to be for God
and Jehu, against Baal and Joram; but if I am, I may be rectified by being
informed, that either now there is, or ever was such a man, who could persuade
himself that any one true Servant of the God of Israel, in those days, did not
heartily close in with Jehu, and submit to his Government; or that any
Worshipper of Baal, who was so in reality, did do it; and then there could be
no Grumbletonians in those days, except the Halters, those that were betwixt
God and Baal, and could be very indifferent whether they worshipped the one or
the other.

Thus we must see, that the things which are, have been of old; there are
difficulties in human Affairs, and men have had great Grounds to differ about
the Subject of Regal Power, and so about the Object of Non-resistance, and that
not only in Israel, but as might be easily shown among the Assyrians, Persians,
Romans, Britains, English, and very much in this Nation, since the Norman
Conquest.

Now this difficulty may be an Argument to move Men not to be over-positive, in
determining, that Damnation, in the strict sense, shall be the Portion either
of the one or the other, in case he acts sincerely according to his best
knowledge, whether he stands up for his King, or his God; whether he stands to
Defend a former King in the Rights he had, or another who takes possession upon
the supposition of a Desertion or a Conquest: Whether he be willing to have
continued, or to have been made a Slave, and lose his civil Rights, and the
Exercise of the true Religion; or whether he had rather to have been made free,
and so let easily into his Rights, by the Assistance of another who might
justly do it; and if he would, might have left 'em in full enjoyment of their
folly and misery.

Thirdly, As to the Punishment here denounced by the word (...), or Damnation,
whether nothing less can or ought to be understood by it, but downright Hell or
Eternity of Torments. Here many things ought to be well weighed before we
determine positively in so great a point. As 1. That all Men agree, that there
are different Senses of this Word in Scripture. 2. Commentators do much differ
and contend about the true meaning of it in this place. And though Dr. Hammond be
resolute in this assertion, yet by the multitude of Objections, which in his
Notes he labors to answer, he shows that his Opinion was neither general nor
clear. 3. That as the Commentators differ, so the interpreters seem somewhat to
differ too. For what is in King James's Translation, shall receive to
themselves Damnation, is in the Bishops Bible (Translated in Queen Elizabeth's
time) shall receive to themselves Judgment. Some may think that both these
words signify the same: But if they cast an Eye upon another Text, Romans 5. 16.
they will hardly do it, for these we have, (...); and that is rendered in the
Bishops Translation; for the fault came unto Condemnation, but in King James's
it is, for the Judgment was to Condemnation. Fault or Judgment, here, is not
the same with Damnation, or Condemnation, but that which leads to it. And if we
look into 1 Timothy 5. 12. it will be worthy of a little remark: That though the
Translators differ in the former places; yet they entirely agree to render here
the word (...) by Damnation; but if you look into St. Chrysostom, and most of
the old Writers, and Dr. Hammond himself; you will find that Hell-punishment is
by no means to be understood in that Text.

Fourthly, It is to be observed further, that as Men differ concerning the
nature of the punishment, so they differ concerning the quality of the sin.
Some tell us that the Apostle means here a very monstrous sin, a sin as black
as Hell it self; and then they tell us that the demerits of it are no less than
Hell Torments: Others speak of a sin which they describe with all possible
alleviating circumstances; and as the sin they speak of, is quite of another
nature from the other, so the punishment is, which they suppose to be allotted
to it. Now if Men did agree about the sin, there could be little dispute about
the punishment. The Reverend Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase on the first verse
of Romans 13. says, That the Apostles advice is contrary to the Doctrine and
Practice of the Gnostics, and he referrs us to the 8th. verse of St. Jude's
Epistle, to see what that was; and there we have an account of a company of
wretched woeful sinners, such as no Man now in Europe would be in the least
concerned to pity, if he thought that Hell Torments were decreed for them; and
so in reference to them, Damnation in the Text may be interpreted in the
strictest, and most severe Sense. They are described Jude 8th. as filthy
Dreamers, that defile the Flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities:
Upon which words, Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase says, That they fall into all
unnatural filthy Practices, and teach the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, so as
to free all Christians from all Authority of Master or KING. Here we have two
Characteristick Notes of them, that they were most impudently declaring against
all manner of Civil Government, and against all manner of Virtuous Life. Now to
both these St. Paul speaks in the 13. chap. to the Romans to the First, verses 1,
2, and 3. and to the Last, verses 13, 14; and therefore it is possible, as the
Dr. hints, that St. Paul's Discourse in that Chapter, is entirely directed
against these.

And perhaps the Author of the Preface to the History of PASSIVE OBEDIENCE, is
of the same Opinion in the case, because he brings in an excellent Divine of
the Church of England; and now one of our Right Reverend Fathers in God,
speaking their sin and folly in these words; The Gnostics thought all the
Governments of the World to be nothing else, but the contrivance of some evil
spirits, to abridge Men of their Liberty, which God and Nature had given them;
and that this is the speaking evil of Dignities, which they are charged with by
St. Jude. Now if these be the Men, and that the sin which St. Paul provides
against in the 13. to the Romans there can be no dispute in the Christian World
concerning the sense of the word (...) in the Text; as it is, so it ought to be
rendered Damnation, or the Punishment of Hell.

But then, When the same Dr. Hammond in his Notes (perhaps forgetting what he
had hinted in his Paraphrase) describes another sin, and clothes that with all
possible alleviated circumstances, and will have downright Damnation, or Hell
Torments to be the Punishment which Gods Justice designs for it; it is no
marvel that he finds many Objections, and hard work to answer them.

If he would but allow the word to be interpreted as it has been either by
Fault, or Judgment, or Damnation in that lesser sense, in which it is used, 1 Timothy 5. 12. He would neither find nor make any matter of controversy; for all
will readily grant, that Resistance of a King, in most, almost all Cases, is a
fault, and leads to Judgment, and will certainly bring to Damnation, at least,
in the sense, the word is used in the last mentioned Text.

These things well considered, may divert men from rash and hasty Judgments,
and move them not to be easy in the declaring the Damnation of their
Neighbors, who may be urged by a sense of extreme necessity, to do those
things which they would not, since they have not so clear a Text, as they
imagined, to support the weight of their assertion. Because it is possible,
that the sin meant in the Text may be such as can now be charged upon no Man;
and it is possible that the word Damnation there, may have no such dreadful
signification, as in some certain places it has.

These things I have set down, not by any means to encourage Resistance against
Princes; for that, in most Cases, is a great sin, and every sin tends to
Damnation. But I would move men to frame their Pleas against it, from proper
Heads, and such as are most likely to prevail. Because, generally, scaring and
affrightning Arguments, if they be not very clear, and well grounded, do but
beget Suspicions and Doubts, fill men with Prejudices, make them stiff and
pertinacious in their Mistakes, and heedless of sober Instructions in undoubted
Duties. Obedience is the thing that is due to Princes, and must be paid to
them, as well for our own sakes, as for theirs, as well for Conscience sake
toward God, (who is a God of Order, and not of Confusion) as upon the Account
of Wrath, and for fear of Punishment: For if we don't obey, he can neither
secure himself, or protect us; it can scarcely happen, that he can suffer
alone; in such a case, he himself must be the Author of his own Calamity. He
must sap the Foundations upon which his Palace stands, and cut down the
Pillars that would have Supported him. Thus he may be overwhelmed on a sudden,
and his People not suffer much, but in the general course of things, King and
People go together; if one suffer, all suffer. And therefore it is the
Interest, as well as the Duty of People, to obey; this they apprehend, and are
ready to comply with all; and that without taking into thought, the nice
Speculations about the outmost stretch of Power; or what are the highest, and
what may be the lowest Measures of Submission: What a King may take, and what
they may, and ought, or ought not to yield. The Talk of Non-resistance
(whatever men think) does little good in the World; and the Talk of Resistance,
in a certain Case, does as little harm: For where Non-resistance is most cried
up, and strongly avowed, there have been most vigorous Resistances; and where
there has been a Resistance owned as lawful in a certain Case, there has been a
most profound Obedience, and no Resistance at all. Of the first, England is an
Instance; of the second, Rome: I must profess, it is strange and puzzling to
me, and may be so to others, to compare the Doctrine of our Divines with the
Doctrine of Bellarmine, and to see both in England and Rome quite contrary
effects, from what their Doctrines tends to: Our Men call for Non-Resistance;
and will not allow of any Resistance of the King, or those Commissioned by him
upon any pretense whatsoever. Bellarmine tells us plainly, that the highest
Power, the very Supreme, as he thinks of all, the very Pope himself may be
resisted, and that with Gun and Sword, with Force and Arms, in a certain Case;
and yet the Pope never complains of this, the Papacy receives no harm by this,
and there is no Resistance made against him, but profound Obedience is given
unto him. But then there is not the same effect of the Doctrine of
Non-resistance amongst us; for the Divines most engaged in teaching of it, and
founding their Hopes and Expectations upon it, do now complain of miserable
Disappointments, and seem to think the World mad, or at least very foolish,
that they do not meet with an entire Compliance with it.

There must be a great Mistake some where or other, and yet it is strange there
should be one in such a Case as this, which lies clear and open alike to all.
Bellarmine certainly saw all the difficulties that our Divines do, and our
Divines see all the Reasons that Bellarmine did, and yet both are resolute in
the Contradictory: It is pretty to consider the Thoughts of Bellarmine in the
Case; after he had wrote his five Books de Pontifice, and therein set up his
Pope as high, as high may be, next and immediately under God himself, Christ's
Vicar, supreme over all, Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations, Countries, and
that by divine Right, Warrant, and Authority; unaccountable to all the
Tribunals in this World, judge of all, and to be judged by none. He then falls
to write of the Authority of Councils, and goes on still in the same way to
mount his Pope, as well over all Church Power, as over all Temporal. And having
done this, any one would think, that he had made a complete irresistible, or a
most proper Object of Non-resistance: But Bellarmine thinks not so; for he
thinks again, that this his wonderful great one is yet but a man, and possibly
he may commit Faults, he may mis-rule, mis-govern; he may design to subvert the
Constitution of the Church, he may endeavor to ruin and to destroy it: Upon
that he queries, Whether the Church, in such a Case, has no Remedy, no help,
nothing to do toward its own preservation; must it needs sink and fall, because
a certain man is willing it should? Bellarmine says no, and directs several
Methods to be used for the support of it, which are softer, more decent, and
mannerly; but after all, if they should fail, he speaks roundly that this Pope
is to be resisted, to be opposed Vi and Armis, with Force and Arms; and that in
such a Case, there needs no Authority to justify the Action of those that
resist him.

His own Words are these, de Concilior. Auctor. Lib. 2. C. 19. At inquiunt,
ergo sola Ecclesia sine Remedio manet, si habet malum Pontificem, and poterit
Pontifex impune omnes vexare, and perdere, and nemo resistere poterit.

Respondeo, non mirum, si manet Ecclesia sine Remedio humano efficaci,
quandoquidem non nititur salus ejus praecipue humana industria, sed divina
protectione, cum ejus Rex Deus sit. Itaque etiamsi Ecclesia non possit deponere
Pontificem, tamen potest ac debet Domino supplicare, ut ipse Remedium adhibeat:
Et certum est, Deo fore curae ejus salutem; qui tamen Pontificem, vel
convertet, vel de medio tollet, antequam Ecclesiam destruat. Nec tamen hinc
sequitur, non licere resistere Pontifici Ecclesiam destruenti; licet enim eum
servata reverentia admonere, and modeste corripere, repugnare etiam vi and
armis, si Ecclesiam destruere velit: Ad resistendum enim, and vim vi
repellendam non requiritur ulla Auctoritas.

That is in English thus, by way of Objection and Answer.

But they say, then the Church only is without Remedy, if she has an ill Pope,
and the Pope may securely vex and destroy, and none may resist him.

I answer, it is no marvel, if the Church be without all human effectual
Remedy, seeing her preservation does not chiefly depend upon man's care, but
God's protection, inasmuch as God is her King. Therefore, although the Church
cannot depose a Pope, yet it may, and ought to pray to God, that he would give
a Remedy; and it is certain, that God will take care of its preservation, and
so will either convert the Pope, or take him out of the World, before he can
destroy the Church. But yet it does not thence follow, that it may not be
lawful to resist a Pope endeavoring to destroy the Church: For it is lawful,
keeping up a due Reverence, to admonish him, and modestly to reprove him, and
to fight against him with Force and Arms, if he will destroy the Church: For to
resist, and repel Force with Force, there is required no Authority at all.

Thus Bellarmine says, and he is very clear, that it is lawful to Resist the
highest Power, the Pope himself, for the sake of the Church, to preserve it
from Ruin and Destruction; I hope no Man will say that this may be done for
the Church of Rome, but not for the Church of England, or that we are not bound
to have as great Zeal for our Church, as he has for his; I am sure, we cannot
challenge, in behalf of a King of England, more right to impunity, or make him
look more unaccountable than Bellarmine does his Pope. And so there can be no
more Grounds of concluding for, or against the Doctrine of Non-Resistance in
the one case than in the other. But yet, Some may think themselves under deeper
Obligation than others, and they may practice the entire Duty of a complete
Non-Resistance; none will blame them for it, so that they do not condemn
others, who are not so easy as they, to give up their Church, and civil
Rights, when they are not obliged to it, as far as they can see, either by the
Law of God or Law of the Land: Men must give allowances to one another, because
it may be possible that they may differ about Notions that are very near to
first Principles; I know not but some may affect slavery, as a state exercising
high Virtue, and tending to perfection; others that cannot reach at such
heights, content themselves with freedom, and think that, a useful and
desirable convenience: This may seem strange, but from thence it comes, as far
as I can guess, that some in the same Text, and same Words, finds Argument that
they should be Slaves, and others that they should endeavor to be Free. St.
Paul says, 1 Cor. 7. 21. Art thou called being a Servant? Care not for it; but
if thou may be made free, use it rather. Upon these Words, some say that St.
Paul recommends to us slavery, and would have us to be Slaves, though we can be
made Free, and so much the rather, because we can; others say, that the Apostle
would have us be content to be Slaves, when we are Slaves; but if we can be
made Free, we should choose Freedom rather. Here is a great difference, which
does not derive from the Text, but from previous thoughts, which Men have
entertained concerning Slavery and Freedom. As they are affected to the thing,
so they judge that they find Argument for it. Now I for my part am for the
later interpretation, because I have a good Opinion of Liberty or Freedom; but
if another prefers slavery, and thinks he has Argument from that Text to be a
Slave, let him be a Slave, and let him enjoy his Opinion of the thing, and of
the Text too, I shall not hinder him. But I must say, it would be an undecency
in him to call my understanding into question for differing from him, because I
have the highest Probability, the Concurrence of the Wisest, and the best in
all Ages on my side. But yet this may be done, because when Men leave common
Sense, and seek for extraordinary Notion, they usually grow froward and
troublesome. Tacitus remarks in the 14th* of his Annals, that some who had got
into their Heads that flight of the Stoics, That a Wise Man was a KING,
presently begun to be busy and meddling, and very scornful of others; Ea male
intellecta arrogantes faciebat and turbidos. It is pity that such little things
should give disturbance to Kingdoms and Nations, but it cannot be helped, for
it is Opinion that governs Men; and it is not what is great, but what is
thought to be great that stirrs them. A little before the fatal overthrow of
Jerusalem, there were many warm Persons in it, who had their Heads full of
Fancies, and particular Notions, and for the sake of them, they could run upon
the most desperate Enterprises, but they would not know the things that
belonged to their Peace. Pliny has a saying, that has much puzzled Physicians
and Critics; He says, that Men die of Sapience or Wisdom, per Sapientiam Mori.
The Physicians find no such Distemper in their Books, but guess that he means a
Phrensy; Something there is, that gets into Men's heads, which seems to them
that have it, to be high Wisdom, but to others a mere Phrensy, which is
extremely mortal and pernicious. Solomon so long ago, advised properly against
it, and it were to be wished, that his Council might yet be taken: He says,
Ecclesiastes 7. 16. Be not Righteous overmuch, neither make thy self overwise;
why should thou destroy thy self? It is hard to think that Men should be
either over-righteous or over-wise; but if Men will affect impracticable
Notions without sufficient Grounds, and look upon them as their Righteousness,
or their Wisdom; and that merely because these are against themselves, and
destructive of themselves; they may well enough be said to be overrighteous,
and over-wise.

Thirdly, The Third thing to be spoken of, is the Origination of Power; and
this is a Subject which I could willingly omit, because I judge it for the
Interest of a Nation, both King and People; that the People have as High, and
as Reverend Thoughts as they can, both of their King, and his Power: Let them
think, that they have their King from God; and that he has his Power from God,
and let him think so too; all this tends to good, because it will make him in
the Exercise of his Power, to Act in the fear of God; and by virtue of that
fear, to abstain from wrong, and to do Justice: And it will awe the People with
a dread of their King's Majesty, and of their God's; and so keep them from
being froward, and peevish; mutinous and rebellious, whilst they believe
themselves in such actions, not only to be offenders against the Law of the
Land, but sinners against the Will and Pleasure of God. Upon this Account, I
could willingly chime in with the Compiler of this History, and with him, fault
Hobbs, and Milton, and Doleman, or Parsons; and with him declare against those
Doctrines, That Power is originally in the Body of the People, and that the
Foundation of all Government is laid in compact, as he says in his Preface. And
I could say with him in his conclusion, page 132. That Power is only from God.
These may be allowed him, or let pass without altercation, so that Men use them
according to their natural tendency, for the Support of Righteousness, Justice,
and Goodness. But if these be used to dazzle and amuse People, that others may
have advantage to Rob and Spoil them: If by virtue of these a passage is made
to let in upon a Nation, a lawless Power, Wrong, Injury, and Tyranny: If Law,
Religion, common Sense, must all be laid aside, and one of the best framed
Polities in the World must be subverted by ill consequences, and forced Pleas
deduced from these Doctrines, we may certainly have Liberty to examine both the
Principle and the Deductions; we may consider what the one will bear, and how
the other is laid upon it. If we must be Slaves, it is all one to us, whether
we be made such in the way of Hobbs, or of this Historian; it is all one,
whether a King has his Power from God, or from the People; if he must be
absolutely absolute, and be obeyed without reserve, without consideration of
Law and Right. And if a King must be a Monster, altogether Arbitrary, mere Will
acting at pleasure, without bounds or limits, he may as well be made such by
the People, as by God; and of the two, the People are the more likely to make
the Monster; because God is always Wise and Good, and all his Actions are Just,
and Right; and therefore as there is more of God in Power, there should be more
of Goodness and Righteousness in the Exercise of it.

It seems therefore a Design ill laid, to challenge for Princes, an infinite
Power of doing what they will, without Check or Control from National
Constitutions, because their Powers come from God; or to be zealous to fetch
all the Powers of Princes from God, for this purpose, that they may do evil
things securely, that they may do what they please, right or wrong, without
danger or hazard, without stop or let.

If we believe the Apostle, Romans 13. The Powers that come from God, and are
ordained of God, are not, they cannot be a Terror to good Works: but according
to this way of discoursing, they are as terrible to the good, as to the bad;
and that for this Reason, because they come from God. Had Princes that singular
Excellency of Nature, which God has, that they neither would nor could do evil,
they might then be allowed to act, as he does, according to the good pleasure
of their Wills, without Control. But if we assert that they may do evil, they
may oppress, rob, spoil, kill, murder, and do all the base things which any
other man can do, for which they have no License or Power from God; why may
they not then have some stops from human Constitutions, to let and hinder them
from doing those things, which God never gave them power to do, and to keep
them in those Methods of acting, which God himself prescribed, when he gave
them power of ruling and governing.

If we say that the necessity of human Affairs does require that Princes should
be unaccountable in this World, it may be allowed so far as that necessity
appears; but then their Exemption from Check or Control, does not derive from
the Source and Origin of their power, that is from God; but from another
Cause, which must be fairly made out, upon the Compare of Benefits or
Mischiefs, that happen from the one supposition or the other.

But when men say, that because Kings receive their Power from God, they must
have no letts from human Constitutions of doing what they will, good or bad;
and then distinguish, that though they are uncontrollable, unaccountable in
this World, yet they are accountable to God, and must give a strict Account to
him, and that for the same Reason, because they receive their Power from God: I
should think that such men are unkind to Kings, and treat 'em with the most
uncouth Courtship in the World: For they do, in effect, tell them this; You are
great and powerful, you may do what you please, you have none to fear but God,
nothing to be afraid of but Hell and Damnation: Others are awed by human Laws,
they are kept in, and restrained from doing the Evils they might do, they are
made better than they would be, and so put into a way of Salvation; but you
Great Princes, you are entirely free, you may do as you will, as you have none
above you, so you have none to awe you, none to give stop to you in all the
eruptions of nature or humor, but only God and his last dreadful Judgments.

I should think a Christian Prince should give a Courtier but little thanks for
such a Speech as this; as he has a Soul to be saved, he must rejoice in God's
preventing Grace, and give thanks when ever it pleases God to keep him from
doing evil, and he may likewise be glad, if by Laws, and human Constitutions,
his ways were so bounded and fenced in, that it might be impossible for him to
deviate from Righteousness and Justice, so he would be in the ready way of
being Happy here, and Glorious hereafter.

As to the Interests of a King of England, it is but vain to search into the
Source and Origin of his Power; how it may be said to be from God, or how from
the People; seeing he has that singular happiness, that if he will Act truly
his part according to the National Constitution, he must appear in the Exercise
of his Power, altogether Divine like God Himself: He is Great and Powerful, his
Person is Sacred, his Actions unquestionable: He does good, and nothing but
good; inasmuch, as the Powers of Dispensing of Favors and Benefits, the Power
of Rewarding, Advancing, Preferring, of giving Riches, and Honors, to the
Industrious and Well-deserving; the Power of Protecting, Defending, Relieving,
Pardoning the poor or miserable, are entirely left to Him: But then the Power
or Impotency of doing Wrong, Injury, or Evil to others, is absolutely taken
from Him.

A King of England, as such, can do no wrong; if he does it, he stretches
beyond himself, and the Man is too hard for the King; because, according to
this National Constitution, all those Acts wherein wrong can be done, are to be
done not by himself, but by proper Ministers and Officers, who are accountable
for the actions which they do, or may have done. Thus the Kings Person is
Sacred, and his Actions unquestionable; and they that do wrong, are answerable
to the Law, and may suffer according to their demerits.

This certainly was a happy Contrivance of Wisdom in our Forefathers, to
secure the Veneration that is due to Princes, and withal, to provide, that
goodness and Righteousness may flourish in their Kingdoms. The Subject, every
one of them either by himself, or his representative, agrees that he will be
hanged or Gibbetted, submit to the halter or the axe, if ever he be mutinous or
rebellious against the King: His King he will Love and Honor, Serve and Obey,
Fight and be willing to Dye for Him: He shall be Great and Powerful, Dreadful
to Enemies abroad, and Dreadful to Enemies at home; and have all the
Assistances of Men and Moneys, to enable him to do all the good his heart can
wish for, if he will but ask it; and that His Majesty may yet be more Bright
and Illustrious, He in his particular, in all his Actions, shall be
unquestionable, unaccountable. On the other hand, the King agrees that he will
Protect and Defend his Subjects, Support them in all their Rights, he will use
their Assistances to beat down, and subdue all their Enemies, and take Care
that they may Live in Peace and Prosperity. He will not oppress, or trample
upon any, whether great or little: Nay, He will not leave it in his own Power
to be able to do wrong or injury to them: And therefore, He will make Laws by
his People's Consent in Parliaments; He will Conduct the Interest of the Nation
by Advice of his Subjects in Council; He will Rule by Officers, and Judge by
Ministers, chosen out from amongst themselves, and that in all Causes both
between themselves and between himself, and them; who shall pronounce and
determine about right, and wrong; and who is guilty, and who is not; without
the least appeal to him: And then, lest those Judges, as Men, should warp
aside, and think that they may be able by their goodly appearances to bear down
right, and set up wrong, they themselves shall not be empowered to pronounce a
Judgment in any Cause, but as a Jury of Neighbors, Twelve Men chosen out of
the Voicenage, shall first find it to be. After all this, The King agrees, that
Ministers of State, Privy Counselors, Military Officers, Judges in Courts, and
each particular Jury-man shall be questionable, and accountable, punishable for
any corruption, oppression, wrong, or injury, that by Law he shall be found
guilty of; and that as much, as rebels are, which too has actually been done
in several Reigns.

How Venerable and Divine is this whole Disposition and Order of Affairs? What
appearance is there of Wisdom and Goodness, that is of God, in it? If a Prince
would be Great, he must be Good; and if he keep to these Methods, he must be
both. And if a People would have happiness in this World, they must either find
it in such a Constitution, as this, or seek it in Vtopia. Why then do Men
trouble themselves to seek for the Source and Origin of Power, and think they
do much in showing that it comes from God, and God only? Whereas we have here
before us Power running down from the Fountainhead a long way, and in all its
course like it self, the same it was, pure and clean, and in all its
appearances Divine and God-like; it acts just as God would have it, and tends
to all those glorious Ends, for which God gave it, and to which God requires
and directs the Use of it. It exerts it self to those Purposes, for which St.
Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 1. 9. That the Law of God was made, not for the
Righteous, to oppress them, but for the Lawless and Disobedient, to beat them
down; to shame, as well as punish them. In these Methods a King may be strong
and mighty, able to throw down, and cast down strong Holds and Imaginations,
and all that exalts it self against God, and Goodness, and Himself too.

If then men will have us to say, that Power comes from God, and only from God,
we may well allow it; because we know that Nature, and an inclination to
sociable living, and Order come from God, and only from him; all these are
good, and God is the Giver of all good things; and besides, we find so much of
goodness both for King and People in this National Constitution, that we may
well think that God, himself, by his Providence* did influence our Forefathers
to agree, and fix upon it. But now if men, from this speculative Notion of
Power, descending down from God, will draw and force out Consequences, and by
virtue of them, will set up, and pull down at pleasure, make new Frames of
Government, and Schemes of Policy: If they will say that this excellent
Disposition of Affairs must be thrown down, and the English Law be laid aside,
and right and wrong become mutable at pleasure; if they will say that Kings of
England must be absolute, and obeyed without Reserve; and all this, only for
this Reason, because their Power comes from God, I hope that they will expect
that we should beg their Pardons; they may think that we judge their Logic
deceives them, and that they left their Aristotle too soon. A Philosopher once
undertook to demonstrate that it was impossible there should be any such thing
as Motion, and he talked prettily upon the Subject; but all the while he
talked, men of plain sense, laughed at him for his vain design; yet, however, he
went on demonstrating, and they laughing.

So it is, Men, engaged in a bold Adventure, will go on, whether they have, or
have not hope of Success.

If Men would but consider fairly, they must see, that there is a vast distance
between their Principle, and their Consequence; it does not follow, that
because God gives Power, therefore Kings must be free to do what they please,
or that they cannot be restrained by National Constitutions, to exert their
power in particular ways and methods. For who knows, but the Limitations and
Restrictions of power, may come from God too; for there are no more miraculous
Attestations to the Divine Origin, and descent of the one, than there is of
the other. And it would be agreeable to God's goodness to do it; because Power
is in it self a very flexible thing, that may be bent and bowed this way, or
the quite contrary; it is like unto Nature, which as it came from God was very
good; but as the man, who had that Nature, and was therewith made upright,
sought out many Inventions: So the King, who has from God the power, may do the
same. The man thought many of his own Inventions to be his Nature, and to come
from God; and a King may think many of his to be his power, and to come from
God. Therefore as God gave new Laws to limit and bind in the man, and his
Nature; so he may, and it were agreeable enough to his Goodness, if he should,
in the Course of his Providence, direct and order Affairs so, that there might
be Limitations and Restrictions given to the King and his Power.

But besides, according to the usual Course of things, God generally gives
Bounds to Power, according to which it shall, or shall not operate, and
therefore as he makes one Power, so he makes another answerable to it; as he
makes the Agent, so he makes the Patient; as he makes Fire, so he makes
combustible Matter to receive it, and to feed it, or else the Fire will soon go
out. God gives to men Power over the Beasts of the field, but if a man will
command any one of them, he must treat 'em in ways agreeable to their Natures,
and make them to find that it is good to be commanded: He that comes on the
blind, or the sore side of his Horse, may have a kick, and he that will vex and
fret his Dog, may have a Bite, and none, in such a Case, will blame either the
Horse, or the Dog, but the indiscreet Master. God gives to Kings, Power over
men, their Subjects; but if a King will treat his Subjects, just as the
indiscreet Master does his Horse or his Dog, he can hope for no better Returns,
than what the other finds. Men and Beasts, by the Frame of their Natures, are
in this much alike; you have them, you loose them; they come to you, or run
from you, just as you treat them; give them kind Usage, and fair Treatment,
they both will follow, and serve, and endeavor to please; but if they find
that they must be abused, kicked, and starved; if they find nothing but the
Effects of Wrath or Contempt, that they must be trampled upon, each of them
will get off, and shift for it self, and seek a more easy and comfortable
State of Being.

Now this Temper, whether in subject Man, or subject Beast, coming from God; as
well as Power in governing King, or governing Man, the one of these must be
suited and accommodated to the other, and must proceed in all Actions upon the
supposition of it; and as it is the Man's part to find out the proper Ways to
gain upon the Beast, to win him, and make him his own, fit for his Service; so
it is the King's part to find out, and to use a due and proper Managery for his
People, by which he may bring them in to himself, and beget in them Trusts and
Confidences toward him. God makes a Power in one to lay on, and in another to
bear; but he that lays on, must consider what the other can bear, or else,
house, and all manner of impositions will come to the Ground, and, possibly,
overthrow, and ruin him in the Downfall.

Every Power has some Bounds, and natural proper ways of exerting it self,
whereby it becomes effectual, and of use. He that would have Food from Cows, or
Clothing from Sheep, or Service from Horses, or Dogs, he must provide for
them, that first they may do well for themselves, before they can do well for
him; he must therefore feed them and defend them from Fears and Affrightments,
such as usually hinder them from attending to their own Necessities, and
Interests. But he that will not give 'em, whereon to feed, or if he does, puts
Wolves and Lions amongst them, to scare and terrify them, must never expect
good or benefit from them.

Thus it was, and ever will be, what way soever the Man came to have Power over
them, right Titles to them, whether that was from God or man, by Donation or
Emption, by Descent or Conquest: And as it is betwixt the Man, and his Beast,
so at least, it must be allowed to be betwixt a King and his People: If a King
will treat them frowardly, make no due Provisions for their Good, but will
treat them arbitrarily, just as he will, and that because he wills it according
to humor, he must not expect what he wishes from them, how or in what manner
soever he receives his Power over them.

Thus let Power be owned to come from God, let it be confessed that He is the
Source and Original of it; yet I think no Man can fetch from thence any Ground
for the assertion of either Destructive or of Arbitrary Proceedings in
Government; a King may however, have bounds and limits, ways and methods fixed
to him, wherein he may, or may not, profitably and effectually exert the
Operations of it; and the consequences of his own Actions, whether they be good
or bad, commendable or blameworthy, will be imputable chiefly and primarily to
himself.

But after all this, What if Power may in some Sense be said to depend upon the
People; though it comes originally from God, yet it may come immediately to one
certain Person by the people; and as God is said to make Kings, so the people
may be said to make them too: I know that this Language is thrown off with
scorn and contempt, and represented in several Prints as most odious. How this
comes to pass, I cannot tell, for it must be owned, that in the Old Testament,
amongst God's own people, this way of speaking was very current and familiar,
in all the Revolutions of State, the people are said to make their King.

Thus it was in the Case of Saul, 1 Samuel 11. 15. He was indeed Anointed by
Samuel, but that Action was done in secret, his own Servant was not permitted
to see it, 1 Samuel 9. 27. and 1 Samuel 10. 1, 2. The Instruction that he then had,
was, not to challenge the Kingdom by Virtue of God's Gift, but to do as
occasion served, 1 Samuel 10. 7. and though he be said to be chosen of the Lord, 1 Samuel 10. 24. yet he was said to be made King by the people, 1 Samuel 11. 15. And
all the People went to Gilgal, and there they made Saul King before the Lord.

Thus too, David was made King by the Men of Judah, over the House of Judah, 2 Samuel 2. 4. and David himself owns, that the Men of Judah Anointed him, 2 Samuel
2. 7. and Ishbosheth at the same time was made King over all the rest of Israel
by Abner, 2 Samuel 2. 9.

After the Death of Ishbosheth, David was again Anointed by the people, 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. and made King by the people, 1 Chronicles. 12. 38.

So was Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 29. 22. and Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 10. 1. and Jeroboam, 1
King. 12. 20. They called him to the Congregation, and made him King over all
Israel. Thus it was with Omri, 1 King. 16. 16. and with Joash, 2 Chronicles. 23. 11.
and Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 1. This is the plain way of speaking in our
Translation, and so it is in the vulgar Latin, and in the Hebrew Text, and that
these were not empty Words, but that real effects for the producing of Power,
did depend upon this Action of the People; we must needs think, because we see
in two instances, that at the same time they made their King, they made
Provisions for the Restraining and Limiting of his Actions; for, that I guess,
must be the sense of that League, or Covenant, or Contract, which then he made
with them, and they with him. This we find was done between King David, and
(...) people; and King Joash, and the people: This we find was done by King
David, 2 Samuel 3. 21. and ^ Sam. 5. 3. and 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. and by King Joash, 2
King. 11. 17. and likely enough by Solomon, when he was made King the second
time, 1 Chronicles. 29. 21. and possibly enough, this was done at the Inauguration
of each of their Kings.

But whether this be so, or no, it is not so material as to engage us, or
others in Dispute and Controversy. That we are now to promote and seek for, is
Peace and Unity, that Brotherly Love, and Christian Charity may abound amongst
us; we must do what we can, to advance the good of our Country, People, and
Nation; to secure our Religion, that we may continue to serve God in simplicity
and sincerity; as for Nicety and Notion, men may think, and if they will, speak
either this way, or the quite contrary. If Passion and Animosity, Heat and
Anger, be laid aside, we may allow men to say, That Power is only from God;
That Resistance is a dangerous thing, and in most Cases very ill; That Passive
Obedience (well explained) is a Duty. And they, on the other hand, may be
content not to urge and discourse these Doctrines in such a way, as must give
us to fear and suspect, that trick and design are carrying on; that we are to
be amused first, and then fooled, and cheated.

And why may it not be presumed? That henceforth no man will dare to move the
People of this Land, Lords, and Commons to submit their Birthrights; all the
Interest they have in Life and Fortune to Arbitrary Disposals; from none of
those wheedling Topics, neither from the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, nor
that of Non-Resistance, nor yet, that of the Origin of Power.

For seeing the Reverend Clergy now Assembled in Convocation, stand up so
resolutely to keep and maintain all the particularities of their Rule, that
they will not part with the least Title of their Establishment; though desired
by the King, and perhaps too, by the greatest part of the Nation: It is very
likely that the Example may be taking, and a Parliament, or the Body of the
People may be as zealous to hold their own, as others are, to hold theirs; and
it is very possible that there should be every jot as great Reason for it.

For certainly it may be thought, that the principal, and essential parts of
this National Constitution, may be of more Value than the Disposition of things
indifferent in Ecclesiastical Affairs. I should think it somewhat worse, to be
hanged, right or wrong; than right or wrong to lose the satisfaction of wearing
a Surplice. And another man may be more willing to permit his Child to be
Baptized without the Sign of the Cross, than to consent that he will be
dragoon'd, whenever his King pleases, only for this Reason, Because he does not
change his Religion, and become Papist, Mohammedan, or what you will.

Here I must stop, not daring to proceed, nor yet daring to exhort my Betters;
but yet I must say, that it were to be wished, that every one, of greater or
lesser degree, would cast a few serious Thoughts upon those Words of our
Savior, Luke, 19. 42, 43, 44.

Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes.

For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side.

And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee: and
they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not
the time of thy visitation.

FINIS.

