Prayer and Praise. A Twofold TRIBUTE, TO BE Paid by all Loyal Subjects TO
THEIR SUPREME, AND Subordinate Sovereign.

A Subject entered upon April 23, 1661. being the Day of the solemn Inauguration
of King Charles the II. and finished the Lord's Day following.

AS It was delivered to the Church of God at Great YARMOUTH.

By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel there.

LONDON, Printed for John Tuthill, Bookseller in Yarmouth, 1661.

TO All the Loyal Subjects OF Their Supreme, and Subordinate SOVEREIGN, IN THE
Town of Great Yarmouth, GRACE and PEACE.
(Much esteemed in the Lord),
WHat signal Testimonies of your real and cordial affection to your dread
Sovereign, King Charles the second, you have lately given, as at his happy
Restoration to the exercise of his Regal Government in this and the
Neighbour-Nations, so now again on the day of his Royal Coronation; my Eyes and
Ears, among many others, have been witnesses. And, according to my bounden
Duty, it has been my desire and endeavor to power some Oil upon this flame,
by making choice of such Subjects to preach upon at those Seasons, as I
apprehended to be very suitable to those Solemnities. The former of which
(entered upon June 28, 1660. and afterward prosecuted in diverse Sermons,) was
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 118.22, 23. where we find mention made of a Stone,
which being first rejected, was afterward advanced. The Stone which the
Builders refused, is become the Head-stone of the Corner: This is the Lord's
doing, and it is marvailou^ in our Eyes. Which how fitly it agreed, as to David
in a Metaphorical, and to Christ in a Mystical sense; so also to our dread
Sovereign, aptly expressing the great and wonderful Change, as of theirs, so of
his Condition: as also what use they who hear of the one, and behold the other,
are to make of both, I then showed you. The other is this of the same Pen,
which writing after the like manner, gives an account to the World of a
twofold Tribute, that should be paid to King Solomon as the Shadow, and to
King Jesus as the Substance* viz. Prayer and Praise. Both which being due from
all Subjects to their lawful and Gracious Sovereigns; are not to be detained,
but readily yielded. And so let them be by you, as unto Jesus Christ your
Supreme; so to his Servant, your subordinate Head and Governor under Him.
Which that they may be, I do here present you all with what some, and many, of
you lately heard touching the latter of these (wanting leisure to transcribe
the former): desiring that it may make a deep impression upon your Spirits, so
as being minded of this your Duty, you may approve your selves truly Loyal
Subjects unto both. Thi^ that you may do, shall be the prayer of him, who i^

Your Servant in the Lord, John Brinsley.
From my Study, May 3, 1661.
Prayer and Praise. A Twofold TRIBUTE TO BE Paid by all Loyal Subjects TO
THEIR SUPREME, AND Subordinate Sovereigns.
PSALM. 72.15. Prayer also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he
be praised.


AS this whole Psalm by the greatest part of Orthodox Expositors is, so this
parcel of it, which I have now singled forth as suitable to the present
solemnity, may be looked upon two ways. 1. Literally, th^n Mystically.
Literally, as relating to King Solomon; Mystically, as relating to King Jesus,
of whom Solomon was a Type. And both these ways shall I (through ^od's
assistance) in the handling of it look upon it: Beginning with the former.

The Literal sense* look upon the words as relating to King Solomon. So does
this whole Psalm, as we may take notice from the Title of it, where we find it
inscribed Leselomo, Ipsi Selomo, to, or for Solomon; that is, a Psalm (or a
Prayer) for him. A prayer composed and made by David, for that his Son, who was
to succeed him in his Kingdom: The last prayer of that kind that he made for
him, or any other. So much is hinted to us in the Epilogu^, the close and
conclusion of it; where it is said, The Prayers of David the son of Jesse are
ended* Intimating that this was the last of those set and solemn prayer, which
was composed by David not long before his Death, and by him left as a
Depositum, a Legacy for his son Solomon, to whom he wished all the blessings
that Heaven and Earth could affoard him. And so looking upon these words which
I have now read, we may take notice from them of a two-fol^ Tribute, which as
it is due, so it will readily be paid by all Loyal Subjects to a gracious
Sovereign, viz. Prayer and Praise. Prayer for him; [ Prayer also shall be made
for him continually]; Praise of him, [ And daily shall he be praised.] Deal we
with these two severally; beginning with ^he former.

Prayer also shall be made for hi^ ^ontinuall^*] Wherein we may take notice of
two particulars, Quid and Quando. The Tribute it self which is to be paid, and
the time when and how often it is to be paid. The Tribute itself, Prayer; The
time when and how often it is to be paid, Continually: Briefly of each.

Tribute it self, that is, Prayer: Prayer is a Tribute due from every man to
all men. So it is upon a Christian account, as the Apostle charge it in that
known Text, 1 Timothy 2.1. I exh^rt therefore (says he) that first of all
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all
men. (...); All kinds of Prayers made for all kinds of men, according to their
occasions and necessities, of what Nation, State, Quality, or Condition soever;
Be they Jews or Gentiles, Christians or Pagans* good or bad, Fri^nds or
Enemies, rich or Poor, public or private persons, Prayer is ^ common Tribute
due unto all. But among all, in a special manner to ^ing^ and Princes: Them the
Apostle makes mention of, in the (...); For Kings, and all that ar^ in
Authority* Rulers and Governors* Supreme, and Subordinate. To them belongs
this Tribute after a ^^^cial manner. So King D^^i^^ looked upon it, who making
and sending forth a Decree for the advancing and furthering of the great work
which the Jews had then in hand, the rebuilding of the Temple at Jerusalem; he
takes order that they should be accommodated and furnished with all such
things as were requisite for the due administration of their public Worship
and Service, expecting that they should pay this Tribut^ unto him, and his,
remembering them in their prayers. So we find it, Ezra 6.10. That which they
have need of, etc. let it be given them day by day without fail, That they may
offer Sacrifices of a sweet savor to the God of Heaven, and pray for the life
of the King, and of his Sons. This may all Kings and Princes expect and look
for as a Tribute due unto them from their Subjects. And this Christians are
willingly and readily to pay to them.

Yea, though they be such as deserve no such Tribute from them by any good
Office which ^hey have done to them. Though they be wicked and ungodly Kings,
Enemies both to God and them. Such a one was King I^r^b^am, one of the worst of
Kings, whom we find stigmatized with this brand, Who did sin, and made Israel
to Sin, 1 King. 14.16. He did Sin himself* this he did as in other waye^, so
speci^lly by setting up an Idolatrous Worship, making those two golden Calves,
the one of which he set up in Bethel, and the other in Dan (as we find it), 1
King. 12.28, 29. And he made Israel to Sin, by causing the People of God within
his Dominions to leave the Temple of the Lord, and to worship those Calves whom
he had set up, which thing became a Sin, as to him, so to them (as it there
follows), ver. 30. And in this Sin of his he was obstinate, insomuch that
when the Man of God, by a special Command from God himself, came and
prophesied against his Altar at Bethel; he was enraged against him, putting
forth his hand, either to lay hold of him himself, or to stir up those who were
the standers by to apprehend him, which he calls out to them to do (as the
Story tells us), 1. King. 13.4. Yet, notwithstanding this, when God had
executed that Judgment upon him, causing his hand to whither and dry up; at his
entreaty the Man of God refused not to pray for him, He besought the Lord, and
the King's hand ^as restored again, and became as it was before (so it there
follows), ver. 6. And the like Office^ are Christians, both Ministers and
People, to be ready to do to the worst of Kings, though Enemies to God and
Them, doing unto them all the evil Office^ that lies in their power; yet are
they not to forbear praying for them: Pray for them that despitefully use you,
Luke 6. 28. Such were the Rulers and Governors in the Apostle's time; the
Roman Emperors, being then Heathen, they were Enemies to the Church, cruel and
bloody persecutors of the Saints, Lions (as Paul is conceived to call Nero, ^
Tim. 4.17.) Insomuch that some happily might make it a Question, whether they
ought to pray for such as they were, or rather pray against them: but the
Apostle here resolves that doubt by instancing particularly in them; Pray for
all men, etc. For Kings, and all that are in Authority. Be they what they will,
so long as their Authority is just: though they be Tyranni exercitio, Tyrants
as to the exercise of their Power; so long as they are not so Titulo, their
Title being just and right, they are to be prayed for by those that are under
their Government: Such is the Apostles Precept.

And such was the practice of the Primitive Saints: They were very
conscien^ious in the paying of this Tribute; constantly, solemnly and seriously
putting up prayers in the behalf of those Roman Emperors under whose
Government they lived; notwithstanding they were such as I spoke of, cruel and
bloody persecutors of the Church. So much we may take notice of, from that
known and remarkable passage of that ancient Father Tertullian, Tertull. Apolog.
who sets forth what their manner then was in their public meetings, Illuc
suspicientes (says he) lifting up our Eyes to Heaven, Nos Christiani, manibus
expansis, quia innocui, We Christians with hands spread abroad, being conscious
of our own Innocence, Capite nudo quia non erubescimus, With heads uncoverd, as
not having any cause to blush; denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus
pro omnibus Impera^oribus, Without any other Monitor, to prompt or help us save
only our own hearts and spirits; we pray for all Kings and Emperors, begging
for them Vitam prolixam, Imperium securum, etc. A long Life, a secure
Governments, etc. Thus did they readily pay this Tribute to those Emperors,
^ough Heathen* and bloody persecutors of them and their Religion.

And if this be to be paid unto such; how much more to Graciou^ Sovereigns, to
good Kings and Prince, such as are vertuou^ and pious, wise and just, merciful
and ^ender hearted toward their Subjects, Friends both to Church and State,
Nursing F^^her to both, such a^ God promises to give unto his Church in the
(...) days, Esaias 49* 23. Being such Rulers, such Governors, now those who are
under their Government, receiving so many and great benefits by it as they do,
they stand engaged after a special manner to be earnest with God on their
behalf; to pray for them. And this, being true Christians, they will readily
do: Prayer shall be made for him, (says David here speaking of his son
Solomon). He being a wise and a good Prince, he made no question, but that his
People, his Loyal and Obedient Subjects, would be ready to power out their
prayers on his behalf.

2. Yea, and that Continually: There is the second particular which Time when,
and how often this Tribute is to be paid. Tamith, Iugiter, Always,
Continually. (...)


So it is, Prayer is an exercise wherein God's People should be frequent and
constant: Praying always. So they are directed by our Savior to do, Luke
18.1. who is there said to speak a Parable to his Disciples, ( viz. that of the
importunate widow), to this end, that men ought always to pray. And again,
Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always. And so Paul calls upon his
Ephesians to do, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always. And so upon his Colossians, Col.
4.2. Continue in prayer. And w^iting to his Thessalonians, he requires them to
pray without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. (...), that is, incessantly, constantly:
not that Christians are to spend all their time in prayer, and do nothing else
(as the Euchites, and some other Heretics of old have thought and taught), but
that they should be ready to pray upon all occasions. Thus are they to pray for
themselves; inasmuch as they stand in continual need of God's assistance and
help, either to bestow upon them some good things which they want, or to free
and deliver them from such evils as they feel or fear, they are to pray
Continually. And thus are they to pray for others; especially such as in a
special manner stand charged upon their prayers. Thus did Paul pray for the
Churches* Praying always for you (so he tells his Colossians), Col. 1.3. And
the like his Thessalonians; We give thanks to God always for you all* making
mention of you in my prayers, 1 Thessalonians. 1.2. And the like are Ministers to do
For their People, and People for their Ministers; Parents for their Children,
and Children for their Parents. And so are Subjects to do for their
Sovereigns; they being their Political Fathers, Pa^res patriae, Fathers of
their Country, they are upon all occasions to be mindful of them, praying for
them, and that continually.

And truly great Reason there is why this Tribute should be thus paid unto
them; considering,

First, The great need that they have of it. Reas. 1.
What the Apostle says to his He^rews concerning Patience, Hebr. 10.36. Ye
have need of Patience, may truly be said of Kings and Princes concerning
Prayers; they have need of them, great need; yea, greater need then others. So
they have, and that both in respect of their Persons, and Government.

Persons, they are exposed to greater dangers than others. So they are, and
that both in their Bodies and Souls.

Bodies: Besides those (...), those trials, common to men; Infirmities,
Diseases, Casualties, which they are subject to as well as others, they have
many Enemies. As Paul says it was with him, that he had (...), many
Adversaries, 1 Cor. 16.9. So must they, if they be good Kings and Governors,
make account to meet with many Enemies; some open, others secret; some out of
envy, others out of malice; some envying their greatness, others maligning
their goodness. Upon these accounts, they may have more Enemies then others of
inferior rank. And that so much the more, by how much the better they are:
Being such as are truly virtuous and pious, such as will own God's Religion and
his People, such as will countenance virtue and piety, and discountenance vice
and impiety; now they shall want no Waspes, no E^emies. And those, it may be,
some of them cruel and deadly, who will not only speak evil of them, but be
ready to act all kind of mischief against them. Such was David's Condition,
whom we may hear frequently complaining of his Enemies. Of the multitude of
them, They compassed me about like Bees, Psalm. 118.12. Of the malice of them,
how they hated him without a cause, They that hate me without a Cause, are more
then the hairs of my Head, Psalm. 69.4. Yea, and they hated him with a cruel
hatred, Psalm. 25.19. Not only reproaching him, and speaking evil of him: As
with a sword in my bones, my Enemies reproach me, Psalm. 42. 10. But wishing
evil to him, wishing his Death; Mine Enemies speak evil of me, When shall he
dye, and his Nam^ perish, Psalm. 41.5? And wi^hing it, they designed it, laying
snares for him; They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me, Psalm.
38.12. Attempting his destruction, They that would destroy me, being mine
Enemies wrongfully are mighty, Psalm. 69. 4. And the like, must pious Kings and
Princes look for; being such as David was, men after God's own heart, they will
want no Enemies, nor their Enemies malice. So as, upon this account, their
dangers are more and greater then others: They are so as to their Bodies.

Souls: Being exposed to more and greater Temptations then others. So it is,
high Towers feel more of the Wind and Weather than lower Cottages. And so it is
with men of high Place, they are exposed to more and greater Temptations than
those of lower condition. The Devil never thought he had our Savior at so
great an advantage, as when he had got him upon the Pinnacle of the Temple. And
surely, of all other, none are more exposed to Satan's Temptations, than those
who are set in places of Eminency; High places are slippery places. Thus have
Supreme Governors great need of prayers greater then others, in respect of
their Persons, being subject to more and greater dangers then others, and that
both in their Bodies and Souls.

2. And (secondly) as they have need hereof in respect of their Persons,
Government; which lies as a he^vy weight upon their Shoulder. So the
Government of Christ is said to do upon his, Esaias 9.6. The Government shall be
upon his Shoulder. And so does the Government of Temporal Kings and Prince^,
The Government lies upon their Shoulders. The Shoulder is the ordinary part of
the Body that is used for the bearing of heavy and weighty burden. Leight
burdens are carried in the hand, but we^ghty ones upon the Shoulder: And such
is the Government which is committed to Kings and Princes; though it be an
honorable burden, yet a burden it is, and that a weighty one. So it is, where
the trust which is reposed in them is faithfully discharged: However, some
there are, and that too many, who divide these two which God has joined
together, the Hon^s and the Onus; As for the Honor of Government, with all the
Profits and Revenue^ belonging thereunto, that they greedily grasp; but as for
the burden, that they cast off: Yet so is it not with good and gracious
Sovereigns, their Crowns sit heavy upon their Heads, their Heads and Hearts
being filled and taken up with a constant care, and solicitude for the
procuring of the peace and welfare, tranquillity and happiness of those that
are committed to their Charge. Now their burden being so great, they have need
of a more than ordinary support for the bearing of it. They h^d need to be
furnished with a more than ordi^ary stock of virtues and graces for the
discharge of this their Trust. This our Solomon, the wisest of Kings, was well
aware of: And therefore, when being newly come to his Kingdom, God made him a
proffer, that he should ask what he would have him to give him, he begs nothing
but an understanding heart, 1 King. 3.7, 8, 9. And now, O Lord my God, (says
he) thou have made thy Servant King in stead of David my Father: And I am but a
little Child, (not in respect of years, for he had at this time a Son, as we
find it, Chap. 14.2^. but in respect of that wisdom which was requisite for the
managing so great a Trust as was committed to him), I know not how to go out,
or to come in. And thy Servant is in the midst of thy People, which thou have
chosen, a great People that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude. Give
therefore thy Servant an understanding heart to judge thy People, that I may
disce^n between good and bad; for who is able to judge this thy so great a
People? And this also David his Father was very sensible of: And therefore the
chief thing that he wishes him, is this, Only the Lord give thee Wisdom and
understanding, 2 Chronicles. 22.12. Kingly Government being so great a Charge, it
calls for a large heart, for the right managing of it. Such a heart God is
said to give unto this King Solomon; God gav^ Solomon Wisdom, and understanding
exceeding much, and largeness of heart, 1 King. 4.29. And such hearts in
measure, supreme Governors had need to have: And therefore upon this account
they have need of prayers, of instant and earnest prayers, to be prayed for by
their Sub^ects, and that Continually.

Reas. 2.
And as they have need of prayers in respect of their Persons and Government, so
have Ch^istians need to put up these prayers for them, and that upon their own
account, as needful for themselves. So they have; considering what an interest
they have in their Supreme Governors, and how much their welfare depends upon
them* upon their right managing of their Government. Their welfare (I say), and
that both Temporal and Spiritual; both which have a great dependence upon the
Supreme Governor of a Nation: who if he be wise and faithful, now he is a
great blessing unto his People, so as they are blessed in him. So says David
of this his son Solomon in the verse next but one after the Text, ver. 17. Men
shall be blessed in him. They should count themselves happy in such a King,
expecting all kind of blessings through him; Blessings (as I said) both
Temporal and Spiritual, both which should be the fruit of his Government. So
much David here in this Psalm makes promise of to the People under the
Government of this his son Solomon. He being a righteous Governor, there
should be peace and plenty in his Dominions. So we have it, ver. 3. The
Mountains shall bring peace to the People, and the little Hills by
righteousness. There should be peace under his Government; which accordingly
there was, as we find it, 1 King. 4.25. Judah and Israel dwel^ safely, every
man under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree; from Dan even to Beersheba, all the
days of Solomon. And as Peace, so Plenty; So the sixth verse in this Psalm
promises, He shall come down like rain upon the mowen Grass, as showers that
water the Earth. And again, ver. 16. in the words nex^ after the Text, There
shall be an handful of Corn in the Earth upon the top of the Mountains, the
fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and they of the City shall flourish
like Grass of the Earth. There should be in that Kingdom an exceeding great
plenty of Corn and other Fruits of the Earth, with a great increase both of Men
and Cattle: Thus should his Subjects abound in Temporal; and as in Temporal, so
in Spiritual blessings. True piety and godliness should flourish under his
Government, so the fifth ve^se has it: They shall fear thee as long as the Sun
and Moon endure, throughout all Generations. Fear thee^ that is, Thee O God,
relating to the first verse, Thy Religion shall be settled and established, and
true piety and godliness shall prosper and flourish. In his Days shall the
Righteous flourish (says the seventh verse), and abundance of peace so long
as the Moon endures.

Such are the blessings of a righteous Government: And are not all these worthy
of the prayers of those who live under it? that they should be instant and
earnest with God in the behalf of those whom he has set over them? Upon this
account the Apostle in that Text forecited, 1 Timothy 2.2. exhorts Christians,
not to be wanting in this Duty. Pray for Kings, etc. That we may lead a quiet
and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. These are the chief
blessings that Christians are to desire, or indeed can desire upon Earth; that
they may live a quiet and peaceable life, as to Temporals; and that they may
live in all Godliness and Honesty, as to Spirituals. Now these are no where to
be enjoyed so well, as under a just and righteous Government. And therefore it
behooves them who would have their share in these blessings, to cast this
Tribute into the common Treasury, to contribute their prayers and
supplications, seeking God in the behalf of their Governors, that God would
protect them, direct them, assist them, giving his Judgments to them, that so
they may rule his People in his fear.

Thus you see what Reasons there are why Christians should readily and
willingly pay this Tribute to those whom God has set over them; why they
should pray as for all in Authority, so in a special manner for those who are
Supreme, which Kings are within their Dominions (as St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet.
2.13). Not to dwell any longer upon the Doctrinal part; That which remains of
thi^ is Application: which let it be directed only two ways, by way of
Reprehension, Exhortation.

Use 1.
By way of Reprehension: Is this a D^ty which God expects and requires, that
Subjects should thus pray for their Sovereigns; what shall we then say to
those, who instead of praying for them, pray against them, and it may be seek
to make a prey of them. Amongst which there are some that are averse to the
Calling to the Office, wishing that there were no such thing as a King upon
Earth. Such spirits there have been of late times, who in a direct opposition
to the People of Israel, whom no Governor would content but a King, they have
at least seemed averse to Monarchical Government, as being inconsistent with
the Government of Christ, insomuch that they would by no means endure that the
Supreme Government of this Nation should be in a single Person. A King! the
very Title was odious unto them: which whilst it was, surely they had fo^gotten
that Promise which informs us and them, what benefit the Church may expect from
Kings in the latter daye^, Esaias 49.23. Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and
Queens thy Nursing Mothers. As also that Prophecy which acquaint^ us, how the
Ten Kings (at least some of them) should hate the Whore, and make her desolate;
be the chief Instruments in the destruction of Antichrist, Rev. 17.16.

Others, though not averse to the Calling; yet it may be they are so to the
Persons in whose hands the Government is, hating and maligning them, though
without any just cause, as David says his Enemies did him, Psalm. 35.19. And
being thu^ disaffected t^ them, in stead of wishing well, they are ready ^o
wish ill to them: They tu^n their Apprecations into Imprecations. In stead of
praying for them, they are ready to curse them, as that dead Dog Shimei did
David, for which Abishai judged him worthy to dye, Because he cursed the Lord's
Anointed, 2 Samuel 19.21. A thing which our King Solomon, the wisest of Kings,
gives a Caution against, bidding all to beware of it, Curse not the King, no
not in thy thought, Eccles. 10. ult.

Sov^raigns, so as they think themselves, and would have others so to think of
them, to be in the number of their best Subjects; yet they make no conscience
of paying this Tribute to them. Other Tribute happily they are willing and ready
to pay (which I wish all were); I, it may be that which is not called for* even
as it is said of the Kings of the East, that they should do unto King Solomon,
ver. 10. The Kings of Tars^ish, and of the Isles shall bring Presents, the Kings
of Sheba and Seba shall over Gifts. So will they, it may be, be ready upon
occasion to show like respects to their Sovereign, presenting him with Gifts,
thereby, as by other ways, to declare their affections. But, in the mean time,
Where are their Prayers? their hearty and affectionate prayers unto God for
him, which are more worth then all other Gifts they can present him with. And
are there not some others (too many), who think there is no such way to declare
their affection to their Sovereign, as by drinking and Carouzing of Healths to
him, drinking by measure without measure? Which however they cannot but take
notice how disrelishing a Sacrifice it is unto him to whom it is offered (which
he has sufficiently declared to them and to the World); yet will they obtrude
and thrust it upon him. Here are their Healths; but in the mean time where are
their Prayers? their serious and affectionate requests put up unto God on his
behalf? Possibly they will, when they hear a form of prayer read for him in
public, be ready to say Amen to it. But when was the time, or where is the
place that ever they fell upon their knees in private to seek God for him?
Alas, very far are they from doing what David here says his Son Solomon's good
Subjects should do unto him; Pray for him, and that Continually. In truth they
cannot be said to pray for him at all; Prayer being an exercise which they have
no acquaintance with, save only the outside of it. But turn we the Reprehension
into a word of Exhortation.

Which let it be directed to all of us who would be accounted loyal and
faithful Subjects; see that we be not wanting in this Duty, Use 2.
in paying of this Tribute to our now dread Sovereign King Charles the Second,
whom God by his Providence and Ordinance has set over us, restoring him in a
wonderful way to his just Right of Government in and over this and the
Neighbour-Nations. Withold we not this due from him, Render therefore to all
their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute (faith the Apostle), Romans 13.7. Being
rightful Governors, the Tribute which is by Law due unto them, is not to be
withheld from them, but to be paid in a conscientious way. And so let this
best of Tributes, this Tribute of Prayer be paid by us, by all of us unto our
Sovereign: Let prayer be made for him, and that Continually.

Arg. 1.
Which as it is his due, so it is a Service acceptable unto God. So much our
Apostle tells us in that Text which I have before had recourse unto, 1 Timothy
2.3. where having put Christians upon this duty of praying, in a general way
for all men (all sorts of men), and in a special way for Kings, and such as are
in Authority, he subjoyns, For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God.
(...), good in it self, and to God well-pleasing. Now such are the things which
Christians are to set themselves to do, such things as are well-pleasing in his
sight (a^ St. John has it), 1 Ioh. 3.22. So as were there no other Argument
but this, this alone should be sufficient to put Christians upon this Duty.

Arg. 2.
But besides this, consider (what has in the general been shown us) the need
which he to whom this Tribute is to be paid, has of it; what need our dread
Sovereign has of Prayers. Which he has, and that not only upon those general
accounts of his Person and Government, which are common with him to all other
Princes, but in respect of his present Condition, and the condition of the
Nations over which he is set; which having lien for so long a time under such
sad Distractions as they have done, he who is to be under God the chief
Physician, the chief Instrument for the healing of them, had need of a more
then ordinary direction and assistance in this so great and difficult a Work.

Arg. 3.
To this add, As our Prayers are needful for him, so they will be profitable
unto us. Water being powered at the Root, the Branches receive the benefit of
it: Oil being in a good quantity powered out upon the Head, it runs down, not
only to the Beard, but to the Skirts of the Garment, (as it is said of Aaron,
Psalm. 133.2.) And the Dew or Rain falling upon the Mountains, makes the
Valleys fruitful (as it there follows). Thus the blessings of Heaven being
powered out upon the Supreme Head of a Nation; there is not the meanest member
of it, but may be the better for it. And upon this account may Subjects well be
induced to pray for their Sovereigns, what ever they be: upon this account the
Lord wills his People, the People of the Jews, to pray for Babylon; Jer.
29.7. Pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof ye shall have peace.
So it was; their welfare, whilst they had their residence there, was inwrapped
in the quiet and welfare of that State, as the safety of Passenger^ is in the
Vessel wherein they are embarked. And even so is the welfare of Subjects in a
great measure inwrapped and bound up in the welfare of their Sovereigns; as the
safety of Passenger^ is in the skill and care of the Pilot that stands at the
Helm. And upon this account let not those who wish well to themselves, cease to
make prayers on their behalf, but pray for them continually.

And this do we for our dread Sovereign this day, being the day of his Solemn
Inauguration; At which time, and upon which occasion, prayers have been used to
be made. So we find it both ordered and practiced at the Coronation of this
King spoken of in the Text, King Solomon, 1. King. 1. Where David appointing
this his Son to be anointed King over-Israel by Zadok the Priest, and Nathan
the Prophet; he orders, that for the greater Solemnity, the Trumpet should be
blown, and that all should say, God save the King, ver. 34. which was
accordingly done, as we find it, ver. 39. And Zadok the Priest took a horn of
Oil out of the Tabernacle, and anointed Solomon; and they blew the Trumpet, and
all the People said, God save King Solomon. And the like let all the People in
this Nation at this day do; not only those who are present at this Solemnity,
but those who are at a distance from it: Taking notice of it let them, and us,
all join in this Appr^^ation, and say, God save King Charles the Second.

And this do we not merely in a formal way and manner, (as the Acclamation^ of
the People too often are, being nothing but the br^ath of their mouths); but do
it seriously and cordially, in an affectionate way, heartily begging for him
the Lords Salvation, that God would direct him in the business of the day, and
make it a happy day to him, and to this Nation.

And this, do we not this day only* Let not our prayers be (as the prayers of
^oo many are) an (...)* the service of a day, but pray we for him continually.
(...), (as Paul there has it, Ephesians. 6.18.) Omni tempore, at all times and
seasons, in public, in private* as we have occasion to make our solemn
addresses unto God, le^ him be remembered.

The best Servic^ that we can do for him, the best Tribute that we can pay unto
him. This is all that Paul beggeth of the Churches in his own behalf, Brethren,
pray for u^* 1 Thessalonians. 5.2^. and a These. ^.1. And again (if that Epistle be
his), Heb^. 13.18. Pray for u^. Where this Tribute is duly paid, other Trib^^^
wilt no^ b^ with holde^. The praying Christian is consciencio^^, and so will
not with h^ld from any man that which is his d^e; which if he should, he cannot
expect that his prayers should be heard.

And this is a Tribute that all may pay: They who have no other Presents to
bring to their Prince, no Gold of Ophir or S^eba, to present him with (which is
here said to be given to King Solomon); yet they may have this Frankincense and
Mirrh, the sweet Odors of their prayers to put up unto God on his behalf. Now
such as they have, let them give; as Peter said to that poor Cripple, lying at
the beautiful Gate of the Temple, begging an Alms of him, Acts 3.6. Silver and
Gold have I none, but such as I have I give thee; a better gift then that which
thou desire, viz. that which Christ has given me power freely to distribute,
the restoring of thy Limbs. And the like let all God's People do to their
Sovereign; such as have not the opportunity or ability of doing service to him
in other ways; such as they have, let them give. Having a praying spirit given
them of God, let them make use of it in his behalf.

Quest.
But what is it that we are to pray for on his behalf?

Answ.
For resolution, I might send you to that ancient Father Tertullian, who in that
place forementioned gives us an account of what things they were that the
Christians in his time were wont in their prayers to beg for their Sovereigns.
Oramus pro omnibus Imperatoribus, We pray for all Emperors, that God would
give them, Vitam prolixam, a long life, Imperium securum, a secure Empire,
Domum tutam, a safe Habitation, Exercitus fortes, valiant Armies, Senatum
fidelem, a faithful Counsel, Populum probum, a good People, Orbem quietum, a
quiet World, and quaecunque Hominis, and Caesaris vota sunt, and what ever good
things Caesar himself, or any other can wish. And all these let us beg for this
our dread Sovereign, that God would bless him with all kinds of Blessings,
blessings of his right hand and left, blessings Spiritual and Temporal.

Spiritual, that God would write all his Laws in his heart, giving him his
Judgments; which is David's prayer for his son Solomon, verse first of this
Psalm; Give the King thy Judgments, O God, and thy Righteousness to the Kings
Son. That so he may be such a King as the Lord makes promise of unto his
People, Esaias. 32.1. Behold, a King shall R^ign in Righteousness, and Princes
shall Rule in Judgment. That God would give him an upright, a perfect heart;
such a heart as King Hezekiah had, that so he may walk before him, as he did;
and be able at the finishing his course to appeal unto him, as he does, Esaias
38.3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart* and have done that which is good in thy sight.
And as an upright, so a wise and a large heart. Such a heart God gave unto this
King Solomon (as you heard), 1 King. 4.29. And this was the chief blessing that
his Father David begged for him, 1 Chronicles. 22. 12. Only the Lord give thee
wisdom and understanding, and give thee Charge concerning Israel, that thou
may keep the Law of the Lord thy God. And that he in whose hand the hearts
of Kings are, (The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of
Water; ^e turns it whithersoever he will, as Solomon tells us, Prove. 21.1.)
would hold the heart of this his anointed Servant in his own hand, making use
of him as an happy Instrument, as in other Services, so in building his House.
This David there beggeth for, and of, his son Solomon, in the verse foregoing,
1 Chronicles. 22.11. Now my Son, the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou, and build
the House of the Lord thy God. Oh that the Lord's Anointed amongst us may do
the like! Thus beg we for him these right hand blessings, spiritual blessings:
And this do we in the first place.

Then do we the like for left hand, Temporal blessings: That God would bless
him in his Person and Government.

In his Person, multiplying his Days: Pray for the life of the King (as that
Text forecited has it), Ezra 6.10. Let the King live forever (says Nehemiah
to Artaxerxes), Neh. 2.3. And Daniel to Darius, Dan. 6.21. Thou will prolong
the Kings life, and his years as many Generations, Psalm. 61.6.

In his Government: that that may be peaceable and happy; that God would
perform unto him what he promised to David, Psalm. 132.18. His Enemies will I
clothe with shame, but upon himself shall his Crown flourish. As also that, in
the verse foregoing; I will make the Horn of David to bud; I have ordained a
Lamp for mine anointed, a Successor that should come out of his Loins. And that
his Government may be prosperous to himself and others, beyond what the best of
his Predecessors have been. This was the prayer of B^naiah, which he made in
the behalf of King Solomon at his Coronation, 1 King. 1.37. As the Lord has
been with my Lord the King, even so be he with Solomon, and make his Throne
great^^ then the Throne of my Lord King David. Wherein he was second^d by
Solomon's Servants, ver. 47. who coming to David, after his Son Solomon was
anointed King, they said unto him, God make the Name of Solomon better then thy
Name, and make his Throne greater then thy Throne. To which David was ready to
say Amen, declaring his assent, by bowing himself upon the Bed. These and all
other blessings, which may be any ways requisite or expedient, let us beg in
the behalf of our dread Sovereign; that he being thus blessed, and we blessed
in him, may have cause to bless him.

Tribute which David here in the Text says should be paid unto his Son
Solomon: His Subjects thus praying for him, they should also praise him; and so
praise him, as they prayed for him, Continually,

And daily shall he praised.] ^olha^om jebar^keneh^* Tota ( or omni) die
benedicet ei. All the day long, or every day, his own People and others, should
speak well of him, bless him. All Nations shall call him blessed, ver. 17.

So did diverse ^orraign Nations, whose Kings having he^rd of his Fame, ^ame to
see him, bringing Presents unto him. So it is here foretold of some of them,
ver. 10. of this Psalm; The Kings of T^rshish, and all the Isles shall bring
Presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer Gifts; Yea, all Kings shall
fall down before him. And accordingly we find it verified in that illustrious
Princess, the Queen of Sheba; who hearing of his Wisdom, came from her own
Country to see him, and have some conference with him. Which having had, she
departed fully satisfied, finding the reality of his worth far exceeding the
report; which at her departure she acknowledged, as we find it, 1 King. 10.6,
etc. And she said unto the King, It was a true report that I heard in mine own
Land of thy Acts, and of thy Wisdom. Howbeit, I believed not the words until I
came; and mine Eyes have seen it, and behold, the half was not told m^; thy
wisdom and prosperity exceeds the Fame which I heard* Blessed be the Lord thy
God which delights in thee, to set thee on the Throne of Israel; because the
Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thee King to do Justice and
Judgment. And she gave the King an hundred and twenty Talents of Gold, and
Spices* very great sto^^, and precious Stones. Thus was he honored, praised,
and blessed of others.

And so he was of his own Subjects, who being (as I said) blessed in him,
blessed him. Even as he, speaking of good Wife, who is wise and careful in
ordering the business of her Family, says, Her Children rise up, and call her
blessed; her Husband also, and he praises her, Prove. 3^.28. So did his
Subjects unto him, feeling the benefit of his wife and righteous Government;
they called him blessed, daily praising of him. Thus was this Tribute paid
unto him.

And so let it be by us to our Royal Sovereign. And that upon a double account;
the Virtues which are eminent in him, and the Benefits which we have received
from him: His virtues, which are truly praiseworthy. Such is the Patience*
which he has shown in bearing of so many, so great, so long continued
Sufferings, as during his so many years exile he has had experience of. And
such is his Constan^y in adhearing to God's true Religion. Notwithstanding his
case was much like unto David's, who complaining unto King Saul of his hard
Usage from his malicious Enemies, says, They have driven me out this day from
abiding in the Inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other gods, 1 Samuel
26.19. Being by their means driven and kept out of his own Land, where he
enjoyed the Ordinances of God freely, he was forced to wander from place to
place, from Country to Country, to have his abode in Idolatrous Nations; By
which doing of theirs, they did as much in them lay, force and compel him to
turn Idolater. And even such has been the condition of this our dread
Sovereign, and that for many years together; yet, through the good providence
of God watching over him, he has continued constant to his Religion, as David
did. To these add his Sobriety and Temperance, wherein he is exemplary to his
Subjects, setting a Copy for them to write after. As also his Moderation and
Meekness, which he has declared by granting such indulgence to consciences
truly tender, which he would not have pressed under the burden of offensive and
unnecessary observances; as by desiring and endeavoring an accommodation of
differences* that there might be (as to matters of lesser concernment) a
Christian compliance amongst persons of different persuasions. To which, ann^x
his Lenity and Gentleness, in not taking all just advantages against all such
as by whom he has unjustly suffered. To all which, add the Zeal which he has
shown against those Epidemical Sins of Swearing and Drunkenness, which through
too much indulgence have been sorife in this Nation. These, and other the like
Virtues, they call for this Tribute to be paid unto him. And so do all those
blessings and benefits, which since his return we enjoyed under his Government:
For which let him, under God, be prais^d.

And oh that the Lord may so bless him for the future, that he may yet be made
a greater blessing unto his People in this and the Neighbour-Nations; that they
sitting quietly under his shadow, may enjoy the Gospel of peace, and the peace
of the Gospel, havi^^ all the Ordinances of God continued to them with Liberty
and Purity. That so they, being blessed in him, may bless God for him; giving
unto God as the Author, and to him as the Instrument, the praise and honor
which is due unto both. But I want time to prosecu^e what I have only
propounded: And so shall take leave of the Literal sense of the words in the
Text, as relating to King Solomon. It remains that I should look upon them in
their Mystical sense, as relating to King Jesus, of whom Solomon was a Type.
But this I shall adjourn to the next Occasion.

The Second SERMON, April 28, 1661.
PSALM. 72.15. Prayer also shall be made for him continually, and daily shall he
be praised.


THese words (as you lately heard) may be looked upon two ways, Literally and
Mystically. Literally, as relating to King Solomon; Mystically as relating to
King Jesus. With the former of these I have done. It now remains that I come to
the latter, to look upon the words as relating unto Christ; of whom King
Solomon was a Type.

That he was so, I presume it will not be questioned by any who understand the
meaning of his Name. Solomon, Pacifious, Peaceable* So we find it expounded, 1 Chronicles. 22.9. where the Lord gives unto David the reason of imposing this Name
upon this his Son: Behold (says he) a Son shall b^ born unto thee, who shall
be a man of rest* and I will give him rest from all his Enemies round about:
For his Name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness unto Israel
in his days. Such a Prince was he; a Prince of peace, of a peaceable
disposition, and under whose Government the Land had peace. And herein was he a
Type of Christ, whom we find described to be such a Prince, having this Name
given unto him, Esaias 9.6. His Name shall be called, The Prince of Peace; Shir
Shalom, the mystical Solomon. To which we may join that other name which was
given unto Solomon, and that also by God himself; Who sending by the hand of
Nathan the Prophet, called his name Iedidiah, that is, beloved of the Lord, as
we have it, 2 Samuel 12.24, 23. Which Name, how fitly it agrees unto Christ, we
may learn from that Voice from Heaven, which was heard at his Baptism; saying,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3.17. This is Ies^s
Christ the true Solomon.

And being so* well may this Psalm (as the 45th, being much of the some ^^ture
an^ kind, without co^^roversy h^^h) be conceived to have an ^ye at him. So it
is agreed by all Ch^istian ^xpositors* Howev^r, some of them have made it a
Question, whether it have an eye at Solomon at all, there being in it many
expressions so highly Hyperbolical, as that they cannot conceive how they
should agree to him, or any Mortal man whatever; yea, diverse of those whom we
account to be the best Interpreters, by their manner of Interpretation
(applying it only to Christ), may seem to have thought little less: yet that
it has a respect unto Christ, and chiefly unto Him, it is on all hands agreed.

And so shall I look upon this passage in it, which I have now in hand. Which
acquaints us with a twofold Tribute due (as unto Solomon, so) unto Christ:
Prayer and Praise* Prayer, [Prayer also shall be m^de for him continually.]
Praise. [And daily shall he be praised.] Be^in we with the former.

Prayer also shall be made for him continually]. Wherein again (as before I
did), I shall take notice of those two particulars: The Tribute it self,
Prayer; And the Time, when and how often it is to be paid, Continually* Touch
upon them severally.

Tribute it self, Prayer. [Prayer also shall be made for him.]

Object.
But what? Prayer made for him, for Christ? How can this be? What, does he stand
in n^ed of our Prayers? that men upon Earth should make prayers for him being
in Heaven? Here the Iew^ fall foul upon us Christians, and jear us, tha^ we
should expound this Psalm concerning our M^ssia; who if he be (what we believe
him) God, how then can this passage agre^ unto him, that prayers should be made
for him? What, pray for our God? Prayers are to be put ^p to him, not for him.

For answer to this: True it is, as it is with Saints and Angels, Answ.
so much more with Jesus Christ, he being ascended into Heaven, and sitting at
the right hand of his Father, Crowned with Honor and Glory, having all Power
given to him in Heaven and Earth; He is far from needing the assistance of men,
or any other Creature^. He needs not our prayers; we have need, and that
continual need, of his, of his Intercession, which he makes for us (as the
Apostle tells us), Romans 8.34. But he has no need of ours, no more then the
greatest Monarch upon Earth has to receive an Alms from the poorest Peasant.
But though he has no need of them, as to his own person; yet his Kingdom has,
his Church, which is as it were a part of himself, his Body* whereof he is the
Head. He is the Head of the Body, the Church, Col. 1.18. his Mystical Body.
Which in re^ard of the near relation it has to him, is called sometimes by his
N^^e; as 1 Cor. 12.12. As the Body is one, and has many members, etc. So is
Christ. And again, Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham, and to his Seed were the promises
made, etc. which Seed is Christ; meaning the Mystical Body of the Church,
whereof Christ is the Head, and his Elect People the Members. Now though he
being the Head, is out of the reach of our prayers, so as that they should be
made for him: yet so are not his Members here upon Earth. And upon that account
prayers may fitly be said to be made for him, being made for his Kingdom.

For which all hi^ Subjects are to pray: So they are taught by Him himself in
that Pattern and Form of prayer which he has left them* After this manner pray
ye, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, Matthew. 6.10. The Kingdom of God,
the Government whereof is committed to Jesus Christ as Mediator; this are his
Subjects to pray for. His Kingdom, his Kingdom of Grace, his Kingdom of Glory;
which are not properly two Kingdoms, but two different states of the same
Kingdom: And for both these are prayers to be made.

1. For his Kingdom of Grace, his Church upon Earth* which is visible,
invisible. Visible in the Nations of the World; Invisible in the hearts of his
Elect People: Both these are Christians to pray for.

1. For his visible Kingdom; for which they are chiefly to ^eg two things,
Preservation, Augmentation, both which are to be effected by the Power of
Christ.

1. Preservation, that it may be continued here upon Earth; which it shall be
to the end of the Wo^ld, being defended and maintained by the power of Jesus
Christ against all the Enemies of it, whether Men or Devils. So he tell^ Pe^er
in that known Text, Matthew. 16.18. [ Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.] Upon this
Rock, not the rock Confessing, but Confessed; not upon Peter, but upon that
Confession which he had then made, ver. 16. Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God, upon this Rock (^aith he) I will build my Church; as I have already
laid the foundation of it, so will I ^arry on the building, upholding and
preserving it, so as the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against i^; that is,
all the power and policy of Satan and his Instruments, (alluding to the custom
of ancient times, w^^rein the Gates of Cities were the chief places of
strength, and the ^^sual meeting places for the holding of Councels), let them
plot, and contrive, and attempt what they will; yet shall they not so far
prevail against the Church as to destroy it, to extirpate and root it out from
off the Earth: still Christ will have a visible Kingdom here upon Earth. And
for this are all his Subjects ^o pray, that this his Kingdom may be thus
continued. Which whilst they do, they may be said to make prayers for him.

2. And a^ they are to pray for the Preservation, so for the Augmentation; as
for the continuance, so for the increase and inlargment of this Kingdom of
Christ, that his Kingdom may come, that his S^^pter may be lifted up, his
Government advanced, his Church enlarged, that it may be made a glorious
Church. So it shall be in the latter days: For which we have many promises,
and those very clear and full. As (among other) that of the Prophet Esaias, Chap.
2. ver. 2, 3. (repeated by the Prophet Micah in the same terms, M^e. 4.1.) It
shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords House
shall be established in the top of the Mountains; and shall be exalted above
the Hills, and ^ll Nations shall flow unto it. [In the last Dayes], in the
Gospel Times, the days of the Messiah, the last Age of the World; [ The
Mountain of the Lords House], the Church, whereof Moun^ Sion, upon which the
Temple was built, was a Type; [ Shall be established in the top of the
Mountains, and exalted above the Hills]* it shall be settled and exalted, being
in the spiritual glory of it advanced far above all secular States and Kingdoms
in the World. [ And all Nations shall flow unto it]* ^^ws and Gentiles out of
all parts of the World shall by whole Flocks and Sho^ls come in and join
themselves to the Church* embraci^g of the Gospel, and submitting themselves to
the Government of Christ. And (as it there follows, ver. 3. M^^y People shall
go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord* to the House
of the God of Iac^b, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
path^.

This shall the People of the Jews do, as (among many other) that Text of the
Prophet Hosea clearly fore-telleth it, Hos 3.4. The Children of Israel shall
abide many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice,
etc. (having neither any form of a Commonwealth amongst them, nor yet the
exe^cise of their Religion in that way and manner that formerly they had.)
Afterward^ they shall return and seek the Lord their God, and David their King;
the true Messiah, the son of David, according to the Flesh, and of whom David
was a Type. They shall seek after him and shall submit to his Government,
taking and ^^knowledging him for their King. They shall se^ve the Lord the^r
God* and David their King (as the Prophet Jeremy has i^), I^r. 30. v^r. 9. And
as the Jews* so the Gentiles; they shall also come in like manner. So the
Prophet Esaias most plainly fore-telleth it, Esaias 60. where setting forth the
glory of the Church under the Gosspel in the abundan^ access of the Gentiles,
he bidd^th her arise* v^r. 1. [ Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the
glory of the Lord i^ risen upon th^^. And ver. 3, 4. he tells her* And the
Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the brightness of thy coming. ^
Lift up thine E^es round about and s^e, all they gather themselves together,
they come to thee. And so he goes on, ver. 9. Then thou shall se^, and fl^w
tog^th^^* and thine heart shall fear and be enlarged* bec^^se the (...) of the
Sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto
thee.] Such and so great should the confluence of People from all par^s of the
World be that should join themselves to the Church, that it should be a matter
of great admiration and wonder to them that should behold it. So he sets it
forth, ver. 8. where ^e bring in the Church speaking after that manner* Who are
these tha^ fly as a Cloud, (...) as the Do^e^ to their Windows? Like as Clouds,
which come oft-times from ^emote quarters, ^eing driven swiftly by the Wind or,
as D^v^s or Pigeons* that fly in great Flocks, and with much speed to their
Dove-coa^^* such incomes should there be to the Church, which should be
wonderfully augmented and increased. A prophecy which as yet has not had the
full accomplishment, so as it shall have in the time appointed. There is a day
a coming when the Scepter of Christ shall be advanced: In that day shall the
Branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious; so says the Prophet Esaias, Chap.
4. ver. 2. speaking of the Messiah, whom we find sometimes called a Branch, the
Branch, as Zach. 3.8. I will bring forth my Servant the Branch. And again,
Chap. 6. ver. 12. Behold the man, whose Name is the Branch; meaning the
promised Messiah, springing from the root of Iesse, and from whom all spiritual
Graces and Blessings do spring, as leaves, and blossoms, and fruits do from the
Branch. Of this Branch it is there said, it shall be beautiful and glorious.
And so it shall be in that day, viz. when the Church shall be increased and
enlarged as it shall be, all Nations being brought under the Government of
Jesus Christ. Hereof God the Father makes a Promise to his Son, Psalm. 2.8. Ask
of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thi^e Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession; Not only the Jews, but the
Gentiles also. And this promise (as already in part it is, so) it shall be
fully made good to him in the latter days, viz. after the destruction of
Antichrist. So we find it foretold, Rev. 11.15. where we read of a gratulatory
Acclamation made by the People of God at that great alteration and change that
should be made in the Church. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were
great Voices in Heaven, saying; The Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever.
The Roman Antichrist being destroyed, now the Kingdom of Christ shall be
enlarged; his visible Church shall be like an Empire, spreading through the
World, and lasting to the end of it.

Thus it shall be, the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth shall be a glorious
Kingdom, his Church shall be settled and established, and it shall prosper and
flourish, it shall be made a praise in the Earth. And for this are all that
profess themselves the Subjects of Christ to pray. So they are called upon by
the Prophet Esaias, Chap. 62. ver. 67. Ye that mak^ mention of the Lord keep not
silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the Eart^.

And this whilst they do, they may truly be said to make prayers for Jesus
Christ, whose Body this is, and whose Glory is so much concerned in it. The
Church's Exaltation is his Exaltation: Behold my Servant (says the Lord,
speaking of the Messiah, his Son Christ, whom he calls his Servant (...), in
regard of that great Service which he was to do in working of the Redemption
and Salvation of his Elect People,) shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted,
and extolled, and be very High, Esaias 52.13. So he is already in his Person,
being set at the right hand of God his Father in the heavenly places, Far abov^
all Principality and Power, and Might and Dominion, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. And so he
shall be in his Kingdom, his Church, which he governing with so much prudence
and wisdom as he does, and shall do, it shall be exalted, and He exalted in its
Exaltation.

Thus is God said to be exalted and lifted up, by doing great things for his
Church and People against his and their Enemies. So the Prophet Esaias has it,
Esaias 33. The Lord is exalted, for He dwells on High, He has filled Zion with
Judgment and Righteousness. And again, ver. 10. Now will I arise (says the
Lord), now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my self. So he is said to be,
when he manifests his Power and Goodness in showing any special favor to his
Church and People, and executing any signal Judgments upon his and their
Enemies. Now his Name is exalted, as the same Prophet has it, Esaias 12.4. where
exciting the People to bless God for his great mercies to his Church, In that
day (says he) shall ye say, Praise the Lord, ca^^ upon his Name, declare his
doings among the People, make mention that his Name is exalted. And thus is the
Name of Christ exalted in the great things which he does for his Church; this
being a manifestation of his Sovereignty, he is thereby honored and glorified.
And upon this account are his Subjects to pray for him; which we find the
Psalmist doing, Psalm. 18.46. The Lord lives, and blessed be my Rock, and let
the God of my Salvation be exalted.

2. And as they are thus to pray for his visible Kingdom, ^o for his Invisible,
his Spiritual Kingdom, which is not outwardly visible to the Eye; but is set up
in the hearts of men. So our Savior tells the Pharisees, Luke 17.20. where
they demanding of him, When the Kingdom of God should come; He answered them,
and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation. (...) (...), with
outward pomp and show, It^^ut observari possit, so as the glory of it may be
discerned by every vulgar Eye, as it is with secular Kingdoms. But it is inward
and spiritual, set up in the hearts of men. So it follows in the next verse,
Neither shall they say, ^oe her^, or ^oe there* for behold the Kingdom of God
is within you. (...), Not only among you, (as it is where the Gospel is
preached, which is the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom), but within you, in the
hearts of the Faithful. There does Christ set up his Scepter, ^uling and
governing by his Word and Spirit. Now upon this account again are all his
Subjects to make prayers for him; that his Kingdom may thus come, and that both
to themselves and others.

1. To themselves, that Christ may enter and take a full possession of their
hearts. These are the Gates, those everlasting Doors, which the Psalmist
calls upon to lift up their heads, that the King of Glory may enter in, Psalm.
24.7, 9. which however it may be understood literally of the Gates of the
Temple, and metaphorically of the Gates of Heav^n, which were set open to
receive Christ at his Ascension thither; yet may it mystically be applied to
the hearts of men, who being the Temple of God, (as Believers are called, 1
Cor. 3.16.) their hearts are as Gates and Doors to let Christ in to their
Souls. And these Gates are they to lift up and set open, earnestly desiring
that Christ may enter, and take up his dwelling there, ruling and reigning
there till ^he has put all his Enemies under his Feet, that so they may have a
more sweet and full Communion with this their Lord and Savior.

2. And as they are to do this for themselves, so for others. For this cause
Paul tells his Ephes^^ns, that he bowed his knees to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ on their behalf, That he would grant unto you (says he) according
to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith. And this are
Christians to beg for their Brethren as the cho^sest mercy, that the Kingdom of
Christ may thus come unto them, that his Sc^pter may be set up in their hearts,
that so they may become his true Loyal and Obedient Subjects. The number
whereof being increased and multiplied, it will tend much to the honor of this
their King. So Solomon tells us it does to a Temporal Prince; In the ^^ltitude
of the People, i^ the Kings honor, Prove. 14.28. And so it does to this our
Spiritual Sovereign. And upon that account it is to be prayed for on his
behalf: Thus are the Subjects of Christ to pray for him, that hi^ Kingdom of
Grace may come.

2. And as his Kingdom of Grace, so of Glory; that he may come The Son of man
shall come in the Glory of his Father with his Angels, (so he himself tells his
Disciples)* Matthew. 16.27. Come like a glorious King. So he shall do at the las^
and great day, Then shall he come in the Clouds of Heaven with Power and great
Glory (as we have it), Matthew. 24.30. And this coming of his, as it shall be
glorious to himself, the glorious appearing of the great God, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ, (as the Apostle calls it, Tit. 2.13.) a full
manifestation of his transcendent Glory, so shall it be joyous to his Subjects,
who are bid then to look up, and lift up their heads, ( viz* those who shall be
alive at tha^ his coming), Luke 21.28. When these things begin to come to pass,
(viz. when they should see the signs of his coming there spoken of) then look
up, and lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws nig^; Your full and
perfect Redemption, when you shall be for ever freed and delivered out of the
hands of all your Enemies, and have a full enjoy^ent of all those blessings
which I have purchased and prepared for you. Then Christ being glorious in
himself, he shall be glorified in his Saints. So the Apostle sets it forth* 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 10. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his
mighty Angels, etc. He shall then come to be glorified in his Sain^s, and to be
admired in all them that believe. So he shall be, when manifesting the fullness
of his Glory unto them, he shall make them partakers of the same glory with
himself. Such shall that his Coming be.

And for this all his Subjects do, or ought to wait. So Paul says his
believing Corinthians did, 1 Cor. 1.7. Ye come behind in no Gift, waiting for
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. (...) (says the Original), the
Revelation, meaning his second coming, when his Glory should be fully
manifested to them, and to the World. And the like he says of his
Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Being turned from Idols to serve the true and
living God, they waited for his Son from Heaven. Which he prays for them, that
they might still do, and that with Patience, 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. And the Lord direct
your hearts into the Love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ.

And whilst they thus wait for it; they are also to wish it, to pray for it.
So the Spirit and the Bride are said to do, Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the
Bride say, Come. The Church, which is Christ's Bride, by the motion of the
Spirit working such a desire in the hearts of true Believers, earnestly*
wishes and prays for the coming of Christ. And this are all that hear of it
to do; And let him that hears say, Come. So did John himself, who having
received from Christ an intimation and assurance of his Coming, that he would
come, and that quickly, he says Amen to it, closing up this Book of his with
this affectionate Apprecation; He which testifies these things, says, Surely
I come quickly; Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. Thus are the Subjects of
Christ's Kindom to make prayers for him.

Continually. There is the second particular: of which but a word, time not
giving way for inlargements, my purpose being to finish the Text at present.

And great Reason there is why they should do so; why the^ should pray for him
Continually.

Reas.
1. This does He for them, being a continual Intercessor on their behalf, He
ever lives to make Intercession for them, Hebr. 7.25.

2. They have need thus to pray for him upon their own account, that he who
has begun to take up his lodging in their Souls, may continue to dwell there;
That as he has begun the good work in them, so he may go on to perform and
perfect it till his appearing.

3. Again they have need so to do upon the Churches account, which being beset
with so many and great Enemies, who are continually at work, being unwearied in
their endeavors for the damage and prejudice of it, and of all the true
members thereof, (your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about,
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8; and so do his Instr^ments), it has
need of a continual Guard to pro^ect and defend it. But leaving the Doctrinal
part, I shall pass to Application: which I shall direct (as before) only two
ways, by way of Reprehension, Exhortation: I shall be brief in both.

Use 1.
Is this a Tribute which is due unto this King, how is it then that it is
withheld from him? Which it is not only,

1. By h^s open and professed Enemies, who will not own and acknowledge his
Sovereignty. Such were the Jews, We have no King but Caesar (say the chief
Priests unto Pilate), Ioh. 19.15. And the rest of the People, being of the same
mind; in stead of praying for him, they pray against him: They cried out, Away
with him, away with him, Crucify him, (as the former part of that verse has
it). And as it was with the Jews, so was it then, and at this day is with many,
the greatest part of the Gentiles, with whom we find the Psalmist contesting
about this their Rebellion, Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3. Why do the Heathen rage, and the
People imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed;
saying, Let us break their bonds as^nder, and cast away their Cords from us.
Thus was David opposed by his Enemies, both before his coming to the Crown, and
after. And thus i^ the Lord Jesus (of whom David was a Type,) opposed; the
gr^atest part of the World being Enemies to him, and to his Kingdom, the
destruction whereof they desire and endeavor. But leaving them,

2. Are there not some, and too many, who go for his Subjects, guilty of the
like disloyalty? Such as have taken the Name of Christ upon them, professing
themselves to be Christians, yet are they far from praying for this their
Sovereign, as they ought to do. It may be they say, and that as often as any
other, Thy Kingdom come, but they mean it not, they do not unfeignedly desire
it* which if they did, they would not oppose his Government as they do. His
out^ard Government in his Church; and his inward Government in themselves. They
s^ut the Doors of their Souls, that this King of Glory may not enter in: They
will not endure that Christ should set up his Scepter in their hearts, they
will not have him to rule over them, in them: They will not be governed by his
Laws. Let not such call themselves his Subjects.

3. And others there are, who, though they do not utterly refuse to pay this
Tribut^ to this their Sovereign; yet they are remiss, and careless in it, not
praying for him Continually, as they ought to do. They are no^ so affected with
the state and condition of his Kingdom as they ought to be, so as to be earnest
in seeking the pe^ce, welfare, and prosperity of the Church. So long as it
goes well with the State wherein they live* as for the Church they little
^egard it. So was it not with the People of God in Babylon, whose affection to
Hi^rusalem we have sent forth, Psalm. 137. ver. 5, 6. If I forget thee, O
Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let
my tongue ^leav^ to the roof of my mouth; If I prefer not Jerusalem above my
chief joy. Thus were they affected with the sad sta^e of the Church, and the
decay of God's true Religion, more then with all their own private
Concernments. This it was that lay nearest their hearts, sat upon their
spirits, so as they had it in continual remembrance. How is it then that so
many, who profess themselves Christians, should be so little affected as they
are with the sad state and condition of the Church at this Day? They do not
remember it, and the interest of Christ in it; if at all, yet not so
affectionately and constantly as they ought to do.

4. To these I may add, such as do not pray for the second coming of Christ:
No, they are far from joining with the Spirit and the Bride in saying, Come
Lord Jesus. This is a thing which they do not firmly believe, that he will
come. However, they hope that he will not come quickly, saying in their hearts
wi^h that evil Servant, Matthew. 24.48. My Master ^^layeth his coming. In the
mean time giving themselves to sensuality and luxury; Nay, their defire is that
he may never come. And so in stead of praying for him, they pray against him:
And surely it can be no otherwise with some, with many, even with all obstina^e
and rebellious Sinners, such as will not have Christ to Reign in them, and over
them here. To all such will this se^ond coming of Christ be a dreadful coming;
When the Lord Jesus shall be rev^aled from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fi^e taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power (as
the Apostle sets it forth, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9.) Oh! this will be to them a
dreadful coming. A^ the beholding of which, they shall do what St. John says
of the ^ings of the Earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the ^hief
Captains, etc. viz. all such as have been En^m^es to Ch^^st and to his Kingdom,
Rev. 6.15. They shall hide themselves in the the Dens, and in the Rocks of the
Mountains, saying to the Mountains and to the Rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the f^ce of him that ^i^teth upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the
La^^* And as they shall then deprecate and pray against his coming, so it
cannot be that they should now apprecate and pray for it. But turn it into a
word of Exhortation.

Which let it be directed to all and every of us, Use 2.
who profess our selves to be Subjects unto this Sovereign; let not us be
wanting in this our Duty, in paying this Tribute unto him, in praying for him,
and that cont^nually, that his Kingdom may come* and that power, that he may
reign and prosper. So it is foretold that he shall do, Jer. 23.5. Behold the
Days come (says the Lord), that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch,
and a King shall reign and pro^^er, and shall execute Judgment and Justice i^
the Earth. In his Days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely*
And this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord ou^ Righteousness.
Which that it is meant of Jesus Christ, i^ not to be questioned, that being ^oo
high ^ Titl^ to be given to any but him, to be called, Jehovah T^idkenu, The
Lord our Right^ousnesse. He is this King, the King of his Church, under whose
Government (it being a righ^eous Government,) this his Kingdom shall pro^per.
And for him for us pray, as David does for his Son Solomon, in that T^^^
fore-ci^ed, 1 Chronicles. ^2. ^^* that he may pro^^^^, and build the House of the
Lord* that the work of the Lord may prospe^ in hi^ hand; that his Church,
through his powerful and gracious Government of it, may not only be
continued, but enlarged; that it may be established and made a praise in the
Earth. That what is here in this Psalm said of Solomon, and his Government in a
literal sens^, may be made good in a mystical and spiritu^ll sense in the
Government of Christ* That he judging the People with Righteousness, and the
Poor with Iudgmen^; The Mountains may bring Peace, and the li^tl^ Hills by
^ighteousness^, ver. 2, 3. That in his Days the Righteous may flourish, and
that there may b^ abundance of P^ace so long (...) the Moon ^ndur^th, ver. 7.
That he may have Dominion f^o^ S^a to Sea, and from the Rivers to the ends of
the Earth, ver. 8. That they which dwell in the Wilderness may bow before him,
and that his Enemies may lick the Dust, ver. 9. Thus was it done to King
Solomon, and so shall it be done to King Jesus: for which let us daily pray.

2. And whilst we pray, that he may thus come to his Church in general, beg we
the like for our selves in particular* that he may come unto us, come into our
hearts, taking a full possession of them, dwelling and ruling there, that so we
may be happy and blessed under his Government, being blessed with all
spiritual Blessings in heavenly places (or things) in him, and have a more
sweet and full Communion with him in his Kingdom of Grace here, and in his
Kingdom of Glory hereafter.

3. For which also let us pray, that that may come, that our eyes may see this
our King coming in his Glory. Which whilst we continually wait for (as we ought
to do), let us in like manner pray for it, that he may hasten his coming, come
quickly. Surely I come quickly; Amen, even so come Lord Jesus. Thus pray we for
^im.

praise him, (of which but a word): This is the other Tribute which is due unto
this our Sovereign; and let it be given to him. So it was in his state of
Humiliation here upon Earth; when he went, in that mean Garb, riding into
Jerusalem upon an Ass, (as we have the story, Matthew. 21.) the People, many of
them, received and entertained him with the like solemnity as Princes in their
Coronations usually are (and as our dread Sovereign lately was in passing
through his Royal City); some spreading their Garments in the way, other's
cutting down Branches from the Trees, and strowing them in the way ^ And the
multitude that went before, and tha^ followed, cried, saying, Hosannah to the
Son of David, Blessed is he that comes in the Name ^f the Lord, Hosannah in
the highest. And so it is, and ever shall be, in his state of Exaltation: where
Angels and Saints beholding him sitting upon his Throne are said to fall down
before him, w^rshipping and praising of him. So St. John says he saw it, and
heard it, Revel* 5.11, 12, 13. And I beheld and heard the voice of many Angels
round about the Throne, and the Beasts and Elders, etc. saying with a loud
Voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and
Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. And ev^ry Creature
which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, etc. heard I saying, Blessing, Honor,
Glory, and Power be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. Here is the Church's Acclamation, whe^ein the rest of the
Creatures join with them, and to which the four Beasts (or living Wights,
(...)) say, Amen, ver. 14. And herein let us join in consort with them* thus
blessing and praising this our Sovereign, giving unto him all possible Honor
and Glory.

This is he worthy to receive: So it is there by that Quire declared, Worthy is
the Lamb that was slain to receive Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, ver. 12.
And so he must be acknowledged to be by us, both in respect of what he is in
himself, and what he is to us. In himself he is a King, a great King, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, (that is the Name which is said to be written on his
Vesture, and on his Thigh, Revel. 19.16.) The blessed and only Potentate, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who only has immortality, dwelling in the Light
which no man can approach unto (so the Apostle describes him), 1 Timothy 6.15,
16. Such is his Greatness. And such is his Goodness, his goodness to us,
which he has already many ways expressed; as in leaving the bosom of his
Father, coming down from Heaven, abasing himself to take our Nature upon him,
in that Nature doing and suffering what Justice required at our hands,
Rede^ming us to God by his Blood, Revel. 5.9. All which call for this Tribute
to be paid unto him by all those who have an interest in him. As also does his
Continual Intercession, which he makes for us, sitting at the right hand of
his Father: And the preparations which he has made for us, being gone before
to prepare a place for us, that we may not only be with him, beholding his
Glory, but also be made partakers of it* To which I might add, The
righteousness and graciousnesse of his Government; The Righteousness of it,
The S^epter of thy Kingdom is a Scepter of Righteousness, Hebr. 1.8. The
graciousnesse of it, in admitting all that will to come unto him, Him that
comes (...), I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. And inviting all that feel
the need they have of him to come unto him, promising them what they can
desire. Come unto me ye that are weary and he^vy laden, and I will give you
rest, Matthew. 11.28. Upon these and many other accounts is this our King to be
blessed and praised.

And, that Daily, [And daily shall he be praised]* Inasmu^h as he daily loadeth
us with his Benefits, giving us every day new experiences of his goodness, in
bestowing upon us so many Blessings both Temporal and Spiritual* all which call
for a grateful acknowledgment. But here I am fallen into a large Field, wherein
I have no time to expatiate: And therefore shall commend what has bee^ spoken
to the blessing of God.

FINIS.

