A Single and general Voice, Lifted up like a TRUMPET, Sounding forth the Lords
Controversy concerning London, with her Governors, Priests, and Citizens that
walk in the Manners, Customs, and Way of the Heathen, that know not the
dreadful God who is Light among them, neither like to retain God (or that which
may be known of God within) in their knowledge, like the Sinners of the
Gentiles that sacrifice to Devils, and not unto God, Romans 1.

With somewhat directed to the ear of Thomas Atkin, called, Alderman of the
said City; A Reproof to his perverse and ungodly Proceedings, Message, and Two
Letters from his Hand Answered, with a lamentable Cry of the Innocent, in and
through a Servant of the Church of the First Born in the Inner-Prison, called,
The Hole, in the Poultery Counter in London.

Also a Letter from a Servant of God in the said Prison to Thomas Allen Mayor
of the City.

The sound may be heard in other parts (and become serviceable) in the Nation,
though it may be (as it is) Rejected by them that forget Mercy, Truth, Equity,
Justice and sound Judgment, the Law and the Prophets, the Lord and his Work,
and rather choose to set their hearts on, and follow after lying Vanities, and
so forsake their own Mercies [who rebel against the Light of Christ in the
Conscience of Male and Female] that are saying in their hearts as in Ages past
to the most High, (that shows to man what is his thought) Depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

By DANIEL BAKER.

Lam. 2.6. The Lord has caused the solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten
in Zion. Rev. 10. And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the Earth, and their
Armies gathered together to make War against him who is called Faithful and
True. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons, near Aldersgate 16^^

A single and general Voice, etc.
SUrely the Light of Life, even the desire and health of the Nations is come in
the midst of a foolish people in these latter days, how many are they that
love not their lives unto the death to publish and proclaim the joyful sound
hereof to the ends of the Earth, by which the Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and
People are provoked to jealousy and wrath? but why do the Heathen Rage, and
the people imagine vain things, seeing he the everlasting light of the house of
Jacob, of Isreal's life and glory, the sure Foundation, the Rock, the
Hiding Place, the strong Tower, whose Name is called the Word of God; by whom
the world was made, even he is come in the middst of us, the true light, that
all men through him might believe and be saved from the wrath to come, by him
the light, the Lord of the Sabbath, the substance, the rest that ends the
signs, and lights every man that comes into the world, even he is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, whose day Abraham saw, before Abraham was I
am, Lo he is come who is the (I am) the Light, the Author of eternal Salvation,
the Resurrection and the Life that is risen; behold with boldness I Testify in
his Name that is faithful and true, in the midst of us, and this is he whose
righteous Scepter shall sway over the Nations, whose dominion shall be from Sea
to Sea, who shall Rule the Nations with his Iron Rod, with the Rod of his mouth
will he smite the Earth, and with the breath of his Lips will he slay the
wicked; be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the
Earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, kiss the Son lest
he be angry and you perish in the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little,
blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

O London, How art thou defiled and poluted and filled with violence, vanity,
deceit, hypocrisy, wickedness, and works of darkness? Surely thy Governors and
Pastors have greatly erred from the way everlasting, that such an unwholesome
ill savor ascends from thee; thy Pastors, thy Priests and thy Heads have erred
and gone astray, a whoring, ravening from the Spirit of Truth, and corrupted
the way of Holiness, or that which may be known of God within, and have greatly
multiplied thine iniquities and crying abominations, and so have perverted all
equity and are estranged from the Life of Truth, so that the Word of Holiness
is become a Reproach, a taunt and by word in the midst of thee, thy loud crying
sins are exceedingly increased, far exceeding thy Sister Sodom that suffered
the vengeance of eternal fire, and according to the number of thine
Inhabitants, have been thy Dumb IDOLS, or gods that cannot save from the power
of the SWORD that's to pass through the Streets of thy defiled wicked
Inhabitants; O! who shall bewail thee in the day and hour of thy calamity and
distress, when bitter howling and wayling shall be heard, when no eye shall
pity or weep over thee, when thy Lovers shall forsake thee because of the
multitude of thy Whordoms greatness of pride and haughtiness, and fornications,
and would in no wise be cleansed, purged, or purified by the Word of the
highest which has been sounded forth and proclaimed-even in and through thy
streets; O London, is not thy Land full of Horses, or is there any end of their
wild Chariots and Idols? Alas, alas, woe and alas for the little ones that lies
wounded and oppressed under all thy filthy Abominations, the multitude of thy
unclean Beasts in the midst of thee are waxed fat and wanton, greedily
hastening and running into the abundance excess, and so greedily devouring,
eating up, and was^^ng and spoiling the goodl^ (...) sidue under their feet, so
that their hearts are waxed gross with fatness (fitted for the day of
slaughter) feeding themselves without fear or amazement over the Worm or
despised Seed of the Covenant in the midst of thee, notwithstanding the Lion
has roared a top of the mountains; O London, London, thy stink and ill savor
has ascended up into the nostrils of the most holy and highest Lord of Lords,
and King of Kings, when as thy scent or smell should have been as Lebanon, or
as the Ancient Garden of Eden; had the precious life of thy long feigned
profession of the holy Prophets, Christ and the Apostles good words freely and
clearly ascended up and spread over thy Walls and Towers and Borders, that the
Nations round about might have scented, tasted, and savoured the good and
precious fruit of the Life of thy seigned Profession, and to have come with joy
and rejoicing, submitting and bending unto thee because of thy perfect beauty,
had it been brought forth at all in its season and comeliness and brightness; as
the light that arises in the East and gives light unto the ends of the Earth,
lo such a thing has not been brought forth by thy Heads, Pastors, Priests, and
Wisemen of thy Inhabitants, but out of the North the precious Lilly sprung up,
the ground is blessed that bare and brought forth this tender plant, that's
never to be forgotten, but to be had in everlasting remembrance of all that
hear the joyful sound, and come to see the glory of the brightness of thy
rising, who shall Trumpet forth thy fame to the utmost parts of the Earth, and
talk of thy mighty power in the Congregation of the righteous.

O London, London, How have thou been visited from on high by the hand of the
Almighty in his faithful (though despised) Messengers, that thou might be
purged and made clean and healed? Lo the multitude of thy polluted Inhabitants
have despised the day of Healing and of small things, and the Children of
Wisdom [that have been wearied, and as it were ready to faint from time to time
under the weight of the multitude of thy pollutions and crying abominations,
and] have truly bewailed and lamented thy estate; but how have they been
esteemed in thine Adulterous eyes as sounding Brass, as signs and wonders, the
off scouring of the World, or as the Wind, thou have not known whence they
come, neither whether they go

O London, Thy defiled Garments, thy Heads, thy Priests, thy Pastors,
Professors, and Profane in thee, thy Judgment Seats, thy Courts, thy Palaces,
with them that that handle the Law, thy Idols Temples, lo even thy streets in
these latter days are stained with the blood of the Innocent; O England,
England, what have thou done or brought forth? how can thou like an impudent
Harlot or murderer, plead before the glorious Throne of the Lord God of
Judgment (and of the Lamb the Son of the highest) and say not guilty, or I am
innocent.

O London, (Remember Jerusalem) its yet but a very little while, and thy day is
passed over thy head, some of thy Mourners have already seen, and yet behold
the Lillies covering the mountains, the good watchmen of the City ( Zion where
the Sabbaths which thou have profaned and polluted, are forgotten) wait for
the gathering and healing of the remaining little ones that are defiled,
wounded, and polluted even in thee.

O London, Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles, prepare War, wake up the mighty
men, all the men of War, let them come up, beat your Plow shares into Swords,
and your Pruning Hooks into Spears, Let the Weak say I am strong.

Assemble your selves and come, all ye Heathen, assemble your selves-together
round about thither, cause thy mighty ones to come down O Lord, let the Heathen
be awaked and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I sit to
Judge the Heathen round about, put ye in the Sickle for the Harvest is ripe;
Come get ye down, for the Press is full, the Fats over flow, for their
wickedness is great, See Joel the third.

O ye heads and polluted Inhabitants of London that call the Scripture your
rule, read and behold your State, see Deuteronomy. 32. and when the Lord saw it, he
abhorred them because of the provoking of his Sons and of his Daughters, and he
said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall be, for
they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.

They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God (they provoked him
to jealousy with strange gods) they have provoked me to anger with their
vanities, and I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people,
I will provoke them to anger with a foolish Nation, for a fire is kindled in
mine anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and shall consume the earth
with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains; I will
heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them, they shall be
burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction.

Now forasmuch as it has been the manner and ancient custom of the Mayors,
Aldermen, Governors, Citizens, and inhabitants of the City of London; the day
when their chief Governor is sworn to do justice, at such seasons, great
shows, and wicked dark vile inventions is acted and brought forth in and
through the open streets and River of the City, because of which exceeding
great multitudes of people assemble and gather together from diverse parts in
the vanity of their vain minds, which are led captive to many and diverse
hurtful lusts, that war against their souls at such seasons; by which the
Creatures are wasted, consumed, devoured and destroyed, (without the fear and
wisdom of God) by high and low, rich and poor, young and old, bond and free,
for which end they were not created, and the everlasting God hereby is greatly
provoked, and highly dishonored, though Thomas Atkin attribute it to the
honor and respect of the Magistrates; But Moses and Joshua the good
Magistrates was not found walking in these or such like ways; and the persons
of the Creatures hurt, and sometime in great jeopardy to the loss of life by
land and water, and from time to time, the Lord God and his spirit has been
grieved, oppressed and vexed with these vain filthy abominations of the
heathen, and Priests, Rulers and people have been and are in a high degree
guilty of all the hurt and waste of the Creation, so much to the provoking and
dishonor of the Almighty Lord and everlasting God of Truth, yea and my spirit
within me has been often pressed down and grieved, because of the weight of
the crying abominations of Priests, Rulers and people that are called
Christians, but are not profirted at all by them the hired Priests that teach
for filthy lucre, their own way, their gain from their Quarters, like greedy
dogs that can never have enough, and are so plentifully bringing forth the
fruits and works of darkness, walking in the manners of the Gentiles; and way
of the Heathen, and pleading for their dumb Idols; wherefore I was not only
moved to write to the two Mayors, namely John Ireten and Thomas Allen, to lay
before them and to stop them and their subjects of their folly and wicked
vanity (but they would not receive warning) as may appear by a paper afterward
published and Tituled A certain Warning from a naked Heart. But the twenty
ninth of the eighth month, on which their Heathenish Ancient Idolatrous
customs and dark inventions was so highly set up and exalted, and carried
th^^ugh the open streets, at which many thousands of people gazed, before which
time I spoke a few words of Truth and soberness which the Lord put into my
heart to some of the Aldermen, as the horses and their Riders passed in at the
Mayors gate; saying, The Lord God will stain the pride and glory of all flesh,
the Lord God will stain the pride of all glory as in the days of old; the Lord
will smite the great men of the earth with astonishment of heart, who forget
Justice and Judgment, and the Lord God has a controversy with all that
forget the Lord and his work.

The Lord will be avenged on the great men of the earth that destroy and devour
the Creatures and the Creation upon their ungodly lusts, and forget to do
Justice and Judgment, for which sayings, I was not only buffeted and abused
at the Mayors gate by the brutish people, but violently dragged and carried
away by Porters, and thrown into the Poultry Counter by Thomas Atkins his
unreasonable will without a Mittimus; But Noble Festus, whom the Professors,
Priests and praphane call Heathen could not do so, Act. 25.27
throw him in said the Officer, and let him lie like a Rogue, and afterward a
Mittimus was sent though dated the same day; The Copy is as follows.

LONDON, ss.
THese are in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of Englamd by authorie of
Parliament, to require to detain and safely keep in your custody the Body of
Daniel Baker, until he find good security to appear at the next Sessions of
peace in LONDON, and in the mean time to be of the good behavior; occasioned a
great tumult of people to be gathered together in the Streets, to the the great
disquiet of the City, and disturbance of the public peace, and this shall be
your Warrant.

Dated the twenty ninth day of Octo. 1659.
to the keeper of the Poultry Counter.
Thomas Atkin.


Now forasmuch as I should have been called to appear at the next Sessions of
peace in London, according to equity and the words in the Mittimus also; but
equity, justice and judgment was past by and forgotten, and I was not called,
but kept a close Prisoner in a stinking hole of the Prison some weeks after,
and I had not only laid before the Jailer the unjustnesse of my Sufferings,
but that it was more then he or the unreasonable Justice, according to the Law
of the Nation could answer what they had done, and the same day as I
understand, the Jailer informed the Justice (concerning the Matter) who sent a
private Messenger to have me come at his will, which cast me into prison
openly, and to have set me free secretly, but at that season I had not freedom
from the Lord that gave me to see the wicked unreasonablenesse of their
dealings with me, and therefore had more Christian boldness to write to him
(the Copy of the Letter is thus written.)

This body in which I am with every Member of it is the Lords, and so was and
is the testimony of Gods truth, whose words I spoke forth (in obedience to his
most Pure Spirit (in my heart) that reproves the World for sin; the twenty
ninth day of the eighth month, and seventh or last day of the week, when the
great, wise and honorable Men and inhabitants of the Earth [and the wisdom
(...) honor) that is from beneath is earthly, sensual and devillish] assembled
together at Thomas Allens the present Mayors house, and from thence thou with
them accompanied, and tolerated in a high degree the wicked inventions, and
idolatrous heathenish customs of the men of sin, kept up and tolerated and
highly exalted in course and time with vain fleshly glory by such that should
be more wise, who are called Christians, Christian Magistrates, Members of
Churches, Governors, Mayors and Aldermen, them to be found Acting and giving
up their strength, means and precious time to lying vanities, rather then to be
good, sound, sober examples to all both young and old, and for them to be found
acting and exerciseing themselves in such Heathenish abominations, and wicked
vain customs of the World that lies in wickedness, to be laughed at by fools
and scorners, though poor wise men lament over and pity you by reproving (with
their life) those evils you are found in, to the end that you might not die in
your sins, which grives and wounds the just principle of God in your selves and
others, which Testimony is one with that which is true that condems the unjust.

But Friend, was not this Body with the true Testimony from the Mayors gate [by
thy will cast into a filthy noisome Prison] from which place by violence with
Porters and others carried through the open streets in the sight of many
hundreds of people, as if I had been such a vile person or transgressor not
worthy to live, and the multitude might so judge of me, seeing me thus openly
carried and dragged, as or far worse then many Malefactors or murderers have
been.

And what, have thou forgot to do Justice and Judgment, and do thou send for
me secretly? for as much as the Law is open, and if I have committed any thing
worthy of death or bonds, Lo here is a body prepared to suffer, and according
to the Mittimus thou sent (after I was thus thrown into a noisome hole of a
Prison by thy will, and under thy hand in writing) I should have appeared at
the last Sessions of Peace (so called) in London, but I was not called
according to the Tennour of the Mittimus, and so thou have greatly erred, and
art found a transgressor thy self, and the Lords faithful witness in thy
Conscience will judge thee for it, and my words I spoke as the Lord moved me at
the Mayors gate is already fulfilled upon thy head, where it will staud aright;
Lo thou have forgot to do justice and judgment, if thou had not, thou would
have (without delay) caused me to have appeared at the Judgment Seat, there to
be Tried openly, as I was cast into Prison openly, and if I had spoke or done
any thing worthy of Death or of Bonds, the Law was open, and thou ought equally
and openly to have executed true Justice and Judgment, and to have laid the
sword upon the head of the transgressor, and so to have been a terror to the
evil doer.

Lo the Sword is to be laid upon thy Head O Man, who have forgot equity, and
lost pure Reason, Justice and Judgment, and thrown the Testimony of Truth into
Prison so openly; and what, do thou fend privately to have this Body which is
the Lords, to do his will and not mine own, neither man's will that cast me in,

From the hole in the inner Prison in the Poultry Counter, the 15 of the 9 mo.
1659. Who am the Lords Prisoner for the Testimony of a pure Conscience, for the
Elects suffering Seeds sake; A Friend to thy Soul, called, Daniel Baker,


The above written Letter was delivered to Thomas Atkin his hand, and the
Messenger brought me tidings that he read it, and when he had done tore it to
pieces and laughed, ill becoming his age, gray hairs and place, who after some
days sent me a letter in the Night when it was dark, a figure of his
unfruitful works, who hates to be reformed, and to the end that others may
beware and learn wisdom, which many reject whose deeds are with Gods fear and
Wisdom to be brought to the Light which equally tries all things, and
accordingly reproves and condemns, or approves and justifies, I say
according to the faithful and true witness in the Conscience of Male and
Female, so shall every ones deeds done in the body be condemned or justified,
as is the ground and nature by which they are conceived and brought forth,
these are the true sayings of the sure word of prophecy that gave forth the
Scriptures of Truth, he that can believe and receive it without offense, let
him.

The Copy of Thomas Atkin his Letter is as follows.
DAniel Baker, I saw you at my Lord Mayors gate upon the twenty ninth day of
October last, being the first day when he came from Westminster, you were in a
wild posture, more like a mad man then a sober person, you were then advised to
return to your house, but you still continued there in drawing a great
concourse of people about you, to the great disturbance of the peace of this
City, drawing Cut-purses and Pick-pokets about you, a fit time for such persons
to commit Robbery; you were then deservedly carried to the Counter by force by
Porters as I am informed, who were paid for their pains taken about you, if you
had gone willingly, you should not have been dragged thither; A Friend of yours
desired me to discharge you, to that end I sent for you to come unto me,
intending to have admonished you to make no such disturbance for the future,
and then to have discharged you, but you writ me a Letter, and sent me word by
your Keeper, that you would be dragged out as you were carried in (this is
false) and if that be your mind, when you desire your Liberty, get a keeper to
bring you to me, and I shall give a discharge, in the mean time if you want any
fitting accommodation in the Counter, it is your own fault, I pity your
condition, the Lord open your eyes, and so I Rest,

Leaden Hall street London the 18 of Nov. 1659. Your well-wishing Friend,
THOMAS ATKIN


Friend, I have received thy Letter, and I did not tear it to pieces after I
read it as thou did mine. But how is it thou art so dark and blind, though
thou saw me at thy Lord Mayors gate, Why could not thou see to do justice, and
relieve the oppressed within and without, and cease from pevishnesse and
perverseness, madness and folly? for it is high time for thee to learn
moderation and sobriety, and cease from false accusing the Lords Servant, whom
thou say appeared more like a mad man (then a sober person) in a wild posture;
know thou that the Servant is not above his Lord, of whom such as crucified him
said he is mad and has a Devil, and if they called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household; and however I appeared to thee
know it was the Lords Truth and Testimony I declared that season against your
abominations, I spoke the words of Truth and sobernes as any moderate men may
read in a Book Tituled, A certain Warning, which is fulfilling, and is to be
fulfilled upon the heads of such as are with thee in thy Life and Nature.

Thou say I was advised that day to return to my house; I say it becomes not a
Ruler to hearken to, or to speak a lie, which I turn back upon thy head, for I
heard none speak such words to me; and forasmuch as thou say, I continued there
drawing a great concourse of people about me, drawing Cut-purses and
Pick-pockets about me, and thou say a fit time for such persons to commit a
robbery, then I say such vile transgressors are beholding to the early Rulers
that occasion so fit opportunities so frequently, more especially in the wicked
City London, of all Cities and Towns throughout the Nations; and I say, how is
it that thou art so dark and sottish, that thou can lay such a charge upon me,
as the cause of such transgressors or concourse of people gathering together.
Behold I tell thee, this filth is not to lie upon the head of the Innocent, but
to be turned back upon the head of the transgresser from whence it came; and
art not thou together with many more of the earthly Rulers, Mayor, Aldermen and
Citizens of this wicked City inexcuseable herein, let the Lords witness in all
sober peoples consciences judge of this matter.

And if such a small number of persons gathered together at the Mayors gate,
were a fit time for Cut-purses and Pick-pockets to commit robbery, I query how
fit and large opportunities have they so frequently given them by the Rulers of
the earth which forget Justice and Judgment, [as thou have done] and to relief
the oppressed, and rather exalt folly and vanity, and heathenish customs which
captivates the minds of people out of Gods fear at such seasons, when the Mayor
Aldermen and great Earthly wise men that have lost the key of knowledge, the
oppressing Lawyers and Rabbis, with their folly and vanity and heathenish
customs and idolatrous abominations, with them is carried through the open
streets of the wicked City, when so many thousands of people are gathered
together [to see the Beast that carries the Whore arise out of the troubled
Sea] and to behold your vanity, and wicked folly, and dark inventions, and
vain glory and excess, which you wast and consume upon your lusts which war
against your souls, when so many poor widows and fatherless, halt, blind and
lame creeples so plentifully, lie crying and lamenting up and down your
streets, and Masshouse doors, and corners of Allies for want of bread, food and
raiment, and honest employments to be set at, work at them that can work; The
Lord God will assuredly account with you for these things, and for his
Creatures which you so greedily waste and consume upon your ungodly lusts; and
thou say I was deservedly carried to the Counter by force by Porters, and what
is my crime thou charge me with, both in the Mittimus and thy Letter to me?
viz. I occasioned a great Tumult of people to be gathered together, drawing a
great concourse of people, of Cut-purses and Pick-pockets about you [say thou
to me;] But hark Friend, have thou a Law for such Crimes, or is this of thy
own making? Now if there be such a Law in force, to be equally ministered or
executed upon all without respect of persons (which is but reasonable, and all
Laws should be grounded upon pure Reason) that occasion great Tumults of people
to be gathered together, amongst whom doubtless may be transgressors of all
sorts, such as the Priests keep ever learning what to say, but do not, (like
themselves) Then what will become of all the earthly wise men of London, what,
must they not all deservedly be carried to prison? I may appeal to the chief
Authority in the Nation, and if the Lords faithful and true witness in their
Consciences will condemn me, Lo I submit; but who occasioned any, or the
greatest tumult or coucourse of people to gather together, whether the Rulers
and wise men of London, in exalting their folly, vanity and vain glory (which
the everlasting God will stain and bring to contempt) or I that in the fear and
power of the Lord, speak a few words of Truth and Soberness, a Testimony
against your Heathenish Customs and wicked actions, which if Turks and Infidels
were here to behold you, no doubt but they would abhor, and detest, and defy
you and your vain Religion, rather then to be won to the faith of Gods Elect,
by such stinking and unsavory examples, to the shame of your dark teachers and
brutish pastors And the Lord is a pleading with the Inhabitants of the Earth,
because of their mighty sins, and whorish, hypocritical coverings, and
inventions of the Whore, of the Beast, and of the man of Sin, together with the
Witchcraft and Sorceries of the Mother of Harlots, the well-favoured Harlot,
that has so besotted and made the Kings and Rulers of the Earth, even of all
Nations of the Earth drunk with the Wine of her Fornication; all Tables are
full of Vomit, woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth.

Moreover thou say, if I had gone willingly, I had not been dragged, (to
Prison) what, is thy Conscience seared? art thou altogether impenitent O man?
and thou I perceive do rather countenance and strengthen the hands of evil
doers, that offer and do violence in a brutish manner, by buffeting and
dragging the guiltless and innocent to Prison, to which place I was forced, I
knowing assuredly by the Testimony of the Lord God within me, that I was
innocent in his sight, and a prison I deserved not, (and had thou been a man of
God, thou might have savoured and seen so much also) and therefore not willing
to go or subject to the corrupt will of vain man, but was therefore as a Sheep
to the slaugter drove, dragged and carried where I should not have been, and
this in the day when the Lords hand visits (from which thou cannot fly nor
hide) will lie heavy upon thy conscience, in the mean time I leave it to the
witness in thee.

Again thou speaks in thy Letter, thou sent for me to admonish me, but thou
being found a transgressor thy self, art not fit to admonish another, but to be
threshed and admonished thy self; and then to have discharged me, thou say
(secretly) when as I was so openly dragged (as a great offender) to Prison, and
thou may know that my words are fulfilled upon thy head, viz. thou have forgot
to do Justice and Judgment, in as much as thou sent not for me before the
Judgment Seat, where I ought to be tried openly as I was cast into Prison
openly, and if I am found a Transgressor of any Law either of God or man, Lo I
refuse not to suffer or to die.

And moreover thou said thus, you writ me a Letter, and sent me word by your
Keeper, that you would be dragged out as you were dragged in.

I answer, this is false, I said not so, but I told thy messenger and the
Keeper, if thou sent for me as I was cast into Prison, that I was in their
hands, they may do as they were commanded, but know thou that he that neither
slumbers nor sleeps is my keeper, though this vessel, suffer under thy corrupt
will, and I was not willing to be dragged to Prison, neither to be dragged out,
and thou did write me word, saying, if that be your mind, when you desire your
liberty, get a Keeper to bring you to me, and I shall give you a discharge.

Know thou that my mind is become subject to the Higher Power, (the light) that
is higher then the power of darkness, and behold I demand my liberty with
boldness, as my proper right, (for I have deserved no bonds, for the precious
truth of God is on my side) as a Friend and Servant of the Lord, and so a true
Christian; and as I am a freeborn Englishman in this land of my nativity, and
as I have served my generation, and moreover dearly purchased by the shedding
of my blood, and shattering of my bones, not only in my own behalf, as I am a
Christian, an Englishman, a Freeborn Member of this Nation; but in the behalf
of all the Freeborn Inhabitants of this Land, and thou also have a share in
what I and many more have jeoparded our Lives and Estates to purchase, and what
art thou found without Natural affection, who also say (after thou have thus
cruelly executed thy enmity against me by casting me into prison) if you want
any thing, it is your own fault, and say thus, I pity your condition, the Lord
open your eyes.

But I know the Lord hears not Sinners, he who was born blind and had his
eyes opened by the Light Christ, said such words, and how do thou pity me,
if I have of my own I need not want, or it is my own fault thou say, then it is
like I may perish for all thy pity, and the tender mercies of the wicked is
cruelty, says the wise man, but know thou that if my outward man perish in
this noisome hole of a prison, that my blood will lie heavy upon thy conscience
more especially, and many more may feel the weight of it also, if so, and the
Lord whom I serve, I know then will require it at thy hand; therefore see thou
to it, for so far have I cleared my Conscience, and I can truly say, I rest in
peace, but I know thou spoke not truth, in saying so in thy Letter, for the
Lords Eternal and Faithful witness in thy Conscience speaks not peace to thee,
and so thou cannot rest, and the Scripture says, the wicked are like the
troubled Sea, that cannot rest, but cast or foam up mire and dirt, and sober
people may favor the dirty stuff and corrupt fruit thou bears and brings
forth; therefore it is needful thou repent of this thy wickedness, and bring
forth fruits meet for repentance, least thou die in thy sins, and if they were
to depart into everlasting flames or unquenchable fire that visited not Christ's
little ones, sick and in prison; what thinks thou will be their portion, that
not only cast them in, but speaks all manner of evil against them? let this
remain with thee and many more of thy brethren, the persecuting Rulers of
England; the Lord lay it not to the charge of them who simply know not what
they do, Father forgive them.

And how can you be clear, and not guilty of all the Robberies, (committed at
such a fit time as Thomas Atkin calls it) hurt to the Creatures, and of wasting
and devouring the Creatures and the Creation thus upon your ungodly lusts time
after time, by which you tempt and and provoke the eternal Spirit of the Lord
God to smite you, and to give you up to the deceit and excess of your own
hearts lusts.

May not the Cut-purses, Pick-pokets and evil doers, say and rejoice in the
strength of their wicked hearts, with such gladness that they have such fit
opportunitiies, so frequently given them by the Governors, Magistrates, and
earthly great men that should be more wise, and be good, sober, sound, savoury
examples to all, and a terror to evil doers; and can you I say be clear of the
same crimes that you will judge and condemn such vile Transgressors for; be
wise therefore and consider and remove the cause of such fit opportunities or
times, as Thomas Atkins calls them.

Now forasmuch as people that suffer in any degree at such seasons may say, if
the Rulers and Magistrates did cease to proceed in their heathenish Idolatrous
Abominations and vain glory, by which the Lord God is so highly dishonored,
tempted and provoked from time to time, (by which also many thousands of people
gather together to gaze at folly and wickedness, and run greedily into the
excess, pride, vanity, pleasures and hurtful lusts of the flesh, that war
against the Lambs Spirit, and neglect their honest employments, we should not
thus suffer in any degree, when the fit time as thou calls it, or I say rather
wicked and vain opportunities be removed and taken away.

And this I may say to clear my Conscience on the Lords behalf, and I know it
of a truth, had not the Spirit of the most high been oppressed, vexed and grieved
with the long continuance of your wicked heathenish actions, doubtless the
Lord had not at any time sent any of his Messengers to testify against and
reprove you, and to lay before you your mighty sins, and to cry aloud, and lift
up their voices like Trumpets, though they be looked upon or esteemed by the
unwise, as mad men, contrary to all men, for reproving you for your folly,
vanity and wickedness, did it not thus abound in all Streets through the
Nation, as the upright in heart feel something of the weight of your
wickedness and great abominations, and the everlasting God will plead with his
Righteous Judgment with you, for a sword is to pass through your Land, Oh ye
stiff-necked Generation, for these things, and except you repent and depart
from evil by the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom, the Light
of the World, whose light is in every one of your Consciences, and with it you
bring forth fruit meet for repentance unto life, as sure as the Lord God has
given you breath, you shall die in your sins, and this is love to thy soul,
among the rest that lies under the bondage of corruption.

What I have suffered since I came into Prison is unexpressible because of sin,
sinful men, ungodliness, blasphemy and profaneness that abounds, which with
my precious life from time to time, I have Testified against, because of which
I have endured the Contradictions of ungodly sinners day by day, and as truly
as the Soul of righteous Lot was vexed from day to day with the filthy
Conversation of the wicked Sodomites, so certainly have I witnessed the like
Condition in this noysom Prison, where wickedness and ungodliness daily
abounds [and where is there a Prison in this Nation that is not as it were a
Nursery for all manner of abominations, and the Rulers ought to see to it that
they be not so, else will it not lie upon their heads, and is countenanced and
upheld by the Keepers also, that should be, as every Magistrate ought to be, a
just man of Truth, hating Covetousness and to despise and shake their hand at
the gain of Oppression, and so to Rule over and be a good example, a terror to
evildoers, that such may go out with a reformed life, rather better then worse
then when they came in; but contrariwise the chief Jailer or Keeper has gone
about and endeavored to limit the Spirit of the Lord; Behold, to his
everlasting praise I testify that I have gladly received that into my heart to
Rule me, and has the pre-eminence, even the Spirit of Truth, the Light that
reproves the world for sin, and with my life in my hand have I reproved and
testified against wickedness and ungodliness, blasphemy, and the like evils
that abound in this Prison, for which the Keeper Humphry Gifford (a Professor
of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles good words) has caused men to draw me
away and cast me into a place where the filth of the prisoners run almost round
about me, and this is of truth that I write, and at that season my Testimony I
declared and laid it upon his head, who Commanded me to be taken away because I
Reproved blasphemy and ungodliness, he said, I spoke too loud, although unclean
and ungodly Songs and wicked Revellings, as it were, made the house ring again
imediately after, as at other seasons; and Humphry Gifford will remember this
when the hand of the Lord visits for all the deeds done in the body; and
forasmuch as he who should have been a terror to evil doers, strengthened their
hands by commanding violence to be done to me that Reproved sin and ungodliness
with my life, the Lord is witness, and sundry men that are more sober then the
rest, can also bear Record.

And moreover, every first day of the Week, since I have been in Bonds, have
the Prisoners done violence to me and my Friend Humphry Bach^, and forced and
carried us into the Hole of the Prison, and Locked us up by the Keepers Order,
because we could not for Conscience sake, but did refuse to enter into Covenant
with them, viz. to be silent (and so limit the Spirit of the Lord, whose
peculiar right only is to command the Tongue and every Member of our body at
his good will in us to work) although such a thing be not demanded of any other
of the Prisoners; and although we have been there while they have been at part
of their Worship, and spoke never a word, yet have they abused, and then done
violence and taken me up and carried me into the Hole and locked me up, and one
Friend thrust out of Door by one Parrat a Turn-key, with such violence as if he
would have broke her neck; and sometime after I asked him, saying, How if thou
had broke her neck? Then I should be hanged for it, said he; And let the
Magistrates consider, Whether such persons be fit to have any Authority, or at
least to serve sober persons, and the Priests that profess themselves
Ministers of Christ beholding such Cruelties, and not a mouth open to reprove
them that do violence, (and one Priest, a prisoner for Debt, said in the
hearing of many Witnesses; There was no way to Dispute with us but with blows.
Let the sober mind weigh and judge of these things) But sometime standing
behind the Door like a Thief and would not come in, as if he were ashamed to
tell his Dream, or studied stuff, or Divination of his own brain, or to
deliver his message, till we have been thus taken and carried violently out of
his sight as Sheep to the slaughter, and cast into the Hole of the prison, and
notwithstanding that Humphry Gifford, chief Jailer, had Covenanted with the
Hired Priest, (and Judas Iscariot the Traitor went from the light, the
unchangeable Priest, to the changeable Priests, and Covenanted with them to
betray and ensnare the Innocent) that we should hear the Priest one time to try
us; yet he saw and also confessed to a Friend, That the Priest his heart failed
him so that he could not, or dare not come in, until we were carried away and
l^cked up in the Hole (as at other times) but had he been a Minister of Christ
he would not have been afraid or ashamed, neither would his heart have failed
him, or feared the face of any man, but would with boldness without guilt upon
the Conscience, which causes the heart to fail, and brings shame, to have
answered a sober question, which by one of them was denied, but would, if a
Minister of Christ, or Spirit of Life, with all readiness of mind count it all
joy to Convince the gain sayers by sound Doctrine; and if we were in Errors, as
we are falsely accused, the Lord is witness he ought to do so, and bring his
deeds to the light that they may manifestly appear before all that they are
unreproveable, wrought in God, and if such hired Priests be Ministers of Christ
or of the Spirit of Life, let such as fear and desire to fear the God of truth
judge; And let this be a Warning to Humphry Gifford, or any that sees the
deceit of the Hirelings, (and I told one of them in the prison before he did
fly, that he would make himself manifest to the people; and immediately he did
fly, because he was a Hireling, and so the Scripture is fulfiled upon his head)
lest such partake with them in their plagues; for behold the Lords hand is
lifted up against the hired Priests and brutish Pastors of England that steal
the Prophets good words that were spoke freely forth, and boast in other men's
lines made ready to their hand, which they make a Trade on through Covetous
practices, beguiling unstable Souls, and keep them ever learning what to say,
but like themselves do not.

And the Cry that has often passed through me, since I have been a Prisoner
here, against the abominations in this prison, has been, O the Ungodliness, O
the Oaths, O the Blasphemy, O the Cursed Speaking, O the ungodly Unclean Songs
of the Drunkards, O the Deceit of the Priests, O the ungodly hard Speeches, O
the Excess, O the Revellings, O the want of the poorer sort. O the
unreasonableness of men hardened from Gods fear, O the cruel Mockings and
Revilings from sinful men, O the Oppression, O the Extortion, O the wicked
Customs; O let this enter into thy heart, O many, and lie even upon thine and
the Keepers head; who as for thy part, when I sent a Letter to thee in love to
thy Soul, thou tore it to pieces and laughed, as I hear, not becoming thy Age,
and gray Hairs, and place; but thou have more need to weep and howl for the
misery that is coming on thee because of thy mighty crying sins.

And thou Humphry Gifford, has often by words our of thine own mouth rejected
the Lords Testimony to my face from time to time, and this is truth whether
thou can believe me or nay, it will stand upon thy head, if happily thou find
a place of Repentance unto life, the Lord lay not these things to your Charge;
however so far have I cleared my Conscience, and my Peace in which I rest no
man can take from me;

From the Hole in the Inner-Prison in the Counter, the 19 of the ^th. Month,
and 7 or last day of the week, and of the year according to the Worlds account,
1659.

Who am a Friend to the whole Creation (that groans for Deliverance, and lies
under the bondage of corruption) and with that which judges the evil-doer, but
justifies and gives life to him whose deeds are wrought in God, in Truth, in
Righteousness. Daniel Baker.

The Original of this in Writing was delivered into the hand of Thomas Atkin,
by a Friend of Gods Truth, Elizabeth harris, who with much tenderness and
bowels of Compassion tendered it to him, and spoke some good wholesome words,
being grieved to see the injustice of such men as he, who instead of being
ashamed of his perverseness, and disowning of his injustice and unequal
proceeding against the Innocent, persisted and rejected wholesome Counsel, and
spoke forth a most wicked Lie, saying, That I had gathered all the
Pick-pockets, Rogues and Whores in London about me, and that I was like to lie
in Prison till I was dragged out; and Reviled the sober Messenger, saying to
some that stood by, You may know that she is a Quaker by her Language; which I
say is pure and true.

Now I leave this to the witness in all sober peoples Consciences to judge
whether such a man befit to Rule over men, It Is like I might be about an hour
and half at the Mayors Gate, and it would be much if all the pick-pockets, and
all the Whores, and all the Rogues in London should be gathered together in so
little time, except they had been summoned beforehand; but I deny such unclean
vile Transgressors with my precious Life the Lord is witness; and seeing if
Thomas Atlin knew so well of so many Cut-purses, pick-pockets, Whores and
Rogues were gathered together, I say it had been a fitter time for him, and
many more of his Brethren, to have laid the Sword upon such vile Transgressors,
and not to have let them gone free and condemn the guiltless by throwing
Truths testimony into prison within and without; But I have spoke enough, and
my Reward is with the Lord, though Thomas Atkin have unwisely rejected his
Testimony with many more, who greedily are hastening farther under the vail of
thick darkness, therefore their glory which is their shame is to be made
manifest to all, that others may learn wisdom by the fear of the Lord, which is
to depart from evil.

A Copy of another Letter from Thomas Atkin, with something added in Answer.
DAniel Baker, I this day had brought me by a Sister of yours a large
Discourse, but little to any good purpose; you magnify your self in your
Gifts, as if no man have such Knowledge as your self; you may know much, but
your Practice is far short of what you seem to know; [Mark] you vilify our
Ministers and Ministry, and call our Churches Mass-houses; your language and
terms are provoking: Cannot you and them of your gang be quiet and exercise
your Gifts in your own Meeting-places, but disturb us in our Congregations,
and Act in the Streets in a most uncivil manner, like distracted men then sober
persons, How if thou had been in the days of the holy Prophets Isaiah and
Ezekiel, to have seen one go naked and bear a sign three years, and another to
bake his bread with man's dung or Cowes dung at the Commandment of the Lord,
its like thou would not have ceased to falsely accuse them to be distracted and
uncivil persons, madmen, and the like.

But why should the Spirit of the holy One be limited, resisted, or stopped (that
made the body and every member of his Creature Man) from Commanding, or his
Creature male or female from subjecting to their Lords Command in or by their
body, without respect of the outward adorning Life; men's persons, time, place,
or days, that the Will of the Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth might be done
in it as it is in the new Heaven and in the new Earth, that the Inhabitants of
the world might cease to do evil, and learn to do Righteousness, even as he is
Holy and Righteous that calls his people out of Babel, the Land of Darkness
and Confusion, lest while they partake of her sins they partake of her plagues
and judgments; Lo the same voice cries now in these latter days, He that has
an Ear to hear let him hear, and come forth, and turn to the Light that's low in
the heart, freely from the Lord given to thee.


drawing Tumults about you to the disturbance of our Peace; You and your
Companions profane the Lords Day, some opening their Shops on that day, which
we can no ways allow of; you make a great Complaint of the Jailer and his
Under Officers; I doubt not but there is great Fault in all of them, there is
no Good to be learned in such places, and I believe it is a Grief to all good
People to see and hear such Sins daily committed in such places; and if it
lies upon your Spirit as you Write it does, (^his is false, I Writ not so, but
I was burdened with the crying Abominations of the City and Prison, Lo in that
fear and wisdom of my Lord and Master, Christ the Light, I have cleared my
Conscience, whether thou and them who are the Cause of it hear or forbear.) I
marvel you will stay so long in that place; If your Under Keeper bring you to
my House that I may talk with you, I may perhaps see Cause that you shall
Return thither no more; when you are weary of your Company you may take my
Advice, and so I leave you, Resting

Your well-wishing Friend, THOMAS ATKIN.
London, the 24 of November.

After I had Written an Answer to the late Letter the 25 of the 9th. Month in
the Morning, from the Lord had I freedom to pass forth to Thomas Atkin with the
Letter, and with the words of my Mouth to lay his wicked lies and false and
unjust Accusations and Proceedings upon his own Head, and to warn him on the
Lords behalf, who with his Servants are and will be clear of his Blood if he
die in his Sins, with many more that reject the Truth, and persecute the life
of it, as its appearance is brought forth in, and by the Friends of Christ
Jesus the light of the World, that lights every man that comes into the
World.
FRIEND,
DId thou never read Christ's words in the Scriptures of Truth, which says, For
every idle word that men shall speak they shall give Account in the day o^
Judgment, and all Liars shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire
and Brimstone; And how is it thou do not fear and tremble before the living God
that has given thee breath, but in the hardness of thy heart and impenitency
(instead of laying thy sad wretched and miserable estate to heart, when its so
plainly laid before thee, had not the god of the World altogether blinded thine
eye thou might see so much O man) who yet fear not to heap up false Accusations
(against the Innocent) which thou and many more are truly guilty of, as I have
sufficiently proved to thee, who most wickedly and profanely, said to my
Friend the Messenger this morning, That I had gathered all the Pick-pockets,
and Whores, and Rogues in London about me; a wicked Lie; so I turn it back upon
thy head, O man what will be thy end?

Art thou fit to bear the Name of a Ruler, a Christian, a Magistrate, a Justice
of Peace which should be a terror to the Liar, the false Accuser, the
Evil-doer, and not fear the God of Truth thy self, but speak such most wicked
Lies and false Accusations, (to the shame of thy greedy dark Teachers) the
Lord's witness in thy Conscience, when the Lord visits for all the Deeds done
in thy body will bring them into remembrance, and judge and condemn thee for
the evil; and behold I yet call for thee to Repent and hearken to the witness
in thee oppressed, and cease from thy wickedness left thou die in thy sins, who
writ to me in thy late Letter after thou have undeservedly spoke contemptiously
and vilely of me, and of what I writ in love to thy Soul.

Thou say I vilify your Ministers and Ministry; Thou err in saying so; for I
do not vilify them in speaking the Truth of or concerning them, as thou may
read and understand by what I have written to thee; but can I speak more vilely
of them then thou in thy Letter to me, saying, There is no good to be learned
in such places, and thou do believe its a grief to all good people to see and
hear such sins daily committed in such places ( viz. Prisons) to thy own shame
thou have written this (better a millstone were hanged about the neck of such as
offend Christ's little ones by casting them into such places) and much more to
the vilifying [as thou call it] of the hired Priests that take so much
Quarterly gain (or yearly gain from their Quarter) to deceive the poor
Prisoners who can learn no good here though they preach for Hire so often, so
that thou have confirmed what I have truly written; and is it not time for them
to be silent that are in deceit, in an evil way, how can they teach the good
old way who are out of it themselves; consider of this and Repent. Another
Charge thou layst to me, is for calling the Churches made with hands,
Mass-houses; Did not the Popes adherents build them to say Mass in, and give
them their Monks and Saints Names, as St. Gregory, St. Dunston, St. Sepulcher,
St. Katherin, St. Antlin, St. Rood, St. Giles, St. Clement, etc. And how is it
thou art so blind and dark, and called a Magistrate, and yet know not the
Church of the living God, which is the pillar and ground of Truth, from an old
Popish Masse-house made up of Lime and Stone with men's hands where God dwells
not, and do not thou blaspheme to call that a Church which is not, but I may
say a figure of thy hard heart, who art yet a member of such a Church which is
not the body of Christ; See Col. 1.24. The true Church is the Body of Christ;
but I deny with my life a stony Idols Temple (Steeple house, or Masse-house)
that it is the Church or Body of Christ, or the pillar and ground of Truth
which is the Church of the living God; behold thy blasphemy and the damnable
error of thy dark Teachers.

And why do thou continue heaping false Accusations upon me and my dear
friends the Lords Servants that Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and deny
the Pope and his Adherents Doctrines, heathenish Traditions. Customs, and vain
Fashions of the World that lies in wickedness, the Lord will judge thee for
these things; while thou have time Repent and prize it.

Thou tell me of my Friends Opening Shops on the Lords Day; but which day of
the Week is not the Lords that made them. The Apostles Doctrine i^, One man
esteems one day above another, another esteems every day alike; but what
shall be done to such? he does not say, Away to Prison with them, beat them,
spoil their goods, persecute them, or we can no ways allow of it, as thou say;
Nay, but thus its written; Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind,
See Romans 14.5. Remember thou art sufficiently warned from this day forward
(seeing the Lord has given thee and many more a day of visitation, of
salvation, whether it be received or rejected) that thou have not a hand in
persecuting any for conscience sake, or for reproving sin in the gate, in the
Mass-house or open street, least the Lord with a quick and mighty stroke, as in
a moment smite thee and take away the desire of thine eyes, who art yet false
accusing me and my Friends, saying, Cannot you and them of your gang (with such
reproachful and unsavory words) be quiet, -- but disturb us in our
Congregations, and act in the open streets in a most uncivil manner, liker
distracted men then sober persons, drawing tumults about you, to the
disturbance of our peace.

Know thou that if the King of darkness, of Babylon, of Confusion, did (or
may) send greetings of peace (as in another case) to all that did or does dwell
in the earth, Dan. 6.25. yet the Prince of Life and King of Righteousness,
Christ the Light of the World comes not to send peace on the Earth, but a
Sword, see Luke 10.34, 35. and the Angel cries, woe, woe, woe to the Inhabitants
of the Earth; Therefore think it not strange that your peace is broken, or
disturbed, for no peace to wicked, but fear God, Repent and bring forth fruits
meet for repentance unto life, least thou die in thy sins, for this is of truth
that I write, whether thou hear or forbear,

From the Hole of the inner Prison in the Poultry Counter, this 24 of the 9 mo.
1659. From thy Souls Friend that writes his name, Daniel Baker.


Here follows a Copy of a Letter sent from a Friend of Gods Truth, to Thomas
Allen Mayor of the City London.
THomas Allen; Ah Friend, what is this that thou have done in this thy
proceeding against me, and to separate me from my family where there is so much
need of me, which thou little regardest, but exercises cruelty on that day,
the first day which thou calls the Sabbath or Lords day, even without mercy?
Yet thou knows or should know, that he or they that rule over men should be
just men, men of truth, ruling in the fear of God.

Friend, I was the last first day of the week save one in my shop in Gods fear,
exercing my Conscience void of offense toward God and man, doing no evil in
word or deed to Man, Woman or Child; for my Religion which is Pure, is to keep
unspoted of the World, and so cannot join one with the World, in observing one
day above another, but esteem every day alike, and am fully persuaded in mine
own mind, and know that the Kingdom of Heaven comes not with outward
observation, and that to the Lord all days are alike good, and that it is the
will of God our Sanctification to be Holy, as God is Holy, every day in all
manner of conversation, to do Justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with or
before the Lord God who searches the Heart. And who have learned and are
taught this by the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, which has appeared
unto all men, even to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
Righteously, Soberly and Godly in this present World, to such all days are
alike who are God-like; for the Lord God made every day good, and every Child
of God that is born of God who is Light, walks in the Light, Christ the good
day that Abraham saw and was glad, which is the true Rest, which the Sabbath
that was given to the Jews for a Sign, was a shadow of; even of the Substance,
Christ the Light, the good day of God, the rest; which remains, in whom all
the Shadows, Signs, and days end. And who now are rooted in him, and built up
in him, Christ the Light, and walk in the Light (which through believing in are
become Children of) and are joined and united to the Body, Christ the substance
that ends the shadows, they dwelling in God who is light, are freed from the
begarly Rudiments, and cannot be in any wise brought into bondage to them again
to observe days, or esteem one day above another; and they now whose life is in
observing of days, which were appointed and given as shadows and signs of the
substance their life is not yet in the substance Christ the Light, but in the
Signs and shadows, and so as yet know not Christ the Light manifest in their
flesh, to redeem out of the bondage of corruption, but still remain children of
the Bondwoman, under the bondage of sin an Satan, and so are not holy any day
of the week, and then, cannot keep or walk holily on the first day of the week,
or on any day else.

But prithee consider, if thou have a Law for what thou does against me, and
would have me and all men account thee a just man, as thou ought to be (and
art called a Justice) for I and all men may judge of thee to be a Justice, and
a just man, if thou do justice impartially without respect of persons; Now, how
have thou so dealt with me to send me to prison for opening my windows, and
because I will not shut them at the Marshal thy servants pleasure, I being a
Free man of the City in equity ought to have as much freedom in opening my
windows and to keep them open, as thou to command thy Servant and horses to
labor on the first day of the week; therefore if thou will do justice without
partiality, command the Marshal thy servant to carry thee to Prison, and if
thou be not willing to go so, at his word, in the Name of the Keepers of the
liberties of England, if the Marshals servant thrust thee violently out of thy
doors as he did me, why let it be so; and if another of his servants take hold
on thee, and kick thee very wickedly and violently as he did me, why, bear it;
and if he take thee by the Collar of thy doublet and band on both sides thy
neck, and shake thee as a Dog would worry a Sheep, as one of the Marshals
Servants did me, and the other carrying a stick under my back, lifted it up
quick on purpose to have me fall on it to hurt me, let him do so to thee and
bear it, and when they have halled thee and dragged thee to the Poultry Counter
gate, if the Marshals Servant search and rifle thy pockets, and take what he
will out, and give thee what he will again as he did by me, the Marshal
standing by, and then thrust thee into a ho^l betwixt the doors of the Prison,
why, be content; and speak Truth, and thou may say, I in commanding my Servants
and Horses to work, am as great a Transgressor and offender, as be that open
his Shop Windows (if it be a transgressior) and was thus dealt withal; and thou
may say I shall not mend my behavior in commanding my man and horses not to
work on the first day of the week, being one of the six on which God commanded
men should labor; And then thou may say, if I be kept there in the hole of the
Prison, till I have learned to do justice without respect of Persons, I
deservedly suffer. But this man committed to Prison from Tower street, was
badly dealt withal and cruelly persecuted by reason of my order, when I should
have been a terror to evil doers that harmed him, and I have not yet learned to
do justice without respect of persons:

Friend, let it sink down into thee, the sense of this thy unjust dealing with
me and repent. And send me word what thou intendest to do with me, and consider
if thou would in thy will send me to prison, whether thou ought not to have
signified under thy hand in writing the Crime thou layest against me; in such a
matter Noble Festus, the Professors call a heathen, will condemn thee, see
Acts. 25. for this day I asked (the Turn-key) for a copy of the Mittimus by
which I was committed to Prison, and his answer was, there is none, though now
it be about ten days since I was cast into Prison. Now consider if it be not a
thing unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not to signify to the Prisoner and
jailer the Crimes laid against him. And if thou art an unreasonable man, what
justice can any expect from thee, if thou art a reasonable man, discover it
hereafter before all men, in doing justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly
before the Lord God; if thou go onto persecute the Innocent, I know it will be
bitterness in the latter end.

From the Lords Prisoner for the testimony of a good Conscience, in denying the
Sign, and witnessing the substance, A Friend to thy precious soul but an enemy
to injustice and persecution, Humphrey Bache.
The Inner Prison called the Hole in the Poultry Counter, the 29th of the 9
month, 1659.

Consider whether or no thou provide for my Children and Family, who have not a
Wife to look to them in my absence, who cast me into Prison for working on that
day which thou make thy Horses work, is not this partiallity and contrary to
the Law of God, that the Creatures should work that day that man should not
work; but surely if you did take as much care for the Poor, and Beggars, and
Children, and Fatherless, and Widows, and Criples at your Steeple-house Doors,
and Alleys, and Corners of Streets; your Women with Two or Three Children in
their Lapps crying for Bread, thou would not turn the Sword against me as thou
do, but relieve them and see that they were relieved, for it is a grief to
hear such a Cry in your Streets, besides Drunkards, Oaths in Taverns and
Alehouses, Tipling-houses, Prisons and places of pleasure, Bouls, Plays,
shows, the vanities that's acted and done in the City under the Government here,
which makes the streets even to stink again, to loath and Surfeit and defile
Nature, for the shameless, unlearned, untaught, unsavory carriages among
people are we moved of the Lord God, at the Command of Christ Jesus the
Righteousness of God to cry Repentance among you, to go in Sackcloth and Ashes
among you, and to go naked among you, a figure of your nakedness of the
garments of Righteousness, which should be a praise in your streets, and to cry
against your Idolatrous Worship, the preaches for money by the Hour-glasse, who
have not profited the people at all, but such as teachers for filthy lucre and
bear Rule by their means, and Divine for money and teaches for the fleece, that
seeks their gain from their Quarter, greedy dumb Dogs that can never have
enough, are such as fit this people.

Now if people bid a Drunkard he should not be drunk, a Swearer he should not
swear, a Liar he should not lie, we are called peace-breakers, and prisoned by
you; Oh! the Righteous suffer and are grieved to see so much Feasting and
Superfluity of all things in abundance among you, and yet let your brethren and
fellow members lie crying up and down streets for bread, and have no compassion
or bowels of mercy.

And your Shows and your Plays of all sorts, and call people together with
Trumpets to it, this now is not called as Evil among you; but if a man go and
warn sinners to Repentance, he shall be cast into prison; so he that reproves
evil in the gate is become a prey among you; you that say the Scripture is your
Rule, the Apostle says you should not judge one another about days, one man
did observe a day, another did not, the Apostles judgment was, Let every man
be fully persuaded in his own mind; and why could not you be satisfied seeing I
am fully persuaded in my own mind, but if you make an Idol of a day, God will
abhor you.

Since I was freed out of prison, Thomas Atkin with bitter enmity met me in the
street, and he drew near, and said, That we were a burden to all places where
we come; And I answered, That we were a burden to wicked Magistrates and
wickedness where we come; and I say we know its written, The burden of the
Word of the Lord for Israel [saith the Lord] which stretches forth the
Heavens, and lays the foundation of the Earth, and forms the Spirit of man
within him, (mark that.)

Behold I will make Jerusalem a Cup of trembling unto all the People round
about, when they shall be in the Siege both against Judah and against
Jerusalem, and in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome Stone for all
people, all that burden themselves with it shall be cut i^ in pieces though
all the people upon the Earth be gathered together against it, Zach. 12.
THE END.

