THE Broken Merchants COMPLAINT: Represented in a DIALOGUE BETWEEN A SCRIVENER
AND A BANKER ON THE Royal Exchange OF LONDON.

Printed by Not. T. at the Entrance into the Old-Spring-Garden near
Charing Cross, MDCLXXXIII.

The Broken Merchants Complaint, Represented in a Dialogue between a Scrivener,
and a Banker, on the Royal Exchange of London.
Scrivener. OH! Good morrow to you Mr. Banker, pray how goes matters and causes
with you, since our last Conference together?


Banker. Why, truly not so well as they should Mr. Scrivener, yet indifferent
well: But pray what is the matter you seem to smile this Morning on me, as if
you had either heard good news, or received some desperate Debt, or had got
some footing in a young Extravagant's Estate, pray let me know the reason of
your pleasantness?


S. Verily Mr. Banker, it cannot but make me smile to observe what Gulls and
Fools You have made of most of the Moneyed people in the Nation, for these
several years last past: Whereas heretofore, the Men of our way did generally
distribute the Cast of the Nation on good Security, yet of late years 'twas but
here and there one, that could procure any Money at all, But were content to
sit down with their old Trade, Engross a pair of Leases, write now and then a
Penal-Bond, a Bail-Bond, or a Bond of Arbitration; and sometimes a Love-Letter
for a Servant-Maid, or so. -- Because forsooth, no Security for Money like the
precious Bankers of Lombard Street.


B. Hold good Mr. Scrivener, and what of all this, I do aver, there was no
Security like the Bank of Lombard. (I don't mean the Lumber-Office erecting;)
But of late I must confess, You the Scribes and Pharisees of the Nation, have,
to advance your own Interest, used all the Artifices imaginable to discredit
our Bank, and You have not wanted too, some help from the late Achitophels of
the Kingdom, to carry on Your Designs.


S. Good Mr. Banker not so hot, let us talk seriously of this matter, for it is
of great moment to You; It may be, I may not have an opportunity to see you on
this place again; since you know how things stand in Lombard Street just at
this time.


B. Let them stand how they will; the ( Bankers no doubt) will acquit
themselves like honest men, and though you Scriveners and your Emissaries, have
incited all persons to come in with violence upon us, (when our Bank lies
abroad in the World, and cannot be commanded at an hours warning,) yet it will
appear to the World in a little time, that their practices have not needed
Extortion'd Pardons every year, as some of your way have thought necessary to
Sue out.


S. Well, Well, I know where about you are, and since you Soar so high, let me
but make some sober Remarks on the Original of your Banking-Trade, and the
Progression of it, and the State it is now in; And when I have so done, I hope
the Nation will take warning thereby, and consider what they do, before they
entrust their own, and Childrens Bread in the hands of such Caterpillars.


B. Now I find Mr. Scrivener, you speak so loud, I shall be even with you by
and by; You pretend to give an account of the Original of Banking, it is
Progression, and present State; I do also (to prevent your running on too fast)
promise my self some diversion in opening the Mystery of Scribes, their
Original, Progression, and present State; And when I have so done, I hope the
prudence of the Nobility and Gentry, and the wariness of Trading Citizens, will
beware how they come under the Harrows and Saws, of You merciless Scribes.


S. But with your favor good Mr. Banker, I told you I would begin first, and
there is reason I should; First, in relation to the Antiquity of my Profession,
and then the Reputation it has above yours at this day, Challenges the
pre-eminence.


B. Well; then even go on, and make all the have you can, for my time on the
Change is but short, and there stays some Friends to go with me to the Mini,
and then I must to the Savoy, White-Fryers, and diverse other places; so that
pray be brief.


S. When all things in this Kingdom in the year 1640. were brought to that
Crisis, that Father rose against Son, and the Son against the Father, when
Rebellion against our Excellent Prince (of ever blessed Memory) was esteemed,
Fighting the Lords Battles, when Covenants, Oaths, and Engagements, were
contrived to Murder the Innocent, to commit Rapines and Sacrilege, to Rob the
Fatherless and the Widow. And to Blaspheme God and the King, were the
distingushing marks of the Lords Secret Ones, (as the Famous Owen well
observes.) When Sequestrations, Decimations, and such like abominations were
accounted doing the Lords work. Then it was that Banking first began in this
Kingdom: Then it was the truly Loyal Nobility and Gentry were forced to
Haberdashers, and Grocers-Hall for composition; Then it was the good men were
forced to leave their Moneys in conjunction with the Zealot, Thimbles and
Bodkins, in order to the carrying on the Cause. Now, here was the general Bank,
which enriched so many of the Rebellious Beggars, the Dray-man, the Cobbler, the
Butcher, the Tailor, the Block-maker, etc. Who qualified themselves by their
vassalage to an impudent Tyranical Usurpation, to become Lords, yea, and such
Lords too, who made all our Nobility and Gentry tremble before them: And here
Mr. Banker, I must acknowledge a difference between this first sort of Banking,
and the late dealing in Lombard. The Cash of the Nation then was employed to
buy Covenants, yea Scotch-Covenants; to buy Armies, yea Scotch-Armies too; to
buy Garrisons, yea strong Garrisons too; That the Blessed King might not have
room where to hide His Head in the day of Battle; To buy a standing Presbytery
in the Church, and root out Episcopacy for the sake of that, and their rich
Lands.

Well, after it had pleased God to permit a prosperous Rebellion, and the hands
of violence to seize our King, and cut him off from his People; and to permit
an intolerable Usurpation, (which counterfeited Monarchy in some degree,) alas
then 'twas our Rebellious Bank was utterly destroyed, and no Banker was to be
heard of till the Collections, either for Slaves in Algiers, or principally for
the Poor Piedmont Protestants.

Lombard, then began to look Great, and the public Money for the Poor and the
distressed, was excellently managed some where, and by some body, as Sir Samuel
Moreland well observes --


B. Hold, Hold, good Mr. Scrivener, let Me have a word too; your reflection on
the past actions of the former Age, is not so well by your favor; you know
they ought to be buried in Oblivion: But for You to ground the Original of
Banking, in Haberdashers-Hall, is pretty I must confess, but very distant from
the point, and yet I am willing to acknowledge it began in Lombard, about the
Piedmont business, or a little before.


S. This interruption was not fair Mr. Banker, but I Will go on. -- After the
Usurper went to his place, and the Masters of mis-rule succeeded, when neither
the Exchequer Cash, nor that of Lombard was safe under the power of those Hydra
of Tyrants: It pleased God to confound all their Councels, and to bring the
Banished Son of the Glorious Martyr (our Dread Sovereign) to the Throne of His
Father. And now begins the flourishing Trade of Banking, by the Managery of
Goldsmiths.


B. Well, and what then?


S. Why then 'twas I say, your old men bred up young ones, in the most
dexterous way of telling over Bags of Money, and one would have thought they
learnt nothing else; but you will find in the conclusion Mr. Banker, the
several gradations by which you had of late raised your selves to that height.

First, when after His Majesty's return, the public Receipts were settled for
the Revenue, 'twas your Principal care to get in with the General Receivers by
Bribes and Rewards, that the returns of their several Quota's might be paid
into your hands, and so long as they could handsomely avoid an Exchequer Process
for its non payment there; and to toll them in the better, 4 per Cent you would
give them during the Credit, and their Money at an hours warning.

Now, one would think that giving 4 per cent. for Money, and answering it at an
hours warning, should be a strange sort of dealing; But here was your knack,
His Majesty after His Return (like a Good and a Gracious Prince,) did bestow
many Largesses on His suffering Subjects, and it may be so many, that the
public Revenue could scarcely answer when they wanted it; so that the poor
Cavalier being delayed at the Exchequer, was fain to have recourse to your
Shops; and having agreed with the good man for his Order at near cent. per
cent. (sometimes when Poverty and want in him star'd you in the Face) you very
fairly paid him with the Kings own Money; so that in process of time, his
Majesty became Debtor to the Bank in prodigious Sums of Money; and because the
necessity of the public Affairs drained the Exchequer as fast as Money came
in, that you could not get your Tallies paid off, His Majesty was fain to allow
you 10 per cent and for the Forbearance. -- Here both King and poor Subject are
very fairly dealt withal: I could in many hundred Instances produce the
various Extortions you exacted from Ambassadors, Agents, etc. Both Foreign and
Domestic, which may remain as an eternal reproach to your Bank.


B. Flesh and Blood is not able to forbear your Impudence any longer, were it
not on the Change, I should call you to another account; you have not only
opened a secret which ought to be hid, but you have reflected on the wisdom of
the whole Court, which I hope will consider you accordingly, when I make my
complaint.

But for such Varlets as You are known to be, to accuse Us of such strange
Extortion, surely none but Children and Fools will give credit to it. I shall
therefore retort on your way of arguing, and let the World know the Mysteries
and Practices of the men of your profession.

First, as to your original, I shall not need to dive into that, it is plain
there were such in the days of our Savior, and long before, Men called
Scribes, that attended on the Money Changers which put forth to Usury (though
there were other sorts of Knaves, called Scribes too in those days) and they
behaved themselves so well in those times, that our Savior whipped them out of
the Temple (for profaning the Holy Temple, to them was as nothing,) and herded
them with the Proud Hypocritical Pharisees, as a sort of Fellows not fit for
humane conversation.

But to come down nearer to our times. Have not I (as well as others) seen a
young man of your profession, some few years past, take a half-Shop, and
furnish it with a Ream of Paper, half a score pair of Indentures, 100 of
Quills; a Bottle of Ink; a Pumice-Stone; a Penknife, (and which I had almost
forgot) four Labels on a Poll at the Shop-window, and be as absolute a Scribe
as any of you. Then having spent his time a while in little Affairs (which
could scarce clear him twice a day at the Wool-Pack in Foster-lane) there
happened an old Usurer to Dialogue with him about Moneys; well quoth the
Usurer, you are a young man, I see you pretty diligent in your Business, I have
a design of kindness to you, if you manage my Affairs warily, and as securely
as you can.

The Instructions I have given to many of your Profession, I now give to you;
and they shall be to you the standing Rules how to manage my Affairs, and your
own too, in the disposing of Money to Interest.

First, let it be your care to frequent young Merchants company on the
Exchange, such who have not very good Foundations for Trade and Bargains, but
are in perpetual want of Money to manage their Affairs, feed them with daily
helps on two Securities first; then as the Sum increases, enlarge your
Security, taking in more, and as near as you can those related to Estates; Let
your Procurations be large, and your Moneys often, lending by particular Sums,
the oftener will your Continuation Money come in, out of which (as you and I
agree) there may be some advance to my Lawful Interest.

Then again, be sure, what ever Tradesmen you lend Money to on personal
Security, you frequently enquire into the several Shop of Your Trade, whether
any of your Bonds-men be there obliged; by such frequent communication, you
shall know the ability of your persons; whether able to stand or are a falling;
Now, this must be done with great caution too, least you having made the first
discovery, and it should happen a number of your Bonds-men should be bound at
other Shops, They should begin the Ruin and Destruction of them first; For
it is common you know, he that comes first, is first served.

Then when you find any of them sinking, ply them close for Continuation, and
Civility-Money, making over Goods to you, or confessing Judgments, Statutes,
or Recognizances, and keep your self safe that way: Frequently visit such sick
Customers, till you see they can bear up no longer, then show no Money, to save
your own Bacon, and mine too; This way I know, many of your Trade have made use
of most part of their time, and have found great comfort and refreshment
thereby, though to the ruin of the poor Ludgateer.

Again, another plain and direct way to advance your Trade, is, by holding
correspondence with the Hectors and Debauchees of the Town, but privately, so
as no sober person take notice of It. By that means you will inform your self
of the ways of the Extravagant Heirs of the Town, and the Hectors will assist
you therein; for they not only are set on work by the Devil to Damn themselves,
but to draw in all they can with them. How have I seen many of your Profession
by little gradations of 50 and 50 and 25 and 10 and 5 Pounds, work into a
Barony or Lordship, till for another larger Sum, upon the pinch of a resolved
Debauchery, part with all the Estate to the great advantage of the Scribe; Thus
must you pursue him till all be gone.


S. Enough, Enough, good Mr. Banker, how came you to be informed so much of our
way? it is possible the young man I knew under the circumstances you represented
him in. -- But I am resolved to pursue you where I left off, and when I have
done, say what you will.

Then when you had wheedled the Bank and Cash of the Nation into your hands,
you did what you would, advance to the King on His Revenues, pay Merchants
Bills, by having their Warehouses in Pawn; receive 200 l. for the loan of 1500
l. Oh brave Merchant, like to thrive! Pawns of Court Jewels, 40 per cent. and
diverse other Intregues, that one would think should have advanced you all to
that degree, as few of the Richest Nobility could equal you in Estate.

For, have I not seen within a few years, several of your way begin with a
small or no Fortune, in a fine Wain-Scoted Shop without Plate, having first
Listed himself into the Congregations of Owen, Doelittle, Jenkins, Vincent, or
some Holders-Forth at Hackney; where the Preacher was sure to be obliged by a
Present, to commend the Cash of the Congregation to the Managery and Care of
the Precious young man; who having learnt the pious Fraud of the SAINTS,
managed their Money, so as in 6 or 8 years time, arrived to his Coach and 4,
his Chariot and 2. and always had 20000 l. of his own, ready for a Purchase.

Again, have not we seen those eminently renowned men of Pretiousness and
Saintship, that not long since lived about Hackney, ( which dealt much in
Excize and Chimney-money,) become Famous Bankers? what a plentiful Table did
they keep in or near that place for the entertainment of both Presbyter,
Independent, and Papist, Quakers, Fifth-Monarch, and Singers of Israel, in
order to the drawing their Money from them to carry on Fireworks in Ireland.
But one thing occurs to my memory, shall be told you. There was a Noble
Marquess of this Nation, came to a Knight, and Alderman in his Shop, and told
him he had some 1500 l. in loose Money in his Closet at home, and having no
occasion for it, desired him to know where he might put out such a Sum safe for
some time? My Lord (replied the Knight) there are none so sure as the Frs. men
of great Dealing and Estates: Then says the Lord I Will send it to you, take the
same Security you say you have for what they owe you, and the same Interest.
Now, so it happened that the Knight had the same Sum in the Bankers hands, went
to them, and only changed Bonds, and so Secured his Money, being sensible the
Bankers could not hold out long. Immediately after they failed; and upon
Composition, told the Lord how the case was, which had like to have cost the
Knight a broken pate, besides his purse.

Then for the Renowned Bankers near the Horse, how were they advanced of a
sudden? nay 'twas a favor they would permit their Boys to give a Note for 1000
l. when brought 'em in; and yet when you have all done, here is nothing but
compounding, ruining Families, and such like, with all your little
Dark-Lanthorn tricks.


B. Since you are reflecting on persons at this rate, I can criminate that way
too, good Mr. Scrivener; You know well enough that there are some of your way,
who not 100 years ago, might wear either Cloth or Leather-Britches, (which
could be got with most ease,) that have within few years done Wonders, nay
incredible things, past any rational man's belief: As supposing a Person of
Honor; (being addicted) to some Extravigances should want 10000 l. ('it is a
great Sum) why, who shall we repair to for the Money, but to one lately plying
at the Temple-gate, or to his Partner near the Change? well, suppose 10000 l.
first, good Land Security, you may be sure; Then comes in by way of humbly
shows to Mr. Alderman, Sir, pray help me to my Money from such a Lord;
There Is for you. Others, Pray take in my Judgment and my Recognizances with
yours into such a Lordship; There Is for you. Then projects set a foot to get
all Encumbrances off; and if such persons had had any sparks of Justice or
Honesty in them, the Noble-man's Estate had not been dwindled into Atoms, and
they (out of his ruins) arrived to the report of being worth 10000 l. Oh brave
Scribe, but this is but one particular instance. Oh! but look abroad into the
Nation, and you will find enough, even in every Family where has been need for
Money. Oh! what Procurations, and Continuations, Staving off, changing
Security, delaying Seisures, have these men made use of, to bring Estates into
their own hands, to the ruin and desolation of many Honorable, Worthy
Families? Woe be to you Scribes.


S. I am very sensible who you mean, but your shallow Brains will never find
out the depth of that concern; we cannot serve Gentlemen for nothing, nor run
great risks as we do without proportinable Rewards; Nor is it fit we should:
every man is born for himself: nor can we in our way, but be guilty of some
over-reckoning, which when we are sensible, may come under the Lash of the Law,
we never want Broad-Seals to preserve us from the hungry pursuit of the Enemy.


B. It Is to be hoped you will find no more such Pardons for your damned
Extortions, and Ruining of mankind. I must acknowledge indeed we have ventured
high in the World, and therefore had need be well considered. -- See how we
have been ruined once by Exchequer-Trade, by City-Trade, by Plots of diverse
sorts, and possibly we had stood firm, had not the Bank of the City been
employed in underground and unaccountable concerns, which in time may be found
out.

And so the India-Bank; forsooth because one cannot be Sheriff, and another
cannot be Alderman, and another cannot be a Knight, and because Pilkington is
cast, and Bethel turned out of all Office; and because forsooth we cannot do
what we would, we cannot pack Juries, to acquit Traitors, nor have Parliaments
when we please, nor will not believe that the Pope sets out from Rome next
Midsomer-day, with his whole College of Cardinals, attended with a Million of
Jesuits, Monks and Friars, with Pardons, Indulgences, and Commissions, (to
renew those lost by Dr. Oats,) therefore we must call in our Money, (cry the
Brethren,) that the sensible decay of Trade, may at last animate the City to
follow the Councels of our late Achitophels; Truly Mr. Scrivener, I am apt to
believe, these, and the former reasons has brought this discredit on our Bank.


S. Well, it is time for me to go home to Dinner, I Will only give some wholesome
Councels and cautions to you, and so leave you to go after your Brethren.

First, I would have you to give up a true and faithful account to all your
Creditors, of the diverse ways and methods you have taken to ruin so many
Families as you have done; Consider how the Widow-Mother mourns, the necessity
the Daughters lie under of being Debauched for want of Husbands; consider the
cries of the Fatherless and Orphans; consider when 'twas, and where he is to be
found of your way (except a very few) that have not squandred and imbezel'd
away Millions of the Subjects Money to their utter ruin and undoing, when no
tolerable account can be given what is become on it; Let all henceforward that
will be wilfully blind, be so dececeived, if they will not return again to our
Shops, where they may have good Land, Lease, or personal Security for their
Money, then shall we see plenty of Trade, no complaints in our Streets, as at
this day.


B. Very pleasant good Mr. Scrivener, even out of the Drying Pan into the Fire;
For my part I am resolved to give over for diverse reasons, but more principally
because needs must. -- And am resolved to get into the new project, I mean the
Lumber-Office; But before I enter on that discourse, I would advise you to go
home, and consider with your self what you have done, and don't think your
rejoicing at our downfall, nor your wheedles of good Security, will encourage
people to return again to their Egyptian Slaveries, especially if they know so
well as I, the miseries that have attended many Families. For shame go and call
your Brethren together, and go to the several Prisons in and about London, and
don't let so many poor disconsolate and ruined people lie there ready to starve
at the Suits of You Scribes; You may e'ne be ranked with the Broker and the
Tally-man, for between them the Securers, Usurers, and such like Cattle, the
Prisons are almost full of poor honest Souls, groaning under Tyranny and
Cruelties.


S. I understand you good Mr. Banker, for my part, I am a little ashamed to see
the cruelties the little Fellows of our Profession use among the poorer sort;
but it is their business, and they do it in their own way; alas for our better
sort, we never trouble our selves about these little minute matters, for when
we strike, it is to knock down a fat Barron or Lordship; when we see there is no
Money stirring about Chancery Lane for Equity of Redemption. -- Well, Friend
Banker; I have buisiness to do at home, and cannot chat with you any longer now,
I wish you well out of your troubles, you and your Brethren; as to the new
Project which is erecting about a Bank of Credit, I look upon it to be a kind
of Plot against the Government; for, (according to their own proposals) it can
suit no Monarchical Government, but that of a Commonwealth, and I am in hopes
our Magestrates will weigh well what they set up of such projects, that may any
ways endanger the Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom.


B, You are quite mistaken in the matter Mr. Scrievener, I am told otherwise,
and that by as notable shrewd men as are in or about Town, Men of great reach,
and understanding in business. -- Besides, you know there are (as it is
reported) many wise and able Aldermen encouragers thereunto, and for my part I
do not comprehend the notion of it so very clear, yet I am sure it has no
relation to the prejudice of the present Government.


S. Prithee Banker don't fill thy head with Projects after all this; I never
saw any of our late Projectors come to any thing but Poverty and Want, the
Poets and they may e'ne keep together. But hold a little Mr. Banker, I must
needs speak a word with yonder Friend, and then come to you again. --


S. Here Is more bloody news still.


B. Why, what is the matter now Scrivener?


S. The matter do you say, why matter enough, I think the Devil has possessed all
you Bankers; why there is another Western Banker just broke my Friend brings me
word, one S. by the Sanctuary-Office in Fleet Street, not very far from the Old
Devil, and his Nephew the Young one: Goodness Sir, what Men break that never
pay Interest for Money! How in the name of Jove can this be? What are you all
linkt together in a Chain? Well, farewell my dear Banker, I Will e'ne home and
laugh at a Friend for entrusting 1500 l. in his hands. -- And so dear Banker
make have off the Exchange, and away to the Turkish-Shoar, and to those other
places where thy Friends are gone before.


B. Ay farewell dear Scrivener, I am resolved to send abroad my first Proposals
for composition, whilst things are hot. -- Farewell.


FINIS.

