A TENDER GREETING AND SALUTATION OF Perfect Love and Life of truth, to the
Children of the Kingdom. From a Brothe^ and living Witness, and fellow servants
and companion of the Election, and of the Churches of Christ gathered by and
through the Power and Ministration of the Eternal Spirit of the Lord Jesus, out
of the World, into Covenant with God and his Christ, over all blessed, over all
for ever, Amen. In which Grace and peace be multiplied and abound to every
member of the infinite Body of which Christ is Head. Amen, for ever.
M^ Friends, ye Babe^ and Children of Life, of pure innocence, of immortality
brought to light, that is clear and mavelous in our eye, that is single, pure
holy, unchangeable (without variableness) in which the perfect love of the
eternal riches of the everlasting Gospel, and glorious power of an endless
Life, and its perfect, unspeakable, blessed unity and fellowship of us with the
Father, with the Son, and one with another, in one and the self-same holy
Spirit of Faith, and Virtue, and Sanctification stands well, entire and
complete in the pleasure of the Lord God, according to the proportion of the
faith of Abraham, in the election dispensed to us, and in every of us received
unto salvation, unto whom the Heavenly Divine Power from on high is come and
given (even unto us) bountifully, with the precious things or riches that is
durable and unvaluable, treasures which pertain to life and godliness more or
less, according to the wisdom of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
through the manifold dispensations of his eternal loving-kindnesses has he
manifested himself, and made known the good pleasures of his Will to usward,
in, by and through the ^evelatio^, manifestation and ministration of his
unspotted Lif^ which well witnesses and bears record both of the Father and
of the Son, in one Word that changes not in us, but is the same as in the
beginning, and before all things, and cannot alter or vary, but remains in
its own entire, unfathomable, unlimited, boundles^ goodn^ss and fullness which
endures forever, ^ho has called u^ with this Eternal Word of Life, of
Holiness, and by the same has wounded and killed, quickened and made alive, to
his glory and virtue, with endless praises in perfect love, in which is no fear
that works evil or torment but that which works good unto edification and
perfection. And on how has the same abounded toward you my dear Friends! And
how has the distillings from God's right hand (of mercy and goodness) where
the Son is, that has made your very hearts glad in the savor of his holy
Spirit (the Comforter) so that it has been unexpressible to demonstrate the
truth of this what your immortal souls have met with, and been made partakers
of under the perfect sense of his unspeakable love, by his righteous Judgments
and Mercies, who has sought and called, and found you that were gone astray
and even lost in obscurity, as 'twere without hope of any recovery, in the
alienation from the Life of God; yea even as exhiled captives, aliens and
strangers, from the unchangeable Covenant of promise that is sure to the Seed of
the eternal inheritance of the purchased possession, the same that was
foreordained for you that believ in the Name of the Lord God of immortality
before the foundation of the World, to the end that ye may be heir^ together
with him that is one with the Father, who has drawn with the Cords of his
Love, by which the bonds of wickedness have been burst assunder, and the Cords
of your sins which have entangled you in captivity, these have been broken, and
iniquities that are past have been finished and blotted out by the arising and
coming of the just one, with his unspeakable refreshings of his glorious power,
even as the morning-light of a clear day; yea with such like healings and
virtuous refreshings of the Son of Righteousness has he come, that expels the
corruptible darkness that has oppressed and covered the earth, so that by its
divine, pure and powerful operation, in the stillness of your subject on to the
same Ordin^nce that is of God Eternal which he has ordained to subdue
contrarieties, and they come to be done away hereby the Cross that extends
pence, as a River of flowing streams to the poor, to the needy, the hungry and
thirsty, to revive and replenish the cont^ite in he^rt by the very same which
sheds its saving health and san^tifying virtu^ to every plant and green thing,
to every Tre^ tha^ buds and blossoms, and bears fruit, according to the
goodness and pleasure of the end of the good Husbandman, that well rejoiceth
over the choice Vines, and Vinyards, and Gardens of the pleasure of his right
hand, where the River streams that makes gl^d the beloved City of my God, and
his pleasant Plants add no sorrow unto his soul, but he well-delighteth in
them, and takes pleasure in them that fear him, and keep their habitations in
the first love, and behold his mercy and goodness is over them as a lovely
banner, and comely Ornament of praise; and his fear seated in your hearts yet
more abundantly manifest in the sight of the Nations, the same shall be a sure
defense to pr^serve you unto his Heavenly Kingdom of all fullness (without
limitation.) What if I say to some, My Babes (and universally to all, My
Friends, my Brethren, my Sisters) to you are these sayings spoken? And what if
I say of the Loveling of my heart, Verily mine eye has well affected mine
heart, and I am in perfect love and unity with every of you that love the Lord,
and obey his unchangeable truth and name, and suffer for it more or less? Well,
J cannot but tell you on this wise, that J heartily love you in the same, in no
other thing, or name, or word, or life, or what else, but in the very thing in
which we are Witnesses of in its dispensations, not only of salvation, but also
of condemnation, in their time and seasons; and because the same love with
which the testimony of my Conscience gives a good evidence to my understanding
that J am beloved of my God, the same well abounds in my very heart to ye, ye
faithful of the Lord; therefore do J send you here with the greetings of the
same kindness to your edification, in the same love by which your most holy
Faith works, that together with me herein your pure minds by way of
remembrance may be stirred up in one spirit to bles^ and praise the living
Lord, as it becomes Saints in Light; and hereby to be the more abundantly
quickened unto all wel-pleasing in the pure presence, in his Light of his
countenance that shines over you for good; and J say and exhort you in the very
self-same Spirit of faith and love, to lay aside, and put far away from you
whatsoever would vail or separate from this unvaluable love and goodness,
virtue and peace of Christ which passes knowledge, and with all readiness of
mind, as it becomes the Election, under the perfect sense of this unspeakable
love and blessed fear of the Lord, to give all diligence to meet in the same
power of life and virtue, and keep to meetings in the Heavenly Order, to wait
upon the Lord in his mercy and fear only overshadowing of you, that the holy
eternal strength and comeliness of the Lord's beauty may adorn you, thereby to
be revived in the loveliness of your souls shining upon you, and surrounding
your Tabernacles; and that the comfort of the blessed steadfast Spirit of Truth
in the Life of the Cross of Jesus, together with the renewings of the Holy
Ghost, you may receive the same in all your Meetings, to every of you, your
particular and everlasting satisfaction, and assured confidence in the holy
faith and patience of the Saints in Light (without doubting) and so your fruit
may abound unto holiness, and the end of the same ye may receive even
immediately from the right hand of God, which is eternal life, and this is the
end of your blessed confirmation of your most holy Faith in every particular,
and in your blessed Assemblies, so that ye know the Way and the Truth
undoubtedly, wherein ye may preciously receive of his fullness from the
bountiful hand of Eternal Life, which is not hid from you (as in times past)
the which comes immediately from God, the clear and unfathomable Fountain of
all fullness, and lives for ever in the holy Seed of lasting righteousness,
which is revealed and come very nigh us, the which breaths and makes
intercession in the acceptance of that which is holy and spiritual, without
spot to God.

To this end my very dear Friends, my tenderly beloved in God, the Spirit of
Love and of the fear of the Lord is upon me to put you in remembrance of these
things that are one and the same with the beginning of your Faith, in the Truth
and Love that is perfect, sound and pure, that neither thinks nor works
evil; behold this is the excellent Way that tends to edify the whole Body, and
every particular Member receives strength, life and virtue, in unity with the
Head Christ, the Seed, the Stone that is precious, the Rock and saving-health,
even the Foundation of God that stands sure, and is over his own House also
in the great Mystery of God, whose House are we, if immovably we abide
faithful, holding fast the good beginning of our confidence in the Head Christ,
firm unto the end: However we know God's Foundation it stands sure; and this
ye know that if we should deny him either in the fellowship of his sufferings
unto which we have been called with holiness, and so not to confess him
(through the same) before men; yet he without doubting or controversy in any
wise cannot deny himself, albeit a Cloud receives him out of the sight of many,
who shall not see his face till they say (who have pierced him) Blessed is he
that comes in the Name of the Lord; yea, and my Spirit shall gladly say, Even
so Amen: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, that the afflicted and upright in heart
may languish no more, but triumph in glory, and be filled with gladness of
heart in perfect quietness in their expected end, for which my soul (as a Dove)
often mourns, traveling in love through distresses, often distressed for thy
sake, oh thou whose Renown is from everlasting, and thy memorial shall never
end, that thou may be raised upon high over all, to be a Royal Diadem in the
hand of thy mighty God; my soul longs for this with many Brethren; lo we
travel in pain often for thy sake, thou Royal Seed of Nobles, the loveliness of
thy Progenitors, the Heavens are dissolved with unspeakable love, and the
Heavenly Hosts, behold how they travel in order for the brightness of thy
rising over all Nations, that thy Dominions, and the largeness of thy unlimited
extent thou may possess, as is meet, that the sons of Nobles, and Daughters
of eternal Renown, with Kings in glory may rejoice in thy fame, and feed thee
with the purest of good things, even the Heritage of Jacob thy Father; and for
thy sake, oh thou loveliness of my heart, how often am J undone for thee! The
Brethren and striplings of my Father's House, how dearly do they love thee! how
willingly are we overcom with thy loveliness to suffer even for thy sake! Shall
J break forth in mourning? or shall J take up a doleful lamentation for many
that have loved thee a little season, till somewhat obscured their eye, and
their back parts is toward thee? Oh! alas! alas! yea woe and alas for them! Oh!
J have traveled in pain night and day for their sakes, insomuch J could even
cry aloud and ro^r as a Lyonness bereaved of her young; the echo might reach
the Heavens to be astonished at this, as in the ancient days when Israel
himself wrought folly, and hewed out Cisterns imperfect, being departed from
the Fountain. Wherefore let all hear and fear, because the mighty day of the
Lord is great, and the trial and travel of the Lot of his inheritance is no
less, and the sense and weighty sense of these things boweth my heart and soul
even to death before the Lord often, so that J know many brethren on this wise
travel, and pure innocence is ready to cry out, being dissolved into pure
virtue in its travel, saying, Lord, how long? how long Lord? shall it be always
thus? Surely no, says the answer of my God; the many days of thy travel and
mourning shall have an end, and thy Work shall be rewarded; neither shall the
renown and same of my people be extinguished, but increase as the Sun and Moon
in their course and order, from generation to generation; and J am the Lord
their God in faithfulness and truth, without variableness, and so they are, and
for ever shall be my people, their Dominion from sea to sea shall extend
without limitation, and the borders of wickedness as chaste and dust under the
soles of their feet, shall not hurt them; the pure Breath of Life Eternal has
spoken it, by the living Word of the Lord that shall stand for ever. Wherefore
be not dismayed nor cast down with overmuch sorrow, though thy travels be not
a little; in the mighty strength of thy God, oh thou afflicted and beloved of
my soul, thine eye shall perfectly behold Jerusalem (the Mount Sion of my God)
with her freeborn completely established, the lovely and desirable praise of
the whole earth; yea, and more then is lawful to be uttered. Wherefore yet be
bold and valiant, and put on courage, with the lovely Armor of eternal
salvation, ye sons, ye harmless sons and daughters of Sions Lamb, that bears
the weighty iniquities, and finisheth the same, and takes them away; and
clothes his people with his Name, and with the lovely Garments of Praise, and
opens the healing Fountain of Wisdom from above, in the holy Spirit of the
Lord's fear, which preserves through many tribulations; and then he like a good
shepherd leads to the living Fountains of Water, where the weary and thirsty
are well satisfied under the light and shadow of his countenance that sits in
the midst of the Throne, who says, I will give freely to him that is a thirst;
therefore the Spirit and the Bride says, Come, with him that hears and is a
thirst, as is the Message of the Angel to the Churches, and not to the fearful
and unbelieving; and to you ye beloved of the Lord that retain your first Love,
is my very heart open in the same, and therefore the more am J enlarged:
Wherefore my dearly beloved, be like-minded; let the same unchangeable mind be
in you, and abound, that dwells in the holy Seed without change or shadow of
turning, that is both sure and peaceable, without fraud or guile, and is
watchful for good, and not for evil, that in his strength who wisely makes all
Grace to abound in every good word and work, ye may stand firm and unblameable,
and complete before him in love, which is the end and beginning of all
Ministrations that accompanies the Divine Power which God Eternal has made
known to you; and the holy and effectual operation of the same Gospel of peace
more or les^, my God that lives for ever has made known, and honored you
withal, what if I say more over and above all the Families of the Earth?

Wherefore, oh ye blessed of the Lord, forget not his pure sayings in the
ancient days, spoken by the same Life, to the same Seed, of which you are
united and made partakers, ye that tremble at his Word; your brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be
glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed; while ye
may say, Oh Lord, I will praise thee; though thou wast angry with me, thine
anger is turned away, and thou comfortest me (...) Behold, God is my salvation,
I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord Jehovah is my strength: etc.
Wher^fore with joy shall ye draw water out of the well^ of Salvation. Oh how h^s
your Light arisen out of obscurity! you whose soul ha^ been revived and drawn
out to the hungry and to the afflicted soul, has been well satisfied with thee
and thy bountifulness, thou blessed Seed of the Lord's anointing; he shall
guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy
bones, and thou shall be like a watered Garden, whose waters fall not; for your
sake are these who are arrayed in white, having past through many tribulations,
following the Lamb (through the same) then he leads to living Fountains opened
for the House of David, whose Tabernacle is raised up for the tribes of the
Lord's anointing, and the dispersed of Israel, the inhabitants of Sion, the
Mountain of holiness in Jerusalem; that is free, with her inhabitants, true
Israelites indeed, in whose mouth is no guile, my soul i^ knit unto ye. Well, I
have much within my heart to say of the goodness, and mercy, and righteous
Judgments of the Lord God of truth, which are more precious then fined shining
Gold, and blessed is the man that is made a partaker hereof, and keeps them, the
fear of my God as a beautiful Crown of Wisdom's Life, shall be his goodly
treasure, to preserve him from the power of the sword, which shall devour the
Adversaries that refuse and rebel against the Light and Counsel of my God. His
saving-health shall not be hidden from thine eye, O thou tender, upright,
mourning Plant, and branch of Righteousness, the days of thy mourning shall
have an end in thy beloved, thy expected end, and his bowel^ of mercy and
tender pity shall not be estranged any more at all from thee, thou beloved seed
of pure innocence, that has heard the joyful sound, the voice of thy beloved,
Lo, thy Companions, the Children of thy Father's House shall joy in the Lord,
and well rejoice in the Holy One of Israel, because of thee and thy
faithfulness to thy mighty God, and tell of his wondrous works, and talk of the
power of his might, in whose mouth never any guile was found; such a true
Israelite, such a High Priest becomes us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sin and sinners, that offered up himself without spot to God
through the eternal Spirit of sanctification. Let every member feel and partake
of the same virtue in the Election; feel and savor the same dwell in them, and
run through them, to the purifying of your hearts, as is meet in the Lord, that
spirit; the eternal riches and blessings h^s been hid in the same from ages and
generations; my heart wishes they may all abound with the mercies of God the
Father of our Lord Jesus, to every of you in his life, who is risen from the
dead, and from their Congregations, and lives and reigns in the lively
Witnesses of his death and resurrection, to whom with the Father be eternal
glory and reverence, power and might, with endless praises and everlasting
Dominion in all, and through all that love his appearance in the un^hangeable
Light of his countenance; and so over all be thanksgivings, Amen. And let the
upright in heart say so; and behold they, even they that are yet afar off,
shall come up to Sion the holiness of my beloved, with songs of deliverance,
making melody because of the perfect beauty and glory of my God, which has
shined upon them that fear him, and behold him face to face; yea, and the
loveliness of my heart, the Seed of the blessed, the joy of many generations,
and the desire of the Nations of peace and plenty, he shall come that will
come, and not tarry, with his reward in his right hand in the bright Heavenly
Clouds, and lo they shall distill and drop down new Wine, with the early and
latter rain of virtuous righteousness upon the tender plants and trees of
virt^^, planted and seated within the Garden of immortality; and the tender
Babes and Children of the Kingdom of eternal life shall with joy unspeakable
rejoice in the abundant fullness of the glory of the Lord, that is King of Sion,
in Jerusalem that is free from above, because of the abundance of peace and
truth, and unutterable virtue, and sanctifying riches of the everlasting
Fountain of Eternity that is opened in Sion's holy Hill, and its streams purely
descend and issue forth to the ends of the earth, to fetch thy sons from far,
and thy daughters from the Lions dens, and from the Mountains of the Leopards,
to worship the Lord the King, the Holy One of Israel, who teaches his people,
children that will not lie; and they that are not, shall say as in the ancient
days, Come oh House of Jacob, come let us go up to the Mountain of the Lords
House, he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; and lo their
faces shall shine with pure innocence that come to live under the hiding of his
power, under the shadowing of the steadfast spirit of glory, of the fear of the
Lord, which shall cover them as a very lovely garment of praise without, but
the glory shall excel within; where uprightness, innocence and pure integrity
to its first Love lives and is preserved in the inner Court, (which looks
Eastward toward the sun rising) of the beauty of holiness, without guile, in
the pleasure of the Lord, at whose right hand the River streams, and so the
lovely seed of his anointing shall flourish and bear much fruit, and shoot
forth its branches, and spread abroad its faithful fruitful bows over the
lovely Walls of salvation of the City of my God; so he that overcomes, shall
inherit all things. And so blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection over such the second death shall have no power, as faith the Angel
to the Churches; These sayings are faithful and true, and holy; and blessed is
he that reads and lives in the integrity and faithfulnes^ of the God of
Abraham, to the end, and in the same do I commend every of you to whom I write,
in the Covenant of Eternity to be preserved steadfast and entire to the
beginning, the sure Foundation of God Eternal, who is the Light, and Life, and
glory, and everlasting strength and beauty of the Election, in whom from
everlasting to everlasting he is to be glorified; and so let him be praised who
is that eternal unchangeable spirit of pure and matchless substance and virtue
Divine, even God blessed for ever, Amen and Amen.

Worcester City-Gaol for the Testimony of Jesus, and Word of God, and his pure
way of Worship, a Prisoner this third Month, the 12th day, 1663. Daniel Baker.

THE END.

