BRITANNIAE SPECULUM OR, A Short View OF THE Ancient and Modern State OF Great
Britain, And the adjacent Isles, and of all other the Dominions and
Territories, now in the actual possession of His present Sacred MAJESTY King
CHARLES II. Treating of Britain in General.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn, for Christopher Hussy, at the
Flower-de-Luce in Little Britain. M.CD.LXXXIII.

THE PREFACE.
THis little Treatise is but the first Part of an intended larger Work, the
Design whereof (as appears in the Title Page) is to exhibit, as in a Mirror, a
view of the ancient and modern State not only of this our Island of GREAT
BRITAIN, but also of Ireland, and all other His MAJESTY'S Dominions and
Territories: not by writing a continued Chronicle or History of all the Kings
or Princes, reigning successively in them; but only by giving an Account of
such signal Mutations, as made any considerable Change in the Administration of
the Government either in Church or State.

In this part (which treats of Britain in general) after a short Description of
the Island, and a brief Account of the ancient Inhabitants thereof (from whom
not only our present Cambro-Britains, but those also of Armorica or little
Britain in France are descended) is inserted a Discourse (which, tho it may
seem a Digression, is neither long nor impertinent) touching the Original and
Excellency of Monarchical Government, to which and none other, this our Island
has been so fortunate, as to have been Subjected from its very first being
inhabited to this very Day.

Hereunto I was forced by the audacious Scribles of certain profligate
Wretches, who, that they may the easilier instigate the Vulgar to a contempt of
the Sacred Authority of their Prince, and thereby make way for the overturning
of this famous Monarchy, and the introducing of Popular Tyranny in its place,
endeavor to debase Monarchy it self, affirming the most High and Sacred Order
of Kings, which is the Ordinance of GOD himself, founded in the prime Laws of
Nature, and clearly established by express Texts both of the Old and New
Testaments, to be a mere human Creature, taking its Original from the Consent
of the People, by whom Sovereignty is conveyed unto Kings in trust only, and by
Communication, and consequently that the People may (whenever they please)
resume this Power, and call their Trustees to an account.

These are the pernicious Maxims, which so lately intoxicated the three
Kingdoms, and are now again for the like purpose taken up by our present
Republicans, and daily dispersed by the scurrilous Pamphleteers of these times,
one of which (who insolently presumes to dedicate his treasonable Libels to a
most Noble and Loyal Peer) falls foul upon the Learned Sr. Robert Filmer for
deriving the Regal Authority from the paternal, instituted by GOD himself; tho
this verity be not only expressly delivered in the Holy Scriptures, which
declare, that the first Government in the World was Monarchical in the Father
of all Flesh, but was by the very glimmerings of Natural Reason discovered by
Aristotle, who, speaking of the Original of Monarchy, says: The first Society
made of many Houses is a Village, which seems most agreeable to nature, as
being a Colony of Families, which some call Foster-brethren, or Children and
Childrens Children. Therefore at first Cities were, and now also Nations are
Governed by Kings, because such came together, as were under Kingly Government.
For the eldest in every House is King, and so for Kindred sake it is in
Colonies, that is, in more Families, which are descended from the same House:
whence Homer says, Every man gives Laws to his Wives and Children. Hence it is
by all ancient Writers acknowledged, that the first Commonweals were governed
by Monarchs; nor indeed was there any other Government known in the World for
above three thousand years, till some ambitious Fellows among the giddy
Grecians, a People always delighted in Novelties, rebelled against their
Sovereigns, and usurped their Authority; as was lately here done by the
Rump-Parliament, and is now again aimed at by the Factors for the
Good-Old-Cause.

The better to excite my fellow Subjects to a dutiful Submission to our common
Father the King, I have reminded them, that all those Rights and Privileges,
to the Preservation whereof (tho neither infringed, nor in danger of being so)
the popular Demagogues pretend to call them forth, when their real design is
utterly to destroy and take away both the Regal Prerogative and the Peoples
Liberties, are originally the Concessions of their Princes; and therefore that,
as it is the height of Ingratitude to employ the Favors of their Sovereign to
the disturbance of his Government: so it is an excess of Folly, to think to
secure their Liberties by the pulling down or weakening that Authority, which,
as it first gave them, so is alone capable to protect and maintain them. This,
tho it may seem strange to those, that have their Heads filled with the
Chimerical Conceits of the natural Freedom and Equality of Mankind, and the
first founding of Government by the Multitude, upon such Terms and Conditions,
as to their Wisdoms seemed fit, is yet clearly manifest from the Histories and
Records of all Ages and Nations, and particularly of this Kingdom of England:
of which it was well observed by the late Lord Keeper Bridgman, then Lord chief
Baron, at the Trial of the Regicides: It is true we have as great Liberties, as
any People have in Christendom, in the World: but let us own them, where they
are due. We have them by the Concessions of our Princes. Our Princes have
granted them: and the King now, He in them has granted them likewise.

After this Account of the Original and Excellency of Monarchy, to which
Government alone, I briefly show, that this Island has been always subjected,
I proceed to the Conquest thereof by the Romans, and thence to such other
Mutations, as happened therein unto the time of Cadwalladar, who in the Year 689
quitting his Kingdom, of which the Saxons had gotten the best part, a Period
was put to the British Monarchy, the very Name of King of Britain not being so
much as heard of till the happy Union of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland
by the Succession of His Majesty's Grandfather King James of famous Memory to
the Crown of England, whose Genealogy from Cadwalladar I have here set down,
clearly demonstrating his present Sacred Majesty to be the true and undoubted
Heir of the said British King, as he is also of the Saxon, Norman, and Scottish
Kings, and consequently to have a clearer Right to this Monarchy, than any
private man can pretend to his Estate.

After this Relation of such Mutations, as concern Britain in general, I give a
general Account of the present Government of this Island. And here according to
my Duty, and the Oath of Supremacy, which declaring the King to be the only
Supreme Governor, admits neither Equal nor Superior, I assert the Sovereignty
of our Lord the King, and show, that there is not in our (nor can indeed be in
any) Monarchy any Authority, but what is derived from the Monarch, in
opposition to the pernicious Doctrine of Coordinacy, daily by the Ringleaders
of the Faction dispersed amongst the People, and endeavored to be justified by
the Author of Plato Redivivus, and T. H. the former of which, speaking of the
late Parliamentary Rebellion, says: This is certain, that wherever two
Coordinate Powers do differ, and there be no Power on earth to reconcile them
otherwise, nor Umpire, they will, de facto, fall together by the ears. And the
latter not only tells us in express terms, that the Parliament derive their
Power and Authority from the same Original, the King derives His; but by
affirming, that there are Treasons of State other than those, that are declared
by the Statutes, and such as the King cannot pardon, would prostitute the Lives
of all his fellow Subjects to the Arbitrary Power of any prevailing Faction,
which may at any time happen to be in the two Houses of Parliament, or perhaps
in the House of Commons alone, the only part (if we will believe the Author of
Plato Redivivus) which is now left entire of the old Constitution.

And because the Heads of the Faction, that they might leave no Stone unturned,
which might be made use of for the battering down of this Hereditary Monarchy,
have essayed to subvert it by impeaching the Descent of the Crown in the Right
Line, I have treated upon the of late much controverted Point of the
Succession, which I have demonstrated to be unalterable by any Statute or Act
of Parliament whatever, and as such to have been acknowledged by all our
Ancient Parliaments, that were neither overawed by Force, nor seduced by
Faction.

Having thus, with what Brevity I could, handled these foregoing matters, I
conclude this Part with a short account of the present Monarch of Great
Britain, Our Sovereign Lord the KING now Reigning (whom GOD long preserve to
the Consolation and Happiness of this Island) of his Queen, and the Princes of
his Royal Blood.

And because the ill-willers to the Peace of this our Israel have raised in the
minds of the unthinking Vulgar terrible Fears and Apprehensions of his Royal
Highness, whom, the readilier to stir up against him the Animosity of the
people, they have audaciously loaded with all the Calumnies and Scandals, which
the Malice of Men or Devils could invent, I have endeavored by a true (tho
imperfect) Representation of his Gests and Character to remove that Prejudice,
which these horrid and malicious Falsities may have created against him in the
Spirits of the unwary.

If these my Endeavors shall prove useful for the reducing of any of my deluded
Countrymen to that natural Obedience, which we owe to our Sovereign, I shall
repute my self abundantly satisfied for my pains, and shall be encouraged to
complete the rest of my designed Work.

THE TABLE.
A ABsoluteness of Paternal Jurisdiction. 57 Act of Parliament in Scotland,
declaring the unalterableness of the Succession. 241 Adam Monarch of the
Universe. 53 Adraste a Goddess of the Britains. 27 Agricola Governor of
Britain. 103 Air of Great Britain. 9 St. Albanus Protomartyr of Britain. 131
Ambrosius King of the Britains. 154 St. Amphibalus Martyred. 132 Arbitrary
Power necessary in all Governments. 58 St. Aristobulus in Britain. 119 Armor
and Weapons of the ancient Britains. 48 Arms of King Lucius. 178 -- of King
Vortigern. ibid. -- of King Aurelius Ambrosius. ibid. -- of Vter Pendragon.
ibid. -- of King Arthur. ibid. -- of Cadwalladar. ibid. -- of the King of Great
Britain since the Union of England and Scotland. 179 -- of the present Queen of
Great Britain. 268 Attire of the ancient Britains. 42
B BAngor a Seminary of Learning. 129 Baptism of the King. 248 Bardiacus a
Garment of the ancient Britains. 43 Bards. 28 Beauty of the British Women. 41
Belerus a God of the Britains. 27 Belisama a Goddess of the Britains. ibid.
Bill of Exclusion. 236 Birth of the King. 247 -- of the Queen. 266 Boadicea
Queen of the Iceni in Britain. 101 Brachae a Garment of the ancient Britains.
43 Britain quitted by the Romans. 143 British Bishops at the Council of Arles.
139 -- at the Council of Nice. 142 British Monarchy restored by King James. 156
Buildings of the ancient Britains. 48
C CAligula's Attempt against Britain. 93 Cassibelan. 87 Chariots of the
ancient Britains. 49 CHARLES the Is It. King of Great Britain murdered by his
Phanatical Subjects. 170 Children of King CHARLES the Is It. 269 Christianity
first brought into Britain. 117 -- restored by Constantin. 135 Cimbri first
Inhabitants of Britain. 20 Claudius Drusus the Emperor in Britain. 98 Climate
of Great Britain. 3 Coming of the King into Scotland 251 Commodities of Great
Britain 12 Community of Women amongst the ancient Britains. 37 Computation of
time by the ancient Britains. 51 Conquest of Britain by the Romans. 94
Constantius Chlorus the Emperor in Britain. 133 Conversion of King Lucius to
Christianity. 123 Cornage. 111 Coronotion of the King. 260 Covinus. 49 Court of
the King, when Prince of Wales. 248 Cure of the King's Evil. 219
D DEparture of the King out of England. 250 Descent of King James from
Cadwalladar. 158 Diet of the ancient Britains. 41 Dimensions of Great Britain.
3 Discovery of Britain by the Romans. 77 Disorder of popular Government
exemplified in the Roman Democracy. 69 Distinction of Monarchy into Despotical
and Paternal groundless. 57 Divinity of the King. 212 Division of Britain. 2 --
of Great Britain. 5 Dominions of Princes anciently small. 64 -- of the King of
Great Britain. 180 Druids. 29
E EDucation of the King. 249 End of Government. 67 Episcopal Sees in Britain.
125 Escape of the King from Worcester. 252 Essedum. 50 Excellency of Monarchy.
67 Excommunication used by the ancient Britains. 38 Extent of Britain taken in
the largest Sense. 1
F FRontinus Governor of Britain. 103
G GAlgacus General of the Britains. 108 Gauls in Britain. 20 Gaunacum a
Garment of the ancient Britains. 43 Genealogy of the King 245 -- of the Queen.
263 Giants in Britain. 32 Gods of the ancient Britains. 26 Government. 52 -- of
Britain always Monarchical. 73 Government of Britain under the Romans. 112 --
Civil as ordered by Constantin. 113 -- Military. 114 -- after the Romans
Depature. 144 -- present of Great Britain. 172 Greeks in Britain. 21
H HArdiness of the ancient Britains. 37 Hesus a God of the Britains. 26 Hues a
God of the Britains. ibid.
I St. JAmes the Apostle in Britain. 118 JESUS CHRIST, the Savior of the
World, born. 116 Inhabitants of Great Britain. 19 Invasion of Britain by the
Romans. 84 Jointure of the Queen. 267 St. Joseph of Arimathea in Britain. 120
Julius Caesar in Britain. 77 Jurisdiction of the Druids. 30
K KIng sole Legislator. 204 -- supreme Landlord of all Lands within His
Dominions. 206 King supreme Administrator of Justice. 209 -- has the sole Power
of the Sword. 211
L LAnguage of the ancient Britains. 39 Laws of the ancient Britains. 23
Limited Monarchy. 62
M MAnners of the ancient Britains. 35 Manner of Fighting used by the ancient
Britains. 49 St. Marcellus in Britain. 122 Marriage of the King. 262 -- of the
Queen. 266 Mary Queen of Scotland expelled her Kingdom by Presbyterian Rebels.
169 Missletoe. 34 Mixed Monarchy. 63 Monarchy. 52 Money of the ancient
Britains. 46 Monks according to the Rule of St. Mark the Evangelist. 129
N NAme of Britain. 2 -- of the Monarch of Great Britain. 175 -- of the present
King. 244 -- of the Queen. 263 Nations erected at the Confusion of Tongues
Seventy two. 55 Nimrod. 64 Noah divided the Earth amongst his Sons. 54
O OFfice of the King of Great Britain. 193 Ogmius a God of the Britains. 28
Onvana a Goddess of the Britains. 27 Prince of Orange. 286 Original of
Monarchy. 52 -- of the Family of the Stuarts. 162 Ostorius Scapula Governor of
Britain. 99
P PAinting of the ancient Britains. 44 St. Paul the Apostle in Britain. 119
Peace enjoyed by no People without Monarchy. 68 Period of the British Kingdom.
155 Persecution of the Christians in Britain. 130 Person of the King. 188 St.
Peter the Apostle in Britain. 118 St. Peter's Cornhil built. 128 Petilius
Crealis Governor of Britain. 103 Petronius Turpilianus Governor of Britain.
ibid. Phoenicians in Britain. 21 Picts. 22 Picts and Scots annoy the Britains.
144 A Plautius sent into Britain. 94 Portion of the Queen. 267 Prerogatives of
the King. 193 Priests of the ancient Britains. 28 Prince Elector Palatine. 288
Proclamations. 196 Progeny of Cadwalladar continued to his present Majesty. 163
Punishments of the ancient Britains. 38
R REcords of the ancient Britains. 40 Recreation of the ancient Britains. 45
Religion of the ancient Britains. 25 Respect of the King. 220 Restoration of
the King. 256 Right of Government descends to the eldest Son. 54 Rights and
Privileges of the People originally the Concessions of Princes. 61 Romans in
Britain. 28 Prince Rupert. 289
S SAcrifices of the ancient Britains. 32 Saxons. 23 -- hired by the Britains
against the Picts and Scots. 150 Scots. 23 Simplicity of the ancient Britains.
36 Shipping of the ancient Britains. 46 Soil of Great Britain. 10 Sovereignty
of the King. 203 Queen of Spain 287 Stature of the ancient Britains. 40
Strength of the Monarch of Great Britain. 181 Succession to the Crown of Great
Britain. 224 Suetonius Governor of Britain. 101 Suetonius a Britain first
Planter of Christianity amongst the Helvetians. 118 Surname of the King. 244
Swiftness of the ancient Britains. 41
T TAramis a God of the Britains. 26 St. Timotheus, Son of Pudens, in Britain.
122 Title of the King. 175 Traffic of the ancient Britains. 45 Trinobantes
revolt to Caesar. 90 Tutates a God of the Britains. 26
V VAlor of the ancient Britains. 36 Vortigern chosen King of the Britains. 146
-- hires the Saxons. 150 Vortimer chosen an Associate to his Father Vortigern
in the Kingdom. 151 -- poisoned by the procurement of Rowena. 152 Vter
Pendragon King of Britain. 154
W WAles subjected to the Crown of England. 166 Westminster Church built. 129
Wicker Image. 32 Winchester Church built. 129
Y Duke of YOrk. 272 -- His Wives and Children. 283

ERRATA.
Page 18. in the Margin read Gascoign then, p. 31. lin. 18. dele the, p. 32. l.
2. r. so to do. p. 33. l. 27. r. and Bushes. p. 74. l. 12. r. contradicting. p.
81. l. 5. r. unlookt-for Accident. p. 89. l. 13. r. retired. p. 122. l. 21. r.
Praxedes. p. 131. l. 17. r. Cassock. p. 135. l. 17. r. particularly, p. 161. l.
18. for not named r. named Nest p. 165. l. 6. r. His inheritance. p. 172. l.
penult. r. hereditary, p. 173. l. 9. r. Empire, p. 179 l. 20. r. Droit, p. 188.
l. 18. r. manners, p. 199. l. 11. r. Commonweal, p. 216. l. 15. r. thirty
fifth, p, 251. in the Marg. r. Scotland. p. 266. l. 13. r. her Mother. p. 292.
l. 28. r. fatality.

OF BRITAIN In General.
CHAP. I. Of Britain in the largest Sense.
BRITAIN in the general and more comprehensive signification contains all those
Islands both great and small, Extent.
which lie about Albion, or Britain properly so called. Ex adverso hujus (says
Ptolomey, speaking of France) Britannia Insula, Albion ipsi nomen fuit, cum
Britanniae omnes vocarentur. The whole Dominion of which Islands is at present
united under the Command of the King of Great Britain.

Division.
They are distinguished into the Greater and Lesser: The Greater are Great
Britain and Ireland; The Lesser are, 1 The Orcades, 2 The Hebrides, 3 Man, 4
Anglesey, 5 The Islands of the Severn Sea, 6 The Sorlinges or Isles of Scilly,
7 Wight, 8 Thanet, 9 Sunderland, 10 Holy Island.

CHAP. II. Of the Name of Britain, of its Climate, Dimensions, Division, Air,
Soil, and Commodities.
Name.
GREAT BRITAIN, or Britain properly so called, without comparison the best and
most flourishing Island of the whole World, is said to have been first named
Samothea from Samothes, supposed to have reigned here Anno Mundi 1910. It was
afterward called Albion, either from (...) Happy, or ab albis rupibus from its
White Cliffs, or (more probably) from King Albion. By degrees the Name Britain
was appropriated to this Island, the rest having their particular Names. It was
called Britain either from two British Words Pride and Cain, signifying Beauty
and White, or from (...) Metals, or from the British Word Brith Painted, the
Greeks adding (...) a Region, or from the Phoenician Word Barat-Anac A Land of
Tynne, in which sense the British Islands were by the Greeks called
Cassiterides, or from King Brutus, reigning here (as is alleged) Anno Mundi
2855.

It is situated from fifty Degrees six Minutes in the sixteenth Parallel and
eighth Climate to sixty Degrees thirty Minutes in the twenty sixth Parallel,
and thirteenth Climate; Climate
Lying thus under the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth
Climates: Insomuch that the longest Day in the most Northern parts is eighteen
Hours and three quarters, and the shortest Day in the most Southern near eight
Hours long.

It is in Length from the Lyzard-Point Southward in Cornwall to the
Straithy-head in the North of Scotland, Dimensions.
six hundred twenty four Miles; in Breadth from the Lands-end in Cornwall in the
West to Dover in the East two hundred and eighty; the whole compass thereof
(allowing for the Turnings and Windings of the Shores) is eighteen hundred
thirty six Miles, thus reckoned: From Dunsby-Heate to the Lands-end eight
hundred and twelve; from the Lands-end to the Foreland of Kent, three hundred
and twenty; from the Foreland of Kent to Dunsby-Heate seven hundred and four.
It is the greatest Island of the whole World, except Java, Borneo, Sumatra,
Madagascar, and Groenland, and was therefore by the Ancients (to whom these
were unknown) called The other World. It is bounded on the East with the German
Ocean, dividing it from Belgium, Germany, and Denmark; on the West with St.
Georges Chanel, separating it from Ireland; on the Northwest with the Vergivian
or Western Ocean, of which the Ancients knew no Shore; on the North with the
Deucalidon Seas; and on the South with the English Chanel, parting it from
France. It is in form triangular; but by some said to have the Resemblance of a
great Snake, the Head whereof with a wide-gaping Mouth, looks toward Norway,
and part of Denmark, his Tail extending to the West.

It is said to have been divided by Brutus into Loegria, Division
now called England, Cambria Wales, and Albania Scotland. But it was found by
Julius Caesar divided into several petty Provinces or Kingdoms, the Names
whereof follow. 1. Cantii, or the Inhabitants of Kent. 2. Regni, Sussex and
Surrey. 3. Durothriges, Dorsetshire. 4. Damnonii, Devon and Cornwall. 5.
Belgae, Somerset, Wilts, and Hampshire. 6. Attrebatii, Berkshire. 7. Dobuni,
Oxford and Glocestershire. 8. Catieuchlani, Warwick, Bucks and Bedfordshire. 9.
Trinobantes, Hartford, Essex, and Middlesex. 10. Iceni, Suffolk, Norfolk, and
Cambridgshire. 11. Coritani, Northampton, Lincoln, Leicester, Rutland, Derby,
and Nottinghamshire. 12. Cornabii, Stafford, Worcester, Cheshire, and
Shropshire. 13. Brigantes Parisii, Lancashire, York, Richmond, Durham,
Westmorland, and Cumberland. 14. Ordovices, Flint, Denbigh, Merioneth,
Caernarvan, and Montgomeryshire. 15. Silures, Hereford, Radnor, Brecknock,
Monmouth, and Glamorganshire. 16. Dimetae, Pembroke, Cardigan, and
Caermardenshire. 17. Ottadini, Northumberland, Teifidale, Twedale, Merch, and
Louthien. 18. Selgovai, Lidesdale, Eusdale, Eskdale, Annandale, and Niddesdale.
19. Novantes, Kile, Carick, Galloway, and Cunningham. 20. Damnii, Fife,
Renfraw, Cluydsdale, Lennox, Striveling, and Menteth. 21. Caledonii Gadini,
Perth, Strathern, Albin, Argile, and Lorne. 22. Epidii, Cantire. 23. Vicemagi,
Murray. 24. Venricones, Mernia, Anguis, Mar. 25. Tazali, Buquhane. 26. Cantae,
Creones, Cerontes, Rosse, Southerland. 27. Carnonacae, Carini, Carnabii,
Stratnavern. 28. Simertae, Logi, Caithnes.


After Britain was conquered by the Romans, it was by them divided into
Britannia Prima, Britannia Secunda, and Maxima Caesariensis: The first of these
containing the South parts, the second all that Western part, now called Wales,
and the third the Northern parts beyond Trent. It was afterward divided into
Britannia Major, now called England, and Minor, which is Scotland.

The Britains, having received the Christian Faith, did (for the better
Government Ecclesiastical) divide the same into three Provinces or
Archbishopricks: viz. the Archbishopric of London, containing Britannia Prima;
the Archbishopric of York, comprehending Maxima Caesariensis; and the
Archbishopric of Caerleon upon Vsk, under which was Britannia Secunda. The
Heathen Saxons afterward overrunning the South part of this Island, and
dividing it into seven Kingdoms, the King of Kent being first converted to the
Christian Faith by St. Austin, the Archiepiscopal See of London was removed to
Canterbury; that of Caerleon was translated to St. David's in Pembrokeshire, and
at last subjected to the Sea of Canterbury; the Archbishopric of York, under
which was the North of England, and all Scotland, keeping still its first place.

The Britains being by the prevailing Saxons forced to retire into the Western
parts beyond the River Severn, that part of the Island was by the said Saxons
called Walishland, since Wales; the Southern part, by them inhabited, named
England; and the Northern part Scotland: and the Name of Britain seemed in a
manner lost, till such time as, the Crown of England by indubitable Hereditary
Right descending on the Royal House of Scotland, King James of happy memory,
Grandfather to our present Dread Sovereign, reuniting the Kingdoms, restored
also the ancient Name of Britain, adding thereto the Epithet Great, the better
to distinguish it from Britannia Armorica, a Province in the Realm of France.

The Air, Air.
tho different according to the many Climates, through which it runs, is
generally mild and temperate: the continual Breezes, and gentle Winds from the
Sea, the very often Interposition of Clouds between the Sun and Earth, and the
frequent Showers of Rain qualifying the Heats and Droughts in Summer; and the
warm Vapors of the invironing Seas mitigating the Cold in Winter, whose Frosts
serve only to meliorate the cultivated Soil, and its Snow to keep warm the
tender Plants. And tho in the most Northern parts of Scotland the Cold is much
sharper in Winter, than in any other place of the Island, yet the great Plenty
of Wood, and other Fuel hinders the Inhabitants from suffering much thereby.
In a word the Cold is neither so piercing, nor the Heat so scorching, as that
there should be need of Stoves in Winter, or Grottaes in Summer.

Soil.
As the Air is kind and temperate, so the Soil is fertile and wholesome, abundantly
watered with Springs and Streams, and in many places with great Navigable
Rivers, the most eminent whereof are the Thames, Severn and Humber. There are
(especially in the South part thereof, called England) few barren Hills, or
craggy Rocks; and tho the Northern parts of Scotland are somewhat mountainous,
yet there want not (even there) fruitful Valleys, apt for Grain, Grass or Wood.
Nay, that very Ground, which lies wast and neglected in England, is (by men of
no small Judgment) thought far to exceed the Soil of many Provinces on the
Continent. The excellency of the Soil is manifested by the Complexion of the
Inhabitants, who therein exceed all other Nations of the Universe. It is
attested also by those transcendent Elogies, given her by Ancient and Modern
Writers. O happy Britain (said an ancient Panegyrist in the time of Constantine
the Great) and blessed above all other Regions: Nature has enriched thee with
all the Benefits both of Heaven and Earth, wherein there is neither extreme
Cold in Winter, nor scorching Heat in Summer; wherein there is such abundant
Plenty of Corn, as may suffice both for Bread and Wine; wherein are Woods
without Wild Beasts, and Fields without noysom Serpents, but infinite numbers
of Milch-Cattle, and Sheep weighed down with rich Fleeces: And that, which is
most comfortable, long Days, and lightsome Nights. And long before that, it
was called by Orpheus The Seat of Queen Ceres; as since by Charles the Great
The Storehouse and Granary of the whole Western World. So that not undeservedly
does our English Lucan sing.

The fairest Land, that from her thrusts the rest,
As if she cared not for the World beside;
A World within her self with wonders blessed.
Commodities.
As this our Island is separated from the rest of the habitable World: so
Nature, like an indulgent Mother, has furnished it with so great abundance of
all things, necessary for the life of Man, that it may easily subsist without
the Contribution of any other part of the World.

Insula praedives, quae toto vix eget orb,
Et cujus totus indiget orbis open:
Insula praedives, cujus miretur, and optet
Delicias Solomon, Octavianus opes,
said old Alfred of Beverly, speaking of Britain. And should I here go about to
enumerate the several sorts of Grain, it bears, its vast abundance of Cattle,
yielding wholesome and substantial Food, its great Plenty and Variety of Fish,
Fowl, Fruit, edible Roots and Herbs, I might be thought by Strangers rather to
reckon up the Works of Nature, than to describe the Plenty of an Island. It
has indeed such a constant continuance of all sorts of necessary Food, that
the Famine, which so often ravages other Countries, has scarce been felt here
these four hundred years. The usual and natural drink of the People is Beer,
Ale, Syder, Perry, and in some places Metheglin or Mede.

As this Island affords its Inhabitants all necessary Food for the support of
their Life: so it yields them plenty of Raiment for their defense against the
Injuries of the Weather. For it produces (especially in the South part called
England) not only very fine Wool, making excellently lasting, and
well-conditioned Cloth; but also such great abundance thereof, as serves not
only for the Clothing of all sorts of People from the highest to the lowest;
but being manufactured into Cloth and Stuffs, is dispersed all over the World,
but especially into High-Germany, Muscovia, Turkey, and Persia, to the great
benefit of its Inhabitants.

And as it thus abounds with Wool: so has it Linen made therein, inferior to
none for its Goodness; nor would it need supply thereof from elsewhere for any
use whatever, were the people but so industrious, as they might be, in sowing
Flax and Hemp, for the producing whereof they want not fitting Ground, tho
there be at present (through their Sloth in neglecting to improve it) much
Linen imported to the shame and damage of the Nation.

The Abundance of Cattle here slain furnishes the People with great store of
excellent Leather for all sorts of Uses; insomuch that the poorest of them were
good Leathern Shoes, whereas in the neighboring Countries they either wear
Wooden Shoes, or none at all.

For building it wants not any requisite Materials, being well stored with
Timber, Iron, Brick, Tiles, Slate, Lime, Lead, Glass, and Stone, of which our
fine Portland Stone is not much inferior to Marble.

For fuel there is either Wood, Sea-Coal, or Pit-Coal, almost everywhere to be
had at reasonable rates; and where this is wanting, they burn Turfs or Peats.

For Shipping there is no where better Oak, no where such Knee-timber, as the
Shipwrights call it; or Iron to make serviceable Guns.

For War, Journeys, and Hunting; for Plow, Cart, and Carriages, there is such
abundant plenty of Horses, that Asses and Mules, so frequently made use of in
France, Italy, and Spain, are here utterly despised.

Dogs it has of all sorts, sizes and uses: amongst which the English Mastiff
deservedly has the first Place from all others in the World, a Dog, bold and
stout as a Lion; and yet (when well bred) gentle and manageable, as a Lamb: and
therefore of singular use for the Defense of Families against the Attempts of
Thieves and House-breakers.

It produces likewise, besides a mighty quantity of Tynn, Lead and Iron, some
Brass and Copper, and has also Quicksilver, Antimony, Sulphur, Black-Lead,
Orpiment red and yellow, Allom, Salt, Hops, Saffron, Liquoris, and diverse other
beneficial Commodities: and has several Silver-Mines, richer than those of
Potosi in the West Indies, whence the King of Spain has most of his Silver:
those yielding usually but an Ounce and an half of Silver in an hundred Ounces
of Oar; and these ordinarily six or eight Ounces per Cent. But these Mines,
lying deep, are hard to come unto, which in Potosi is otherwise.

And (as if all this were not sufficient) it yields Physic likewise to the
Inhabitants, having in it Hot Baths for the ease of Maims, Bruises, inward
Aches and Pains, and abounding in Medicinal Springs.

And although there be not much Wine made here at present, yet, if we shall
consider, that Vineyards were heretofore common in most of the Southern and
middle parts of England, we shall easily be induced to attribute this Defect
(if it be any) to the better improvement of our Ground, and the cheap and easy
Importation of that and other foreign Commodities, the Advantages, it has
from all parts of the World to take in Trade and Merchandise, being so great,
as abundantly verifies that of the Old Poet: Quicquid amat Luxus, quicquid
desiderat Vsus,
Ex te proveniet, vel aliunde tibi.


In a word, tho this Island is by some Countries in some things excelled, yet
if we consider the Salubrity of the Air, free (in a manner) from violent
Thunder and Lightning, unwholsom Serenes, and tempestuous Hurricanes, and
well-stored with Birds and Fowls; the Fertility of the Soil, rarely subjected
to Droughts, Inundations, or destructive Earthquakes, the Fields being laden
with Corn, the Pastures stockt with Cattle, the Forests, Parks (of which in
England alone there are more, than in all Europe besides) Warrens, and Woods
stored with wild Beasts only for Recreation and Food; the Amoenity and Utility
of its Seas, Rivers and Ponds, covered with Ships and Boats, and abounding with
all sorts of Fish; its Plenty of Metals and Minerals; the strength of its
Situation, being so walled and guarded with the Ocean, so well furnished with
excellent Shipping and Sailors, and so abounding with commodious Ports and
Havens, that it is rightly termed The Lady of the Sea, we may well be permitted
to affirm, that for necessary Food and Raiment, for pleasant and wholesome
Living, for Safety and Security, it is hardly to be equalled by any Kingdom in
the World, and needs not fear the Force of any Neighboring Nation, but that,
which overpowering us at Sea, shall thereby deprive us of our strongest
Bulwark, and of an Island make us a Continent. Not without reason therefore did
an Ancient Writer thus cry out: Britain, Thou art a glorious Isle, extolled and
renowned among all Nations; the Navies of Tharsis cannot be compared with thy
Shipping, bringing in all precious Commodities of the World: The Sea is thy
Wall, and strong Fortifications do secure thy Ports: Chivalry, Clergy, and
Merchandise do flourish in thee. The Pisans, Genoveses, and Venetians do bring
thee Saphires and Carbuncles from the East: Asia serves thee with Silk and
Purple, Africa with Cinnamon and Balm, Spain with Gold, and Germany with Silver:
Thy Weaver Flanders does drape Cloth for thee of thine own Wool; Cascoign- then
under the Crown of England.
Thy Gascoign does send thee Wine: Buck and Do are plentiful in thy Forests:
Droves of Cattle, and Flocks of Sheep are upon thy Hills: All the Perfection of
the goodliest Land is in thee: Thou have all the Fowl of the Air. In plenty of
Fish thou do surpass all Regions. And albeit thou art not stretched out with
large Limits, yet bordering Nations, clothed with thy Fleeces, do wonder at
thee for thy blessed Plenty. Thy Swords have been turned into Plow-shares:
Peace and Religion flourishes in thee; so that thou art a Mirror to all
Christian Kingdoms.

CHAP. III. Of the Inhabitants: Of the Laws, Religion, Manners, and Punishments
of the Ancient Britains; Of their Language, Stature, Diet, Attire, Recreation,
Traffic, Shipping, Coins, and Buildings; Of their Arms and manner of Fighting:
Of their Computation of Time.
BRITAIN, being a Country, Inhabitants.
so rich in Commodities, so beautiful in situation, and so well stored with
every thing, necessary for the support of Human Life, that, if the World had
been by its omnipotent Creator fashioned like a Ring, as it is like a Globe,
she might well have been esteemed the only Gemme therein: it is no wonder, that
she has been possessed by many Nations, and coveted by many more; and that,
whereas some Countries are still held by their Aborigines, or the first, that
laid claim to them, it should be a matter of no small difficulty to find out
the first Inhabitants of this Island.

The first Inhabitants of the Island, now called Great Britain, had their
Original (as may be reasonably conjectured from their calling themselves
Kumero, Cymro, and Kumeri, which Name was so ancient amongst them, that Cymro
and Cymri does now signify as much as Aborigines) from the Cimbri of the
Continent, who are supposed to be the Relics of the ancient Cimmerii, that,
proceeding from Scythia into the Countries, afterward called Sarmatia and
Germany, and establishing themselves upon the Seacoasts of Gaul, passed over
into this Island likewise, and here seated themselves. But in process of time,
and before the Days of Caesar, the Germans Valor decreasing, the Gauls,
increasing in Number and Power, recovered their ancient Seats, and proceeded
into Britain also, and invaded part of the Cimbri, who had long before placed
themselves in this Island; and although they obtained the Seacoasts, and entered
far into the Inland parts, and so by long possession came to be called
Britains, yet they were by the more ancient Inhabitants, who esteemed
themselves the only Aborigines of the Island, looked upon only as Incroachers.

Soon after (if not contemporary with the Cimbri) are the Phaenicians supposed
to have been in this Island, who, being in the first Ages of the World the
best, if not only Navigators, passing through the Straits to discover the
Western Seas, first of all the Inhabitants of the Mediterranean found out these
Islands, arriving first at the Isles of Scilly, which finding to abound with
Tynn, they called in their Language Bratanac, which the Greeks by a Word of
like signification rendered Cassiterides. The Phaenicians, afterward
discovering the Western parts of this Island, now called Cornwall and
Devonshire, the same name was communicated thereunto, and by Degrees to all the
Islands, situated in the Western Ocean.

The Usefulness of those excellent Commodities, brought by the Phaenicians from
Britain, rendered the Greeks very curious in search of the Place, from whence
they came, which the Phaenicians as studiously concealed from them: Yet Colaeus
having discovered the Western Seas, the Greeks found out these Islands, where
they settled vast Colonies, landing first at Man and Anglesey, and introduced
into the whole Island a great number of their Religious Ceremonies, and other
Customs.

In the Year of the World 3913. Julius Caesar, being offended with the Britains
for having underhand assisted his Enemies the Gauls, invaded this Nation, but
may be said rather to have discovered it, than conquered it: from which he was
so far, that Lucan says positively of him,

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. But afterward in the Time of
Claudius the Southern Parts of it were made a Roman Province.

The Britains being thus partly subdued by the Romans, some of them, impatient
of subjection, sheltring themselves behind the Cheviot Hills, and Mount
Grampius, infested the Roman Colonies, and retaining the ancient Custom of
painting themselves, when the other Britains, now civilized, had left it off,
were distinguished by the Name of Picts, those only being called Britains, who
were under the Romans Jurisdiction. These Picts inhabited the more Southern
Parts of so much of the Island, as was left unconquered by the Romans, the more
Northern parts being long before possessed by the Scots, who Anno mundi 3641.
coming out of Ireland, seated themselves there, and called it Scotland.

In the Decay of the Roman Empire the Britains, deserted by the Romans, and
weakened by the many Armies, they had drawn from them, and infested by the Scots
and Picts, did in the Reign of King Vortigern call in the Saxons to their
Assistance, who by degrees possessed themselves of all the flourishing parts of
the Island, driving the Britains into the mountainous Parts of Wales and
Cornwall.

Of the Laws, Laws.
whereby the Ancient Britains were governed, the most remarkable, that have
come to our knowledge, are seven, said to have been made by Molmutius Dunwallo,
translated out of the British speech into the Latin by Gildas, and afterward
into the English Saxon by King Alfred. They are these that follow:

1. That the Temples of the Gods should enjoy such Privileges, that whatever
Malefactor should fly thither for Sanctuary, should not be forced from thence,
till he had obtained Pardon for his Crime.

2. That the Ways, leading to the Temples, and the Roads of great Cities,
should have like Privileges.

3. That Plows, Oxen, and other laboring Cattle should enjoy the like
Immunities, lest, the Ground being untilled, the People might perish for want
of Bread.

4. That a certain number of Plows should be used in every County of the Land,
with severe Penalties to be inflicted upon those, that should lessen the Number.

5. That no Oxen or laboring Beasts should be seized for Debt.

6. That Buying and Selling should be by certain set Weights and Measures.

7. That Thieves and Robbers should be severely punished.

Religion.
The great Goodness and Wisdom of GOD having created Man for the Enjoyment of
himself, and all other things for the use and service of Man in order to his
attaining of this sublime End, it is but just, that Man should pay a Sovereign
Adoration and Respect to this bounteous Creator, and a punctual Obedience to
all his Commands. The true Manner of performing this Adoration was by Adam, who
received it of GOD himself, taught his Posterity; but they deviating from his
Precepts, and becoming guilty of all sorts of Impieties, the Almighty sent an
universal Deluge, which washed away all Mankind (eight Persons only excepted)
from off the Face of the Earth.

The Posterity of Noah, who with his Wife, his three Sons, and their Wives,
alone escaped this common Calamity, too soon forgetting the severe Punishment,
inflicted upon the former Generation of Men for their Irreligion, left the
Service of the true Deity, adoring the Inventions of their own Heads, and the
Works of their own Hands: so that amongst all the Inhabitants of the Earth
there were anciently none but the Jews, who Worshipped the true GOD in the true
manner.

No wonder then, that the Religion of the ancient Britains was Paganish
Superstition, they having many Idol-Gods, the chief whereof were these, that
follow.

1. Taramis, or the Thunderer, the same with Jupiter, to whom, as to many other
of their Gods, they offered human Sacrifices.

2. Tutates, or Mercury, who was esteemed the Inventor of all Arts and
Sciences, and particularly of Letters, and the Sickle; as also the Leader in in
all Journeys, and Guide in all Ways; and whose Patronage was esteemed to be of
a wonderful Efficacy for promoting Gain in Money, or any kind of Merchandise. To
his Honor there were Mounts cast up, and consecrated, especially where many
Ways met, and his Statue erected upon them, pointing to the Ways.

3. Hesus, the same with Mars, the God of War and Peace, called also Camulus:
from whom came Camulodunum or Mars-Hill, now Maldon in Essex. To him also were
Men sacrificed.

4. Hues, or Bacchus, whose Priests were called Eubages. Of the Feasts of this
God Pliny is supposed to speak, where he says, That the Britains died
themselves like Aethiopians at some solemn Sacrifices, and performed their
Worship with Men and Women going naked.

5. Belenus, who was the same with Apollo, represented by the Britains with an
Harp. His Priests were called Paterae.

6. Belisama, or the Moon, The Queen of Heaven, viz. Diana, the Sister of
Apollo, called also Ardurena and Ardoena, the Goddess of Woods and Mountains.
She had sometime a Temple in London, where now stands the Cathedral of St. Paul.

7. Onvana, or Minerva, to whose Honor there was a Temple erected, where is
now the Cathedral of Bath.

8. Adraste, or the Goddess of Victory, supposed to be the same with the Venus
armata of the Cytheraei and Lacedaemonians, and the Venus Victrix of the
Romans. In Temples, and in Groves, called by her Name the Groves of Adraste,
they sacrificed to her Prisoners alive.

They are thought also to have worshipped Ceres and Proserpina, to whom and
other Infernal Deities were performed Nocturnal Sacrifices, where many
abominable Lusts, and horrid Villainies were committed.

In these parts likewise was Worshipped Ogmius or the Phoenician Hercules, who
was represented an Old and decrepit Man, bald-pated, white-haired,
wrincle-skinned, and Sunburned, having a Globe in one hand, and a pair of
Compasses in the other.

Besides these they had also for Gods Portenta (says Gildas) ipsa diabolica
paene numero Aegyptiaca vincentia Many ugly Specter, merely Diabolical,
exceeding in number even those of Egypt. Some of which Representations were
remaining even to his days in the Ruins of their Cities, having deformed
Lineaments, and stern and grim Countenances.

For the performance of their Sacrifices, and other Superstitious Ceremonies of
their Idolatrous Religion, they had many Priests and Instructers, the chief
whereof were the Bards and the Druids. The Bards, who are justly esteemed the
most ancient Order in Britain, and were long before the Druids, being supposed
to have their Original from the Phoenicians, were made use of in the Deifying
of Great Men, composing in Verse the Praises of the Gods and Heroes, and the
whole Body of their Divinity: till that, the Druids, who were brought in by the
Greeks, geting the upper hand, they degenerated by degrees into common
Ballad-singers, and those, that before sang of the Immortality and Essence of
the Soul, the Praises of the Gods, and the Encomiums and Virtues of Great Men,
gave themselves up now to the composing of Mystical Rimes, Charms, Spells, and
Incantations: to which, as the Britains of old, so the Welsh are even at this
day prodigiously addicted.

The Druids, succeeding, did not totally abolish the Customs and Opinions of
the Bards, but retained the most useful of them, particularly the Doctrine of
the Immortality of the Soul, to which they added that of its Transmigration,
first taught by Pythagoras, about whose Time, or not long after, the Greeks are
supposed to have entered this Island. These grew so powerful, that they not only
became the sole Interpreters of Religion, necessarily present in the exercise
thereof, without whom neither public nor private Sacrifices could be
performed; but were made Judges also of all Controversies and Crimes, and
absolute Determiners of all Disputes about Inheritances and Bounds of Lands,
issuing out their Excommunications for Nonperformance of their Decrees even
upon the Temporal Magistrates themselves, and making themselves feared by
having it in their power to determine, whose Blood would be the most acceptable
Sacrifice to the Gods. No wonder therefore, that they were exempted from War,
and Taxes, and enjoyed many other great Privileges and Immunities.

Their Jurisdiction extended over the whole Island and some part of Gallia, and
they were subject to two Primates: one of which, under whom were the Northern
Druids, had his Residence in the Isle of Man; the other, under whom were the
Southern, in Anglesey. Yet Caesar writes, that they were subject but to one
Chief, who was constituted by Election. This being a Place of Great Repute,
there were in its vacancy many Competitors, insomuch that the Secular Power was
sometimes engaged in the Quarrel, each Prince endeavoring to strengthen his
Authority by advancing a Favorite of his own to that Seat. They had once a
year a solemn Meeting at Chartres in France, but their chief Residences were in
the Isles of Man and Anglesey, whither resorted both from Britain and Gaul
those, who desired to be initiated in their Ceremonies, where they continued
sometimes near twenty years to be instructed in the Mysteries of their
Religion, which they were not permitted to carry away any otherwise, than in
their Memories. When Britain was invaded by the Romans, the the Southern Druids
retired to Anglesey, and the Northern to Man: at length those of Anglesey,
being driven out of their Seat, repaired likewise to Man, where they continued
till such time, as King Cratilinth Anno Domini 277. with great difficulty
expelled them.

They taught among other things, that the Life of a Man, either in a desperate
Sickness, or in the Perils of War, could not be secured, unless another
suffered in his stead: wherefore in such Cases they either sacrificed Men, or
vowed so do after their delivery. The most acceptable Sacrifice to their Gods
were esteemed Murderers, Robbers, and such like Criminals, but where those
were wanting, Innocents often suffered. They made in some places the Image or
Statue of a Man, the Limbs whereof were made of Osier Twigs, woven together
like Basket-ware: this they filled with live Men, and setting it on fire,
caused the poor Creatures to perish in the Flames and Smoke.

The first Occasion of erecting these Wicker Images is supposed to have been in
Detestation of the Slavery, they suffered under the Phoenicians, who, being Men
of a vast and exceeding Stature, had for a long time subdued, and kept them
under, and were (no doubt) those Giants, whom the British Histories say to have
so long infested the Land. The Tradition of whose being in Cornwall was
preserved to the days of Havillan the Poet, who lived about four hundred years
since. Whose Verses concerning Cornwall are these.

-- Titanibus illa
Sed paucis famulosa Domus, quibus uda Ferarum
Terga dabant Vestes, Cruor Haustus, Pocula Trunci,
Antra Lares, Dumeta Thoros, Caenacula Rupes,
Praeda Cibos, Raptus Venerem, Spectacula Caedes,
Imperium Vires, Animos Furor, Impetus Arma,
Mortem Pugna, Sepulchra Rubus: Monstrisque gemebat
Monticolis tellus: sed eorum plurima Tractus
Pars erat occidui, Terror, majorque premebat
Te Furor, extremum Zephyri, Cornubia, Limen.
-- Here lodgd of Old
A Race of Titans, impious and bold:
Their Bodies with raw Hides they clad, allaid
With Blood their Thirst, of hollow Trees they made
Their Cups, their Beds were Moss Bushes, Dens
Their Houses were, their Chambers craggy Pens:
Their Hunger Prey, Rape did their Lust supply:
The Sport of slaughtring men did please their Eye:
Force gat them Rule, Fury them Courage gave,
Rage Arms, a Battle Death, a Grove a Grave:
These Monsters dwelt on Hills, and did molest
Each Quarter of the Land, but most the West,
Thou, Frighted Cornwall, never having Rest.
The Druids officiated only in Groves of Oak, planting for that purpose very
many up and down the whole Island: for they highly venerated this Tree, and
more especially the Missletoe growing thereon, without a Branch whereof they
performed no Sacrifice, and which, being found on a Tree, was esteemed a sure
Sign, that the GOD, whom they were then about to serve, had made choice of it.
This was by them gathered with many Superstitious Ceremonies and great
Devotion. 1. They observed, that at the time of gathering it the Moon was to be
neither more nor less than six days old. 2. Having prepared their Sacrifices
under the Tree, they brought thither two young Bullocks milk-white, whose Horns
were then, and not before, bound up. 3. The Priest, clothed in white, climbed
the Tree, and with a golden Bill cut down the Missletoe, which was received
below in a Soldiers white Cassock. 4. They blessed the Gift, mumbling over
many Orisons. The Missletoe, thus gathered, was reputed a Sovereign Antidote
against Poison and Barrenness.

Caesar, at his coming into Britain, Manners.
found it Inhabited by two sorts of People: The more inland parts by such, as
esteemed themselves (...), or to have had their Original out of the very Soil,
they lived in, quos natos in Insula ipsa memoria proditum dicunt, as he has it;
The Maritime parts being possessed by such, as resorted thither from Gaul and
Belgium, for the sake either of Traffic or Conquest. The want of observing
this Distinction is the Cause of the seeming Contradictions, that are found in
such Writers, as discourse of the Manners and Customs of the ancient Britains.

Those on the Seacoasts were more civilized, had Houses, Orchards, Gardens,
tilled and manured their Grounds, and agreed very much in manners with the
Gauls; but the Inlanders for want of Converse, and living in a perpetual State
of War, were more rude and barbarous, symbolizing with the Germans, from whom
they are thought to have had their Original.

The Britains are generally represented by most Authors to be of a kind and
gentle Disposition, not having the Craft and Subtilty of other Nations, but a
fair-conditioned People, of a plain and upright Dealing.

That they were valorous, none can doubt, who considers, with what difficulty,
notwithstanding the many Divisions and Quarrels amongst their own petty
Princes, they were subjected to the Romans; how serviceable they were to them
afterward in their Wars; how vigorously, tho then very few, their Land having
been dispeopled by the Romans, they withstood the numerous Forces of the
Saxons, whom their own Invitation first gave footing amongst them; and, when
overpowered by them, they were forced to retire into the more Western Parts of
this Island, how stoutly they maintained their Liberties against the English
Kings both of the Saxon and Norman Race; and how by a voluntary Submission,
rather than Force, they were brought under Subjection to the Crown of England:
Since which time they have been outgone by none in Loyalty and Fidelity to
their Prince.

The Inlanders had all things amongst them in common, and would not admit of
any Propriety, insomuch that ten or twelve of them promiscuously made use of
the same Women, Brethren with Brethren, and Parents with their own Children,
the Issue, which was bred up by a common Stock, being more particularly reputed
his, who had the first Enjoyment of the Mothers Virgin Embraces.

They inured themselves to all Hardship, being able to undergo any Cold,
Hunger, and Labor whatever: so that they would stick themselves in Boggs up to
their very Heads, continuing there many days together without any Sustenance.

The Britains were generally very much addicted to Magic, as are their
Descendents the Welsh even to this very day.

Punishments.
It was the Custom of the ancient Britains, that, when any great man died, his
Relations made Enquiry (if there were Suspicion) amongst his Wives concerning
his Death, who, if they were found guilty, were punished with Fire and other
Torments: From whence Sir Edward Cook derives the Law of England at this day
for burning those Women, who kill their Husbands.

Thieves and Murderers were reserved by them to be offered in Sacrifice to the
Gods: and so were Captives, taken in their Wars.

The greatest Punishment, not capital, amongst them was Excommunication, which
was issued out by the Druids not only against private, but also against public
persons. Those, upon whom this Censure was inflicted, were accounted impious
and profane, incapable of any Honorable Office, and excluded the Benefit of the
Law, none daring to approach them, or converse in talk with them, tho at a
distance, for fear of being infected by them.

The old Language of the Britains, Language.
who have been above all other Nations curious to preserve it entire without
any mixture, was the same (setting aside some small Variations) that is spoken
at this day not only by the Britains of England, but also by those of Armorica
in France. Which although it has in it many Phoenician, and more Greek Words, yet
the Idiom of it, as to the main, appears to be Teutonick, and the Words, which
they received either by Trading with the former Nations, or the Invasion of the
Gauls, seem much to be modelled to that Dialect.

Besides this general Language of the Country, the Greek, or at least a
Dialect thereof, was preserved entire amongst the Druids, who not only therein
concealed the Mysteries of their Religion, which they committed not to Writing,
but delivered down by a Traditionary Conveyance to those only, who admitted
themselves of that Order, and underwent the Severities of a long and tedious
Discipline: But their Records also were preserved in the Greek Tongue and
Characters, which, unintelligible by the Vulgar, none could have Recourse unto,
but Persons of Repute and Learning: Nor were they permitted to take any thing
away in Writing, but by Memory only, the Trust of keeping these things being
reposed in some persons, who for their singular Fidelity, Integrity, and
Learning were chosen for that purpose.

Stature.
The ancient Britains were of Stature taller than the Gauls (whose Expression
concerning them to Caesar was, that other Nations seemed as Nothing in their
Eyes) their Hair not so yellow, nor their Bodies so compact, knit, and firm,
having but bad Feet to support them; but the other Lineaments of their Body
were well made, and their Features excellent. The Goodness of their
Constitution was such, that they are said to have lived to the Age of an
hundred and twenty Years. Strabo says, that he saw very Youths amongst them
taller by half a foot than the tallest men. Nor were the Women less remarkable
for Beauty, than the Men for Stature. Yet were not the Complexions of the
People every where the same: the North Britains being fair, having large Limbs,
and long yellow Hair, as the Germans; the South Britains swarthy, and having
curled Hair like the Spaniards; the Coast, lying upon France, agreeing in
Language, Customs, and every thing with the Gauls.

They were so exceeding swift of Foot, that, laying their Hands on the Manes of
their Horses, they could equal them in their Race.

Their Diet was simple, not dainty; Diet.
and that of the inland Britains very spare and mean: for living continually in
War, and frequently shifting the Places of their Abode, not much unlike the
Cossacks in the Vkraine, they tilled not any Ground, kept no Sheep, nor made
any Cheese; but satisfied their Hunger with any sort of Prey, as Venison,
Natural Fruits, and Milk, and many times with Roots and Barks of Trees. They
esteemed it unlawful to eat either Hare, Hen, or Goose. The Seacoast or
Gaulish Britains had Gardens and Orchards, manured their Grounds with Marl,
howed their Corn, and brought it in by Sheaves; but never threshed more than
for present use only. These were daintier in their Diet than the former, having
particular Dishes in great Request, the most delicate whereof was the
Chenerotes, a Fowl somewhat less than Wild-Geese. The Britains had also a kind
of Food, of which eating but the Quantity of a Bean, they did for a
considerable time after neither hunger nor thirst. Their usual drink was made
of Barley, a thing in former Ages unknown to any Nation of Europe, the Britains
only excepted: to whom this Custom is (not improbably) conjectured to have been
brought by the Phoenicians from Egypt.

Attire.
Man, being created in a State of perfect Integrity, had before his fall no
other Clothing, but his own Innocence. But no sooner had he transgressed the
Command of GOD by eating the forbidden Fruit, but being divested of that Robe
of Purity, wherewith he was clad in his Creation, he grew ashamed likewise of
his external Nakedness, which he sought to cover with Figleaves. Soon after he
received from GOD himself a Coat of Skins, and this was the first Original of
Apparel, which Pride, playing upon conceited Opinions of Decency, has since
infinitely varied in matter, form, and fashion, still continuing to do the same.

Of the Old Britains, the Inlanders were for the most part clothed with Skins,
some few only going naked. The Seacoast or Gaulish Britains had the same sort
of Habits, as the Gauls: The most remarkable whereof were Gaunacum, whence our
Word Gown, which was a thick Covering, made of course Wool, having a Nap on
both sides like Freez, worn by the Gauls and better sort of Britains to keep
out the Cold; and Bardiacus, a Garment of diverse Colors woven together, the
gaudy Show whereof was no doubt very pleasing in the eyes of the Britains; to
which may be added Brachae, a Garment common both to the Gauls and Britains,
descending below, and covering the knees: of which Martial says, Quam veteres
Brachae Britonis pauperis. --

The Hair of their Heads, and upper Lips they wore long, but shaved it off in
all other parts.

In Caesar's Days the Britains painted their Faces, Hands, and such other parts
of their Bodies, as were commonly exposed to sight, with Woad, that they might
appear more terrible in Battle. But in after Ages amongst those Britains, who,
being by the Romans driven out of their possessions, betook themselves both Men
and Women to their Arms, and were reduced to a Savage Life, this use of
Painting, practiced before only in Time of War, and that by none but men, grew
into such Request, partly, because it was (as they fancied) terrible to their
Enemies, and partly, because wanting Clothes, they had no other distinction of
their Dignities, that the Women, as well as the Men, painted all their Bodies
with terrible Creatures, and because by their being exposed naked in the
Fields, and often subject to wet weather, their Painting was apt to wash off,
they made Incisions into their Flesh, whereby to keep it in. From hence in
process of time, these painted Britains were called Picts.

About the same Time also, as it is not improbably conjectured, was the Custom
taken up of wearing Iron Rings about their Necks and Bellies, which being first
begun by a necessity of Carriage, was afterward esteemed an Ornament.

The chiefest Recreation of the Britains, Recreation.
whose Habitations were most in the Woods, was Hunting, they having excellent
Dogs for that purpose: insomuch that Strabo witnesses, that the Dogs, called
Agasaei, so much esteemed by the Greeks, were of British Race, which Dogs are
by us to this day called Gase-hounds.

The Trading of the ancient Britains, Traffic.
tho not to be compared with that of Aftertimes, was not yet so
inconsiderable, as they would persuade us, who affirm, that it consisted
chiefly in Ivory Boxes, Sheers, Onches, Bits and Bridles, Wreaths and Chains,
with other Conceits made of Glass and Amber: For Strabo, relating their
Traffic, says, that, in exchange for Tynne and Lead, Skins and Furrs, they
received Earthen Vessels, Salt and Brazen Ware of the Phaenicians, who were the
first, that traded hither, and so industriously concealed this Navigation from
others, that a certain Master of a Ship, being jealous of a Roman Vessel, that
followed him, for to learn this Traffic, purposely ran his Ship upon the
Sands, and having brought those, by whom he was followed, into the same
Destruction, himself escaped Shipwreck, and received Satisfaction for his
Losses out of the public Treasury.

Shipping.
Their Shipping indeed was very mean: for they had only certain little Skiffs,
the Keels and Footstocks whereof were made of slight Timber, but the Bodies
were wound and wrought with Osiers, and covered with Leather.

Money.
For the better supply of the mutual Necessities of Mankind, People at first
bartered or exchanged (according as occasions required) one Commodity for
another; but that being found troublesome, some one or other Commodity was every
where found out to be the Standard of Commerce and Traffic. This amongst all
civilized Nations terminated in Gold and Silver, which, as most beautiful,
pliable, portable, and least Subject to rust, were (even in the Days of
Abraham) chosen to be the Instruments of Exchange, and the Measure of all other
things, and were at first paid only by weight, till the Romans about three
hundred years before CHRIST first invented the Art of Coining.

Yet have not these two Metals so far prevailed, but that other matter has
been, and in diverse places still is used for Money. The ancient Britains
particularly instead of Money made use of Iron Rings, sized at a certain
Weight, and besides these of brazen Pieces, some of which had a figure of a
Shield embost, and on that side a certain Image, the Device being within: which
kind of Coin was in use in no other part of the World, except in some places,
belonging to Greece.

Buildings.
The Buildings of the Seacoast Britains were many, and like to those of the old
Gauls: The Inlanders had no Houses but certain cumbersome Woods stood them
instead of Cities and Towns: for when they had by felling of Trees encompast a
spacious round plat o^ Ground, and fortified it with Rampires and Ditches, they
built there for themselves Huts and Cottages, and for their Cattle set up
Stalls and Folds, making thither their Retreat and Resort, to eschew the
Invasions of their Enemies

Arms.
The Britains, (being as we have observed) a People very swift of foot never
burdened themselves with an Armor, which they could not a their pleasure fling
off. Their Defensive Arms were only Shields; for Offensive Weapons they had
short Spears at the lower end of which was fastne^ a round Bell of Brass, which
at the beginning of a fight they shook with great Courage, conceiting, that
such a rattling Noise did dismay the Enemy. They had also Daggers, and Swords,
which those, who went naked, girt about their Bodies with Iron Chains.

The different Interests of the many petty Princes, Manner of Fighting.
amongst whom this Island was divided, keeping them in continual Wars, the
Britains must of necessity be well-experienced Soldiers: But their Manner of
fighting was so peculiar to themselves, that Caesar related it for a Wonder in
the Western Parts. They fought in a Body, called Caterva, or Caturfa, as the
Romans had their Legion, and the Macedonians their Phalanx.

Their usual manner of fighting was in Chariots, of which they had several
sorts, the most remarkable whereof were the Covinus and the Essedum.

The Covinus was a sort of Chariot, carrying no men at all, but only him, that
guided it. It was exceedingly well harnassed and armed, having at both Ends of
the Axletrees Hooks and and Scyths fastened, so that driving furiously into the
Enemies Battle, they made whole Lanes of slaughtered men, the Scyths cutting
off those in the middle, who did not speedily make way, and the Hooks catching
up those, that had escaped the Scyths.

The Essedum carried many persons, who, as the Charioteer rode through all the
parts of the Battle, bestowed their Darts, which, with the terrible appearance
of the Horses, and the rattling Noise of the Wheels, usually brake the Ranks of
their Enemies. When they had wound themselves in amongst their Enemies, they
leapt out of their Chariots, and fought on foot, the Charioteers in the mean
time driving out of the Battle, and drawing up their Chariots, whither they
retired, when overpowered by the Enemy. In the managing their Chariot-Horses
daily Practice had rendered them so expert, that driving forcibly down a steep
Hill, they could stop, and turn short in the midst of their Career, run upon
the Beam, stand upon the Harness, and skip presently back into their Chariots.

The Horses, used by the Britains in their Chariots, were small and swift:
their Harness was not only substantial, but also curiously wrought and
engraven, as may be gathered from these Words of Propertius, Esseda caelatis
siste Britanna jugis.

The Britains began their day at Sunset, Computation of Time.
which Custom they are supposed to have learnt from the Phaenicians, who, as
all other Eastern Nations, used the same manner of Computation, which they
received from the Jews, who were taught by Moses, that the Evening and the
Morning were the first Day. Thus, what the Romans called Septimana, is in the
British Tongue to this day called With-nos. and in English a Sennight, the
Abbreviation of Seven Nights.

From the same Original also was their Observation of the New Moon, in whose
first Quarter they began not only their Months, and New Years, but their
several Ages likewise, which were comprehended in a Cycle of thirty Years.

CHAP. IV. Of Government: of Monarchy, its Original, and Excellency: Britain
always governed by Monarchs.
Government.
OF Government there neither are, nor can be more than three Species: For the
Sovereign Command of a State must either reside in one, which is Monarchy; or
in some principal persons, which is Aristocracy; or in the whole Body of the
People, which is Democracy.

Monarchy.
Of these the best and only perfect (not to say, only lawful) kind of Government
is the Monarchical, not only as having the nearest Resemblance of the Divinity,
but as being the first, and only Natural Government of Mankind, and under which
the Subject has ever found the greatest Happiness, and suffered ^he fewest
Inconveniences.

Original.
The Original and first Institution of this most excellent Government was from
GOD himself; who, having created Adam, commanded him to multiply, and replenish
the Earth, and subdue it, and to have Dominion over all Creatures, constituting
him thereby Monarch of the Universe.

The Posterity of Adam had no Right to possess any thing, but by Grant or
Permission from him, or Succession to him, who, when his Children grew up, and
came to have Children of their own, over whom they also had a Command and
Power, assigned them their distinct Territories by Right of private Dominion,
yet still with Subordination to himself, who was Lord-paramount over his
Childrens Children to all Generations. Absurd therefore is the Fancy of those,
who imagine an independent Multitude, having a natural Right to Community: A
thing, which never had any Being, but in the Chimaerical Brains of the
Assertors. An Opinion this is, which cannot be maintained without the great
Scandal of Christianity, and opening a Door to Atheism by denying the Creation
of Adam.

Adam then was Father, King, and Lord over his Family; a Son, a Subject, a
Servant, a Slave, were then one and the same thing. Nor was he tied to govern
by any Laws, but that, which was by his Creator implanted in his Breast, called
therefore the Law of Nature, which if he transgressed, he (as all succeeding
Monarchs) was accountable to GOD alone, from whom he received it.

From Adam this Right of Sovereignty was to descend to his eldest Son, to whom
GOD himself (even in his Fathers Lifetime) speaking of his younger Brother,
said: Unto thee shall his Desires be subject, and thou shall rule over him.

This was the Foundation of Government before the Universal Deluge: which
(washing away all the rest of Mankind from the face of the Earth) left this
Universal Sovereignty to Noah, who with his Wife, his Sons, and their Wives,
only remained alive. By Noah was the whole World divided amongst his three
Sons: From one of which, their Sons, or Nephews, scattered abroad after the
Confusion of Babel, do most of the civilest Nations of the Earth labor to
deduce their Original.

The Posterity of Noah, to secure themselves (as they thought) from being
destroyed by another Flood, went about to erect a Tower, the Top whereof, they
intended, should reach up to Heaven. But to show, how vain all humane
Designments are, which think to contest with the Dispensations of Divine
Providence, the Almighty sent amongst them a Confusion of Tongues, and
dispersed those, who were congregated into one place, over the Face of the
whole Earth.

By this Dispersion there were (according to the generally-received Opinion)
seventy two distinct Nations erected, all which were not confused Multitudes,
left at Liberty to choose what Governors or Government they listed; but so
careful was GOD even in that Confusion to preserve the Paternal and Monarchical
Authority, that he distributed the Diversity of Languages according to the
Diversity of Families, having Fathers for Rulers over them. This appears
plainly in the sacred Text, where, after the Enumeration of the Sons and
Grandsons of Japheth, immediately follow these Words: By these were the Isles
of the Gentiles divided in their Lands: every one after his Tongue, after their
Families, in their Nations. So again of the Children of Ham it is said: These
are the Sons of Ham, after their Families, after their Tongues, in their
Countries, and in their Nations. And again of the Children of Shem: These are
the Sons of Shem, after their Families, after their Tongues, in their Lands,
after their Nations. The Conclusion of the whole being thus: These are the
Families of the Sons of Noah, after their Generations, in their Nations: and by
these were the Nations divided in the Earth, after the Flood.

However therefore the Manner, used by Noah in the Distribution of the Earth
amongst his Posterity, be uncertain; yet most certain it is, that the Division
it self was by Families from Noah and his Children, over which the Fathers were
Rulers, enjoying as absolute an Authority and Dominion, as ever any Monarch
since the Creation pretended to.

Agreeably to this Account of the Original of Monarchy, delivered in in holy
Scripture, does Plato in his third Book of Laws affirm, that the true and first
Reason of Authority is, that the Father and Mother, and simply those, that
beget and engender, do command and rule over all their Children.

Groundless therefore is that Distinction, which some men make of Monarchy into
Despotical and Paternal: since no Master has Right to exact a more absolute and
unlimited Obedience from his Slave, than is due from the Child to the Father.

Of the Absoluteness of this Paternal Jurisdiction Examples are frequent in
Holy Writ. Thus we find, that Abraham commanded an Army of three hundred and
eighteen Soldiers of his own Family; and that Esau met his Brother Jacob with
four hundred Men at Arms. Thus Abraham concluded a Peace with Abimelech, and
ratified the Articles by Oath. Thus Judah sentenced Thamar, his
Daughter-in-Law, to be burnt for playing the Harlot. Which three Acts of making
War, concluding Peace, and giving Judgment of Life or Death, are the chief
marks of Sovereignty, that can be found in any Monarch.

As the Original therefore of Monarchy was of Divine Institution: so its Power
was uncontrollable; nor can it be otherwise without the Destruction of the
Government it self. Rightly then (whatever Milton in his Justification of the
blackest Treason, that ever Eye beheld, says to the contrary) is a King
defined by Salmasius He, who has the Supreme Power in the Kingdom, accountable
to none but GOD, who may do, what he pleases, and is free from the Laws.

Ridiculous then (if not Malicious) are the clamors of those, who daily fill
the World with Outcries against Arbitrary Power: For there never was, nor ever
can be any People governed without a Power of Legislation, which Power must of
necessity be Arbitrary, and is an inseparable Concomitant of the Supreme
Governor or Governors, and must therefore in a Monarchy reside in one.

The Question then is not, whether there shall be an Arbitrary Power, without
which not any Government can one Moment subsist; but who shall have this
Arbitrary Power, whether one man, or many: that is in effect, whether the
Government shall be Monarchical, or not?

Nay it has been seen, that those very Persons, who clamored so much (and with
so little reason) against an Arbitrary Power in their Prince, have themselves
exercised the Height of Arbitrary Power over their fellow Subjects, punishing
them by Imprisonment, and other Penalties, not for the Breach of any known and
certain Laws; but of unknown and uncertain Privileges: and ascending to that
Excess of Insolence, as (even against all Law, Reason, and Equity) to declare
it Criminal for any one to lend Money to his King.

It is an ancient Tradition, which has every where obtained Reputation, that
Noah, as Lord of all, was Author of the Distribution of the World, and of
private Dominion, and that by the appointment of GOD himself he confirmed this
Distribution by his last Will and Testament, left at his Death in the Hands of
his Eldest Son Shem, by which he warned all his Sons, that none of them should
invade any of their Brothers Dominions, because Discord and Civil War, would
thence necessarily follow.

Thus we find, that in all Nations the Princes were at first Lords of the whole
Lands, as well as of the whole Inhabitants, amongst whom they divided such part
thereof, to be held by such Tenures and Services, as they judged most
convenient. Instead then of Empires being founded in Property (as some men love
to speak) the Natural dominion of the Prince was the Original of all Propriety.

Monarchs at first governed by no stated Rule or Law, but by immediate Edicts
or commands of their own Wills, as they in their own Judgments thought fit. But
when Kings came to be so busied with Wars, and distracted with public Cares,
that private persons could not have access to them, to learn their Pleasure
upon every occasion, then did they both for the Ease of themselves, and their
people, set down Laws, by which they would ordinarily govern, reserving to
themselves nevertheless Liberty to vary from them, as often as they in their
Discretion should think fit. Afterward Princes graciously condescended to call
to their Councels several of the Chief men of their Kingdoms, and in time to
admit likewise of Deputies from their People, without whose Advice and Consent
they would neither make new, nor abrogate old Laws. Thus all those Rights and
Privileges, which licentious people make their pretense of contesting with
their Sovereigns, had no other Original but the Gracious Concessions of
Princes, which tho they are so far bound to keep, as that, when in a settled
Kingdom the Prince leaves to govern according to Law, he is guilty of very
great Injustice; yet where he sees the Laws rigorous or doubtful, he may (to
the Peoples great Happiness, lest otherwise Summum jus should prove Summa
injuria) mitigate and interpret them. And whenever any powerful Faction shall,
by making ill use of the Grace and Bounty of the Prince, endanger the
Subversion of his Government, the Safety of the People, whom GOD has committed
to his Care, being the Law-paramount over all others, obliges him to make use
of that Arbitrary Power; whereof (tho in the exercise of it he may restrain
himself, yet) he can never be divested, to secure himself and people from the
Contrivances of malicious and ill-designing Persons.

Those therefore, that argue for Limited or Mixed Monarchies, do in effect only
plead for Anarchy and Confusion. For either these Limits must be such Laws and
Bounds, as the Monarch has set himself to Govern by, to the Observance whereof
tho he may by Promise so far engage himself, that he cannot (as has been said)
ordinarily transgress them without the Sin of Injustice; yet this Promise of
his, which is but an After-act of Grace, not dissolving that absolute
Subjection, which preceded it, his Power (if he will sinfully put it forth to
act) is no less Arbitrary, than it was before the making of the Promise.

Or if you will imagine these Bounds of the Monarchs Power to be ab externo, and
not from the free Determination of his own Will, then (the Subject, as they
say, not being legally bound to subjection, in case the Prince commands beyond
the Law) if there arise a Dispute between the Monarch and the meanest of his
Subjects about the Legality or Illegality of his Commands, either the Monarch
himself must be Judge, and then farewell Limitation; or else the whole people,
or some part of them, and then farewell Monarchy; or else there must be no Judge
at all, and then farewell Government.

So likewise in that, which they call a mixed Monarchy, or a Government,
composed of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, either the Sovereign Power
must be Originally in the Monarch, and derivatively only in the others, and
then farewell the Mixture; or else it must (tho acknowledged to be an
indivisible Beam of Divine Perfection) be originally shared amongst them all,
and then farewell the Monarchy. So also in this Mixture (as they call it) of
Power, if a Difference arise between the Prince and the States, there being
(according to their Principles) no Authoritative judge to determine it, the
Government is dissolved, and every man left at liberty to side with that Part,
which in his Reason and Judgment stands most for public Good, more than which
the Wit of Man cannot say for Anarchy.

The unlimited Jurisdiction of Kings is so strongly asserted in Scripture, that
it occasioned one, who writ in justification of the late Rebellion, to affirm,
That to make a King by the Standard of GOD's Word, is to make the Subjects
Slaves for Conscience sake. Than which, I know not, whether any thing can be
said more impious.

The Paternal Empire, as it was in it self hereditary, so was it, as other
Goods are, alienable by Patent, and seizable by an Usurper. Thus amongst the
first Fathers of Families, dispersed by the Confusion of Babel, was Nimrod,
who, being (no doubt) by good Right Lord or King over his own Family, and not
contented therewith did against Right enlarge his Empire by violently seizing
on the Rights of other Fathers of Families, and laid the Foundation of the
first of those great Kingdoms, which for the vast Extent of their Dominions
were called the four Monarchies of the World. Yet this Power he got by
Usurpation, and not by any Election of, or Faction with the People or Multitude.

The Dominions indeed of Princes anciently were but small, consisting generally
but of Cities apiece, with the adjacent Teritories. Thus in a little Corner of
Asia nine Kings met at once in Battle: In the small Circuit of the Land of
Canaan Joshuah destroyed one and thirty Kings: Adonibezek made seventy Kings,
whose Thumbs and Toes he had cut off, to feed under his Table: Two and thirty
Kings came to Benhadad King of Syria: and seventy Kings of Greece went to the
Wars of Troy.

But in process of Time, partly by Conquest, partly by Lineal Succession, and
partly by the Cession of many little Princes, these Petty Kingdoms were united,
and greater Monarchies erected. Whence, tho Kings are not now the Natural
Parents of their Subjects, yet they all either are, or are to be reputed, the
next Heirs to those Progenitors, who were at first the Natural Parents of the
whole people, and, as such, succeed to the Exercise of Sovereign Jurisdiction,
not only over their own Children, but over their Brethren, and all that were
subject to their Fathers.

As long as the first Fathers lived, they were properly called Patriarchs; but
when the Fatherhood it self was extinct, and the Right only descended to the
next Heir, they were more significantly styled Kings and Princes.

If through Negligence the Knowledge of the true Heir to any Kingdom be lost
(for the Right it self never can) yet does not the Supremacy devolve to the
multitude, who never yet had right to Rule, or choose their Rulers; but to the
Princes and independent Heads of Families, and (because the Dependency of
ancient Families is frequently obscure, and worn out of Knowledge) to such
persons, as the Wisdom of the precedent Monarchs thought fit to adopt for Heads
of Families, and Princes of Provinces These, and none but these, have it such
Case alone Power to consent in uniting or conferring their Fatherly Right of
Sovereign Authority, o^ whom they please. Nor does the person, thus elected,
hold his Power as a Donative from the People, but from GOD, from whom alone he
receives his Royal Charter of Universal Father, tho testified by the Ministry
of the Heads of the People.

And although I do not say, that all popular Governments are so far unlawful, as
to oblige them (things being, as they are) to subject themselves to Monarchy;
yet this I must aver, as a most undoubted Truth, that no other Government, but
Monarchy, had ever any lawful Original, there never having been any Nation,
which was not for many years governed by Kings, until Wantonness, Ambition, or
Faction of the People made them attempt new ways of Regiment: which Mutations
always proved bloody, and miserable to their Authors, and happy in nothing,
but the short time of their Duration.

The Excellency of Monarchy is not only manifest by the Divineness of its
Original, Excellency.
but also by the singular Advantages, it has over any other Form of Government.

The chief End of Government is, that the People may (according to the Apostle)
Lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty. Consequently
whereunto we find, that in all Monarchies, both before the Law of Moses, under
it, and ever since, whether Grecian, or Barbarian, Jewish, or Pagan, Christian,
or Turkish, a singular Care has been taken for Religion, the Priests whereof
have been always had in such Respect and Veneration, as to have an eminent
Share in the Administration of the Government. But in all popular States, their
main Devotion being exercised only in opposing and suppressing Monarchy, their
next is to exclude the Clergy from meddling with Government, wherein the United
Netherlands and Venice (of which it is commonly said, that the one has all
Religions, and the other none) do at this day agree.

As for Peace, it is well known, that no people ever enjoyed it without
Monarchy. The Lacedaemonians preserved themselves by warring, and when they had
gotten the Empire, were presently undone: for they could not live at rest,
knowing no better Exercise than that of War: And whereas the main Preservatives
of Peace are the Durability and Order of the Government, if we examine the most
flourishing Democracy, that ever was in the World, viz. that of Rome, we shall
find, that the Duration thereof from the expulsion of Tarquin to Julius Caesar
was but four hundred and eighty years, whereas both the Assyrian Monarchy
lasted without interruption at least twelve hundred, and the Empire of the East
fourteen hundred ninety five.

And from Order they were so far, that, during these four hundred and eighty
years, there was not any settled Form of Government in Rome: for having once
lost the Natural Power of Kings, they could not find whereon to rest. They
first chose out of the Senators annual Consuls, who had, during the short Time
of their Government, full Regal Power: About sixteen years after the first
Creation of Consuls, the Commons by Sedition prevailed, and chose among
themselves Tribunes of the People to preserve their Liberty: About forty years
after they left Tribunes and Consuls, and chose ten Men to make them Laws:
These after three years they displaced, and set up Tribunes and Consuls again:
Not long after they demanded, that one of the Consuls might be chosen out of
the Commonalty, which after a Dispute of threescore and eighteen years they
carried by the stubbornness of the Tribunes, who, for five years together
hindering the Election of the greater Magistrates, forced the Nobles to yield to
their Request, lest an Anarchy should destroy them all: Sometimes they chose
Dictators, who were Temporary Kings, sometimes Military Tribunes with Consulary
Power: One while the Senate made Laws, another while the People: In fine such
and so frequent were their Alterations in Government, that the best Historians
are not able to find any perfect Form of Regiment in so much Confusion. And if
the Government of Rome may be said to have been for some time popular; yet it
was so to the City of Rome alone, all the rest of the Dominions being shared
into Provinces, over which their Proconsuls, Propraetors, and Legates exercised
Regal Authority: so impossible it is to govern a Kingdom, much more many
Kingdoms by the whole or greatest part of the People.

And tho Rome in the time of her Popularity bred many admired Commanders
(several of which were but very ill requited by the People) by whose Conduct
she gained such Victories abroad, as amazed the World; yet even then did the
Tragical Slaughter of her Citizens at home deserve Commiseration from her
vanquished Enemies. Nor were all of them able to support her in times of
danger; but in her greatest Troubles she was forced to create a Dictator, whose
Authority was absolute and unappealable, testifying thereby, that the last
Refuge in Perils of State is to have recourse to Regal Authority.

And whatever may be pretended to be the Inconveniences of Monarchy, yet cannot
it be denied, but that they are all outweighed by the Sedition, which
necessarily attends Popularity: There not having been a quarter of the Blood
shed in Rome by the Cruelty of all her Tyrannical Emperors, as was by Seditions
in the last hundred years of her glorious Commonwealth, when the Blood was
sucked up in the Marketplaces with Spunges, the Current of the River Tyber
stopped with the slaughtered Bodies of Citizens, and the Common Privies stuffed
full of them. For the Cruelty of Tyrants rarely extends any farther, than to
some particular persons, that offend them: so that a King can never be so
notoriously vicious, but he will generally favor Justice, and maintain Order,
except in the particulars, where he is swayed by his inordinate Passion. For
the Multitude of People, and the abundance of their Riches, whose Bodies do him
service in War, and whose Goods supply his present Wants, being the only
Strength and Glory of every Prince, Natural Love to himself, if not Affection
to his People will make him desirous to preserve the Lives, and protect the
Goods of his Subjects, which, as it cannot be done without Justice, so if it be
not done, the Princes Loss is thereby the greatest. But in a popular State,
every man knowing, that the Public Good does not depend wholly upon his Care,
they all mind chiefly their private Benefit, none taking the Public to be his
own Business: whence it follows, that every man (as it is said of Israel, when
they had no King) does that, which is right in his own Eyes. And this is the
Original of that unnatural State of War, which some are pleased to miscal the
Natural Liberty of Mankind, where every man pretending a Right to every thing,
there is none, that can have the least Security of any thing, he enjoyes, nor
yet of his very Life: since he may be deprived thereof by any one, that shall
prove stronger than hinself.

The Island of Great Britain has always had that happiness, Britain always
Governed by Monarchs.
as never to be subject to any other Government, but the Monarchical. Not that
the whole Island was always under the Command of one Monarch, (which as some
say) it never was till since the Uniting of the Crowns of England and Scotland
by King James, there being at Caesar's Arrival here no fewer than four Kings
found in Kent alone. But that these were so many Sovereign Princes, reigning
absolutely over their own small Dominions, who, at the Invasion of the Romans,
joined together in a Confederacy for their mutual Defense, of which they made
by common Consent Cassibelan their Head. The Words of Caesar are Summa imperii
bellique administrandi communi consilio permissa est Cassivellauno: from whence
some would infer, that the Britains had no King in time of Peace, but that
Cassibelan was by Consent of a great Common Council chosen King and General
against his Landing: Contracting herein Caesar himself, who not only affirms,
that there were four Kings within the County of Kent, whose Names he likewise
gives us; but also describes Cassibelans Territory to have been bounded by the
River Thames, which divided it from the Maritime Provinces, and to have
extended eighty Miles from the Sea, telling us withal, that, whereas before his
Arrival Cassibelan was in continual Wars with the Neighboring States, the
British Princes, in this common danger of foreign Invasion, united in a
defensive League, and unanimously chose him for their Leader.

Nor was Britain brought under the Power of the Romans, till that, the Popular
State of Rome being after manifold Alterations ruined by its own Strength,
Civil Contentions had at last resetled the Government into a Monarchy.

And although the Invasions of Foreigners, the ill Conduct of our Kings, the
Ambition of the Princes of the Blood, the Faction of the Nobility, and the
Sedition of the Vulgar have sometimes caused Disturbance in the State; yet
never was there any Attempt to abolish Monarchical Government in this Island,
till such time as, a certain hotheaded Frenchman, having invented a new
fangled Ecclesiastical Government, agreeing (said King James) with Monarchy, as
GOD with the Devil, which by animating the People to Rebellion against, and
Expulsion of their Lawful Prince, he introduced into Geneva, his Fanatical
Disciples here in Great Britain, laboring to establish their Diana of the
Presbyterian Discipline, and combining with certain Gentlemen, who by reading
the Books of such ancient Historians, as, living under Popular States, decried
Regal Authority by the Name of Tyranny, and extolled the Popular by the Name of
Liberty (tho never any Tyrant was half so cruel as a Popular State) had imbibed
Democratical Principles, raised a formidable Rebellion against the Father of
his present Sacred Majesty, who, being by the Presbyterians outed of all his
Regal Prerogatives, made a private man and a Prisoner, and charged with the
Guilt of all the Blood, shed in the Rebellion, was by their younger Brethren
the Independents (consequently thereunto) under a pretended Form of Justice
barbarously beheaded on a Scaffold, erected for that purpose before the Gates
of his own Royal Palace: Giving occasion to that (no less true, than) witty
Saying, That the Independents murdered Charles Stuart, but the Presbyterians
killed the King.

But tho, after this horrid Murder of the best of Kings, all the Art^ that the
Malice of Men or Devil^ could imagine, was made use of t^ change this Kingdom
into a Commonwealth; yet so naturally are the People of this Island inclined
to submi^ to nothing but Monarchy, that the^ could find no settlement (having
in the space of twelve years tried no fewer, than five several sorts of
Regiment) till the universal Genius of the Isle by mighty, tho invisible,
Influence concurred to recall their exiled Sovereign, and reestablish their
ancient Government.

CHAP. V. Of the Discovery, Invasion, and Conquest of Britain by the Romans.
ABout the Year of the World 3913, Discovery.
and fifty three years before the Birth of CHRIST, the Britains, having notice,
that Julius Caesar, the Roman General in Gallia, displeased with them for
having assisted the rebellious Gauls, intended to invade their Country, and
fearing the Consequence of his Ambition, and usual Success, to avert his
Design, sent Ambassadors to him with promise of Hostages and Obedience to the
Roman Empire. These, after Audience given, he sent back, promising them fair,
and exhorting them to continue firm in these Resolutions: and with them his
Confident Comius, on whom he had bestowed the Kingdom of Arras to signify to
them his Intentions of coming speedily over in person, giving him private
Instructions to manage his Interest secretly with the Princes and States of
Britain, and to gain a Roman Party in the Island.

Gaesar in the mean time, having sent Caius Volusenus to spy out the Coasts,
drew down his Forces into the Country of the Morini about Bulloign, from
whence was the shortest Passage into Britain. Here he commands a general
Rendezvous of all his Naval Forces, summoning from all parts his Shipping.

Volusenus after five days Sail being returned with such small Discoveries,
as, not daring to land for fear of the Britains, he had been able to make from
abord his Ship, Caesar, who had with him two Legions, ordirily amounting to
five and twenty thousand Foot, and four thousand five hundred Horse of Romans
and their Allies, having embarkt the Foot in eighty Ships of Burden, besides
the Galleys distributed amongst the Commanders, and commanding the Horse, whom
he sent eight Miles upward to another Haven, where eighteen Ships, appointed
for them lay wind-bound, to follow him with speed, about the third Watch of the
Night with a good Gale set off for Britain: In sight whereof coming by Ten in
the Morning, and finding that Place, which was a narrow Bay, close environed
with Hills, upon every one whereof he beheld Multitudes of armed men, no way
commodious for Landing, having called a Council of War, to whom he imparted the
Discoveries, made by Volusenus, and gave necessary Orders, his whole Fleet
being now come up, about three in the Afternoon he weighed Anchor, and with a
favorable Wind and Tide removed eight Miles thence to a plain and open Shore,
commonly supposed to be about Deal in Kent.

The Britains, who watched his Motions, sending their Horse and Chariots
before, their Infantry speeding after, undauntedly assaulted the Romans under
their very Ships, and gave them so smart a Welcome, that Caesar himself, tho
endeavoring by all means to excuse it, could not yet deny, but that the
resolute Opposition of the Britains made his Soldiers forget their wonted
Valor.

By the help nevertheless of his Galleys, which, as more apt for Motion, he
commanded to row up against the open side of the Enemy, the unusual strangeness
whereof, together with the Rattling of their Oars, and the fierce Battery of the
Engines set up in them, made the amazed Britains stand a little at a Bay; and
by the great Courage of the Standard Bearer of the tenth Legion, who, seeing,
that the Romans, fearing the Depth of the Sea, or (more probably) the
Readvancement of the Enemy, durst not quit their Ships, having first invocated
the Gods, leapt over board and with his Eagle advanced, marched boldly against
the Britains, the Foot were with much difficulty disembarkt, and the wearied
Islanders after a sharp dispute forced to retire, whom Caesar for want of his
Horse, that were yet kept back by the wind, was not able to pursue.

The Britains, finding themselves over-mastered, had now made their Peace, sent
in some Hostages, and promised more, and several of their Princes had submitted
themselves and States to Caesar, lying encamped, as it is thought, upon
Barham-Down, when an unlookt-for Accident put them upon new Counsels. For the
eighteen Ships, which had been left behind to transport the Roman Horse, being
four days after Caesar's Arrival come within sight of the Camp, were by a
sudden Tempest dispersed, and that Night most of them lost: Their Galleys also,
which had been haled ashore, being the same Night covered with a Springtide,
and their Ships, that lay off at Anchor, sorely shattered.

This the British Princes perceiving, and from the Compass of their Camp, which
without Baggage was the smaller, guessing at the Number of the Roman Forces,
consulted together, and, secretly one by one withdrawing from the Camp,
resolved to stop all Provisions, and to protract the Business unto Winter:
judging, that if they could now destroy their Enemies, or intercept their
Return, none would ever after dare to invade them.

Caesar from his own Condition, and the Britains neglecting to send their
Hostages, suspecting, what was like to happen, got up, what Corn he could, and
with Materials fetched from the Continent, and the Remains of such Ships, as
were quite spoiled, repaired the rest: so that by the indefatigable Industry of
his Soldiers all of them, but twelve, were in a short time made serviceable.

While this was doing, Caesar advertized by the Sentinels at the Camp-Gates,
that an unusual Dust was seen to arise from that part of the Country, whither
the seventh Legion was gone forth to forage, taking with him the Cohorts of
his Guards, and commanding all the rest, but two, who were to keep the Camp, to
speed after him, came very opportunely, to assist his Legion, that was now
overborn by the Britains, who, not doubting but their Enemies would on the
morrow return to that Place, which they had only left unreapt of all their
Harvest, had laid themselves in Ambush, and, whilst the Romans were dispersed,
and busy at their Labor, set upon them, killed some, and routed the rest, and
had now enclosed them with their Horse and Chariots, when Caesar's Arrival
caused the Britains to retire, and he, not thinking it convenient to offer them
Battle, drew off his Legions to the Camp.

Foul weather for many days after hindering all Action on both sides, the
Britains by dispatching Messengers into all parts, signifying to what small
number their Enemies were reduced, the great Hopes, there was of Spoil, and of
freeing their Country from future Invasion, if they could now make the Romans a
severe Example, had got together great Multitudes both of Horse and Foot, whom
Caesar having after a fierce Encounter put to flight, pursued, as far as he
could, and in his return burnt and laid wast all about him. The Britains the
same day sent Ambassadors to him to treat of Peace, who, glad no doubt, that
he could return with some Show of Honor, whereas, if they had delayed but a
little he must either have forsaken the Island, or else perished for want of
Provisions, enjoined only (for so great a Breach of Faith) a double number of
Hostages, to be sent him into Gallia, and about Midnight set Sail for the
Continent, whence sending to Rome an account of his Attempt, the Senate for
this Discovery decreed twenty days of Thanksgiving to the Gods.

Invasion.
The Britains not sending their Hostages, Caesar, at his Departure (according to
annual Custom) for Rome, commanded his Legates to provide, what possible
Shipping they could, ordering them to be low-built for the easier Fraughtage,
and better haling ashore, and flat-bottom'd for the more convenient
Transporting of Horse.

Finding at his Return six hundred such in readiness, with twenty eight
Galleys, and above two hundred Adventurers, and other Hulks, in all a thousand,
about Sunset with sive Legions and two thousand Horse hoy^ing Sail from Port
Iccius, he was at Midnight becalmed: so that at Daybreak descrying the Island
to bear left of him, he turned about with the Tide, and by the unwearied Labor
of his Soldiers, who cheerfully tugged at the Oar, came up about Noon near the
same Place, which the year before he had found so convenient for Landing.

At his Arrival no Enemy was seen, the Britains, who had been there in great
Numbers, being withdrawn into the higher Countries, terrified with the Sight of
so vast a Fleet.

Having landed his Army, encamped to the best advantage, and learnt of some
Fugitives, where to find the Britains, leaving Quintus Atrius with ten Cohorts
and three hundred Horse to guard his Ships, about the third Watch of the Night
he advanced with his main Body twelve Miles into the Country, where upon the
Banks of a River, commonly thought to be the Stowr in Kent, he sees embattelled
the British Forces, who with their Horse and Chariots, having possessed
themselves of the upper Ground, smartly opposed the Romans March; but repulst
by their Enemies Cavalry, retired into the Woods to a Place, fortified both by
Art and Nature, cast up, as it seemed, in time of Wars amongst themselves, the
Passages whereto were on all sides blockt up with huge Trees, felled and laid
overthwart one another, within which they did their utmost to keep out the
Romans, till the seventh Legion, having raised a Mount, and locked their Shields
close over their Heads like a Roof, without much loss of Blood took the Place,
and drove the Britains from their Holds, whom yet Caesar would not pursue
through unknown ways; but, Evening drawing on, more wisely employed the Time
in fortifying another Camp, and refreshing his Soldiers.

Next Morning early three Bodies of Roman Horse and Foot, sent to seek the
Enemy, were not yet got out of sight, when News, coming Post from Q. Atrius,
that most of the Fleet, wrackt that Night by a sudden Tempest, lay split on the
Shore, made Caesar call back his Forces, and return to his Ships: of which
finding about forty* utterly lost, and the rest so shattered, as not to be new
rigged without much Labor, he assembled, what Shipwrights he could, both from
his own Legions, and the Continent, sending Orders to Labienus, whom he had
left to make good the Port in Gallia, to fall a Building more; and in ten days
time, not respiting his Soldiers either Night or Day, drew up all his Ships,
and entrencht them within his Camp.

This done, leaving there the former Guard, he marched up to the same Wood,
where he had defeated the Britains, whom he finds now repossest of that Place
with far greater Numbers, under the Command of Cassibelan, chosen by the
British Princes, whom common Danger had now united, for their chief Leader: who
with his Horse and Chariots stoutly fought the Roman Cavalry in their March,
but being somewhat overmacht, retreated to the Woods and Hills, whither the
Romans too eagerly pursuing them, the Britains, rallying again, cut off the
forwardest, and after a while, when Caesar, who thought all over, was busied
about the entrenching of his Camp, of a sudding breaking out of their Coverts,
fiercely assaulted the very Stations of his Guards and Sentries, and whilst two
of the choicest Cohorts, drawn out of two Legions, and sent to the Alarm, stood
at small distance from each other, amazed at the Novelty and Fierceness of the
Fight, charged back again through the midst without Loss of a Man.

Next Morning the Britains showed themselves upon the Hills, and, tho not so
boldly as before, skirmished with the Roman Horse; but about Noon, Caesar
having sent forth three Legions, and all his Horse to seek Fodder, they
suddenly set upon the Forragers, and charged up after them to the very Legions
and their Standards, where they were courageously repelled by the Romans, whose
Horse, well seconded by their Foot, so closely pursued them, that the Britains,
not having leisure to rally, stand, or descend from their Chariots, were many
of them slain, and the rest generally routed.

Cassibelan, after this Overthrow, resolving in a manner to change the whole
Nature of the War, disbanded many Auxiliary Forces, that had from all parts
been sent him, and with the choicest of his Men, and four thousand Chariots,
which he judged sufficient to hinder the Enemies Incursions, set himself to
attend Caesar's March: Who, advertized thereof, drew his Army toward the
Frontiers of Cassibelans Kingdom, which was bounded by the Thames, fordable
only in one Place, conjectured to be about Coway Stakes near Oatlands, where
Cassibelan, having caused the Bank to be set with sharp Stakes, and the Ford
knocked full of them, covered with Water, had drawn up his men in great numbers
to oppose the Passage of the Romans, who, having notice of this Stratagem by
their Captives, with greater Circumspection entered the River, first the Horse,
then the Foot, wading up to the Neck in Water, so resolutely, and so fast, that
the Britains, having bestowed a few Darts upon them, reti^ into Woods and
secret Coverts, where lining with their Horse and Chariots the Roads, through
which Caesar was to pass, and driving the Inhabitants and their Cattle into
places of security within the Woods, with continual and unexpected Sallies upon
the Roman Horse, cutting off some, and terrifying others, they compelled them so
close together, that they could not fetch in Prey or Booty without ill success.

The Affairs of Caesar, who had nothing left in his way but empty Fields and
Houses, had now but a bad Aspect, his Army, whose Horse durst not stir out of
the Protection of their Foot, being almost starved, when a Dissension, arising
among the Britains, brought them joyful News of a Supply. The Trinobantes, one
of the most potent States amongst the Britains, out of an old Grudge against
Cassibelan, who had slain their King Immanuentius, and forced his Son
Mandubratius, called also Androgori^ and Androgius, to secure his Life b^
Flight into Gallia, sent Ambassador to Caesar, imploring his Protection^
promising Obedience to the Roman State, and desiring Mandubratius, who was then
with Caesar, to be sent to take Possession of his Fathers Crown. Caesar granted
their Request, having first demanded forty Hostages, and Provisions for his
Army, which they sent in, and had their Confines protected from the Soldier.

By their Example did several other States also submit themselves, from whom
Caesar having learnt, that Cassibelians chief Seat, supposed to be Verulam
(near the now St. Albans) was not far off, fenc't about with Woods and Marshes,
and full of Men and Cattle went thither, assaulted it in two Places, and after
some Dispute forced the Britains to fly out at a Postern Gate, and leave the
Plunder of the Town to the Enemy, by whom many of them were cut off in their
Flight.

Yet did not Cassibelan desert himself, but sending into Kent, directed
Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, four Kings, reigning in those
Countries, who still kept faithful to the Union, to raise, what Forces they
could, and assault the Camp, where the Roman Shipping was entrencht; but these
Kentish Soldiers being raw and unskild, not able to endure one Sally, were
totally routed, and Cingetorix made Prisonor.

Cassibelan, informed of this Defeat, and seeing the treacherous Defection of
so many States, for the Preservation of himself and Country, by the Mediation
of Comius of Arras sent Ambassadors to Caesar, who, having enjoined him not to
Molest Mandubratius and the Trinobantes, settled the Annual Tribute to be paid
by the Britains to Rome, and received Hostages, with a great number of Captives
put off to Sea, having at twice embarkt his whole Army. Returning to Rome, he
offered to Venus Genitrix, the Patroness of his Family, a Corslet of British
Pearls, as a Testimony of his Glorious Enterprise.

Julius Caesar having now taken his last Farewell of Britain, the Romans,
hindered partly by Civil Dissensions, and partly by other more urgent Affairs,
had not the least Thoughts of making any farther Attempt against it for twenty
Years together, when Octavius Augustus, now settled in the possession of the
Roman Empire, having advanced as far as Gallia, in order to the reducing of
Britain, was diverted by a Revolt in Pannonia: as he was seven Years after by
the unsetledness of Gallia, and the coming of the British Ambassadors thither
to him; and the Year following by new Commotions, arising in Spain. Being so
often crossed in his Designs upon Britain, he no more bent his thoughts that way,
being satisfied with the Respects, paid him by the British Princes, who courted
his Friendship with Gifts offered in the Capitol, and other obsequious
Addresses. The like amicable. Correspondence they held also with his Successor
Tiberius, whom more highly to oblige, they courteously entertained, and sent
home the Soldiers of Germanicus, cast by Tempest on their Shore. Caligula
indeed, to whose Protection, Adminius, Son of Cunobelyn, banished by his
Father, had betaken himself, making semblance to invade Britain, brought down
all his Army to the Belgic Shore, where being informed, that the Britains,
having levied the Strength of their Nation, stood ready to oppose his Landing,
if he should make any attempt upon them, he commanded his Soldiers, whom he
supposed to have Lyncean Eyes, to take a full view of the British Forces, and
having encouraged them not to fear their great Numbers, with unmatchable Valor
rowed a Stones cast or two from the Shore, where resolutely defying the
Britains, he caused the Engines of Battery to be set up, the Trumpets to sound
a Charge, and the Soldiers to fall on, but no Enemy appearing, he ordered them
to plunder the Ocean of its Shells, and therewith fill their Helmets and Laps;
and that the Memory of so Heroic an Enterprise might not be lost, he erected
in the same place an high Tower, wherein Lights were set to direct Mariners in
their Courses by Night, the Ruins whereof, sometimes seen at Low Water on the
Coast of Holland, are to this day by the Inhabitants ealled Briten-huis.

Conquest.
The Britains, for well-near an hundred Years after the departure of Julius
Caesar, had been governed by their own Princes, unmolested by the Romans, to
whom after the first breaking out of the Civil War they paid not any Tribute,
except such easy Customs, as were levied on the Commodities, wherewith they
traded into Gallia, when, intestin Divisions among themselves making way for a
Roman Conquest, Claudius Drusus, now the third time Consul, instigated by the
persuasions of Bericus (of whom there is no farther knowledge) and other
Fugitives, whom the Britains demanding, he had refused to deliver up, and they
for that cause had denied farther Amity with Rome, resolved upon an Invasion of
Britain, sending Orders to Aulus Plautius the Praetor to transport thither the
Legions, lying in Gallia, who, complaining, that they must now be put to make
War beyond the Worlds end, were at last with much difficulty prevailed upon,
and from three several Ports set sail for Britain; but meeting with cross
Winds, were driven back and disheartened, till in the Night a Meteor darting
Flames from the East, and directing, as they fancied, their Course for this
Island, they again put to Sea, and landed without opposition, the Britains, who
had heard of their Unwillingness, having neglected to provide against them, and
now retiring into the Woods, where they intended to wear them out with Delays,
as their Predecessors had formerly done Caesar.

The British Armies were commanded by two young Sons of the deceased Cunobelyn,
who, keeping their Forces separate, were by Plautius, after he had with much
difficulty found them out, easily overcome, first Caractacus, then Togodumnus:
Whereupon the Dobuni, formerly subject to the Catieuchlani, submitted
themselves to the Conqueror, who, leaving a Garrison there, marched on to a
certain River, where finding the Enemy, who thought, the Romans without a
Bridge could not possibly get over, lying on the farther side careless and
secure, he sent first the Germans, that were in his Army, whose Custom it was
armed to swim with ease the strongest Current: These, having got footing on the
other side, spent, as they were commanded, all their Darts on the Britains
Horses, which, falling dead in their Harness, rendered the Chariots, wherein
consisted their chief Art of fighting, not only unserviceable, but cumbersom,
when Vespasian with his Brother Sabinus, sent by Plautius to second them,
unexpectedly assailing those, who were least aware, with great slaughter forced
the Enemy to retire: Who, yet the next day reuniting, with such Courage fought
the Romans, that the Victory hung in suspense, till Caius Sidius Geta, in
danger of being taken, valiantly recovering himself, turned the Scales on the
Romans side, for which he afterward at Rome received high Honors.

The Britains, after this, drew back to the Mouth of the Thames, which
acquainted with the Shallows and Flats, they easily crossed, whom, their
Enemies, unadvisedly following, were in great hazard of being lost; yet the
Germans getting over by swimming, and others by a Bridge a little higher, so
encompast the Britains, that they did great Execution upon them; but too
eagerly pursuing them into Bogs and Marshes, lost as many of their own.

Plautius, who in these Engagements had lost many of his Soldiers, perceiving
the Courage of the Britains rather inflamed, than cooled, by their Defeats, and
their Rage exasperated by the Death of Togodumnus, slain in one of the former
Encounters, durst not proceed any farther; but having been commanded by
Claudius on any great Emergencies of Affairs to give him speedy Intelligence,
accordingly sent to him, who, waiting ready with a vast Preparation, marched
through Gallia, leading with him (so apprehensive was he of the Difficulty of
this Enterprise) besides his Roman Legions, and the Auxiliaries of Germans and
Gauls, many armed Elephants, to meet the naked Valor of the undaunted Britains.

Having with this Equipage crossed the Channel, he directly joined Plautius,
who with the Residue of his Men lay encamped at the Mouth of the Thames to
secure his Landing, and having past the River, discovered the Britains, who,
having the Courage, but wanting the Conduct of old Cassibelan, scrupled not
with daring Manhood to combat in open Field almost the whole Power of the Roman
Empire, whereby being overcome, Camalodunum (now Maldon) the Royal Seat of
Cunobelyn, with many other important Places, some by Force, others by Treaty,
were yielded up to Claudius, who for these Successes was often by his Army
saluted Imperator, a Title before this time never given above once to any in
the same War, as if there could not Honor enough be given to so great
Atchievments.

Claudius, having disarmed the Britains, but remitted the Confiscations of
their Goods, for which they, who (by their former long acquaintance with the
Romans) were well-skild in all the Arts of Flattery, erected Temples, and
offered Sacrifices to him, as to a God, leaving Plautius to subdue, what
remained, returned to Rome, whence he had been absent only six Months, and in
Britain but sixteen Days, sending before him the News of his Victories to the
Senate, who for such transcendent Merits decreed excessive Honors: Arches,
Triumphs, annual Solemnities, and the Surname of Britannicus both to himself
and Son.

From this Time Britain may be reckoned amongst the Provinces of the Roman
Empire, whereunto it now began to be subjected, tho not without great
Resistance of the Inhabitants, who after the departure of Claudius gave
Plautius Work enough to deserve at his Return to Rome a petty Triumph, riding
on the Emperors Right hand into the Capitol, Triumphal Ornaments and other
Honors being given also to Vespasian, who in these Wars had subdued two
powerful Nations, above twenty Towns, and the Isle of Wight. Nor was Ostorius
Scapula, the Successor of Plautius, less busied, the Britains, who were not yet
subdued, at his very first Coming making Incursions upon those, who had
submitted to the Romans; but he, by an unexpected Assault overcoming them, and
disarming all those, of whom he had any Suspicion, placed many Garrisons upon
the Rivers Sabrina and Antona. Then having vanquished the Iceni, and spoiled
the Country of the Cangi, supposed to be a small Territory in Cheshire, he was
come to the Irish Sea, when he was recalled by Commotions amongst the
Brigantes, whom, by punishing some, and pardoning the rest, he soon quieted,
and having planted Camal^dunum with a Colony of Veteran Soldiers, he marched
forth against the Silures, who under the Command of Caractacus, upon whose
Courage and Conduct they very much relied, were at a place (supposed to be Caer
Caradoc on the West Edge of Shropshire) not without great Slaughter of the
Romans, whom, not able to endure the Galling of the British Darts, they forced
to make a Testudo of their Shields at length overcome, the Wife and Daughter of
Caractacus taken Prisoners, his Brethren reduced, and I himself by
Cartismandua, Queen o^ the Brigantes, to whom he fled for Protection,
treacherously delivered up to the Romans, against whom he had held out nine
years, and by them sent to Rome, where the Gallantry of his Deportment in his
Afflictions procured Pardon for himself and all the rest. To Ostorius, whose
Actions were esteemed equal to theirs, that had brought in Bonds to Rome the
greatest Princes, was a Triumph decreed by the Senate.

After this, tho those Britains, that were yet unsubjected, did with perpetual
Skirmishes and Excursions so infest the Roman Province, that the very Vexation
of it cost Ostorius his Life, yet did the Romans still keep their Hold, and by
Degrees extend their Conquests: till about the third year of Nero, Boadicea,
Widow to Prasutagus, King of the Iceni, who at his death had made the Emperor
Coheir with his two Daughters, taking advantage of the Absence of Paulinus
Suetonius the Governor, who, having subdued many British Nations, was busied
in conquering the Isle of Mona (now called Anglesey) to revenge the barbarous
Usage, her self and Daughters had received from the Romans, solicited the
Britains, already by the Oppressions of Catus Decianus the Procurator, Seneca
the Philosopher, and others deeply discontented, and by the intolerable
Licentiousness of the Soldiery highly exasperated, to a Revolt; and having
sacked Camalodunum, routed Petilius Crealis, and cut his Legion to Pieces,
destroyed London and Verulam, and slain seventy thousand Romans and their
Allies, she endangered the utter Extirpation of the Roman Government in this
Island, when Suetonius, who was opportunely returned out of Anglesey, having
got together about ten thousand men, at one Battle overthrew her Army of two
hundred and thirty thousand, fourscore thousand whereof he slew, with the loss
only of four hundred Romans, and as many more wounded: the Grief of which
Defeat, assisted (as some say) by Poison, put a Period to the Life of Boadicea.

Britain, which was wel-nigh lost, being thus by one Battle recovered, the
vindicative Nature of Suetonius, who, tho otherwise a very worthy person,
over-proud of his Victory, gave too much way to his Anger against the Britains,
caused those, that were yet untamed, to stand out, encouraged the rather
thereunto by the Differences between him and the new Procurator Julius
Classicianus. But Suetonius being recalled, his Successor Petronius
Turpilianus, set himself wholly to quiet the Province, without making any new
Attempts, so that thenceforward the Britains, who lived unmolested, beginning
to suck in the Pleasures of Vice, were more enslaved by the Roman Luxuries,
than ever they had been by their Arms.

In this posture Affairs continued here, till that Vespasian, having taken
possession of the Empire, sent hither Petilius Crealis, who had many Battles
with the Brigantes, over whom tho he obtained some Victories, yet he had
always enough of War. His Successor Julius Frontinus subdued the stout and
warlike Nation of the Silures. But Julius Agricola, sent into Britain in the
last year of Vespasian, extended the Roman Limits beyond all his Predecessors:
For at his very entrance into this Government he overthrew, and almost
extirpated the whole Nation of the Ordovices, and gained the Isle of Mona, from
the Possession whereof the Rebellion of the Britains had called back Suetonius.
After which by proportionating with Equality the imposed Tribute, removing the
Exactions and exorbitant Fees of Officers, and bridling the Extravagance and
Licentiousness of his Domestics and Soldiers, he brought the People to be in
love with Peace, which before seemed no less formidable to them, than War it
self: So that having first by many Inrodes terrified the Enemy, and then by his
gentle Demeanor allured them, several Cities, which hitherto had refused to
bend, voluntarily submitted to him, gave Hostages, and received Garrisons, for
which he providently chose Places of such advantage, that never any of them was
either forced, yielded up, or quitted. Then encouraging the Britains, who
before lived rude and scattered, to build Houses, Temples, and Places for
Public Resort, he taught them the Institutes and Customs of a Civil Life,
causing their Noblemens Sons to be instructed in the Liberal Sciences, and by
preferring the Wits of Britain before those of Gallia, bringing them, who
before hated the Roman Language, to be in love with the Latin Eloquence. Now
likewise came in the Gown, and other Fashions of the Romans, and by Degrees all
those Incitements of Vice, and Voluptuous Living, which the Luxurious miscall
Civility.

Glota and Bodotria (called at this day Dunbritton and Edinborough Friths) two
opposite Arms of the Sea, disjoined only by a Neck of Land, with all the Creeks
and Inlets on this Side, being now held by the Romans, and the Enemy shut up
(as it were) in another Island, Agricola passed over into, and subdued Nations,
till then unknown, supposed to be the Orcades, and other Scotch Isles, and
placed Garrisons likewise in that part of Britain, which faced Ireland, at the
Conquest whereof he also aimed, courteously entertaining for that purpose one
of the Irish Kings, driven out of his Country by Civil Wars, whom he kept with
him for a fit Occasion.

But an Apprehension of a general Rising of the Nations beyond Bodotria called
him away from this design: for understanding, that they had forelaid the
Passages by land, he commanded his Fleet to bear along the Shores, and up the
Friths and Harbors, himself with even Marches keeping up close to it, so that
both Land and Sea Forces joined commonly at night with Shouts and loud
Greetings: Which much daunted the Britains, not accustomed to see their Sea so
ridden.

Yet the Caledonians, generally taking Arms, and attacking sundry Castles,
struck no small Terror into several of the Roman Commanders, who, concealing
their Fears under the Name of cautious Counsel, advised the General to retreat
on this side Bodotria. But he, whose Resolutions were otherwise, having
Intelligence, that the Enemy would fall on in many Bodies, divided also his
Army into three parts: Which the Britains learning, changed Counsels, and with
all their Forces assailed by night that part of the Roman Army, which they knew
to be the weakest, whom surprising between Sleep and Fear, they had now begun
some Execution, when Agricola, who was informed of their March, following them
at the Heels, commanded the lightest of his Horse and Foot to charge on their
Backs, the whole Army soon seconding them with a Shout: So that by approach of
Day the Caledonians, finding themselves encompast with the glittering Roman
Ensigns, after a sharp Fight betook themselves to their old Refuge, the Woods
and Boggs, or else that day had probably made a total End of the War. The
Romans, reencouraged with this Success, and now boasting, who but ere while
trembled, with one voice cried out to be led on, as far as there was any
British Ground. Nor did the Britains, who imputed that Days Victory not to the
Valor of their Enemies, but to the Policy of their General, abate any thing of
their Stoutness; but arming their Youth, and conveying their Wives and Children
to places of Safety, with solemn and sacred vows bound themselves to mutual
assistance against the common Adversary.

In the mean time a Cohort of Vsipians, here in Britain, having slain their
Centurion, and other Officers in a Mutiny, fearing Punishment, fled to Sea
without any Pilot in three Pinnaces, and being driven at random about the
Coast, used Piracy, where they landed, till, after various Fortunes, taken
first by the Suevians, afterward by the Frisians, they were sold into Britain,
where being known, they first discovered to the Romans, that Britain was an
Island.

The Summer following Agricola, having gained this Knowledge, sending forth his
Navy to scour the Coasts, and by various and uncertain Landings to divert and
disunite the Enemy, with a flying Army, wherein were many Britains, whose
Courage and Fidelity he had long experienced, came as far as the Mountain
Grampius, where the Caledonians to the number of thirty thousand were assembled
under the command of Galgacus, whom both his Birth and Merit made their chief
Leader. He by his rough Oratory in detestation of Servitude and the Roman Yoke
having augmented the Eagerness of his Followers, and Agricola having incited
his by exhorting them to Glory and Victory, the Armies joined Battle, where
after a vehement and various Contest the Romans clearly wan the Day, ten
thousand of their Enemies being slain, and the rest so totally discomfited,
that the next day there was not a Man of them to be seen, all being fled, none
knew whither.

Agricola, informed hereof by his Scouts, Summer being far spent, and it being
now no fit Time to divide his Forces, leads his Army amongst the Horesti,
thought to be the Inhabitants of Eskdale in Scotland, from whom having received
Hostages, he commanded his Navy to sail round Britain, whilst himself with slow
Marches, that he might aw the new-conquered Nations by his Delay in passing,
placed his Men in their Winter Quarters. His Fleet, having prosperously and
speedily compast the Isle, put in at the Port Trutulensis, now Richborough,
near Sandwich, from whence it first set out.

Agricola, envied by the Emperor Domitian, in the fourth year of whose Reign,
Anno CHRISTI 86. this Victory was gotten, was soon after recalled, leaving his
Province to his Successor quiet and secure.

The Roman Province in Britain, extended thus by Agricola as far as Glota and
Bodotria, or the Friths of Dunbritton and Edenborough, was by the Emperor
Hadrian, following the Advice of Augustus and Tiberius to gird the Empire
within moderate Bounds, reduced to a narrower Compass. For he, giving the
Northern Nations, no longer now called Britains, but henceforth first
Caledonians, afterward Picts and Scots, more Room to Inhabit, quitted the
colder and more barren Soils, reserving only the most delicate Part of the
Island, which, to hinder the Caledonian Boars from breaking in and rooting it
up, he enclosed (like a precious Garden-Plot) with a mighty Wall of fourscore
Miles in length from the Bay of Itun (or Solway-Frith) on the Irish Sea to
Tinmouth on the German Ocean: Which Wall, decayed by the Injuries of Time, and
the Incursions of the Enemy, was reedified by the Emperor Septimius Severus,
who fortified it with a deep Trench, and many Turrets, erected at such
convenient Distances, that the Sound of a Trumpet, tho against the Wind, might
be heard from one to another. In the same Wall also is said to have been
artificially set a Brazen Trunk, which, running from Tower to Tower, served
upon the Invasion of the Enemy to give speedy and secret Intelligence. But this
Wall now lying along, and no Pipe remaining, many Tenants at this day hold
Farms of the King in Cornage, whereby they are obliged by winding of an Horn to
give Notice to their Neighbors of the Enemies Approach.

Agricola, having thus conquered all the Southern Part of this Island,
abrogated most of the ancient Rites and Customs of the Britains, in the Room
whereof the Roman Laws, Usages, and Learning began here to Flourish. Their
humble Cottages he changed into fair Houses and stately Palaces, superb
Porticoes, and sumptuous Baths: Their Diet was now more curious, and their
Apparel more magnificent: Their cumbersome Chariots were turned into the
Coaches and delicate Litters of Rome, and for the Convenience of Travel Roads
and Causies began to be made through the whole Island, and paved with Stone.

CHAP. VI. How Britain was governed under the Romans.
BRITAIN, not being annexed to the Roman Empire till after the Division of
Provinces made by Augustus, had this Privilege above other Nations, that it
was never subject to any Consular or Proconsular Deputy after the manner of
other Provinces; but was always esteemed to be Praesidialis, or under the
immediate Protection of the Emperor, held by his Garrisons, and governed by
Lieutenants, sent and recalled at his sole Will and Pleasure.

The Britains had also (even within the Roman Pale) for a time Kings of their
own, the last of which was Lucius, surnamed Lever-maur, who flourished in the
time of the Emperor Commodus Antoninus. This, tho it carried with it a certain
show of Liberty, was yet only the usual Method of the Roman State, first
practiced in the Time of their Democratick Government, when their Insolence was
such, as to make Kings the Instruments of their Ambition, whom they first drew
up with Plumes of Majesty, and seemed even to adore; but, when their Turns were
once served, with as great Contempt and Ingratitude (according to the constant
Humor of Commonwealths) they trampled upon them.

For the governing of Britain one Legate was thought sufficient, till the
Emperor Septimius Severus, finding by experience, that it was a Province too
great and powerful to be trusted in the hands of one Man, first divided it into
two Governments, committing the North part thereof to Virius Lupus, and the
South to Heraclytus.

From the Time of Constantin the Great there were no more Propraetors or
Lieutenants in Britain: For he, having ordained four Prefects of the
Praetorium, viz. of the East, of Illyricum, of Italy, and of Gaul, and two
Leaders or Commanders of the Forces, the one of the Foot, the other of the
Horse, in the West, whom they termed Praesentales, ordered the Government of
Britain in this manner.

For Civil Government there ruled over Britain the Prefect of the Praetorium in
Gaul, whose Vicegerent was the Vicar General of Britain, honored with the
Title Spectabilis, and having under him (according to the number of the
Provinces) two Consular Deputies, and three Presidents, who had the hearing of
Civil and Criminal Causes.

For Military Affairs, there ruled the Leader or Commander of the Foot in the
West, under whom were the Count of Britain, the Count of the Saxon Coast along
Britain, and the Duke of Britain, every one of which was likewise styled
Spectabilis.

The Count of Britain seems to have ruled the Inland parts of the Island,
having with him seven Companies of Foot, and nine Troops of Horse.

The Count of the Saxon Coast along Britain, who defended the Maritime parts
against the Saxons, and is by Ammianus called Comes tractus Maritimi, had for
Defense of the Seacoasts seven Companies of Foot, two Guidons of Horse, the
second Legion, and one Cohort.

The Duke of Britain, who defended the Frontiers against the Barbarians, had
the Command of thirty eight Garrison-Forts, wherein fourteen thousand Foot and
nine hundred Horse kept their Stations: so that in those days (according to
the Computation of Pancirolus) Britain maintained about nineteen thousand two
hundred Foot, and seventeen hundred Horse in ordinary.

Besides these, the Comes sacrarum largitionum, who managed the Emperors
Finances, had under him in Britain the Rationalis or Auditor of the Sums or
Revenues of Britain, the Provost of the Augustian Treasures in Britain, and the
Procurator of the Gynegium in Britain, where the Clothes of the Emperor and his
Soldiers were woven.

The Comes rerum Privatarum had also his Rational of private State in Britain,
to say nothing of other inferior Officers.

CHAP. VII. Of the first introducing of Christianity into Britain: The
Conversion of King Lucius: The Persecution under Dioclesian: The Establishment
of the Christian Faith by Constantin.
AS the rude and barbarous Manners of the Britains gave place to the Roman
Civility: so the Bloody Cruelties of their Idolatrous Superstitions were
abrogated by the Introduction of Christian Religion, for the admittance whereof
a Passage was opened by means of the Correspondence between Britain and the
rest of the Roman Empire.

It was in the Year of the World 3966. the two and fortieth of the Emperor
Augustus, fifty three Years after the first Arrival of Julius Caesar in
Britain, and the third Year of the British King Cunobelyn, the whole World then
enjoying a general Peace, that the Prince of Peace, our ever-blessed Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, the only eternal Son of GOD, was miraculously born of a
pure Virgin in Bethlehem, the City of David.

This our glorious Redeemer, having for the space of three and thirty years led
a Life, no less poor and painful, than holy and exemplary, offered himself upon
a Cross to his eternal Father for to expiate the Sins of Mankind in the
eighteenth year of the Emperor Tiberius, who, having received an Account of
the Death of this Saint of Saints, as also of his great Virtue, and stupendous
Miracles, from Pilat, then Governor of Judea, published it in the Senate, by
whom he would have had CHRIST admitted into the number of the Roman Gods; but
they, displeased, that Pilat wrote only to the Emperor, and not to them, would
by no means consent thereunto.

The Emperor however forbidding upon pain of Death all persons to persecute
the Disciples of JESUS, Christianity brought into Britain.
the glorious Gospel, preached by his Apostles, upon whom, the better to enable
them thereunto, he had fifty days after his Resurrection conferred the Gift of
speaking unknown Languages by the Descending of the Holy Ghost, did even in the
Days of this same Tiberius so far extend it self, as to spread its bright
Beams upon this remote and frozen Island of Britain.

St. James
In the Year of CHRIST 41. being the third of Caligula, the holy Apostle St.
James, returning out of Spain, visited amongst other Countries this our Island,
and here preached the Gospel, the effects whereof were so prevalent, that many
stiff-necked Britains submitted themselves to the easy Yoke of our Redeemer.
Amongst these there is recorded one Suetonius, born of noble Parentage, who,
being converted to the Christian Faith here in Britain, undertook a Voyage to
Rome, that he might be more perfectly instructed by St. Peter, by whom being
baptized, and named Beatus, he was after sufficient Instruction employed in the
Apostolical Office of teaching others, and became the first Planter of
Christianity amongst the Helvetians.

St. Peter.
The great hope of happy Success is supposed chiefly to have induced St. Peter,
when the Jews were banished Rome by the Fmperor Claudius, in whose second year
he came thither, to repair into Britain, where he continued a long time,
converting several Nations, and erecting many Churches, till warned by Angels,
after he had constituted and ordained Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, he
returned to Rome, and was there soon after crowned with Martyrdom.

A tedious impatience to see the horrible Actions of Nero forced St. Paul also
to quit Rome, St. Paul.
and disperse the precious Seed of the Gospel even as far as Britain. This is
expressly testified by Venantius Fortunatus, who, in his Poem upon the Life of
St. Martin, speaking of St. Paul, says. Transit and Oceanum, vel qua facit
Insula Portum,
Quasque Britannus habet Terras, atque ultima Thule.


With St. Peter or St. Paul, St. Aristobulus.
one of whose Disciples he was, is St. Aristobulus supposed to have come into
Britain, where being made a Bishop, he preached the Gospel of CHRIST, and
having constituted Churches, and Ordained Priests and Deacons, here happily
ended his Life.

St. Joseph of Arimathea.
About the latter End of Nero's Reign and before the blessed Apostles St. Peter
and St. Paul were consummated by a glorious Martyrdom, Suetonius Paulinus being
Roman Lieutenant in Britain, St. Joseph of Arimathea, sent hither (as some say)
by St. Peter, or (as others) by St. Philip the Apostle, with eleven Companions,
entering into this Island, addressed himself to the British King Arviragus, who
not only gave them permission freely to convert his Subjects, but extended also
his Liberality to them, affording them a place of Retreat in an Island, called
at that time Avalon, or the Isle of Apples, afterward by the Britains
Iniswytrin, or the Glassy Island, by the Saxons in the same sense Glastney, and
by the Latins Glasconia. Here the Holy Men made it their first Work to build
for the Worship of the only true GOD a Temple or Church, which they dedicated
to the Memory of the Holy Mother of GOD, and perpetual Virgin Mary, the Walls
whereof were on all sides made of Rods, watled or interwoven. In this the
Fervor and Piety of our primitive Christians was so great, that it was
deservedly called the Mother of Saints. The Memory of this Building was
preserved by an Inscription cut in Brass, and heretofore fastened to a Pillar in
Glastenbury Church, which, being rehearsed by Bishop Godwyn, Sir Henry Spelman
caused to be entirely transcribed, and put into his Collection of British and
English Councels. To this their Solitude did St. Joseph and his Companions
frequently repair, both to repose themseves after their Labors, and by
undistracted Prayers to renew their Courage and Patience in their Apostolical
Employment, laying thus the Foundation, and giving Example both of Active and
Contemplative Life. Here did St. Joseph after near twenty years painful Labors
change this mortal Life for an immortal one in the Year of our Lord 82. With
him are said to have been buried two Silver Vessels, which he had brought along
with him, filled with the precious Blood of our Savior JESUS CHRIST.

The Faith, thus planted by these Holy Apostles, daily here increasing, the
British Christians are said in the Year of our Lord 100. to have sent an
Ambassador to St. Clement, then Bishop of Rome, desiring him to communicate to
them the Rites and Order of celebrating Divine Service.

About the latter end of Trajans Reign, the Roman Bishop St. Evaristus, sending
a Message to the Britains, exhorted them to the Christian Faith: The verities
whereof the better to propagate, his Successor St. Alexander sent hither
certain Apostolical Preachers, amongst whom are thought to have been St.
Marcellus, afterward Bishop of Triers, and St. Timotheus, Son of Pudens a
Roman Senator, and Brother to the Holy Virgins St. Praxedes and St. Pudentiana,
whose Mother is by many supposed to have been the Famous British Lady St.
Claudia. These gathered into a Flock the Remainders of those, who had been
converted by St. Joseph of Arimathea and his Companions, confirming them in the
same Faith, which, thus watered, spread so far, that Anno Domini 141. there are
said to have been Baptized in Granta (since called Cambridge) nine Doctors and
Scholars.

About the Year of the Lord 181. the British King Lucius, Conversion of King
Lucius.
who had hitherto been kept by its Poverty and want of Worldly Splendour from
embracing the Christian Religion, to a Liking whereof an Account of the
constant Perseverance of the Christians at Rome amidst their great and horrible
Persecutions had induced him, being now by the Emperors Lieutenants Pertinax
and Trebellius informed of the Favor, shown to the Professors of Christianity
by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who, having obtained a famous Victory by the
Christians Prayers, set forth an Edict in their behalf, as also of the Increase
of their Number by the Conversion of many of the chiefest Roman Senators, began
to hearken to the Admonitions of such, as taught that Religion here in Britain,
the Fountain whereof understanding to be at Rome, and not knowing of any
Ecclesiastical persons in Britain of Authority sufficient to establish here a
New Church, sent Elvanus of Avallonia, and Medwinus of the Province of the
Belgae with Letters to St. Eleutherius, then sitting in St. Peter's Chair,
desiring from him more perfect Instruction, and a greater Authority for settling
the common Affairs of Christianity. St. Eleutherius, together with the same
Messengers, one of which (to wit Elvanus) he is said to have consecrated a
Bishop, sent over to him two Reverend Prelates, whose Names were Phaganus and
Diruvianus, commissionating them not only to instruct and Baptize the King, and
such others, as should embrace the Christian Faith, but also to order and
establish all Ecclesiastical Affairs in the Kingdom. But whereas the King
desired, that his Messengers might bring with them the Roman Laws, according to
which he would order the Civil State of his Kingdom, the holy Bishop sent him
word, that those Laws were not necessary for the Constitution of a Christian
Commonweal, since that in them many things were established, that ought not to
be observed by the Professors of Christianity.

These Messengers being arrived, the King, his Queen, his Sister St. Emerita,
and his whole Family were washed in the Laver of Baptism, whose good Example a
great number of his People soon followed. A Testimonial of this Conversion is
yet remaining in the Library of Sir John Cotton, being a Coin of this King,
bearing his Image, his Name LVC, and the Sacred Sign of the Cross, the common
Badge of Christianity.

This done, these four holy Men employed themselves in Preaching the Gospel of
CHRIST through all the Provinces of the Kingdom, disputing daily with the
Druids, and by the help of the Kings Authority and Zeal abrogating their
abominable Superstitions, whose horrid Sacrifices of humane Blood had caused
the Romans long since to prohibit them in Gaul, and consecrating Priests and
Bishops, and designing for Episcopal Sees those Places, where formerly the
chief of the Druids, whom by a Title, borrowed from the Romans, our Historians,
writing in Latin, frequently term Flamines and Archiflamines, had their
Residence. The Names of the Cities, that were then in Britain, compassed with
Walls, and fortified with Towers and Gates, for each of which a Bishop was
intended, are as follows. 1. Cair Guintwick, now Winwick in Lancashire. 2.
Cair Mincip, Verolam near St. Albans. 3. Cair Liqualid, now Carlisle. 4. Cair
Meguaid, now Meivod in Montgomeryshire. 5. Cair Colun, now Colchester. 6. Cair
Ebranc, now York. 7. Cair Seiont, afterward Cair Custeint, near Carnarvon. 8.
Cair Caradoc in the Borders of Shropshire. 9. Cair Grant, now Cambridge. 10.
Cair Maunguid, now Manchester in Lancashire. 11. Cair Lundein, now London. 12.
Cair Guorthigirn in Radnorshire. 13. Cair Ceint, now Canterbury. 14. Cair
Guiragon, now Worcester. 15. Cair Peris, now Portsmouth. 16. Cair Daun, now
Doncaster in Yorkshire. 17. Cair-Legio, now Westchester. 18. Cair Guricon, now
Warwick. 19. Cair Segeint, now Silcester in Hampshire. 20. Cair-Leon on Usk in
Monmouthshire, now quite demolished. 21. Cair Guent, now Winchester. 22. Cair
Britto, now Bristol. 23. Cair Lerion, now Leicester. 24. Cair Draiton, now
Dragton in Shropshire. 25. Cair Pentavelcoit, now Ilchester in Somersetshire.
26. Cair Urvac, now Wroxcester in Shropshire. 27. Cair Calemion, now Camelet in
Somersetshire. 28. Cair Lindcoit, now Lincoln.


Three of these were designed to be Metropolitical Cities, the Title of
Archbishops not being then in use, viz. London, York, and Cairleon upon Vsk:
the first whereof was York, being at that time not only a Colony of the Romans,
but the Place, where the Emperors Palace and Courts of Judicature were kept.
The first Metropolitan of London was St. Theanus, for whom the King built a
Church in the place called Cornhil, which was consecrated to St. Peter.

In the Year of CHRIST 186. the holy Prelates Phaganus and Diruvianus, going to
Rome, obtained a Confirmation of all, they had done in Britain, from St.
Eleutherius, from whom at their Return hither they presented the King with an
hallowed Crown.

These Holy men being now come back, there were more Churches built,
particularly that of Westminster, which which was even from its first
Foundation deputed for the Burial of our Kings, and that of Winchester, to
which the King granted great Immunities, settling on it ample Revenues, and
placing therein Monks, living according to the Rule, delivered by St. Mark the
Evangelist.

Nor was the Devotion of King Lucius content only to build Churches and
Monasteries, but he erected also Seminaries of Learning, of which that of
Bangor was most remarkable, wherein at the coming of St. Augustine into England
there were more than two thousand Monks.

Christian Religion being thus settled in Britain, King Lucius, out of his Zeal
to propagate the Gospel, is said to have relinquished his Crown, and passed
over into Bavaria and Rhaetia, together with his Sister St. Emerita, where
being Crowned with Martyrdom, he was buried at Curia or Chur: after whose Death
the Romans suffered no more British Kings within their Province.

St. Phaganus and Diruvianus, traveling over the whole Island, teaching and
baptizing the Inhabitants, visited the Isle of Avallonia, where they built
another Oratory, dedicated to St. Peter and St. Paul, and having established
there a Succession of twelve persons in memory of St. Joseph and his
Companions, are supposed there to have ended their Days, Anno Domini 191.

Persecution under Dioclesian.
The Christian Faith, thus settled in Britain, flourished here, unmolested by any
Persecution till the Year of our Lord 286. when Dioclesian, being now in the
third year of his Reign, took for his Companion in the Empire Marcus Valerius
Maximianus. These two Emperors, the former whereof* assumed the Surname Jovius,
as the other did Herculius, designing wholly to extirpate Christianity out of
the World, raised a more dismal Persecution against the Professors thereof,
than ever any of their Predecessors had done, and this their supereminent
Cruelty they extended so far, that the Isle of Britain, which in former
persecuting Emperors times had been exempted from participating with the
Sufferings of other Nations, was now made a Scene of Blood, and the very first
Theater, whereon these bloody Emperors began to Act those Tragedies, whereat
Mankind stood amazed.

The first, that suffered under their cruel Edicts, was our glorious
Protomartyr St. Albanus, who, being an Inhabitant of Verulam, descended of an
illustrious Roman Family, and the Emperors Procurator in Britain, courteously
(tho himself yet a Pagan) entertained a certain reverend Christian Priest,
named Amphibalus, then newly come from Rome into Britain, by whom being
converted to the true Faith, he lent him at his departure his own Military
Cassock, woven with Gold, that he might the better escape: for which being
accused before the Judge, constituted for that purpose, and owning himself a
Christian, he was after various Torments beheaded, the Executioners Eyes
falling to the Ground with the Martyrs Head. To his Honor after the ceasing of
the Persecution were several Churches erected, one particularly in the Place,
where by shedding his Blood he had triumphed: Which St: Germanus Bishop of
Auxerre in France, visiting, that he might here pay his thanks to GOD, for his
Victory over the Pelagian Heresy, took from the Place, where the Martyrs Blood
had been shed, a Lump of Earth, which he carried with him into France. This no
doubt occasioned the Mistake of those, who affirmed the Body of St. Alban to
have been carried hence into France by St. Germanus.

Not long after St. Amphibalus, taken among the Cornabii, where a great
Multitude of People were, as they attended to his Preaching, slain by the
Pagans, was brought to Rudburn, a Village three Miles from Verulam, where his
Belly being ripped open, and his Guts fastened to a Stake, set in the Ground, he
was by cruel whipping forced to walk about it, enwrapping it with his Bowels,
his Body likewise being torn with Knives and Lances, till at last he yielded up
his Soul to GOD: After which his Body was by a certain Christian privately
taken away, and buried.

Many more were here likewise Crowned with Martyrdom, two of the most
remarkable whereof were St. Aaron and St. Julius, considerable Citizens of
Caer-Leon upon Vsk.

Besides those, who suffered Martyrdom, many persecuted Christians, which were
left, hid themselves in Woods, Deserts, and Caves of Rocks, expecting from GOD,
the just Judge of all, when he would please to execute his Judgments on their
Persecutors, and restore Safety and Liberty to their own Souls.

The British Christians thus absconding, the Rage of their Enemies extended it
self upon their Churches, all which by this Tempest were either utterly
destroyed, or turned into places for the Idolatrous Worship of the Gentiles, as
that of Westminster was into a Temple of Apollo, so that in several Provinces
of this Island there remained no Marks at all of Christian Religion.

Tho the Britains for about nine years groaned under this Persecution, yet it
was sooner mitigated here, than in any other part of the Empire. For
Constantius Chlorus, who by the virtuous demeanor of his Wife Helena, a
Christian Lady, Daughter to Coilus a British Prince, had been brought to a
secret Liking of their Religion, being by Maximian, who, constraining him to
divorce Helena, had given him his Daughter to Wife, chosen Caesar, as Galerius
was by Dioclesian, came into Britain to subdue the Usurper Alectus, where he
put a stop to this Issue of Blood, so that, the British Church enjoying Peace,
whilst in all other Provinces of the Empire Cruelty and Slaughter were
Triumphant, the Christians here began to repair their demolished Churches, to
build new ones in honor of their late Martyrs, and Publicly to celebrate
Divine Mysteries and solemn Festivals.

Maximian and Dioclesian after twenty years fruitless Cruelty voluntarily
deposing themselves from the Empire, the Western Provinces fell to Constantius,
who, choosing rather to govern well, than much, resigned Italy and Africa to
Galerius, esteeming them too remote from the Seat of his Residence, which he
held in Britain: Into the Northern parts whereof he was drawn by some
Commotions amongst the Picts, whom having removed beyond the Limits prescribed
them, he fell sick at York, where, having embraced the true Faith, he piously
ended his days, Anno CHRISTI 306. leaving his Empire to his eldest Son
Constantin, born in Britain of his beloved Wife Helena, by whom he was solemnly
buried.

Constantin, Christianity restored by Constantin.
who (tho flying from it) was forced to yield to the Soldiers, saluting him
Emperor, although not yet a Christian, yet having from his Infancy been bred up to
the Love of Christians, and imbued by his Mother with the Principles of their
Religion in his tender Youth, indulged them the same Peace and Security through
all his Dominions, and particulary in Britain, as they had enjoyed under his
Father Constantius. Hence several Churches were rebuilt and replenished within
this Island: whereof two of the most famous were those of Winchester and
Abingdon, to the latter of which belonged no fewer than five hundred Monks
living by the Labor of their Hands in Woods and Deserts, and resorting every
Sunday and Holyday to the Monastery to perform their Devotions: besides whom
there constantly remained there sixty, daily attending to celebrate Divine
Service.

In the Year of our Lord 311. Galerius being dead, there remained in the Empire
four Persons, by whom the respective Provinces were supremely and independently
administered: Gaul and Britain by Constantin; Italy and Africa by Maxentius; the
East by Maximinus; Pannonia, Greece, Illyricum and Thrace by Licinius. Whereof
Maxentius, under whose Tyranny all Italy (especially Rome) groaned, refusing
Conditions of Peace, offered him by Constantin, whom he would not admit into
fellowship in the Empire, Constantin, concluding a War against him to be both
just and necessary, and sensible, that his Adversary was superior to him in
strength, had recourse to Divine Assistance, and uncertain amongst such a
Multitude of Gods, to which he should address himself, calling to mind, how
former Emperors had to their own Ruin been abused by the deceitful Oracles of
their false Gods, resolved to put his Trust in the only true GOD, worshipped by
his Mother Helena all her Lifetime, and by his Father Constantius toward his
latter end, to whom when he had offered up his Prayers, the Almighty was
pleased by a stupendous Miracle in the sight of his whole Army to declare, how
acceptable this was to him. For the Emperor saw manifestly in the Heavens over
the Sun, which had now passed his Meridian, and began to decline, the Sign of
the the Cross, figured by a resplendent Light, together with these Words
inscribed, (...): Which Spectacle caused great Admiration in himself, and his
whole Army, then attending.

To Constantin, distracted with great Doubts about the Portent of this Vision,
did our Lord, bearing the same sign, which had been shown him from Heaven,
appear in his sleep, commanding him to cause a Representation thereof to be
framed, which he should make use of, as a firm Guard, whenever he was to join
Battle with his Enemies.

The Day appearing, the Emperor, having declared this Vision to his Friends,
called together the most skilful Jewellers, that could be found, to whom having
described the Pattern of the Sign, which he had seen, he commanded them to make
the Resemblance thereof in Gold and Precious Stones, which he always made use
of, as a sure Defense against all hostil Violence.

Constantin, encouraged with this glorious Testimony of Divine Assistance,
armed with the Cross both on his Helmet and Forehead, and having this
Triumphant Banner (to which the Roman Eagle now gave place) born before his
Army, passed the Alps, and coming into Italy, fought Maxentius before the Walls
of Rome, whose Army being discomfited, the Tyrant, having cast off his Marks of
Authority, adventured himself to the River Tyber, where he was drowned.

Soon after Constantin met Licinius at Milan, to whom giving his Sister
Constantia for Wife, he prevailed with him not only to subscribe to an Edict
for giving free Liberty to Christians, and restoring to them all their
Churches, that had been seized on, but also to join with him in a Letter to
Maximinus, Emperor of the Eastern Provinces, to grant the same Freedom within
his Dominions, to which Maximinus, tho with some unwillingness, consented.

In the Year 314. Constantin, then residing in Gaul, was much distracted by the
Factions of Schismatics amongst the Christians. For the repressing therefore
of the Seditions, raised by the Donatists, he was necessitated to command a
General Assembly or Synod of the Western Empire to meet at Arles, where there
were present above two hundred Bishops: amongst whom were these three from
Britain, Eborius Bishop of York, Restitutus Bishop of London, and Adelfius
Bishop of Colonia Londinensium or Colchester, which some, affirming Colon:
Londinens: to have been mistakingly written by the Transcribers for Colon:
Camalodun: interpret Maldon in Essex.

In the Year 317. Licinius, contrary to his Covenant with Constantin, beginning
to presecute the Christians, was by him in two Battles overthrown. After which
tho there was a new League made, and all the Eastern Provinces together with
Thrace assigned to Licinius; yet he, renewing the War, was slain the next year,
and a firm Peace given to the Christian Churches all the World over.

Now began Constantin to publish Laws for the advantage of Christianity,
ordaining, that Clergymen should be excused from all manner of Civil Offices
and Duties, to the end they might not by the envious Malice of any be withdrawn
from the Service of GOD. For to encourage likewise the Love of Virginity and
Single Life, he abrogated the Roman Laws against Celibacy, and appointed a
certain Measure of Wheat yearly to be given to all Widows, and those, who
observed a Virgin Life. He ordained also, that all Judges, Inhabitants of
Cities, and Tradesmen should rest on the Venerable Day of our Lord; but
Countrymen were permitted to employ themselves in cultivating their Grounds,
because that, many times no Day being more commodious for plowing or digging
the Vines, a common Good, granted by Divine Povidence, ought not to be lost. He
prescribed likewise a Form of Prayer, to be used upon all Sundays both by
Citizens and others.

In the Year of our Lord 324. Constantin, who, according to a Custom,
frequently practiced by the Christian Converts of those primitive Times, had
hitherto delayed his Baptism, to cleanse his Conscience, stained with the Blood
of many Innocents, amongst whom was his own Son Crispus, put to Death upon the
false Accusations of his Stepmother Fausta, was washed in the Laver of
Regeneration, being Baptized at Rome by the Holy Bishop Sylvester, and while he
was yet in his white Robes, then usually worn for seven Days after Baptism,
made several Laws for the advancement of true Religion.

1. He declared that CHRIST was the only true Lord, and commanded, that he
should be adored throughout the whole Empire.

2. He appointed severe Punishments to be inflicted on those, who by word or
deed should dishonor him.

3. He ordained likewise Penalties for those, who should persecute or molest
any Christians. He gave also Imperial Privileges to the Roman, and great
Immunities to all other Churches, and conferred many Gifts upon several
Ecclesiastical Persons.

The year following, to suppress the Heresy of Arius, he caused a Council to be
assembled at Nice of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, where a Decree was
likewise made for an Uniformity in the Observation of Easter, about which the
Church had been much disquieted. Hereunto agreed those of the Church (...).

In the Year 326. died St. Helena, Mother to the Emperor, who, with great Care
and Industry having found out the Cross, whereon our Blessed Savior suffered,
and the Manger, wherein he was born, built in the same place a Church,
dedicated to Christian Devotion, for which she was by the Jews, Enemies to all,
that own any thing sacred in Memory of our Savior, despitefully called
Stabularia. About the same time Constantin, returning into the East, expressed
his Zeal against Idolatry, shutting up the Temples of the Heathens, and making
severe Laws against their Sacrifices.

CHAP. VIII. Of the quitting of Britain by the Romans: The State thereof after
their departure.
IN this Island did the Roman Government continue till the time of the Emperor
Honorius, Britain quitted by the Romans.
in the fifteenth year of whose Reign, being the Year of our Lord 410. and four
hundred sixty and two years after the first Arrival of Julius Caesar on the
British shore, the Britains, the Flower of whose Youth had been from time to
time drawn out by the Romans, whose Forces also were now called from hence for
the defense of Italy against the Goths, not having Power sufficient to defend
themselves from the Incursions of their Northern Enemies, sent their Messengers
to the Emperor, humbly craving his Protection. But he, not able to afford them
any Assistance, Rome it self being then besieged by Alaric, by whom it was the
same year taken, sent them Letters, exhorting them to stand on their own Guard,
and acquitting them of the Roman Jurisdiction.

State thereof after their Departure.
The Romans thus relinquishing all Care and Protection of Britain, the
Government devolved on its own petty Princes, who independently ruled the
several Provinces thereof. But they, unable to support themselves against the
daily Inroads of the Picts and Scots, again sent Letters to Honorius, who,
compassionating their Miseries, the Fear of Alaric being now over, sent a
Legion to their Assistance, who, having with great Slaughter driven back the
Picts beyond the Marches, and cleared the Frontiers, caused a Rampire to be
built cross the Island from the Frith of Edenborough to the City Alcluith on
Dunbritton, as Agricola formerly had done.

No sooner were the Romans departed to the defense of France, but the Picts,
breaking down this Wall, slightly cast up of Turfs only, and pouring into the
Province like a Torrent, laid all waste, wherever they came, the Scots
likewise out of their Carroghs or Leather vessels, wherein they used to pass
the Scitick Vale, landing in whole Swarms, and making havoc of whatever came
in their way.

The Britains, thus bandied between two merciless and insolent Enemies, yet
once more sent Ambassadors to Rome, who with rent Garments, and Sand on their
Heads, mournfully supplicating Valentinian the third, then Emperor, that he
would not suffer a Province, which had been so serviceable to the Romans, to be
the Subject of Barbarian Scorn and Insolence, excited in him such Pity of their
Complaints, that to succor them he sent certain Regiments, who, coming
unexpectedly upon those ravenous Spoilers, surprised them with terrible
Slaughter.

The Britains thus rescued, and the Province cleared of the Enemies, the Romans
gave them their help to build another Wall of Stone, twelve foot high, and
eight broad, traversing the Island in a direct Line from East to West, where
Severus had walled before, between certain Cities, placed as Frontiers to keep
off the Enemy, and along the South Shore, from whence Hostility was also
feared, they erected Towers at certain distances for safety of the Coast.

This done, having instructed the Britains in the Art of War, leaving them
Patterns of their Arms and Weapons, and exhorting them manfully to resist the
Invaders of their Country, they took their last Farewell, never purposing to
return.

The Romans being finally departed, and their Resolution of not returning
known, the Scots and Picts, more confidently than ever issuing out of their
Holes, seized upon all the North part of the Island even as far as the Wall,
which, not fearing to be dispossessed, they, as natural Inhabitants, planted and
manured: Not content herewith, they assaulted the Garrison on the Wall, whence
with their Hooks and Engines pulling down some, they put the rest to flight,
themselves taking possession of the Frontier Cities, and having with such ease
broken into the Province, pursued the Britains into the Inland Countries,
bringing destruction still along with them.

The better to withstand the frequent Inroads of these cruel Enemies, the
Princes, after the example of their Ancestors in the days of Julius Caesar,
resolved to choose a General Captain of the whole Nation, and to establish the
Kingdom in his Line.

For this high Dignity there were two considerable Competitors: Aurelius
Ambrosius, descended of a noble Roman Family, and (as it is supposed) Son of
Constantin, who in the days of Honorius pretended to the Roman Empire; and
Vortigern, Prince of the Damnonii, or, as some write, Consul of the Gevissei,
Inhabitants of the South-Western parts about Cornwall or South Wales: Which
Principality, it seems, he had governed well enough to be esteemed not unworthy
to be preferred above his formerly Fellow-Princes.

Ambrosius therefore, with his Brother Vter Pendragon, retiring into lesser
Britain in Gaul, quitted both his Pretense and Country to Vortigern, who, the
Choice thus falling on him, was in the Year 438 anointed King: For, that in
those ancient times of British Government the solemn Ceremony of anointing
their Kings was in use in this Island, is clear from the Testimony of Gildas.

Vortigern, thus advanced to the Throne, governed a while his Principality with
Moderation. In the eighth year of his Reign the Picts, who after their
miraculous Discomfiture by St. Germanus had for the most part kept within their
own Territories, now breaking in afresh, miserably wasted all those Provinces
of Britain, which had formerly been subject to the Romans: and this Invasion
they continued the year following with such violence, that after much
Bloodshed, and horrible Devastation of the Country, the Britains, having no
other Refuge, wrote to Aetius, then President of Gallia, this short, but
lamentable, Epistle, recorded by Gildas.

To Aetius, the third time Consul, the Groans of the Britains. The Barbarians
drive us to the Sea, the Sea beats us back upon the Barbarians. Between these
two we are exposed either to be slain with the Sword, or drowned: and to avoid
both we find no Remedy.

But in vain were these Supplications, the Romans, who could scarce secure the
heart of their Empire, infested with the Huns and Vandals, not being able to
afford them any assistance. Many therefore of the Britains, seeing themselves
thus rejected, wearied with flying from place to place, and spent with the
terrible Famine, which had long afflicted them, yielded themselves Slaves to
their Savage Enemies; but others, more resolute, taught by their Miseries to
seek aid from Heaven, retired to inaccessible Mountains and Caves, whence with
Courage and Success they often assaulted these ravenous Spoilers, recovering
from them their Booty, and driving them back to their own Quarters.

These hostil Invasions therefore a while ceasing, the Britains set themselves
to cultivate their Ground, which with scarce credible Plenty abundantly
recompensed their Labors.

No sooner were their Enemies departed, and their pinching Hunger allaid, but
their Piety likewise vanished, in the room whereof succeeded excessive Luxury,
accompanied with all sorts of Vices, infecting not the Laity only, but the
Clergy also, who ought to have been Guides to others. And although GOD sought to
reclaim them by his Scourge of Pestilence, by which such Multitudes perished,
that the Living were not sufficient to bury the Dead; yet were they with this
Severity nothing at all amended, but like Solomon's Fool, tho scourged, yet they
felt it not.

GODs Patience therefore being spent toward a People, which grew worse both by
Prosperity and Adversity, he so far infatuated their Counsels, that they
themselves invited from a remote Country Enemies, far more savage and barbarous
than either the Picts or Scots.

The Northern Spoilers, whom fear of the Contagion had kept within their own
Borders, the Infection now beginning to cease, readvanced into the Inland
Country, against whose Incursions the better to provide, King Vortigern
summoned a general Council, where by common Advice it was resolved, that
Ambassadors should be sent into Germany to hire the Saxons to their assistance:
an Army of which in the year 449 landing in Britain under the Conduct of
Hengist and Horsa, the Britains, by their Help overcoming their Enemies, who
were come as far as Stamford in Lincolnshire, gave them great Possesions in
that part of the same County, now called Lindsey, where they built Thong-Castle.

King Vortigern, falling in love with Rowena, Daughter to Hengist, divorced his
Queen, a virtuous Lady, by whom he had three Sons, named Vortimer, Catigern,
and Pascentius, to make his Bed vacant for this Pagan, whom he bought of her
Father with the Kingdom of Kent: who soon after, taking advantage at the
Discontent of the Britains for this Act of their King, picked a Quarrel, and
making a League with the Picts, laid wast the Country.

The Saxons Power increasing by the coming over of fresh Supplies, the British
Laity first, and afterward the Clergy represented their Danger to the King,
whom, either not believing, or not regarding their Complaints, they in the
sixteenth year of his Reign deserted, and followed his Son Vortimer (choosing
him, as some say, for their General, or, as others, for an Associate to his
Father in the Kingdom) under whose Conduct they had many Conflicts with the
Saxons, and that with various Success: in one of which, the Vant-guard being
led by Aurelius Ambrosius, newly come out of Little Britain to assist Prince
Vortimer, the main Body by Vortimer himself, and the Rere by his Brother
Catigern, Catigern was slain, and buried at Alestrew, now called Aylesford in
Kent, where a Monument erected for him, is at this day corruptly called
Keith-Coty-House.

This Proceeding of the Britains (tho the more excuseable, in that they did not
presume to depose their King, which yet Parker in his Antiquities of the
British Church not only affirms they did, but (like a true Calvinist) commends
them for so doing; but only without, or (perhaps) against his Consent chose
themselves a Leader against their Enemies) as it was not justifiable, nor yet
approved by all the Britains, many of which took not well this advancing of the
Son against the good Liking of the Father: so was it fatal to Vortimer himself,
who, having six years enjoyed this Dignity, lost both that and his Life, being
poisoned by the Procurement of Rowena. After his Death Ambrosius returned again
into Britain in France.

Hengist and his Saxons, who under Pretense of a Treaty of Peace had slain
three hundred of the British Nobility, and by detaining Vortigern Prisoner had
extorted from him the Counties of Essex, Sussex, Surrey, Norfolk, and Suffolk
for his Ransom, growing daily more and more powerful, whilst Vortigern lurkt
ingloriously in his Castle Gener^ amidst the inaccessible Mountains of the
Country, now called Cambria or Wales, and the middle Provinces of the Realm,
left without any Defender, being exposed to the fury of the Enemy, the
Britains, deserted by their King, were forced to seek one abroad.

They directed therefore Messengers into Little Britain to Ambrosius and his
Brother Vter Pendragon, beseeching them with all speed to quit that Country,
and repair into their own, to the end that expelling both the Saxons, and their
hated King Vortigern, they might receive the Crown of Britain.

The Princes upon this Invitation returned, attended with Ships, and armed
Soldiers, and being arrived here, had a great Battle with Hengist, wherein tho
the Britains were worsted, yet the Saxons received such Loss, that they both
gladly continued quiet. The Fury of the Saxons thus allayed, Ambrosius marched
into Wales, where setting fire to the Castle of King Vortigern, he consumed
both him and his to Ashes: After whose Death by Consent of the Nobles he
assumed the Crown Anno CHRISTI 481.

In the Year of our Lord 496. Pascentius, the Son of Vortigern, with an Army of
Germans came against Ambrosius, by whom being discomfited, he fled into
Scotland: Whence about five years after returning with an Army, and
understanding, that Ambrosius lay sick, he hired a certain Saxon, named Copa,
who, feigning himself to be a British Monk and a Physician, poisoned the King,
Pascentius in the mean time and all his Captains being slain by Vter
Pendragon, who in the head of the Kings Forces marched out against him.

The Line of Vortigern being thus extinct, and Ambrosius now dead, the Realm
was without any Competitor governed by Vter Pendragon, under whom and his
Successors the Britains had continual Struglings with the Saxons, by whom being
at last outed of the best part of their Country, they retired beyond the River
Severn, and in those parts fortified themselves, a Period being put to the
British Kingdom in the Year of our Lord, 688. about two hundred seventy eight
years after that Honorius had by Letters of Discharge quitted the Britains of
the Roman Jurisdiction, two hundred and fifty from the Reestablishing of the
British Monarchy by the Election of King Vortigern, two hundred thirty nine
after the first Arrival of Hengist and his Saxon Auxiliaries, and in the third
Year of Cadwalladar, who was the last, that was dignified with the Title of
King of Britain, his Successors being styled Kings and Princes of Wales.

CHAP. IX. Of the Restoration of the British Monarchy by King James: His
Descent from Cadwalladar.
The British Monarchy restored by King James.
THe conquering Saxons, having possessed themselves of all the Southern parts of
the Isle, except what lies beyond the Severn, and the mountainous Country of
Cornwall, whither they had forced the Britains to retire, gave to the Country,
held by themselves, first the Name of East Saxony beyond Sea, and afterward
that of England: That Part of the Island, which was still enjoyed by the
Britains, they called Wales, the Inhabitants Walsh or Welsh-men, and their
chief Governors Kings and Princes of Wales. Hereby was the Name of Britain
banished as it were the Island for above nine hundred years, till such time as,
the Line of Henry the VIIIth. (whose three Children, Reigning successively,
died Issueless) being extinct, the Crown of England by indubitable Hereditary
Right fell to James the VIth. King of Scotland, whose Great Grandmother was
Margaret, eldest Daughter to Henry the VIIth. King of England. This famous
Monarch (as is manifest by his Genealogy hereunto annexed) lineally descending
from Cadwalladar, the last King of the Britains, not only restored the British
Line to the Throne, but the Name of Britain also to the Island, causing himself
immediately upon his Coming to this Crown to be styled King of Great Britain.

The KINGS And Princes of WALES, Descent of King James fom Cadwalladar.
from whom is Lineally descended the Royal Family of the STVARTS, now actually
swaying the Scepter of GREAT BRITAIN.
CADWALLADAR King of Britain, driven by the Saxons to forsake his Native
Country, sojourned with his Kinsman Alan, King of Little Britain in France,
whence designing again for Britain, he was by an Angel admonished in a Vision
to go to Rome, where he ended his days Anno Domini 688. With him died the
British Monarchy.
Edwal Ywrch, left by his Father at his Departure for Rome in Little Britain
with his Cosen Alan, who sent his Son Ivor with a Navy into Britain, where he
was the first King of Wales. 1. Roderick Molwynoc, who in the Year 720.
succeeded his Cosen Ivor, the Son of Alan, in the Kingdom of Wales. 2. Fermael,
who died without Issue in the Year 763.

RODERICK MOLWYNOC, King of Wales, had Issue.
1. Conan Tindaethwy, King of Wales. Esylht, Queen of Wales, married to a
Nobleman named Mervyn Vrych, descended in the right Line from Belinus, Brother
of Brennus, King of Britain. His Mother was Nest, Daughter to Cadelh, Prince of
Powys, whose Father was Brochwel Yscithroc, Prince of Powys, that in the Year
617. fought against the Saxons at Bangor. 1. Roderick Mawr, King of Wales, who
by his Wife Engharad, Daughter to Meyrick, Prince of Cardigan, had a numerous
Issue. He divided Wales into three Talaiths or Kingdoms: Giving to Anarawd, his
Eldest Son (to whom the other two were Tributaries) Gwyneth or Northwales; to
Cadelh, his second Son, Dehevbarth or Southwales; to Mervyn, his third Son,
Mathraval or Powys. 1. Anarawd, King of Northwales, and Sovereign of all Wales,
died in the year 913. leaving behind him two Sons. 1. Edwal Voel, King of
Northwales, and Sovereign of all Wales who had a numerous Issue. 2. Elise,
slain with his Brother, King Edwal Voel, in the year 940. Conan, who died
without Issue. Trawst a Daughter, married to a Nobleman, named Sitsylht.

2. Cadelh, King of Southwales, and, after the Death of his Brother Mervyn, of
Powys, from whom descended the Kings and Princes of Southwales. 3. Mervyn, King
of Powys, who, being slain in the year 900. was succeeded by his Brother
Cadelh, King of Southwales.
2. Gwyriad, who together with his Brother King Roderick was slain in the Year
877.
2. Howel, who, rebeling against his Brother, was by him overcome, and forced
to fly into the Isle of Man, where he died Anno. 819.

TRAWST, the Daughter of Elise, by her Husband Sitsylht, had Issue.
Lhewelyn, who married Angharad, the Daughter and Heir of Meredyth, King of
Southwales. This Lhewelyn in the Year 1015. raised a great Power against Aedan,
the Son of Blegored, who had usurped the Kingdom of Northwales, whom with his
four Sons having slain, he took to himself the Name and Authority of King of
Wales. 1. Gruffyth, who in the year 1037. having slain in battle Jago, King of
Northwales, assumed the Kingdom to himself. A Daughter, not named, married to
Fleance, Son of Bancho, a Scotch Nobleman, cruelly murdered by Mackbeth, King
of Scotland, whose Fury Fleance escaping, fled into Wales, where being kindly
received by King Gruffyth, he privately married his Daughter, whereat the King,
who by his Daughters being with Child had found out the Marriage was so highly
offended, that he caused Fleance to be killed, and his Daughter imprisoned, who
was soon after delivered of a Son, which was named Walter, who, going into
Scotland, grew into such Favor with King Malcolm the IIId. that he was by him
made Lord High Steward of Scotland, receiving the Kings Revenues of the whole
Realm, by the faithful Discharge of which Office, he merited for for himself
and Posterity the Surname of Stuart.

2. Rees, slain at a place, called Bulendune, in the year 1053.
2. Conan, slain with his Brother Lhewelyn in the year 1021.
This was the Rise and Original of the Royal Family of the Stuarts, which has
now for above three hundred years been in possession of the Crown of Scotland,
and about fourscore the sole Monarchs of Great Britain. But tho this Descent be
of the Younger House, as coming from Elise, second Son of Anarawd, the first
King of Northwales; yet that his present Majesty of Great Britain is by Right
of Primogeniture the next and undoubted Heir to Cadwalladar, will manifestly
appear by the following Table, representing

The Progeny Of Cadwalladar, continued from Edwal Voel, the eldest Son of
Anarawd, to our present Dread Sovereign King CHARLES the IId. now swaying the
Scepter of Great Britain,
EDWAL VOEL King of Northwales, and Sovereign of all Wales, eldest Son of
Anarawd, first King of Northwales, and Grandson of Roderick Mawr, King of
Wales, had Issue.
1. Meyric, who was deprived of his Inheritance, first by his Cosen Howel Dha,
the eldest Son of Cadelh, first King of Southwales, and afterward by his own
Brethren Jevaf and Jago. In the year 973. he had his Eyes put out by his Nephew
Howel, the Son of Jevaf, and soon after died in Prison, leaving behind him two
Sons. 2. Jevaf, who with his Brother Jago after the Death of Howel Dha, usurped
the Kingdom of Northwales, being the Right of their eldest Brother Meyric.
About the year 967. he was Imprisoned by his Brother Jago, and in the year 973.
set at liberty by his Son Howel, who chased Jago out of the Land, and took the
Kingdom to himself. 3. Jago, who together with his Brother Jevaf in the year
948. after the Death of Howel Dha, usurped the Kingdom of Northwales, which of
right belonged to their elder Brother Meyric.
MEYRIC, the Son of Edwal Voel, had Issue
1. Jonaval, who in the year 985. was slain by Cadwalhon, the Son of Jevaf, and
left no Issue 2. Edwal, who in the year 992. recovered his Grandfathers
Inheritance, and after six years was slain by Swayn King of Denmark. Jago, who,
being under Age at his Fathers Death, was deprived of his Inheritance by Aedan
the Son of Blegored, slain in the year 1015. by Lhewelyn, the Son of Sitsylht,
who being in the year 1021. killed by Howel and Meredyth, the Sons of Edwyn, Jago
recovered his Kingdom, but was in the year 1037. slain by Gruffyth, the Son of
Lhewelyn. Conan, who, being by Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn driven out of his
Inheritance, fled into Ireland, where he married the Daugher of Alfred, King of
Develyn. Gruffyth, who, in the year 1078. bringing a great Army of Irishmen and
Scots into Wales, and joining with Rees ap Theodor, the Heir of Southwales,
recovered his Grandfathers Kingdom. He is the last, to whom the Wel^ Historians
give the Name of King.



GRVFFYTH, Son of Conan, had Issue.
Owen Gwyneth, Prince of Northwales, and Sovereign of all Wales. He died in
the year 1169. leaving behind him a numerous Issue. 1. Jorwerth Drwyndwn,
deprived of Inheritance by his younger Brother David. Lhewelyn, Prince of
Northwales, and Sovereign of all Wales, for his Heroic Acts surnamed the
Great, who in the year 1237. being weakened by a Palsy, and vexed with the
Rebellion of his Base Son Gruffyth, sent Ambassadors to Henry the IIId. King
of England, submitting himself to his Protection, condescending to hold his
Principality of him, and promising upon all Occasions to assist him to the
uttermost of his Power. He died in the year 1240.
2. David, who, usurping the Right of his eldest Brother, succeeded his Father
in the Principality, which he held till the year 1194. when he lost it to his
Nephew Lhewelyn, the right Heir.

LHEWELYN, the Son of Jorwerth, by his Wife Jone, Daughter to John King of
England, had Issue.
David, Sovereign Prince of Wales, who submitted himself and his Principality
to his Uncle Henry the IIId. King of England, doing him Homage and Fealty for
the same. He died in the year 1246. without Issue. Gladys Dhu a Daughter,
married to Ralph Lord Mortimer of Wigmor, by whom she had Issue Roger Mortimer,
Lord of VVigmor, who ought to have succeeded his Uncle David in the
Principality of Wales; but the Welsh Nobility out of their Aversion to the
English, not regarding his Right, did their Homage to Lhewelyn and Owen Goch,
Sons of Gruffyth, Bastard-brother to the last Prince, who divided the
Principality between them, till that Lhewelyn in the year 1254. having taken
his Brother Owen Prisoner in battle, enjoyed alone the whole Principality. But
in the year l282, Lhewelyn being slain by one Adam Francton an Englishman, all
Wales was by Edward the Is It. brought in Subjection to the Crown of England,
and has so continued ever since. The Eldest Son of Roger Mortimer by his Wife
Maud, Daughter of William de Bruise Lord of Brecknock, was Edmund Mortimer,
Lord of VVigmor.


EDMUND MORTIMER, Lord of VVigmor, had Issue.
Roger Mortimer, Lord of VVigmor, who married Jone, Daughter and Heir of Sir
Peter Genivil, was created Earl of March by King Edward the IIId. and
afterward attainted. Edmund Mortimer, Lord of VVigmor, married Elianor, Widow
of William de Bohun, Earl of Northampton, one of the Daughters and Heirs of
Bartholomew Badelsmer, Lord of Leeds in Kent. Roger Mortimer, Lord of VVigmor,
restored by King Edward the IIId. to the Earldom of March, and all his
Grandfathers Inheritance, Honors, and Possessions, the Attainder being
repealed. Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, and Lord of VVigmor, married
Philippa, Daughter and sole Heir of Leonell, Duke of Clarence, in whose Right
he was Earl of Vlster. He died at Cork in Ireland Anno 1381.



EDMUND MORTIMER, Earl of March had Issue
Roger Mortimer, Earl of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmor, Trym, Clare, and
Connaght, who married Elianor, Eldest Daughter and one of the Heirs of Thomas
Holland Earl of Kent. 1. Roger Mortimer died without Issue. 2. Edmund Mortimer
died without Issue. 3. Anne Mortimer, married to Richard Plantagenet, Earl of
Cambridge, by whom she had Issue Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, Earl of
Cambridge, March, and Vlster. Edward the IVth. King of England and France, and
Lord of Ireland. 1. Edward the Vth. King of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland, murdered in the Tower left no Issue. 2. Richard Plantagenet, Duke of
York, murdered with his Brother King Edward, left no Issue. 3. Elizabeth,
eldest Daughter to Edward the IVth. married to Henry the VIIth King of England
and France, and Lord of Ireland.




ELIZABETH, eldest Daughter to King Edward the IVth. by her Husband King Henry
the VIIth. had Issue
1. Arthur, Prince of Wales, died before his Father, and left no Issue. 2
Henry the VIIIth. King of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
1. Edward the VIth. King of England, France and Ireladd, died without Issue. 2.
Mary, Q. of England France and Ireland, died without Issue. 3. Elizabeth, Queen
of England, France and Ireland, died without Issue.
3. Margaret, eldest Daughter to Henry the VIIth. married to James the IVth.
King of Scotland, by whom she had Issue James the Vth. King of Scotland. Mary
Queen of Scotland, who was by her Subjects, infected with Calvinism (of which
it is truly observed, that it never entered into any Country but by Rebellion)
expelled her Kingdom, and forced to fly for shelter into England, where (so
implacable is Presbyterian Malice) they never left persecuting her, till they
had brought her (after eighteen years Imprisonment) to end her days upon a
Scaffold. By her Husband Henry Lord Darnley, Son to Matthew Stuart, Earl of
Lenox, she had Issue James the VIth. King of Scotland, who after the Decease of
Elizabeth Queen of England, as next Heir, enjoyed the Crown of this Realm,
whereof he was no sooner possessed, but he reassumed the Title of Great Britain.
1. Henry, Prince of Wales, died before his Father, and left no Issue. 2.
CHARLES the Is It. King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, a Prince of incomparable Virtues and Endowments, who was on the 30th. of
January 1648. barbarously and inhumanly murdered before the Gates of his own
Royal Palace by a traitorous Crew of villainous Phanaticks, so secure in their
own Thoughts of having thereby extirpated Monarchy out of this Island, that
they insolently set up on the Royal Exchange in the place, where his Statue
(which they maliciously decollated) had been erected amongst those of his
Predecessors, this Inscription: Exit Tyrannus, Regum ultimus. 1. CHARLES the
IId. by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, now reigning. Who^ GOD long preserve. 2. The Illustrious Prince,
James Duke of York and Albany. 3. Mary, Mother to the present Prince of Orange.
4. Henrietta, Mother to the present Queen of Spain.
3. Elizaheth, married to Frederick, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, by whom she
had a numerous Issue.




CHAP. X. Of the present Government of Great Britain in general.
OF Monarchies some are Hereditary, the Crown descending either only to the
Heirs Male, as has long been practiced in France; or to the next of Blood
without Distinction of Sex, as in Great Britain and Spain. Others are Elective,
where, upon the Death of every Prince, another is chosen to succeed, without
any respect to the Heirs of the Predecessor, as is used in Poland.

Of Hereditary Monarchies some are dependent, holden of earthly Potentates, to
whom the Princes are obliged to do Homage for the same, as is the Kingdom of
Naples, holden at this day of the Pope by the King of Spain: Others are
independent, whose Princes acknowledge no Superior upon Earth, but hold only of
GOD and by their Sword.

Of this latter sort is the Empire of Great Britain, being an Hereditary
Monarchy, consisting of two Provinces or Kingdoms, governed by one Supreme,
Absolute, Independent, Undeposable, and Unaccountable Head, according to the
known Laws and Customs of each Kingdom.

It is a Free Monarchy, challenging, above many other Europaean Kingdoms, an
Exemption from all Subjection to the Emperor, or Laws of the Empi- to which as
the Northern Part of the Island, or Kingdom of Scotland was never subject; so
the Southern part, since called the Kingdom of England, being abandoned by the
Romans, who had by force obtained the Dominion thereof, the Right of Government
by all manner of Laws reverted to the ancient Inhabitants, to the last of whose
Kings, viz. Cadwalladar our present Sovereign is (as appears by the precedent
Genealogy) by Lineal and Legitimate Descent the true and unquestionable Heir.

And as it is exempt from all foreign Jurisdiction and Dominion, so likewise
is it free from all Interregnum, and many other Domestic Mischiefs, whereunto
Elective Kingdoms are ordinarily subject.

It is a Monarchy, wherein the Grace and Bounty of its Princes, rendering the
subordinate Concurrence of the three Estates necessary to the making and
repealing of all Statutes or Acts of Parliament in either Realm, have afforded
so much to the Industry, Liberty, and Happiness of the Subject, and made the
Yoke of Government so easy, and its Burden so light, that, were it not for
those malevolent and Fanatical Spirits, which by sowing Jealousies amongst the
People, and raising Animosities in their Minds against their Prince, endeavor
to deprive us of the benefit of our Parliaments by rendering their Meetings
unpracticable, our Condition might well be envied by all other Nations of the
Universe.

CHAP. XI. Of the Monarch of Great Britain, and therein of his Name, Title,
Arms, Dominions, and Strength: Of his Person, Office, Prerogative, Sovereignty,
Divinity, and Respect.
TO the Monarch of Great Britain is given in English, which is the Language
most generally spoken through his whole Dominions, the Name King, which has
its Original from the Saxon Word Koning, and intimates that Power and
Knowledge, wherewith every Sovereign should especially be invested.

The Modern Title, used by the Monarch in all Treaties with foreign Princes,
and in all public Affairs, relating to his whole Dominions, and stamped upon
his Coin, is By the Grace of GOD King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; but in all Writs and other public Instruments,
referring to the particular Concerns of either Kingdom of England or Scotland,
the two Kingdoms are distinctly, named that Kingdom having the Precedence in
such Instrument, which is therein particularly concerned.

To the King alone belongs Dei Gratia, taken simply and in the strictest sense,
as holding his Regal Dignity by the Favor of none but GOD; the Archbishops and
Bishops, to whom that Title is also sometimes given, must understand Dei Gratia
and Regis: For tho their Character and Spiritual Function be from GOD alone;
yet their Baronies, Dignity, and Interest in the State, and even that external
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which they exercise (and that legally in their own
Names) within his Majesty's Dominions, are from the Grace and Bounty of the
Prince.

Defender of the Faith was (as appears by a Charter of King Richard the IId. to
the University of Oxford) anciently given to the Kings of England, and
therefore not so much conferred upon, as confirmed unto King Henry the VIIIth.
by Pope Leo the Xth. for a Book written against Luther in Defense of some
Points of the Roman Faith, and since the ejection of that Religion continued in
the Crown by Act of Parliament.

The Title of Grace, since appropriated to Archbishops and Dukes, was first
given to the King about the Time of Henry the IVth. as about the Time of Edward
the IVth. that of High and Mighty Prince, since also given to Dukes. To Henry
the VIIIth. was given first Highness, since the Style of all the Princes of the
Blood, then Majesty, and now Most Excellent and Sacred Majesty.

The King of Great Britain in his public Instruments and Letters uses, as his
Predecessors have ever done since the Time of King John, Nos We in the Plural
Number; but before his Time Kings used the Singular: Which Custom is still
practiced in the Ends of Writs and Patents Test meipso.

The Word Sir, answering to the Latin Dominus, and supposedly the same with
Cyr, an Abbreviation of the Greek Word (...), which, prefixed before the
Christian Name, is given only to Baronets, Knights of the Bath, and Knights
Batchelors, is the ordinary Appellation, used in speaking to all persons of the
better Rank from the King to the Gentleman; tho in France the Word Sir or Sire
is reserved only for the King, as is with us, Great Sir.

Arms.
Arms are Ensigns of Honor, born in a Shield for Distinction of Families, and
descending, as Hereditary, to Posterity; yet not generally fixed, unless in the
Kings of Europe, in Great Britain or France, till after the Time of the Holy
War about four hundred years ago.

Our first Christian King, and the first Christian King of the whole World,
Lucius bare Argent, a Cross Gules, in the first Quarter a Cross Patee Azure.

After the Desertion of this Island by the Romans King Vortigern bare Gules, a
Cross Or. Aurelius Ambrosius bare Gules, a Griffin Sergreant Or. Vter
Pendragon bare Or, two Dragons endorsed Vert, crowned Gules. King Arthur bare
Vert, a Cross Argent, on the first Quarter Our Lady with her Son in her Arms.
Cadwalladar, the last King of the Britains, bare Azure, a Cross Patee on three
parts, and fitched on the fourth, Or.

The Sovereign Ensigns Armorial of the King of Great Britain, since the Uniting
of the two Crowns of England and Scotland, are as follows.

In the first place, Azure, three Flower-de-Lys Or, for the Regal Arms of
France, quartered with the Imperial Ensigns of England, which are Gules, three
Lions Passant Guardant in pale Or; in the second place, Or, within a double
Tressure counter-flowered de Lys, a Lion Rampant Gules for the Royal Arms of
Scotland; In the third place, Azure, an Irish Harp Or, stringed Argent, for the
Royal Ensigns of Ireland. All within the Garter, the chief Ensign of that most
Honorable Order; above the same an Helmet, answerable to his Majesty's
Sovereign Jurisdiction; upon the same a rich Mantle of Cloth of Gold, doubled
Ermin, adorned with an Imperial Crown, and surmounted for a Crest by a Lion
Passant Gardant, Crowned with the like. Upon a Compartment, placed underneath,
in the Table whereof is his Majesty's Royal Motto Dieu and mon Droet, stand the
Supporters, being a Lion Rampant Gardant Or, Crowned as the former, and an
Unicorn Argent, Gorged with a Crown, having thereto a Chain affixt, passing
between his Forelegs, and reflext over his Back, Or.

The Arms of France are placed first, because France is the greater Kingdom;
and also for that those Arms from their first Bearing have always been the
Ensign of a Kingdom, whereas the Arms of England were originally of Dukedoms,
having been brought to England from Normandy, and Aquitain by William the
Conqueror, and Henry the IId. and probably likewise, that the French might be
thereby more easily induced to acknowledge the English Title.

The Motto Dieu and mon Droit, GOD and my Right, first given by King Richard
the Is It. to intimate, that he held not his Empire of any, but of GOD alone, was
afterward taken up by Edward the IIId. when he first laid Claim to the Crown
of France.

Dominions.
The Dominions of the King of Great Britain are at this day in possession the
Islands of Great Britain and Ireland, containing three Kingdoms of large
Extent, with all the other Isles lying in the British Sea, being above four
hundred in all, great and small, some whereof are very considerable, together
with all the adjacent Seas even to the Shores of the Neighboring Nations. As a
Mark whereof all Ships of Foreigners have anciently demanded leave to fish and
pass in these Seas, and do at this day lower their Topsails to all the Kings
Ships of War. And therefore Children, born upon those Seas (as it sometimes
happens) are esteemed natural born Subjects to the King of Great Britain, and
therefore need no Naturalization, as do those, that are born out of his
Dominions. He has likewise in possession the Isles of Jersey, Guernsey,
Alderney and Sark, being Parcel of the ancient Duchy of Normandy; besides the
profitable Plantations of New England, Virginia, Barbados, Jamaica, Maryland,
Bermudos, Carolina, New York, and other places in America, with some in the
East Indies, and upon the Coast of Africa.

The Strength of the Monarch of Strength
Great Britain since the Union of the two Kingdoms has never yet been fully
tried, the Parliaments of the two last Kings, infected with the pestilential
Principles of Presbyterianism and Democratism, having upon all occasions proved
refractory to their Designs, and rather catching at all Opportunities of
diminishing the Royal Prerogative, and augmenting the (falsely so called)
Liberty of the People, being (to speak truly) only a Privilege to Tyrannize
more uncontrollably over their Fellow Subjects; than any ways endeavoring to
support and maintain the Grandeur and Glory of the King and Kingdom: insomuch
that there was invented a most unnatural Distinction of Subjects into
Royalists, and Patriots, as if any man could show himself a Lover of his
Country by braving and opposing the Father of it; whereas the Relation between
King and Kingdom is so great, that their Wel-being is reciprocal. And tho for
some time after his Majesty's Return the Parliaments of all his three Kingdoms
seemed to vy, which of them should most readily comply with their Sovereigns
Desires and Designs; yet the Fanatical and Antimonarchical Faction (who ever
since his Majesty's happy Restoration have been secretly blowing the Coals of
Rebellion, and by their sly and false Insinuations have continually labored to
disquiet the Minds of the People with pretended Fears of Popery, and ungrounded
Jealousies of (I know not what) Arbitrary Power) have so far of late prevailed,
that the Loyalty of many unthinking persons has been strangely staggered, and
their Spirits so exasperated, that several of the English Commonalty have by
the Artifices of these Seditious Boutefeus been brought to such a forgetfulness
of the Duty, which by all Divine and Humane Laws they ow unto their Prince;
that some Parliaments have of late seemed perfect States of War, wherein a
prevalent Faction in the House of Commons, instead of readily affording their
Assistance to their Sovereign for the strengthening and supporting of his
Government against Foreign and Domestic Enemies, have (under Pretense of
securing the Privileges and Liberty of the People) been tugging and contending
to ravish away the Regal Prerogatives from the Crown, and, by importuning his
Majesty (contrary to his often-declared Resolutions of never consenting to so
great an Injustice) to alter the Succession of the Crown from its lineal and
legal Descent, to subvert this ancient and hereditary Monarchy by ruining its
firmest Foundation.

But the Intrigues of the Faction having been laid open by his Majesty's
Gracious Declaration of the Reasons, inducing him to dissolve the two last
Parliaments, and by the seasonable Publication of that Horrid Association, a
Copy whereof was produced at the late Proceedings against the Earl of
Shaftsbury, in whose Closet it was proved to have been found, the Mists, which
these Religious Juglers, for the better concealing their damnable Designs, had
cast before the Eyes of the People, are so far dissipated, that whenever his
Majesty shall in his Princely Wisdom think fit to call another Parliament, it
may well be hoped, that the People, from whose Eyes the Scales, which have so
long blinded them, begin now to drop off, will choose themselves such
Representatives, as in their Testimonies of Loyalty and Submission to their
Sovereign will eagerly strive to outgo the very best of their Predecessors;
such, as will by their unanimous Acknowledgment of the unalterableness of the
Succession (as has been lately done in Scotland) assert the Sacredness of the
British Monarchy; by their Care to put a Stop to the Debauchery of the Press,
whose prolifick Womb, daily teeming with new Monsters, fills every Corner of
the Nation with Seditious Pamphlets, will take away those continual Incentives
to Rebellion; by undeceiving the deluded Vulgar will free us from that Charm,
under which we have now almost these four years lain (as it were) bewitched;
and by readily complying with all his Majesty's just and honorable Desires and
Designs, will enable him to vindicate his own and the Nations Honor against
all external Oppositions or internal Rebellions: And then it will not be easy
to comprehend, what great things his Majesty, so Loyally assisted, may attempt
and effect, especially if we shall but consider, how the mighty Power of the
King of England, before the Conjunction of Scotland, and total Subjection of
Ireland, both which were usually at enmity with him, has been notoriously known
to the World, and sufficiently felt by our Neighbor-Nations.

The Island of Great Britain is (by a present learned Writer, to whose
Collections I am not a little indebted) not unfitly said to resemble a great
Garrison-Town, not only fenced with strong Works her Port-Towns, and environed
with a vast and deep Ditch the Sea, but guarded with excellent Outworks, the
strongest and best built Ships of War in the World, and so abundantly furnished
within with Men and Horses, with Victuals and Ammunition, with Clothes and
Money, that, if all the Potentates of Europe should (which GOD forbid) conspire
against it, they could hardly distress it: Insomuch that we may well be
permitted to affirm, that, as her own Natural Commodities are sufficient to
maintain her, so nothing, but her own unnatural Seditions, is capable to
destroy her.

Thus admirable is the Defensive Strength of the Monarch of Great Britain; nor
can his Offensive Puissance but be formidable to the World, when it shall be
considered, that being Master of the Sea (as, if he be not wanting to himself,
or his Subjects to him, he must be) he may in some sort be said to be Master of
every Country, bordering thereupon, and is at liberty, where, when, and upon
what Terms he pleases, to begin or end a War, for the carrying on of which he
is well able, whenever he shall think fit so to do, to raise of Englishmen
(besides Auxiliaries of valiant Scots and Irish) two hundred thousand Foot, and
fifty thousand Horse (so many having been computed, during the late Rebellion,
to have been in Arms on both sides, and that without any considerable miss of
them in any City, Town, or Village) whose natural Agility of Body, Patience,
Hardiness, and Resolution is so great, and their fear of Death so little, that
scarce any Nation of the World, upon equal Terms, and Number, has ever been
able to stand before them either at Sea or Land. For the transporting of an
Army his Majesty has at command near two hundred Ships of War, and can hire as
many, or more stout English Merchant Ships, not much inferior to Ships of War,
all which he can soon Man with the best Sea Soldiers (if not the best
Mariners) in the World. And for the maintaining so vast a Fleet sufficient
Money may for a competent Time be raised by a Moderate Land Tax, and for a long
time by an easy Excise, to be laid only upon such Commodities, as naturally
tend to the occasioning of Pride, Idleness, Luxury, Wantonness, and the
Corruption of good Mann^r^s.

Person.
That the Persons of Monarchs have in all Ages of the World been esteemed
sacred, and (as such) received a more than ordinary Respect and Veneration from
their Subjects, is so manifest from the concurrent Practice of ancient and
present Times, that it cannot with any show of Truth be contradicted.

The Patriarchs of the old World were not only Kings, but Priests, having in
themselves all Fullness of Jurisdiction, and taking no less Care for the
instructing of those, whom GOD had subjected to them, in the manner of
performing their Adorations to their Creator, than in teaching them the Laws
and Institutes of a Civil Life. And tho the Almighty was pleased amongst his
own peculiar People the Israelites, after their Departure out of the Land of
Egypt, to separate the Spiritual and Temporal Functions, entailing the
Priesthood upon Aaron and his Posterity, into whose Office it was not lawful
for their Kings themselves to intrude, yet were they in all Civil matters
subject to the Kings Authority, who was (as were also the Priests) anointed
with Oil, to intimate the Sacredness of his Person.

When the Kings and Princes of the World began to submit their Crowns and
Scepters to the Cross of our Redeemer, and instead of Persecutors to become
Protectors of the Church, this sacred Ceremony of Anointing was again restored,
and Monarchs thereby admonished, that, as their Persons were sacred and
Spiritual, so it was no less a part of their Duty to take care of the external
Regulation and peace of the Church, than of the Civil Government of their
States. Yet were there anciently none anointed, but the two Emperors of the
East and West, the Kings of France, England, Sicily, and Jerusalem: amongst
whom the Monarch of Great Britain may lay as ancient a Claim to this Holy
Unction, as any other Prince of Europe, the very first Kings of this Island,
after it was freed from the Jurisdiction of the Romans, having been anointed.
By reason of which Unction, it was in the Reign of Edward the IIId. declared,
that the Kings of England were capable of Spiritual Jurisdiction.

Of this Sacred Person of the King, of his Life and Safety so singular a Care
is taken, that the Laws of both the Realms, whereinto this Island is divided,
do herein agree, that it is High Treason, only to imagine or intend the Death of
the King: And because likewise by imagining or conspiring the Death of the
Kings Counselors, or Great Officers of his Household, the Death of the
Sovereign may ensue, and is usually aimed at, all such Conspiracies, tho never
taking effect, are punished with Death, tho in all other Capital Cases no man
is put to Death, unless the Act follow the Intent.

Nay in so high an esteem is the Kings Person had, that to offend against those
Persons and Things, whereby he is represented, as to kill some of the Crown
Officers, or any of the Kings Judges, executing their Office, to counterfeit
the Kings Seals, or his Moneys, is made High Treason, because by all these his
Sacred Person is represented. And so horrid is this Crime of High Treason, that
besides the Loss of Life and Honor, the Criminal forfeits all his Estate Real
and Personal, his Wife loses her Dower, his Children their Nobility, and all
their Right of Inheritance to him or any other Ancestor, and are to be ranked
amongst the Peasantry and Ignoble, till the King shall please to restore them.
For so heinous is this Offense, that the Law can hardly endure to see the
Posterity of the Offender survive him.

And rather than Treason against the Kings Person shall go unpunished, the
Innocent shall in some cases suffer: for if an Idiot or Lunatic (who, having
no Will, cannot possibly be said to offend) shall, during his Ideocy, or
Lunacy, kill or go about to kill the King, he shall be punished as a Traitor;
tho not being Compos mentis, he can neither commit Felony, Petit Treason, or
any other sort of High Treason,

So tender a Regard is moreover had of this most precious Person of the King,
that no Physic ought to be administered to him, but what his Physicians prepare
with their own Hands, and not by the Hands of any Apothecary; nor are they to
use the Assistance of any Surgeons, but such, as are sworn Surgeons to
his Person.

This Person of the King in his Natural as well as Politic Capacity is every
Subject to defend with his own Life and Limbs. For, the King being Father of
his Country, it should seem a pleasant thing to every Loyal-hearted Subject to
lose Life or Limb in defending him from Conspiracies, Rebellions, or Invasions,
or assisting him in the Execution of his Laws.

The Office of the Monarch of Great Britain (and indeed of every Christian
Prince) Office.
was by the Holy Roman Bishop St. Eleutherius described to our first Christian
King Lucius: Which Description, recorded in the Laws of St. Edward the
Confessor, King of England, is, as follows. A King, being the Minister and
Delegate of the Supreme King, is appointed by GOD for this end, that He govern
this Earthly Kingdom and People of our Lord, and above all that he govern and
venerate his Church, defending it from all, who would injure it: That he root
out of it, and utterly destroy all Evildoers.

For the better enabling themselves to discharge this great and weighty Office
(to the just and upright Performance whereof every King at his Coronation
obliges himself by solemn Oath) Prerogatives.
the Monarchs of Great Britain have reserved, as inherent in their Crown,
certain extraordinary Powers, Preeminences, and Privileges, commonly called
Royal Prerogatives, some of the most remarkable whereof, in which, as being
necessary for the Preservation of the Government, and the Safety and Interest
of the People, the Laws of both Kingdoms agree, do here follow.

The King solely and alone has by his Royal Prerogative, without any Act of
Parliament, the absolute Power of declaring War, making Peace, sending and
receiving Ambassadors, entering into and concluding Leagues and Treaties with
any Foreign Prince or State. He has the sole Disposing and Ordering of the
Militia by Sea and Land, raising Forces, Garrisoning and Fortifying Places,
setting out Ships of War, and Pressing Men, if need require. He alone disposes
of all Magazins, Ammunition, Castles, Fortresses, Ports and Havens, and has the
laying out and employing, as he pleases, of all Public Moneys or the Revenues
of the Crown and Kingdom. He appoints the Metal, Weight, Purity, and Value of
Money, and may by his Proclamation make any Foreign Coin to be lawful and
Current Money within his Dominions.

By his Royal Prerogative, he may of his mere Will and Pleasure convoke,
adjourn, prorogue, remove, and dissolve Parliaments, and may to any Act, passed
by them, give or refuse (without rendering any Reason) his Royal Assent, without
which a Bill is but a mere Cadaver, a lifeless and inanimate Lump. He may at
his pleasure increase the number of the Members of Parliament by creating new
Barons, and bestowing Privileges upon other Towns to send Burgesses to
Parliament: Yea, he may call to Parliament by Writ any one, whether Alien or
Native, whom he in his Princely Wisdom shall think fit, and may refuse to send
his Writ to some others, that have sat in former Parliaments.

His Majesty alone has the Choice and Nomination of all Magistrates,
Counselors, and Officers of State, of all Bishops, and other high Dignities in
the Church, of all Commanders, and other Officers at Sea and Land; the
bestowing of all Honors of the higher and lower Nobility; the Power of
determining Rewards for Services, and Punishments for Misdemeanors.

He may by his Letters Patents erect new Counties, Bishoprics, Universities,
Cities, Buroughs, Hospitals, Schools, Fairs, Markets, Courts of Justice,
Forests, Chases and Free-Warrens.

He has by his Prerogative Power to enfranchise an Alien, and thereby to
enable him to purchase Houses and Lands, and to bear some Offices. He has
Power to grant Letters of Mart or Reprisal, Safe Conducts, etc.

No Proclamation can be made, but by the King: Between which and a Statute as
the Difference originally was not great, the King making the latter by the
Common Council of the Kingdom, whereas in the former he had but the Advice of
his great Council of the Peers, or of his Privy Council only: So what Judgment
Parliaments have formerly had of Proclamations, appears by these Words of a
Statute, made in the one and thirtieth year of King Henry the VIIIth. Forasmuch
as the King, by the Advice of his Council, has set forth Proclamations, which
obstinate Persons have contemned; not considering what a King by his Royal
Power may do: Considering that sudden Causes and Occasions fortune many times,
which do require speedy Remedies, and tha^ by abiding for a Parliament, in the
mean time might happen great prejudice to ensue to the Realm: And weighing
also, that his Majesty, which by the Kingly and Regal Power, given him by GOD,
may do many things in such Cases, should not be driven to extend the Liberties,
and Supremity of his Regal Power, and Dignity, by wilfulness of froward
Subjects: It is therefore thought fit, that the King with the Advice of his
Honorable Council should set forth Proclamations for the good of the People,
and Defense of his Royal Dignity, as necessity shall require.

The King only can give Patents in case of Losses by Fire, or otherwise, to
receive the charitable Benevolences of the People, without which none may ask
it publicly.

The King by his Prerogative is Vltimus Haeres Regni, and the Receptacle of all
Estates, when no Heir appears: For this cause all Estates for want of Heirs, or
by Forfeiture, escheat to the King. All Spiritual Benefices, for want of
Presentation by the Bishop, are lapsed at last to the King. All Money, Gold,
Silver, Plate or Bullion, found (and the Owners thereof not known) belong to
the King: and so do all Wayfs, Strays, Wrecks, not granted away by him, or any
of his Predecessors. All Wast Ground, or Land, recovered from the Sea; all Land
of Aliens, dying before Naturalization; all things, the property whereof is not
known; and all Gold or Silver Mines, in whose Ground soever they are found,
belong to the King.

In the Church the Kings Prerogative is very great. He only has the Patronage
of all Bishoprics: None can be elected Bishop, but whom he has first
nominated; None can be consecrated, or take possession of the Revenues of any
Bishopric without his special Writ or Assent. He is the Nursing-Father of the
Church, and has Power to call a National or Provincial Synod, and with the
Advice and Consent thereof to make Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, relating to the Government and Polity of the Church, wherein (as
it was affirmed by Christopher Wray, Speaker of the House of Commons in the
thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth) the Princes Power is absolute.

The King has Power, upon Causes only known to himself, to dispense by Non
Obstantes with General Laws, made in Parliament, and with the Penalties for
transgressing them, where such Penalty is appropriated to himself alone; to
mitigate the Rigor of the Laws, where Equity and Conscience require Moderation,
to alter or suspend any particular Law, that he judges hurtful to the
Commonwealth; to pardon a Man, legally condemned; to grant special Privileges
to particular Persons, Colleges, and Corporations, and if any Doubt arises
concerning such Privileges, he only has Right to interpret them. To him, and
the Judges, constituted by him, does it belong to interpret all Statutes, and
to determine, and pass Sentence in Cases, not defined by Law.

These are some Branches of that Jus Coronae, of that Regal Prerogative, of the
name whereof however some persons are afraid, yet may they assure themselves,
that the Case of Subjects would be desperately miserable without it: since the
Kings just Rights are the best Preserver of the Peoples Liberties, being an
impregnable Bulwark against all popular Invasions and illegal Powers. Nor have
there ever been found any greater Oppressors of the People, than those, who
under pretense of asserting their Liberties have endeavored to lessen the Royal
Authority. Thus in the great Contest between Henry the IIId. King of England,
and the Barons, about the pretended Liberties of themselves and the People, the
King being forced at length to yield, the Lords, instead of that glorious
Freedom, which they promised the Nation, engrossed all Power into their own
Hands under the Name of the twenty four Conservators of the Kingdom, behaving
themselves like so many Tyrants, acting all in their own Names, and in Juntoes
of their own, wholly neglecting, or else overruling Parliaments. But then not
agreeing among themselves, four of them ( viz. the Earls of Leicester,
Gloucester, Hereford and Spencer) defeated the other twenty, and drew the entire
Management of Affairs into their own hands: Yet it continued so not long,
Leicester getting all into his own Power, who being slain in Battle, the King
recovered his Authority, and the People their true Liberty.

Many of these Prerogatives, those especially, that concern Justice, and Peace,
are so essential to Royalty, that they cannot be separated from it, but by the
destruction of the Monarchy it self. Not without reason therefore did the
Estates of England, assembled in Parliament in the Reign of King Edward the
IIId. declare, that they could not (tho the King himself should desire it)
assent to any thing, which tended to the Disherison of the King and his Crown,
whereunto they were sworn. The King therefore, as he is by his Office Debtor
Justitiae, obliged to administer Justice to his People, so is he in Conscience
bound to maintain the Rights of the Crown in possession, and to endeavor the
recovery of those, whereof it has been dispossessed. And how dismal the Effects
have been, whenever any King, neglecting the religious observance of this part
of his Duty, has been prevailed upon to give way to the lessening of his Royal
Prerogative, we have a sad Example in his Majesty's Father of Blessed Memory,
who parting (tho but only Pro illa vice) with his absolute Power of dissolving
Parliaments, and giving it to the two Houses, they never ceased farther
incroaching upon his Prerogatives, till he himself was barbarously murdered,
the Government wholly subverted, and all the Liberties of the People trampled
under foot. To him therefore, that shall seriously consider the many fatal
Mischiefs and Inconveniences, which necessarily follow the Diminution of the
Kings Prerogative, it will seem no Paradox to affirm, that it is the Subjects
great Interest to be far more sollicitous, that the King maintain and uphold
his own Prerogative and Preeminence, than their Rights and Liberties, which, as
they had no other Original but the Grace and Bounty of the Prince, so must they
of necessity perish, when he is no longer able to protect them. It is not
thefore to be wondered, that a right Apprehension of such pernicious
Consequences made his Sacred Majesty refuse his Royal Assent to a Bill,
presented him for the raising of the Militia, tho it was (if passed into an
Act) to have continued in force but six Weeks: Because the Tendency of the Bill
being to put out of his Possession the Posse Regni, or absolute command over
the Forces of the Realm, he could not answer unto GOD, by whom alone he is
entrusted with his Regal Power for the Safety and Well-Government of his
Subjects, the abandoning (tho for so short a time) the Protection and Defense
of the People, committed to his Charge.

Whatever things are proper unto Supreme Majesty, Scepters and Crowns,
Sovereignty.
the Purple Robe, the Globe or Golden Ball, and Holy Unction, have as long
appertained to the British Monarch, as to any other Prince in Europe. The
Antiquity of anointing Kings in Britain has been already shown out of Gildas;
and as for the other four, they are by Leland, a famous Antiquary, ascribed
unto King Arthur, who began his Reign in the Year of our Lord 506. Which was as
soon, as they were ordinarily in use with the Roman Emperors.

The King of Great Britain is an absolute and unaccountable Monarch, a Free
Prince of Sovereign Power, not holding his Kingdom in Vassallage nor receiving
his Instalment or Investiture from another; Nor does he acknowledge Superiority
to any, but to GOD alone.

He is not only the Supreme, but sole Legislator within his Dominions. The
Power of making Laws (whatever some Antimonarchists pretend to the contrary)
rests solely in him. And although the Gracious Condescension of our Kings has been
such, as to render the subordinate Concurrence of the Estates of each Realm a
Condition, requisite to the making of new, or abrogating of old Laws within the
respective Kingdoms; yet are they not thereby admitted to any Share in the
Sovereignty, their Power being wholly derivative from the King, who is Caput,
Principium, and Finis Parliamentorum, the three Estates, when assembled in
Parliament, being as much his Subjects, as every particular Man of them is,
when the Meeting is dissolved. All Bills, passed by them, are but so much dead
matter, till quickened by his Royal Fiat, which alone gives Life and Form to all
their Proceedings. Nor is it ex debito Justitiae, but of his Special Grace,
that he passes such Acts, as are presented to him. Thus Henry the IIId. begins
his Magna Charta with Know ye, that WE of our mere and free Will have given
these Liberties. Thus we hear King Edward the Is It. saying: The King of his
special Grace for Redress of the Grievances of His People sustained by his
Wars, and for the Amendment of their Estate, and to the intent that they may be
the more ready to do him Service, the more willing to assist and aid him in
time of need, Grants. 28. E. 1. c. 1. And although of later times Laws are said to
be made by Authority of Parliament, yet if we look into our ancient Statutes,
we shall find the meaning to be, that The King Ordains, the Lords advise, and
the Commons consent.

Those then are much mistaken, who affirm the Parliament to be (at the least)
as Essential a Part of the Government as the Prince: Which if it were true,
whenever the Parliament is dissolved, the Government would be so too. But this
with the Pernicious Maxim of Coordinacy, or sharing the Sovereign Power between
King, Lords, and Commons, with other treasonable and Antimonarchical Doctrines,
daily dispersed amongst the People, and with the utmost of his Art
industriously asserted by the Author of a late seditious Book, entitled Plato
Redivivus, together with his audacious Proposals, aiming to take all the
Flowers out of the Imperial Diadem of the British Monarch, are most fitly to be
answered in Westminster Hall, as tending no less to the subversion of our
Government (which being purely Monarchical, may be without the two Houses,
whereas they cannot be without the King) than those traitorous Designs, for
which Coleman and his Accomplices paid their forfeited Lives to the Justice of
the Laws.

The King of Great Britain is Lord Paramount, supreme Landlord of all the Lands
within his Dominions, all landed men being mediately or immediately his Tenants
by some Tenure, or other. By the Laws and Ordinances of ancient Kings (says
Sir Edward Cook in the first part of his Institutes) and especially of King
Alfred it appears, that the first Kings of this Realm had all the Lands of
England in Demesne; and the great Manors and Royalties they reserved to
themselves and of the Remnant they, for the Defense of the Realm, enfeoffed the
Barons of the Realm with such Jurisdiction, as the Court Baron now has. The
King (as it is evident by the Rolls of the Chancellery in Scotland, which
contain their eldest and fundamental Laws) is Dominus omnium bonorum, and
Dominus directus totius Dominii, the whole Subjects being but his Vassals, and
from him holding all their Lands as their Over-lord. Thus none, but the King,
has Allodium and Directum Dominium, the sole and independent Property in any
Land. Upon this Ground no doubt it was that Sergeant Heal in the three and
fortieth year of Queen Elizabeth said in Parliament, He marvelled, the House
stood either at the granting of a Subsidy or time of Payment, when all we have,
is her Majesty's, and She may lawfully at her pleasure take it from us; and
that She had as much Right to all our Lands and Goods, as to any Revenue of the
Crown; And he said, he could prove it by Precedents in the time of Henry the
IIId. King John and King Stephen. And upon the same Ground was it resolved by
the Judges in the beginning of the Reign of King James, when there was a
purpose to have taken away Tenures by Act of Parliament, That such a Statute
had been void, because the Tenures were for the Defense of the King and
Kingdom. And although since that the Tenures, which gave a Dependency upon the
Crown, and were the greatest Safety to the King and People, have been taken
away, and thereby a great Blow given to Monarchy; yet let those, who have the
Fee, the Jus perpetuum, and the Vtile Dominium, have a care, lest by following
the mischievous Advice of Plato Redivivus, and abusing the Grace and Bounty of
the Prince by endeavoring to draw the Sovereignty to themselves, they
necessitate not their King, for the Preservation of himself and People, to have
Recourse to his Prerogative, which is a Pre-eminence, in Cases of Necessity,
above and before the Law of Property or Inheritance: For the Prevention whereof
it is to be wished, that either by an Act of Resumption of the ancient Demesns
of the Crown (which was a sacred Patrimony, and by Law unalienable) or by such
other way, as the Wisdom of the Nation shall think fit, a Royal Support,
adaequate to the Charges of the Crown, be made for the King to defend his
Kingdom and protect his People: so that he may not be reduced to the Infelicity
of having a precarious Revenue out of the Peoples Purse, and to be beholden to
a Parliament for his Bread in time of Peace, which is no good Condition for a
Monarchy.

As the Legislative Power is solely in the King, so he alone has the Sovereign
Power in the Administration of Justice and Execution of the Law. He is the
Fountain of all Justice, which by his Judges, and other inferior Officers, as
so many Crystal Pipes, he conveyeth to his People. We will (says Edward the
Is It. in his Book of Laws, written at his appointment by John Briton, Bishop of
Hereford) that our own Jurisdiction be above all Jurisdictions in our Realm, so
that in all manner of Felonies, Trespasses, Contracts, and all other Actions
Personal or Real, We have Power to render or cause to be rendered such Judgments
as do appertain without other Process, wherever we know the right Truth, as
Judges. All Jurisdiction (say the Scotch Laws) stands and consists in the Kings
person by reason of his Royal Authority and Crown, and is competent to no
Subject; but flows and proceeds from the King, having Supreme Jurisdiction, and
is given and committed by him to his Subjects, as he pleases. The King then is
the sole Supreme Judge, all other Judges being his Deputies, to whom whatsoever
Power is by him committed, yet is the last Appeal always to be made to
himself, who may therefore (as his Predecessors formerly have done) sit in any
Court, and take Cognizance of any Cause: but in Treasons, Felonies, etc. the
King, being Plaintiff, sits not personally in Judgment, but does perform it by
his Delegates.

From the King of Great Britain, who, being the only Supreme Head, is furnished
with Plenary Power and Jurisdiction to render Justice to every Member within
his Dominions, there lies no Appeal in Ecclesiastical Causes to the Bishop of
Rome, whose Authority ever since the Reformation has been here wholly
abrogated; nor in Civil Matters to the Emperor, who for above twelve hundred
years has not had the least Shadow of Pretense to any Jurisdiction within this
Island; nor in either to the people, who both in themselves, and by their
Representatives in Parliament, as well Conjunctim as Divisim, are his Subjects,
and ow Obedience to his Commands.

To Legislation and Judicature, which are solely and supremely in the King, is
necessary the Power of the Sword (without which all other Power is nothing) for
forcing Obedience to the Laws, and Judgments given both in Criminal and Civil
Causes. This, having in virtue of their Sovereignty been always indisputably
enjoyed by the Monarchs of this Nation till the time of the late Rebellion, was
since his Majesty's Restoration by a Parliament, as truly zealous for the
happiness of their King and Country, as ever this Nation saw, in proper and
express Terms declared to be the Right of the King only without either of his
Houses of Parliament, the contrary Position thereunto, asserted by the
rebellious Members of the Parliament of 1640. having been the chief Means of
overturning our Government, and bringing Confusion and Misery upon this
flourishing Kingdom.

Divinity.
So great was the Veneration, shown to the ancient Christian Emperors by their
Subjects, that they gave them (tho imperfectly only and Analogically) the
Titles of Your Everlastingness, Your Divinity, and the like, belonging
essentially and perfectly to GOD alone: Who, to show the great Power, by him
given to Sovereign Princes, and to beget in the Hearts of their People an
higher Esteem, and more reverend Awfulness of them, which failing, all
Confusion, Impiety and Calamity break in upon a Nation, is himself pleased, as
is manifest in Holy Writ, to bestow upon them the Title of Gods, as being his
Vicegerents, and representing his Majesty and Power upon Earth.

Nay so excessive was the Respect of the good Christians of those times, that
they were wont to swear by the Majesty of their Emperor, as Joseph sometimes
did by the Life of Pharaoh. And this Custom seems to be justified by Vegetus, a
learned Writer of that Age, being practiced only to create in the Subjects a
greater Reverence for these Earthly Deities.

In like manner the Laws and Constitutions of this Monarchy attribute to the
King, whom they regard as GOD upon Earth, diverse Excellencies, which belong
properly to none but GOD. Thus as GOD is perfect, so the Law will have no
Imperfection found in the King: No Negligence, no Folly, no Infamy, or
Corruption of Blood, all former Attainders (tho even made by Act of Parliament)
being ipso facto purged by the Accession of the Crown.

To the King is attributed Infallibility and Justice in the Abstract: The King
cannot err; The King can do no wrong. To the King is likewise ascribed a Kind
of Immortality: The King never dies; as being a Corporation in himself, that
lives for ever: For all Interregna being unknown in these Kingdoms, the same
Moment, that one King dies, the next Heir is fully and absolutely King without
any Coronation, Ceremony, or Act to be done.

The King is also in some sort said to be Omnipresent. He is in a manner every
where, in all his Courts of Justice, in all his Palaces: Therefore it is, that
all his Subjects stand bare in the Presence Chamber, wheresoever the Chair of
State is placed, tho the King be many Miles distance from thence.

He has also a kind of Universal Influence over all his Dominions. His
Fatherly Care is extended to preserve, feed, instruct and defend the whole
Commonweal. His War, His Peace, His Courts of Justice, and all His Acts of
Sovereignty tend only to preserve and distribute to every person within his
Territories their particular Rights and Privileges.

By his Power of creating to the highest Dignity, and annihilating the same at
pleasure; and much more by his Prerogative of pardoning those, whom the Law has
condemned, he is invested with a kind of Omnipotency, whereby he can restore to
life those, that are dead in Law. And this Power of pardoning condemned
Criminals is of such Benefit to the Lives and Estates of the People, that
without it many would be exposed to die unjustly.

The King alone in his own Dominions can say with GOD, whose Representative he
is, Vengeance is Mine: For all Punishments proceed from him in some of his
Courts of Justice, it not being lawful for any Subject to avenge himself.

The King alone is Judge in his own Cause, tho he delivers his Judgment by the
Mouth of his Judges.

But in nothing does the King more resemble the eternal Deity, than in the
Plenitude of his Power to do, what he pleases, without being opposed, resisted,
or questioned by his Subjects. Nemo quidem (says Bracton) de factis ejus
praesumat disputare, multo minus contra factum ejus ire. Let none presume to
search into his deeds, much less to oppose them. Nor is this a Privilege,
belonging only to the King of Great Britain, but a Prerogative inherent in
every Sovereign Prince by virtue of his Sovereignty. Where the word of a King
is, there is Power: and who may say unto him, what do thou? says the Spirit
of God by the mouth of the Royal Prophet Solomon. For Kingly Power, being by
the Law of God, has no inferior Law to limit it. The Emperor (says Saint
Augustine) is not Subject to Laws, who has Power to make other Laws.
Accordingly it is delivered by the great Lawyer Vlpian for a Rule of the Civil
Law, Princeps Legibus solutus est, The Prince is not bound by the Laws:
Agreeable whereunto is what is said in the Laws of England, Potestas Principis
non est inclusa Legibus. The Power of the Prince is not included in the Laws.
Hence no doubt it was, that Mr. Grivel in the Thirty first year of Queen
Elizabeth said in Parliament, That he wished not the making of many Laws: since
the more we make, the less Liberty we have our selves, Her Majesty not being
bound by them. Yet is not this so to be understood, that Kings have hereby a
right to do Injury; but that it is Right for them to go unpunished by their
People, if they do it. The King cannot be impleaded for any Crime. No Action
lies against his Person: For the Writ goes forth in his Name, and he cannot
arrest himself. If he should (which God forbid) violently seiz^ upon the Estate
of any Subject, having no Title by Law so to do, the only Remedy is by
Petitioning him to amend his Fault, which if he shall refuse to do, it will be
Punishment sufficient for him to expect, that GOD, who has given him his
Prerogative of being above all Laws for the good only of them, that are under
the Laws, and for the Defense of his Peoples Liberties, will severely avenge
the Cause of oppressed Loyal Subjects.

But although whatever the King shall do, he is not questionable for it by his
Subjects; yet there are diverse things, which he cannot do Salvo Jure, Salvo
Juramento, and Salva Conscientia sua. For by an Oath, taken at his Coronation,
the King obliges himself, and indeed without any Oath he is by the Law of
Nature and Christianity (as are all other Christian Kings) obliged to procure
the Safety and Welfare of his People, to protect and defend them against their
Enemies, to maintain and preserve them in their Properties, just Rights, and
Liberties, to administer upright Justice with Discretion and Mercy, and in
order thereunto to consent to the enacting of good Laws and repealing of Bad.
Thus the King can do nothing unjustly, nor can he divest himself or his
Successors of any part of his Regal Power, Prerogative, and Authority, inherent
in the Crown, and necessary for the Government and Protection of his People.
Two things there are especially, which having somewhat of Odium in them, the
King does not usually do without the Consent of his Parliament, that is, make
new Laws, and impose new Taxes: the one whereof seems (and does but seem) to
infringe the Peoples Liberties, and the other to entrench upon their
Properties. To take away therefore all Occasions of Disaffection to the
Anointed of the Lord (styled in Holy Scripture the Breath of our Nostrils, and
the Light of our Eyes) the Wisdom of our former Princes, his Majesty's Royal
Ancestors, has contrived, that for both these there should Petitions first be
made by the People to the King.

Tho these and diverse other Prerogatives do rightfully belong unto, and are
enjoyed by the Monarch of Great Britain; yet does he ordinarily govern his
people by the known Laws and Customs of his Kingdoms, making use of his Royal
Prerogative for the Benefit, not Damage of his Subjects, in some rare and
extraordinary Cases only.

Hereunto may be added a singular and Miraculous Privilege, enjoyed by the
Kings of Great Britain, quatenus Kings, conferred first by the Divine Benignity
upon that Blessed King of England, St. Edward the Confessor, and ever since
continued to his Successors, which is, by the Imposition of their Sacred Hands
to drive away and cure that stubborn Disease, called the Struma or Scrofula,
and by us commonly from this supernatural manner of its Cure the Kings Evil.

Upon certain days almost every Week, during the cold Seasons, his Majesty
graciously permits all, that are afflicted with that Disease, having been first
carefully viewed, and allowed by his Surgeons, to be brought into his Royal
Presence: Where an appointed Form of Divine Service (consisting of some short
Prayers, pertinent to the Occasion, and two Portions of Holy Scripture, taken
out of the Gospel) being read, the King at the pronouncing of these Words (They
shall lay their hands upon the Sick, and they shall recover) gently draws both
his Hands over the Sore of the sick person, the same words being repeated at
every Touch.

And at these Words (This was the true Light, which enlightneth every Man, that
comes into this World) he puts about the Neck of each Sick person a piece
of Gold, called (from the Impression) an Angel, being in value about eleven
Shillings Sterling.

This evident Cure is by many malignant Nonconformists, those true Sons of
Belial, daily despising, and speaking evil of Dignities, ascribed to the
Strength of Fancy and exalted Imagination; but little do they reflect, upon how
many tender Infants, no way capable of such Transports, this stupendous Cure
is effectually performed.

Respect.
In consideration of these and many other transcendent Excellencies, to no
Prince, or other Potentate in Christendom is done more Honor, Reverence, or
Respect, than to the Monarch of Great Britain: All his Subjects at their first
Addresses kneel unto him; At Table he is served on the knee; All persons (the
Prince or other Heir apparent not excepted) are bare-headed in his Presence; In
the Presence Chamber (tho the King be not there) all men are not only
uncovered, but do, or ought to do Reverence to the Chair of State.

The Kings only Testimony of any thing, done in his presence, is of as high a
Nature and Credit, as any Record: And in all Writs, sent forth for the Dispatch
of Justice, he uses no other Witness but himself, viz. Test meipso.

As the King of Great Britain is thus reverenced and respected at home, so is
he no less honored and esteemed abroad. For if he be regarded solely as King of
England, we shall find, that the Emperor was accounted Filius major Ecclesiae;
the King of France Filius minor; and the King of England Filius adoptivus: That
in General Councels the King of France took place on the Emperors Right Hand;
the King of England on his Left; the King of Scots having Precedence next
before Castile: And that, tho since the time of the Emperor Charles the Vth.
the Kings of Spain have challenged the Precedence of all Christian Princes,
(which nevertheless they have within this twenty years yielded to France) yet
in the time of our King Henry the VIIth. Pope Julius gave it to the English
before the Spaniard.

But if looking upon him, as succeeding to the ancient British Kings (whose
true and undoubted Heir he is by Lineal and unquestionable Descent) we shall
consider the Antiquity of his Predecessors, either as Kings (Reigning here
above a thousand years before the coming in of the Romans, His Majesty, now
regnant, being from the first British Kings the hundred thirty nineth Monarch)
or as Christians, this Island having not only shown to the World the first
Christian King, named Lucius (whence the Title of Primogenitus Ecclesiae
rightfully belongs to the King of Great Britain) but given to the Church the
first Christian Emperor, even the famous Constantin, here born of there-nowned
British Lady St Helena, by whose Example and Encouragement the Faith was
generally received throughout the whole Empire: The Independency and
Absoluteness of his Authority, holding of none but GOD, and having in his own
Dominions neither Superior nor Equal: The Eminence of his Royal Dignity,
State, and Titles, his Realm not having been only styled an Empire, and his
Crown Imperial, but this Island both in ancient and later Times having been
regarded as another World, whereof the Monarch is sole Lord and Emperor: The
Martial Exploits and Achievements of his Ancestors abroad, amongst whom is the
first Christian Worthy, and first Founder of Martial Knighthood, the famous
King Arthur, in whose Heroic Acts there is Truth enough (all, that is thought
fabulous, being rejected) to render him renowned to all posterity: The
Gallantry and and Stoutness of his People, arising from their Freedom, the
Plentifulness of their Country, and Generality of their Wealth: His long-lined
Royal Extraction, wherein His Majesty, now Reigning, excels all the Monarchs of
the Christian (if not of the whole) World: The Hospitality, and Magnificence of
his Court, than which no Court in Christendom is served with more punctual
Attendance and State: The Diversity of Nations, and differing maternal Tongues,
subject to his Command; The admirable Laws and Constitutions of his Government:
The Greatness of his Power by Sea and Land both Offensive and Defensive: These
and many other his Prerogatives considered, We may well be permitted to affirm,
that (besides the Preeminence he may challenge by his just Right to the Crown
of France) the Monarch of Great Britain (except the Precedence, which he, as
all other Christan Princes, acknowledges to the Emperor) if he go not before,
yet at least ought not to come behind any King whatsoever.

CHAP. XII. Of Succession to the Crown of Great Britain.
THE Monarch of Great Britain has Right to the Imperial Crown of this Island
by Inheritance, according to the Laws of GOD and Nature, and the fundamental
Constitutions of the Realms of England and Scotland, which both agree in this,
That, upon the Death of the King, the next of Kindred, tho born out of the
Dominions of Great Britain, or born of Parents, not Subjects of Great Britain,
is immediately King before any Proclamation, Coronation, Publication, or
Consent of Peers or People.

The Rule of Inheritance, given by GOD himself to the People of Israel, is
this: If a man die, and have no Son, then he shall cause his Inheritance to pass
unto his Daughter. And if he have no Daughter, then ye shall give his
Inheritance unto his Brethren.

Agreeably to which Rule, the Crown of Great Britain descends, as an
inalienable Heritage, from the Father to the eldest Son and his Heirs; for want
of Sons, to the Eldest Daughter, and her Heirs; for want of Daughters to the
Brother and his Heirs; and for want of Brethren, to the Sister and her Heirs.

And so unalterable is this Course of Descent, that no Act, no Crime, no
Attainder of Treason, can bar the next of Blood from being King in the instant
of Time, his Predecessor does not so much dye, as by a State- Metempsychosis
transmit his Life, his Breath, or his Soul into the Nostrils, the Body of his
Successor.

For Hereditary Monarchy being (as it has been clearly demonstrated) an
immediate Ordinance of GOD, founded in the Prime Laws of Nature; and the Laws
of GOD and Nature being (as all Christians acknowledge) absolutely immutable,
it is a Madness to think, that any Act of Parliament can change this
unchangeable Law, or, with the least Color of Justice, alter the Right of
Succession.

This was well known to all our ancient Parliaments, that were neither
overawed by any prevailing Faction seduced by designing Intreaguers, nor yet
vainly flattered themselves with an Omnipotent Power to create and annihilate
Kings: In one of which the States of the Realm unanimously answered King Edward
the IIId. asking their Advice in matters, relating to the Crown: That they
could not consent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the Disherison of
the King, and his Heirs, or the Crown, whereunto they were sworn. From whence
Sir Edward Cook concludes, That it is a Law and Custom of Parliament, that no
King can alien the Crown from the right Heir, tho by consent of the Lords and
Commons. And elsewhere affirming King John's Resignation of the Crown to the
Pope to have been utterly void, he alleges this Reason: Because the Royal
Dignity is an Inherent inseparable to the Royal Blood of the King, descendable
to the next of Blood to the King, and cannot be transferd to another.

And although by the Treasons and Conspiracies of ambitious, disloyal, and
designing Persons, the Crown has now and then been transferred from one Family
to another, yet does it appear in Story, that since the time of the Norman
Conquest the right Heir was never yet kept out beyond the second Descent. And
to the Honor of English Parliaments we can aver, that never any Usurper (tho
armed with Power) laid claim to the Crown in Parliament, but by pretending to
be of the Right Line; nor did ever the Parliament allow of such Pretense, if
false, but when awed by Fear and a vast Army. And whenever, the Terror of such
armed violence being removed, the true Heir was enabled to claim his Right, the
Parliament, notwithstanding all such pretended Acts, readily submitted
themselves to their legitimate Prince, as being bound thereunto by the Laws of
GOD and Nature.

Thus although Henry, Duke of Lancaster, backed by an Army of forty or fifty
thousand men, under Pretense of a feigned Title from Edmund Crouch-back, forced
his Natural Sovereign, King Richard the IId. first to resign, and afterward to
be deposed from his Crown, which, waving his former pretended Title, he caused
to be entailed upon himself, his four Sons, and the Heirs of their Bodies, by
Act of Parliament, whereby he thought to have secured it to his Posterity for
ever; Yet, notwithstanding these cautious Provisions, seconded by, the Valor
and prodigious Success of that noble Prince Henry the Vth. when in the year
1460. this Entail was alleged against Richard Duke of York, laying claim in
Parliament to the Crowns of England and France, as being the next Heir to
Lionel Duke of ^larence, elder Brother to John of Gaunt, of whom the House
Lancaster was descended, the Duke of York unanswerably replied, That, if King
Henry the IVth. might have obtained the said Crowns of England and France by
Title of Inheritance, Descent, or Succession, he neither needed, nor would have
desired, or made them to be granted to him in such wise, as they be by that
Act: Which (said he) takes no place, neither is of any force, or effect
against him, that is right Inheritor of the said Crowns, as accords with the
Laws of GOD, and all Natural Laws. Which Answer of the Duke of York, and h s
Claim to the Crown, was by the same Parliament expressly recognized and declared
to be Good, True, Just, Lawful, and Sufficient.

And when in the same year Edward Earl of March, eldest Son to the said Duke of
York, upon the death of his Father, took possession of the Crown by the Name of
King Edward the IVth. his Title was in full Parliament by all acknowledged in
these Words: Knowing also certainly, and without doubt and ambiguity, that by
GODs Law, and the Law of Nature, He (viz. the said King Edward) and none other,
is, and ought to be true, R ghtwise, and Natural Liege and Sovereign Lord: And
that he was in right, from the Death of the said Noble and Fam us Prinee his
Father, very just King of the same Realm of England. And so little Respect was
given to the aforementioned Act of Entail, that it was not so much as repealed,
being esteemed from the very beginning null and void in it self. Nor indeed
were any Acts of Henry the IVth. Vth. or VIth. (styled Kings in Deed and not of
Right) deemed to be in force, but such, as were expressly confirmed by Edward
the IVth. in the same manner, as his Sacred Majesty, now reigning, confirmed
the judicial Proceedings of the late Usurpation.

As little Success had that Monster of Nature, Richard Duke of Gloucester, who,
being by the Interest of several factious Lords chosen Protector to his Nephew,
the young King Edward the Vth and having by that means gotten into his hands
the military Force of the Nation, pretending, that the Children of his Brother
King Edward the IVth. were illegitimate, laid claim to the Crown, which he not
only entailed by Act of Parliament upon himself and his Issue, but the better
to secure it in his Line, caused the Innocent young King, and his only Brother,
the Duke of York, to be barbarously murdered in the Tower; yet did he within
three years lose both his Crown and Life to Henry Earl of Richmond, on whom and
his Heirs it was again by Act of Parliament entailed, which yet would little
have availed him or his Posterity, had he not prudently (acording to his
promise, by which several of the Nobility were induced to assist him) married
Elizabeth, eldest Daughter of King Edward the IVth. and immediate Heiress of
the Crown, whereby, happily turning his Usurpation into a lawful Sovereignty,
he secured himself in the Throne.

But that his Issue by any other Lady could not have had better Success against
the Princely House of York, than Adonijah had against Solomon, may more than
probably be presumed, if we shall consider, what Fate attended the many mad
Acts, made by Henry the VIIIth about the Succession.

This haughty Prince, whose capricious Humor none of his Parliaments durst
gainsay, having after above twenty years Cohabitation divorced his Queen, a
chaste and virtuous Lady, did in the twenty fifth year of his Reign disinherit
by Act of Parliament the Lady Mary his Daughter by her, settling the Crown by
special Words, for want of Issue Male, on his Issue Female by the Lady Anne
Bullen: To the observation of which Act the whole Nation was obliged, by an
Oath, imposed the year following, the Refusal of which Oath was adjudged
Misprision of Treason. And yet in the twenty eighth year of his Reign he
bastardized and made illegitimate to all intents and purposes (as he had done
formerly the Issue of Queen Katherine) the Issue betwixt him and the Lady Anne
Bullen, barring them to claim, challenge, or demand any Inheritance, as Lawful
Heir, or Heirs to him by Lineal Descent; making it Treason for any one
(notwithstanding their former Oath) by Words, Writing, Printing, or any other
exterior Act directly, or indirectly to call any of the Children, born under
the unlawful Marriages of Katharine and Anne Bullen, legitimate; and enacting,
that in case he had no Issue by Jane (his then Queen) he might dispose of the
Crown to whatsoever person or persons, he pleased, the whole Nation being bound
to the observance of this Law by the Sanctimony of an Oath, the refusal whereof
was made High Treason. After all this, in the thirty fifth year of his Reign he
by another Act entailed the Crown on himself, Prince Edward, and the Princesses
Mary and Elizabeth, (without repealing the former Acts, or taking the least
notice of their being so signally bastardized) and for default of Heirs of
their Bodies, on such person or persons, as he should nominate by his Letters
Patents under his Great Seal, or by his last Will in writing, signed by his
most Gracious Hand, the whole Nation being again sworn to observe his pleasure
herein: Consequently whereunto he by such his last Will and Testament solemnly
bequeathed the Crown, upon failure of his own Issue, to the House of Suffolk,
being the Issue of his younger Sister Mary, excluding by that means from the
Throne (as much as in him, and his Act of Parliament lay) the Issue of his
Elder Sister, whose Royal Blood he affirmed the cold Air of Scotland to have
frozen up in the North. Yet, when after the Death of his three Children,
reigning successively, these disinheriting Statutes (the last whereof was
confirmed by Act of Parliament in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, in whose
thirteenth year there passed also an Act, That it should be Treason, during her
Life, and a Praemunire afterward, to assert, that the Imperial Crown of
England could not be disposed of by Act of Parliament) came to the Test, they
had not the Honor to be repealed, but were held null and void from the
beginning, as being notoriously repugnant to the Laws both of GOD and Nature,
and the common Customs and Constitutions of the Realm. And the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal and the Commons assembled in Parliament (notwithstanding all these
unrepealed Acts) having confessed the Inestimable and unspeakable Blessings
accrewing from the Union of England and Scotland under one Imperial Crown in
the Person of King James, lineally, rightfully, and lawfully descended of the
most Excellent Lady Margaret, Eldest Daughter of the most renowned King Henry
the VIIth. and the high and noble Princess Queen Elizabeth, his Wife, eldest
Daughter of King Edward the IVth. proceeded to the Recognition of his Title in
these Words: We, being bounden thereunto both by the Laws of GOD and Man, do
recognize and acknowledge that immediately upon the Dissolution and Decease of
Elizabeth, late Queen of England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England,
and all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights, belonging to the same, did by
inherent Birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession descend and come to
your most Excellent Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and
sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm: And that by the Goodness of GOD
Almighty, and lawful Right of Descent Your Majesty is under one Imperial Crown
of the Realms and Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland the most
potent and mighty King. And thereunto we most humbly and faithfully do submit
and oblige our selves, our Heirs, and our Posterities for ever. And some years
after it was by all the Judges of England expressly resolved in Calvin's Case:
That King James his Title to the Crown was founded upon the Laws of Nature,
viz. by inherent Birthright, and Descent from the Blood Royal of this Realm.

All Acts of Parliament then for excluding from the throne the next Heir of the
Blood Royal, on whom the Crown descends by the Laws of God and Nature, by
inherent Birthright, and undoubted Succession, being ipso facto null and void,
it is not to be wondered, that his present Sacred Majesty so constantly
declared, that he would never consent to alter the Descent of the Crown in the
right Line, as not being willing, by showing his People a Method of disposing
the Succession, to shake at the same time the Title of his own Possession:
Since it is evident, that the Heir apparent, or next of Blood has the same
Right to enjoy the Crown after his Predecessors Death, as the Actual Possessor
has to it, during his Life; and consequently, that the People have no more
Right to disinherit the one, than to depose the other.

Nor can any man be blamed for apprehending, that some such thing might be
aimed at by the first Projectors of the Bill for excluding his Royal Highness
from the Succession, if it shall be considered, that the chief Sticklers for
that Bill insisted on the Deposition of Edward the IId. contrived by a
leacherous Queen and disloyal Parliament, and that of Richard the IId. who was
for pretended Misgovernment removed from the Throne by a Parliament, overawed
by an Army of forty or fifty thousand men, and Henry the IVth. substituted in
his stead; that during the Heat of these debates, the Answer to the Great and
Weighty Considerations (wherein, besides many other treasonable Passages, the
Author has these express words: I hope there are very few in this Nation, that
do not think it in the Power of the People to depose a Prince, who really
undertakes to alienate his Kingdom, or give it up into the hands of another
Sovereign Power, or really acts the Destruction or general Calamity of his
People) was publicly sold before the very Doors of Parliament; and that the
same House of Commons, which was with so much eagerness hurried on to the
passing of that Bill, was also prevailed upon to importune his Majesty in
behalf of the publisher of that pernicious Appeal from the Country to the City,
which by affirming, that No Government, but Monarchy, can in England ever
support or favor Popery, endeavors not only to destroy the King, but even
Kingship it self.

But well fare the noble Lords of England, who (with a Nolumus Leges Angliae
mutari) rejected that abominable Bill; which, tho it would, if passed into an
Act, have been of no greater Force or Validity, than the Wild Ordinances of the
Rebellious Parliament of 1640. yet might it (as they were) be made use of to
induce the deluded Multitude to hazard their Souls, Bodies, and Estates by a
damnable Opposition of their Lawful Sovereign, and to raise up a Contest in
this Nation, not unlike to the old Yorkish and Lancastrian Quarrel, the
Thoughts whereof every good man must certainly dread, when he shall seriously
consider, how that War lasted about sixty years, and cost the Kingdom its whole
Treasure, and the Lives of above two hundred thousand of the Commons, besides
several Kings and Princes, and Nobles without number.

So sensible was the renowned Queen Elizabeth of those fatal Consequences,
which necessarily attend so unjust an Act, as that of altering the Succession,
that, although for Reasons obvious enough (and needless here to be mentioned) she
yielded to pass an Act, whereby it was made Treason to say, that she and her
Parliament could not dispose of the Crown, yet could she never be brought to
give her Consent to the actual disposing thereof, tho the next Heir, then
alive, was not only a Papist, but her own Rival to the Throne. Nay she was so
averse to any such Act, that (as Camden tells us) She never heard any thing
more unwillingly, than that the Title of Succession should be called into
question. And therefore she sent Mr. Thornton Reader of Law in Lincoln's Inn, to
the Tower, because in his Reading he called in question the Queen of Scots
Title to the Crown. And when the Lord Keeper Bacon was accused by the Earl of
Leicester for having intermedled against the Queen of Scots Right to the
Succession, and for being privy to a Book, wherein Hales went about to derive
the Title of the Crown of England, in case the Queen should die without Issue,
to the House of Suffolk, Hales was therefore committed to the Tower, and Bacon,
tho denying it, was not without great difficulty restored to favor. So
likewise, when in the eighth year of her Reign, Bell Mounson, and a great
Number of the House of Commons, thought it their Right, as Representatives of
the whole Kingdom, whereof they do not in reality represent the sixth part, to
decide and settle the Succession, the Queen by a Prince-like Speech in the
Parliament House speedily suppressed their Insolence. In like manner when in
the thirty fifth year of her Reign Mr. Peter Wentworth and Sir Henry Bromley
delivered a Petition to the Lord Keeper, desiring the Lords of the Upper House
to be Suppliants with them of the Lower to Her Majesty for entailing the
Succession of the Crown, for which they had a Bill ready drawn, the Queen
highly displeased hereat, charged her Council to call the Parties before them:
Whereupon Sir Thomas Henage, sending for them, commanded them to forbear the
Parliament, and not to go out of their several Lodgings. They were after called
before the Lord Treasurer, Lord Buckhurst, and Sir Thomas Henage, by whom
Wentworth was committed to the Tower, Sir Henry Bromley, and other Members of
the House of Commons, to whom he had imparted the matter, being sent to the
Fleet. So careful was this prudent Queen to keep the People from presuming to
intermeddle with the Succession.

The same Consideration, that the Altering or Diverting the Succession in an
hereditary Monarchy, where the Kings (deriving their Royal Power from GOD
Almighty alone) do succeed lineally to the Crown, according to the known
Degrees of Proximity in Blood, cannot be attempted without involving the
Subjects in Perjury and Rebellion, and exposing of them to all the Fatal and
Dreadful Consequences of a Civil War, not only caused the Estates of Scotland
in their very last Sessions of Parliament, from an hearty and sincere Sense of
their Duty to recognize, acknowledge, and declare, That the Right to the
Imperial Crown of that Realm is (by the Inherent Right, and the Nature of the
Monarchy, as well as by the Fundamental and unalterable Laws of the Realm)
transmitted and devolved by a Lineal Succession according to the Proximity of
Blood; And that upon the Death of the King or Queen, who actually Reigns, the
Subjects of that Kingdom are bound by Law, Duty and Allegiance to obey the next
immediate and lawful Heir, either Male or Female, upon whom the Right and
Administration of Government is immediately devolved; And that no Difference in
Religion, nor no Law, nor Act of Parliament, made, or to be made, can alter or
divert the Right of Succession and Lineal Descent of the Crown to the nearest
and lawful Heir, according to the Degrees aforesaid; nor can stop or hinder
them in the full, free and actual Administration of the Government, according
to the Laws of the Kingdom; but obliged also His Majesty, for the preservation
of the Peace and Tranquillity of that Kingdom, with Advice and Consent of the
said Estates of Parliament, to declare, That it is High Treason in any of the
Subjects of that Kingdom, by Writing, Speaking, or any other manner of way, to
endeavor the Alteration, Suspension, or Diversion of the said Right of
Succession, or the debarring the next lawful Successor from the immediate,
actual, full, and free Administration of the Government.

Nor is it to be doubted, but that the Commons of England, who now begin to
grow sensible of those Precipices of Ruin, whereinto they were ready to tumble
through the Contrivances of of those malicious Incendiaries, that by terrifying
the People with panick Fears of Popery and Arbitrary Power endeavored to
kindle a Fire of Rebellion in this Nation, will, whenever it shall please His
Majesty to call a Parliament, show themselves no less Zealous (than the Scots
have done) to assist and defend (according to their Oaths) the Kings Rights and
Privileges, the chiefest whereof, upon which all the rest depend, as on a
Corner Stone, is the unalterable Hereditariness of the Monarchy, and thereby
defeat the Designs of those cursed Achitophels, who labor by involving us in
Confusion to establish their beloved Democracy, the very worst of Tyrannies.

CHAP. XIII. Of the present Monarch of Great Britain: His Name, Surname,
Genealogy, Birth, Baptism, Court, Education, Departure out of England, Coming
into Scotland, Escape from Worcester, Restoration, Coronation, and Marriage.
Name.
THe now-reigning Monarch of Great Britain is CHARLES, the Second of that Name.
His Name of Baptism, in Latin written Carolus, in English CHARLES, in the
German Language Karle, is contracted from Car-eal, which is it self an
Abbreviation of the old Teutonick Gar-edel, and signifies All or wholly Noble.
Not improperly then was this Name given to this Prince, whose Subjects may
justly glory in the Enjoyment of that Happiness, for which Solomon pronounces a
Land blessed, that their King is the Son of Nobles.

Surname.
Tho Surnames are neither used by Sovereign Princes, nor necessary to them, as
they are to other inferior persons; whose Surnames preserve the Memory of their
Relations and Families; yet as Bourbon and Austria, which were but the
Possessions of their Progenitors, are now generally esteemed the Surnames of
the Present French and Spanish Royal Familyes: So Stuart or Steward, the
Abbreviation of the Saxon Word Stedeward, signifying the same, as Locumtenens
in Latin, and Lieutenant in French, which was originally but the Name of Office
to Walter (Son of Fleance by the Daughter of Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn King of
Northwales, and Progenitor to Robert the IId. King of Scotland, from whom our
present King is descended) who was by King Malcolm Canmore created Grand
Seneschal or High Steward of Scotland, has by Prescription of Time and long
Vulgar Error so far prevailed, as to be accounted the Surname of the now-Royal
Family of Great Britain, and of many other Families, descended from him. Nor is
this Name unfit for any King, as being in his Kingdom the Steward, Lieutenant,
or Vicegerent of Almighty GOD.

Our Sovereign Lord the King, Genealogy.
now reigning does for Royal Extraction, and long Line of just Descent excel
all the Monarchs of the Christian, if not of the whole World, being lineally
and lawfully descended from, and by Right of Primogeniture next Heir unto the
British, Saxon, Norman, and Scottish Kings and Princes of this Island, his
Grandfather King James, who by along Descent of Royal Ancestors was was derived
from Malcolm Canmor King of the Scots, and the Lady Margaret his Wife, Sister
and Sole Heir of Edgar Atheling, the last surviving Prince of the English
Saxons, joining the Saxon and Scottish. Titles to the British and Norman,
already united in the Person and Posterity of Edward the IVth. King of England.

He is from the first British Kings the hundred thirty ninth, from the Scottish,
in a continued succession for almost two thousand years, the hundred and ninth,
from the Saxon the forty sixth, since the Norman Conquest the twenty sixth,
from the Uniting of the Royal Families of York and Lancaster the eighth, and
since the Union of England and Scotland the third sole Monarch.

He is the first, that was born Prince or Heir apparent of Great Britain, and
has in his possession larger Domininions than any of his Royal Ancestors.

His Father was Charles the Martyr, and his Mother the Princess Henrietta
Maria, Daughter to Henry the Great, Sister to Lewis the XIIIth. and Aunt to the
present Lewis the XIVth. most Christian Kings, a Lady, who needs no other
Character, than what is found in the seventh Chapter of that unimitable Book,
compiled by him, that best knew her. From these two Royal Stocks, he has in
his Veins some of all the Royal Blood of Europe concentred.

This most Excellent Prince was born on the twenty ninth of May, 1630. at the
Royal Palace of St. James's, Birth.
near Westminster, over which there was the same day at noon by thousands seen
a Star impending, and soon after the Sun suffered an Eclipse, which was by some
even at that time regarded as a sad Omen, that the Power of this Prince should
for a while be eclipsed and that some Subject, signified by the Star, should
have more than ordinary Splendour.

Baptism.
On the twenty seventh of June following he was baptized by Dr. William Laud,
then Bishop of London, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, who was in the year
of our Lord 1644. by a pretended Ordinance of the rebellious long Parliament,
barbarously murdered for his Fidelity to his Sovereign.

His Godfathers were his two Uncles the most Christian King Lewis the XIIIth.
and Frederick, Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, then called King of
Bohemia, represented by the Duke of Richmond, and Marquess of Hamilton, his
Godmother being his Grandmother Maria de Medicis, then Queen Mother of France,
whose Substitute was the Duchess of Richmond. He had for his Governess Mary
Countess of Dorset, Wife to Edward Earl of Dorset.

In May, 1638. he received the Order of Knighthood, Court.
being immediately after made Knight of the Garter, and installed at Windsor.
About which time he was by Order, not Creation, first called Prince of Wales,
having all the Revenews of that Principality, with diverse others Lands annexed,
and the Earldom of Chester granted unto him, and holding his Court apart from
the King.

In the eighth year of his Age being taken from the Charge of his Women,
Education.
he had for Governor William, then Earl, afterward Marquess, and lately Duke of
Newcastle, and after him Thomas, late Earl of Berkshire; and for Tutor or
Preceptor Dr. Brian Duppa, then Dean of Christ-Church in Oxford, soon after
Bishop of Chichester, after that of Salisbury, and lately of Winchester.

In October 1642. the two Houses having, out of their superabundant Loyalty,
and great Zeal for the preservation of their Sovereign, raised an Army to
divest him of his Sovereignty, he was with his Father at the Battle of
Edgehill, and not long after was at Oxford committed to the Care of William
Marquess of Hertford, whom, after his own happy Restoration, he restored to
the Dignity and Precedence of Duke of Somerset.

In the fifteenth year of his Age he was sent by his Father into the West of
England, to perfect an Association, begun there in the end of the foregoing
Summer. And not long after there was a Marriage proposed between him and the
Infanta Joanna, eldest Daughter to the King of Portugal, since deceased.

Departure out of England.
The year following, Barnstable being taken, and Exeter besieged by the Rebels,
he withdrew from Devonshire into Cornwall, from whence he passed into the Isle
of Scilly, and thence to the Queen his Mother, being at St. Germains near Paris.

In the year 1648. a Considerable part of the Royal Navy, encouraged thereto by
Captain Batten, formerly Vice Admiral to the Earl of Warwick, being put into
his Power, he endeavored to rescue the King his Father out of the impious hands
of his rebellious Subjects. But failing of Success, he was forced to retire to
his Sister at the Hague, where not many Months after upon the sad News of the
barbarous Murder of his Royal Father, he was first saluted King, and soon
after proclaimed in Scotland and most Towns of Ireland, being yet under
nineteen years of Age.

In the latter end of the year 1649. he received, being then in Jersey, Coming
into England.
a Message from the Committee of Estates of Scotland, brought by Mr. George
Windram of Liberton, and the March following met the Scotch Commissioners at
Breda in Holland, and about the beginning of June 1650. being invited by a
solemn Message from the Estates of that Kingdom, he took Shipping at
Scheveling, and having escaped the danger both of a sudden Storm, that cast him
upon certain Danish Islands, and of a Fleet of English Vessels, sent out under
Popham to intercept his passage, arrived at the Spey in the North of Scotland,
from whence all along his way to Edenborough he was entertained with the
general Joy of the People, several of the Towns, by which he passed, making him
considerable Presents. On the fifteenth of July, he was again solemnly
proclaimed King at Edenborough Cross, and was the first of January following
crowned at Scoon, the accustomed place for Coronation of the Kings of Scotland.

Escape from Worcester.
Being invaded by an Army from England, he was forced to quit that Kingdom, and
try his Fortune in this which he entered the sixth of August 1651. and on the
twenty second of the same Month came to Worcester, where on the third of
September was fought that fatal Battle, in which tho his Majesty acted with
such mavelous Gallantry and Conduct, that he wan applause from his very
Enemies, yet he unfortunately lost the Day, and his whole Army, himself not
without a Providence, unparalleld in History, escaping the Hands of his
blood-thirsty Enemies, who not only by public Act promised a Sum of Money to
those that should discover him, but likewise threatened the Penalty of High
Treason to any, that should conceal him. For being in the very Heart England,
and a thousand pounds set upon his head, he was forced to wander about in
disguise for six Weeks, and to appear in many Places and Companies, before he
could find a fit opportunity of Transportation. During which time tho he were
seen and known to many person, diverse whereof were excessively indigent, and
therefore liable to be tempted by the proposed Reward, diverse of the Female
Sex, and so not only most unapt to retain a Secret, but also very subject to be
terrified by the threatened Penalty, and diverse besides all this of the Roman
Religion, which alone (the very Principles thereof having been always clamored
against, as reputed to teach nothing but Treachery and Disloyalty to Princes,
and the Lawfulness of breaking Faith with Heretics) might have made his
Majesty afraid to trust them; yet was he still most miraculously preserved, and
at length by one Tetershal, since a Captain in his Majesty's Navy, (whose Wife,
suspecting the Business, was so far from disencouraging him, that she said, She
cared not, if she and her little ones begged their Bread, so the King were in
safety) transported from Bright-hemstead near Shoram in Sussex to Feccam near
Hauvre de Grace in Normandy, whence he posted directly to Rouen, and having
thence dispatched Letters to the French Court, he was met the Queen his Mother,
the Duke of Orleans, and many Persons of Quality, and by them conducted to
Paris, where with his Royal Brothers, and diverse of the British Nobility,
Clergy, and Gentry, he was for some years received and treated as King of Great
Britain.

There by his Excellent Wisdom and Address, mediating with the Prince of Conde,
and the Duke of Lorrain, then in the Head of two great Armies against the
French King, he quenched the newly-kindled Fire of an universal Rebellion,
raised against him, and was a Means of restoring Cardinal Mazarine, who had for
fear of the Princes of the Blood withdrawn himself to Colen, to his former
Authority and Greatness.

In the year 1654. His Majesty, understanding, that upon a Treaty of Peace
between the French King and Oliver Cromwell, then stiling himself Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, one of the chiefest
Articles, insisted upon by the Usurper, was the excluding of him with his
Relations and Followers out of France, to prevent a ceremonious Expulsion,
voluntarily departed thence into Germany, making his first place of Residence
at the Spaw, whence after a few Months he went to Colen, where was discovered
the Correspondence between Thurloe, Cromwels Secretary, and Manning, one of the
Kings Secretaries Clerks, who, for giving weekly Intelligence to the Usurper of
the Transactions in his Majesty's Court, was deservedly shot to death.

After the Rupture between Cromwell and the King of Spain, he was by Don John of
Austria, who, being Governor of the Low-Countryes for his Catholic Majesty,
sent the Count of Fuensaldagne to offer him in the name of the Spanish King all
possible Service and Assistance, invited into Flanders, where making his
Residence for the most part at Bruges, he continued till a little before Sir
George Booths Rising in Cheshire, when he removed privately from Bruxels to
Calais, whence having notice from my Lord Mordant of the disappointment of much
of the design, he went to Bulloign, and thence to Reuen, whither Dr. Allestry
bringing him News of Sir Georges being in Arms, he went thence by Caen to St.
Maloes, where being in preparation of a Vessel to transport him into. England,
he received the fatal Tidings of Booths Defeat.

Thence his Majesty went to Fontarabia, to be present at the Treaty of Peace,
managed upon the Borders between France and Spain by the two chief Ministers of
those two Kings, where he was with all imaginable respect entertained by Don
Lewis de Haro, Plenipotentiary for his Catholic Majesty, from whom he received
large Promises of Assistance both with men and money, and a Present of twenty
thousand Crowns for defraying the Expenses of his Journey.

There receiving Advice from the Lord Mordant of the Disorders in England, he
returned through France toward Bruxels, staying by the way some few days with
his Royal Mother at Paris.

Restoration.
In the year 1660. Perceiving a general Inclination in his Subjects to receive
him, he providently, upon Advice sent him by General Monk, the late Duke of
Albemarl, removed from Bruxels to Breda within the Dominions of the United
Netherlands, whence he sent Letters, bearing date the fourteenth of April, to
the Lords, to the Speaker of the House of Commons, to the Generals Monk and
Mountague, and to the City of London, together with a gracious Declaration for
the composing and quieting the minds of his Subjects. These were on the first
of May, read in Parliament, and on the eighth he was with great Solemnity
proclaimed in the Cities of London and Westminster. The Tenor of the
Proclamation, agreed upon by the Lords and Commons, clearly expressing the
Hereditariness of this Monarchy, and consequently the unalterableness of the
Succession, is, as follows.

Although it can no way be doubted, but that His Majesty's Right and Title to his
Crown and Kingdoms is, and was every way completed by the Death of his most
Royal Father of Glorious Memory without the Ceremony or Solemnity of a
Proclamation: Yet, since Proclamations in such cases have always been used to
the end that all good Subjects might, upon this occasion, testify their Duty
and Respect; And since the armed Violence, and other the Calamities of many
years last past, have hitherto deprived Us of any such Opportunity, wherein we
might express our Loyalty and Allegiance to his Majesty; We therefore, the
Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, and other Freemen of this
Kingdom now present, do, according to Our Duty and Allegiance, heartily,
joyfully, and unanimously acknowledge and proclaim, That upon the Decease of
Our late Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of
England, and of all the Kingdoms, Dominions, and Rights belonging to the same,
did by inherent Birthright, and lawful and undoubted Succession, descend and
come to his Most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the Second; as being lineally,
justly, and lawfully next Heir of the Royal Blood of this Realm; and that by
the Goodness and Providence of Almighty GOD, He is of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, the most Potent, Mighty, and Undoubted King: And thereunto
we most humbly and faithfully do submit, and oblige Our Selves, our Heirs and
Posterities.

May the twenty third his Majesty, after a magnificent entertainment at the
Hague by the States of Holland, and an humble Invitation of English
Commissioners, sent by the Lords and Commons, then assembled at Westminster,
embarkt at Scheveling, and with a gallant Fleet, and gentle Gale of Wind landed
at Dover on the twenty fifth and on the twenty ninth, being his Birth day, his
Majesty, then just thirty years of Age, entered into London, accompanied with
his two Brothers, attended by most of the Nobility and Gentry of the three
Kingdoms, and received with the most Universal Joy, Acclamations, and
Magnificence, that could possibly be expressed.

This wonderful Restoration of his Majesty after so many years Dispossession,
his irreconcilable Enemies, who were fully possessed of the Government, being
supported by an Army of thirty thousand experienced and victorious Soldiers in
Eng and, all fostered up in an Aversion to Monarchy, besides the trained
Militia of the Nation, amounting to a far greater number, and wholly consisting
of chosen men of the like Principles, attempted and effected without Blood,
Blows, Bargain, or Obligation to any foreign Prince or Potentate, by the
Generosity and Prudence of that Noble Captain George, late Duke of Albemarl,
whose Courage and Conduct this present Age cannot but admire, and our Posterity
will with difficulty believe, was so signal a Dispensation of Divine
Providence, which not only raised up that Noble Instrumont, but darted likewise
on a sudden into the Hearts of the People a Desire of their Sovereign, which,
like Lightning, running over his Kingdoms, made them burn with eagerness for
his return, that the Great Turk, hearing thereof, openly declared, that, if he
were to change his Religion, he would adore and worship the GOD of the King of
Great Brtain.

Coronation.
On the two and twentieth of April, 1661. His Majesty, according to the ancient
Custom of his Royal Predecessors; made a glorious and splendid Cavalcade from
the Tower to Westminster, where the next day, being the Festival of St. Geopge,
he was Crowned with great Ceremony by Dr. William Juxon then Archbishop of
Canterbury, to whom that Office belonged in right of his See, the
Coronation-Sermon being preached by Dr. George Morley, then Bishop of
Worcester, now of Winchester.

On the eighth of May following began a Parliament at Westminster, as
remarkable for their Loyalty and Zealous Affection to the Service of their
Sovereign, as that of 1640. is notorious for Disloyalty and Sedition. In this
Parliament were condemned, as illegal, and destructive to the Government, all
those Factious and Antimonarchical Doctrins, first broached by the Rebels of
the late times, to justify their audacious Impieties, and now again revived (no
doubt for the same purpose) by the scurrilous Pamphletiers of this our Age, who
by their more than Jesuitical Equivocations eluding the plain and express Words
of an Oath, purposely framed to countermine and prevent such seditious Opinions
and Practices, which, as they formerly have, so may again be made use of to
involve us in Confusion and Misery, endeavor (as much as in them lies) to
render all Profession and Promises of Allegiance and Fidelity, made by Subjects
to their Prince, invalid, and of none effect.

Marryage.
On the twenty eighth of the same Month His Majesty declared to his Parliament
his Intention to marry the Infanta of Portugal, who accordingly in May 1662.
being landed at Portsmouth, was there espoused unto him by Dr. Gilbert Sheldon,
then Bishop of London, lately Archbishop of Canterbury.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Present Queen of Great Britain: Her Name, Genealogy, Birth,
Marriage, Portion, Jointure, and Arms.
THE present Queen of Great Britain is Donna CATHARINA Infanta of Portugal. Her
Name Catharina, Name.
originally Greek, signifies a Woman of excelling Purity and Chastity.

She had for Father John the IVth. Genealogy.
King of Portugal, and is lineally descended from John of Gaunt, King of
Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, and fourth Son to Edward the IIId. King of
England, as here appears.

John of Gaunt, besides several other Children, had a Daughter, named
Philippa, married to John the Is It. tenth King of Portugal, by whom she had
Issue Edward, the eleventh King of Portugal. Alphonso the Vth. twelfth King of
Portugal. Emanuel, second Son, who Succeeded his Elder Brother John the IId.
dying Issueless, and was the fourteenth King of Portugal. Edward Infant, sixth
Son. Catharina, married to John, Duke of Braganza, and, after the Death of her
Uncle Henry the seventeenth King of Portugal, true Heir to the Crown, from
which she was barred by the Arms of Philip the IId. King of Spain. Duke of
Braganza. John Duke of Braganza, who in the year 1640. recovered his
Inheritance, and reigned over Portugal by the Name of John the IVth. The
Infanta Donna Catharina, Queen Consort of Great Britain.








Her Majesty's Mother was Donna Lucia, Daughter of Don Gusman el Bueno, a
Spaniard, Duke of Medina Sidonia, lineally descended from Ferdinando de la
Cerde, and his Wife Blanch, Daughter to St. Lewis, King of France, who
relinquished to her his Right and Title to Spain, derived to him by his Mother
Blanch, eldest Daughter and Heir of the Spanish King Alphonso. She was a Lady
of that admired Magnanimity and Prudence, that the King her Husband trusted so
much of the Reins of Government to her masculine and politic Spirit, as
occasioned a jesting Spaniard to say: That it was not the Portugal Force, but
the Spanish Policy, which kept that Kingdom from the Catholic King.

The Queen of Great Britain is the only Sister of Don Alphonso the VIth. the
two and twentieth King of Portugal, born in the year 1642, and has one Brother
more, named Don Pedro born 1648, and now called Prince Regent of Portugal.

Birth.
She was born the fourteenth of November. 1638, at Villa Vicosa in Portugal, her
Father, who (tho right Heir to the Crown of Portugal) was then only Duke of
Braganza, being the most potent Subject in Europe: for a third part of Portugal
was even at that time holden of him in vassallage.

Marriage.
Having been most carefully and piously educated by Mother, she was at the Age
of two and twenty desired in marriage by Charles the IId. King of Great
Britain: And the Marriage, not long after concluded by the Negotiation of Sir
Richard Fanshaw, Ambassador of his Majesty of Great Britain in the Court of
Portugal, and of Francesco de Melo, Conde de Ponte, Marquis de Sand,
Extraordinary Ambassador from the King of Portugal, being solemnized at Lisbon,
on the twenty third of April, 1662. being the Festival of St. George, Patron
both of England and Portugal, she embarkt for England, and was by his
Excellency Edward Earl of Sandwich, Vice Admiral of England, safely conducted
by a Squadron of Ships to Portsmouth, where being met by the King, she was
remarried to him.

From Portsmouth she was by his Majesty brought to Hampton Court, where she
continued till the three and twentieth of August following, when coming up
thence by Water, she was with great Pomp and Magnificence received at Chelsey
by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, who waited on her thence by Water to
Whitehal.

The Portion, Portion.
brought by her Majesty, was eight hundred Millions of Reas, or two Millions of
Crusadoes, amounting to about three hundred thousand Pounds Sterling; the City
of Tangier on the Coast of Africa; and the Isle of Bombaim nere Goa in the
East Indies; together with a Privilege, that any Subjects of the King of Great
Britain may trade freely in the East and West India Plantations, belonging to
the Portugueses.

Her Jointure, Jointure.
agreed upon by the Articles of Marriage, is thirty thousand Pounds Sterling
per Annum, to which the King, as a Testimony of his great Affection to her, has
added ten thousand Pounds per Annum more.

Arms.
Her Arms, as Daughter of Portugal, are Argent, five Scutcheons Azure Crosswise,
each Scutcheon charged with five Besants Argent Salterwise, with a Point Sable.
The Border Gules, charged with seven Castles, Or. This Coat was first worn by
Don Alphonso, the first King of Portugal, as well in memory of a signal
Victory, obtained by him over five Kings of the Moors, as in honor of the
five Wounds of our blessed Lord and Savior, who just before the Battle
appeared crucified unto him, a voice being heard, as once to Constantin the
Great, In hoc Signo vinces: before which time the Portugal Arms were Argent, a
Cross Azure.

Her Majesty is a Personage, endowed with rare Perfections both of Mind and
Body, a Lady of transcendent Piety, Modesty, and Charity, and many other
eminent Virtues.

CHAP. XV. Of the present Princes and Princesses of the Royal Blood of Great
Britain.
THe Glorious Martyr CHARLES the Is It. King of Great Britain, had by his Queen
Henrietta Maria, Daughter to the most Christian King Henry the IVth. four Sons
and five Daughters. His Sons were, 1. CHARLES-JAMES, born at Greenwich on the
thirteenth of May, 1629. baptized immediately by Dr. Web, one of his Majesty's
Chaplains then in attendance, and afterward a Bishop in Ireland, lived not
above two hours. 2. CHARLES, our present Sovereign, whom GOD long preserve. 3.
JAMES, now Duke of York and Albany. 4. HENRY, born at Oatlands, on the
twentieth of July 1640. declared by his Royal Father, Duke of Gloucester, but
not so Created till the thirteenth of May 1659. He lived till above Twenty, and
dyed unmarried the thirteenth of September 1660. almost four Months after His
Majesty's happy Restoration, bereaving thereby these Nations of those fair
Hopes, which had been generally conceived from his Noble and Princely
Endowments.


His Daughters were, 1. MARY, born the fourth of November 1631. married on the
second of May 1641. to Count William of Nassau, Eldest Son to Henry Prince of
Orange, to whom she was, the February following, conveyed by her Mother into
Holland. The Prince, her Husband, dyed in the beginning of November, 1650.
leaving her Great with child; soon after whose Death she was delivered of a
Son, being the present Prince of Orange. Coming into England to see her
Brother, whom the Divine Bounty had miraculously restored to his Throne, she
here ended her days the twenty-fourth of December, 1660. being little above
nine and twenty Years of Age. Her Loss, was exceedingly bewailed by All, who
had the honor to know her, as being a Lady of universal Goodness and Charity.
2. ELIZABETH, born on the eight and twentieth of December 1635. a Princess of
incomparable Virtues and Abilities, Dyed the eighth of September, 1650 at
Carisbrook in the Isle of Wight of Grief for the Murder of her Father. 3.
ANNE, Born the seventeenth of March 1636. Dyed very Young. 4. CATHARINE, Dyed
almost as soon as Born. 5. HENRIETTA, Born at Exeter on the sixteenth of June
1644. and at the surrendry of that Town brought to St. James's, whence she was
afterward, by her Governess the Lady Dalkeith, conveyed into France to the
Queen her Mother, by whom she was Educated in the Roman Religion. About the Age
of Sixteen Years she came with the Queen Mother into England, whence after six
Months stay, returning into France, she was Married to Philip Duke of Anjou,
only Brother to the present French King, by whom she had Issue two Daughters,
the Elder whereof is Queen of Spain, the Younger being deceased. She was a
Princess of incomparable Beauty, and Gallantry of Spirit, and Dyed suddenly at
Paris, in June 1670. being Six and Twenty Years of Age.


Of the Duke of York.
HIS present Majesty of Great Britain having no Issue by his Queen, and having
by his Royal Declaration (which he has caused to be Registered in Chancery, and
which not any good Subject, nor indeed not any rational Man, can choose but
believe) solemnly protested, That he was never Married to any other Woman: The
first Prince of the Blood, and Apparent (or, according to the new-coyn'd
Distinction, Presumptive) Heir of the Crown, is His Royal Highness, JAMES Duke
of York and Albany, Earl of Vlster, Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter, third Son of CHARLES the Is It., and and sole surviving Brother of our
sacred Sovereign CHARLES the IId.

He was Born at Somerset House in the Strand on the fourteenth of October,
1633. and was immediately at the Court-Gates proclaimed Duke of York. On the
four and twentieth of the same Month he was Baptized, having for Godfathers
the King of Denmark, represented by the Earl of Arundel, and the Duke of
Orleans, by Prince Harcourt, and for God-mother the Queen of Bohemia, whose
Substitute was the Duchess of Buckingham.

He was in his Infancy committed to the Government of the Lady Hatton, but when
he grew up, had for Governor Henry Lord Jermin, now Earl of Saint Albans, and
for Preceptor Dr Broughton of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford.

In February, 1641. He was by the King his Father sent for from London to
Greenwich, that he might accompany him thence to York.

Having been by special Command called Duke of York from his Birth, he was on
the seven and twentieth of January, 1643. (having the Year before received the
Order of the Garter) so Created by Letters Patents at Oxford; but without the
Solemnities, usual in such Cases, the Iniquity of those Times not admitting
thereof.

After the Surrendry of Oxford to the Rebels in the Year 1646. His Royal
Highness was conveyed thence to London, and at St. Jameses committed with his
Brother the Duke of Gloucester, and his Sisters the Princesses Elizabeth and
Henrietta to the Tuition and Care of the Earl of Northumberland and his Lady.

Here he continued unto the three and twentieth of April, 1648. when having
with Colonel Bampfield, sent over purposely on that Design by the Queen his
Mother, contrived an escape, after he had received the usual Visit of his
Guardian the Earl of Northumberland, he lingered out the remainder of the
Evening (that he might avoid the suspicion of his Attendants) in the Chamber of
his Brother the Duke of Gloucester, and at a fit Opportunity retiring into the
Garden, by the help of a Key, which he had borrowed of the Gardener, he quickly
got to the place, where he was expected by the Colonel, by whom, being
disguised in the Habit of a Girl, he was conveyed to Dort, whence he went
immediately to his Sister the Princess of Orange, and thence soon after to his
Royal Mother then at Paris.

Thence he came to the Prince of Wales, his Brother, then endeavoring with
part of the Navy, which had submitted to him, to rescue his Royal Father out of
the Traitorous hands of the villainous Rebels, by whom he was kept Prisoner in
the Isle of Wight.

But that Design being disappointed, his Royal Highness returned to the Court
of France, where he continued, till he was about twenty Years of Age, when
going into the Campaign, he performed under that great Commander, the Marshall
de Turenne, such eminent Services for the French King against the Spanish
Forces in the Netherlands, that before the Age of one and twenty, he was made
Lieutenant General of the whole Army, and was by Turenne himself, then lying
desperately Sick, recommended to his most Christian Majesty, for the fittest
person he could nominate to be General of his Army, as being so Noble,
Valorous, and fortunate a Commander, that his Affairs could not (in all humane
probability) but prove Successful under his Conduct.

Notwithstanding which, upon a Treaty between the French King, and the English
Usurper Cromwell, he was in the Year, 1655. (tho not without some Complements
and Apologies for his Dismission) advertized to depart with all his Retinue out
of the French Dominions by a prefixed time: Which he accordingly did, having
been first visited by the Marshall de Turenne, and diverse other French
Grandees, as also by the Duke of Modena, then in France about some important
Affairs.

His Royal Highness then, having taken His leave of the King and Court of
France, and being attended by the Earl of St. Albans, and several other English
Lords, took His Journey toward Bruges in Flanders, the Residence at that time
of the King His Brother, who, having upon foresight of the Event of the Treaty
prudently withdrawn himself out of France, was by Don John of Austria,
Governor of the Low Countries for the King of Spain, solemnly invited into
those parts.

The Duke in his way touchd at Bruxels, where he was magnificently entertained
by Don John, to whom he proffered his service in the wars against the French
King, then leagued with the English Rebels against Spain. Which being with many
thanks accepted, his Magnanimity and Dexterity in Martial Affairs wan him so
much esteem, that a little before his Majesty's happy return he was offered in
the Name of the Spanish King the high Dignity of Admiral of Castile.

In the year 1660, He returned with the King his Brother into England, of which
being Lord High Admiral, and in the year 1665 in the War against the United
Nether-Lands, commanding in Person the whole Royal Navy, he with unmatchable
Valor, and extraordinary Hazard of his Princely Person, which was besprinkled
with the Blood of those, that fell by his side, obtained after a sharp dispute
on the Seas between England and Holland a signal Victory over the whole Dutch
Fleet, sinking many of their ships, blowing up their Admiral Opdam, and by
sacking of Scheveling making Amsterdam it self to tremble. For which great
services, so sensible was the Parliament, how much the English Nation was
indebted to him, that, as a small acknowledgment of his Merit, and a grateful
testimony of their Affections, they made him a Present of an hundred thousand
pounds.

In September 1666, the City of London laboring under a terrible Fire (whether
occasioned by the supine negligence of the Baker and his servants, in whose
house it began; or by an Hellish combination of malicious Persons, there having
been executed the April before eight Fanatical Plotters, who confessed at Tyburn,
that they had so contrived that Fatal Scene, that it could not miscarry, their
Prediction, as to the Fire, tho not as to the rest of their intended Tragedy,
proving true to a day) he exposed his Person to a thousand Dangers to rescue it
from Destruction, breaking open Pipes and Conduits for Water, reaching Buckets
as nimbly as any of the common people, clearing the Streets of the Crowds, that
hindered the people from carrying away their goods, appointing his servants and
Guards to conduct them to secure places, and in fine for several nights and
days with unwearied industry appearing in all parts, giving necessary orders to
prevent the farther spreading of the Conflagration. In requital of which his
never to be forgotten Pains and diligence for the suppressing of those Flames,
some ungrateful and audacious Villains have impudently dared to calumniate him,
as the Author of that dreadful Fire, than which Hell it self cannot forge a
falser or blacker Lie.

In the year 1672 he again in a second War against the United Netherlands
commanded the whole English Fleet, behaving himself with such gallantry, that
notwithstanding the many notable disadvantages of wind and tide, being at
Anchor, when set upon, and the succeeding Mist, he after a long and fierce
encounter put the Dutch to flight, though with exceeding great peril of his
Life, having in the heat or the engagement (when Refitting would have lost the
benefit of his Orders and Action) changed Ships oftener, than great Generals at
Land have done their Horses. Insomuch that De Ruiter himself acknowledged His
Royal Highness to exceed all the Admirals in Christendom as much by His Bravery
as by His Birth.

In the Year 1678. after the discovery of the Popish Plot, some Sons of Belial
(that they might more freely vent their malice against the Royal Family)
impudently and falsely calumniated his Royal Highness, not only as having
publicly professed the Romish Religion, which yet is so palpable an Untruth,
that it needs no Confutation; but also (though in direct contradiction to the
depositions of Oats and Bedlow the chief discoverers, the last whereof even at
his death acquitted him) as the Author of the Plot, which yet he was so earnest
to have sifted to the Bottom, that (as the Earl of Danby in his Printed Case
tells us) It had never been brought upon the Stage, but for the Dukes
Importunity. Yet were these Surmises, how ridiculous and groundless soever, so
cunningly by seditious Boutefeus insinuated into the belief of the giddy
Multitude, that his Majesty, at whom these envenomed Arrows, tho seemingly shot
at his Brother, were directly aimed, thought it convenient, Because he would
not leave the most malicious men room to say, he had not removed all Causes,
which could be pretended to influence him toward Popish Counsels, and that he
might thereby discern, whether Protestant Religion and the Peace of the Kingdom
were as truly aimed at by others, as they were really intended by himself, to
deprive himself of the Conversation of his Royal Highness by commanding him to
depart the Kingdom: To which Command the Duke paying an entire submission and
obedience, on the third of March 1679. took leave of his Majesty, and, after a
short visit to his Daughter, the Princess of Orange, in Holland, retired with
his Family to Bruxels in Flanders.

Thence his Royal Highness, having about the latter end of August following
received the unwelcome News, that the King his Brother was seized with a fit of
sickness, hastened over to Windsor to visit him, protesting, that, although his
Loyalty and Fraternal Affection had obliged him to perform this Duty, he was
ready upon his Majesty's first Command not only to return into Flanders, but to
go to the farthest part of the Earth.

On the Seventeenth of September, He came with His Majesty, by the infinite
mercy of Heaven recovered from His sickness, to London, and on the
Twenty-eighth of the same Month departed again for Flanders, whence returning
about the middle of October, He took his journey by order of the King on the
first of November for Scotland, where by his prudent Conduct (being by His
Majesty constituted High Commissioner of that Kingdom) He quieted the dangerous
Commotions, raised therein by certain furious and factious Zealots, and
restored it to full peace and Tranquillity.

Coming into England about the latter end of March 1682, He was by His Majesty
then at Newmarket, received with the greatest Testimonies of affection
imaginable. Returning again about the middle of May by Sea toward Scotland, to
fetch thence his Duchess, He was by the singular Providence of Almighty GOD
delivered from eminent danger of drowning, The Gloucester a Third Rate Fregate,
whereon he was imbarkt, by the negligence of the Pilot striking on the sands,
and sinking under Him, His Plate, and whatever else was abord, being lost,
several Persons of Quality, who accompanied him, and of his Servants and Seamen
about two hundred Persons, whose unparalleld affection and generous Loyalty
(when there was no hope of safety for themselves) with shouts of joy gave
thanks to Heaven for the preservation of His Royal Highness, being swallowed up
by the Waves.

So sensible were all the Loyal Engglish of the great damage, that would have
befallen these Kingdoms by the loss of so Heroic a Prince, that several parts
of this Nation have in their Addresses to the King since the return of their
Royal Highnesses, not only congratulated the happy deliverance of his only
Brother, but have also humbly supplicated their Sovereign, that he would no
more permit him, who is next after his sacred Majesty their chief hope and
comfort, to be separated from his Royal Presence.

His Royal Highness had for His first Wife ANN, eldest Daughter to Edward,
Late Earl of Clarendon, and Lord High Chancellor of England. She Dyed at St.
Jameses, on the one and Thiriteth of April 1671. having made him Father of a
numerous Issue, whereof are living, 1. MARY, Born the Thirtieth of April 1662,
whose Godfather was Prince Rupert, and Godmothers the Dutchesses of
Buckingham, and Ormond. On the fourth of November, 1677. She was by Dr. Henry
Compton, Bishop of London, and Brother to James, late Earl of Northampton,
married to William of Nassaw Prince of Orange. 2. ANNE, born in February 1664,
whose Godfather was Dr. Gilbert Sheldon, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
her Godmothers being her Sister the young Lady Mary, and the Duchess of
Monmouth.


In November 1673, His Royal Highness was by Dr. Nathanael Crew, Bishop of
Durham, and Son to John Lord Crew, secondly married to JOSEPHA-MARIA d'Este,
Daughter of Alphonso the IIId. late, and Sister to Francis present Duke of
Modena, her Mother being Laura Martinozza the present Duchess Dowager. By her
he has had several Children, of which is living one only Daughter, named,

CHARLOTTA MARIA, born the fifteenth of August 1682. and Baptized the day
following by Dr. Henry Compton, Lord Bishop of London; her Godfather being the
Duke of Ormond, and her Godmothers the Countesses of Arundel and Clarendon.

Though the ambitious and designing Adversaries of His Royal Highness employ
their utmost Artifice to cloud and conceal from the eyes of the People his many
admirable endowments and Princely qualities; yet cannot they with any color of
Truth deny him to be a most Glorious and Honorable Prince, not only of a most
high Spirit and invincible Courage? but also a Commander of great experience
both at Land and Sea, where he has not only several times exposed his Life for
the safety and honor of this Nation, but also, wherever he appeared, carried
victory along with him, which in his absence was not found: He is of a quick
apprehension, and sound judgment, sedulous and diligent in Business, wary in
Counsel, speedy in execution, and in his resolutions constant and inflexible:
He is a kind Brother, a dutiful Subject, an obliging Husband, a tender Father,
a firm Friend, and an excellent Master. In his Word and Promises strictly
Faithful, and in payment of his Debts punctually just. He is brave and
generous, liberal but not profuse, manages his own fortune discreetly, and yet
keeps the best Court and Equipage of any Subject in Christendom. He is affable
and courteous to all, and (however the inveterate malice of his restless and
factious Enemies may have possessd some credulous Persons to the contrary) of
no persecuting or vindicative Spirit, nor has any thing in his whole Conduct
to be excepted against, much less dreaded. He is in a word, what the French
call un honneste homme, A Person endowed with all the good Qualities, that make
a man truly valuable, and seems born to retrieve the sinking glory of the
English Nation.

Of the Prince of Orange.
AFter the Duke of York and his Issue the next Heir to the Crown of Great
Britain is William Frederick Henry of Nassaw, Prince of Orange and Stadtholder
of the united Provinces, only Issue of the Princess Royal Mary, Eldest Daughter
of our late martyred Sovereign King Charles the Is It. and Wedded on the second
of May 1641. to William of Nassaw, only Son of Henry Prince of Orange, then
Commander in chief of all the Forces of the States General both by Land and Sea,

He was born at the Hague on the fourteenth of November 1650 being nine days
after his Fathers decease. He had for his Godfathers the Lords States General
of Holland and Zealand, and the; Cities of Delft, Leyden and Amsterdam and for
Godmothers the Queen of Bohemia and the old Princess of Orange.

His Governess was the English Lady Stanhope, then Wife to the Here Van
Hemvliet. Being eight years of Age, he was sent to the University at Leyden.

On the fourth of November 1677. being then near Seven and Twenty years of Age,
he espoused the Lady Mary, eldest Daughter to His Royal Highness, James Duke of
York.

His Revenue is about threescore Thousand Pounds Sterling per Annum, besides
Military advantages, enjoyed by his Father and Ancestors, amounting to about
thirty thousand Pounds Sterling per Annum more.

He is a Prince of great valor and courage, in whom the High and Princely
Qualities of his Ancestors have always appeared, and a great Lover of Soldiers.

Of the Queen of Spain.
THe next Heir (after the forementioned) to the Imperial Crown of Great Britain
is Her most Serene Majesty the present Queen Consort of Spain, Daughter of the
Princess Henrietta, youngest Sister to His present Sacred Majesty of Great
Britain, by the most illustrous Prince Philip, now Duke of Orleans, only
Brother to the most Christian King Lewis the XIVth. now reigning.

She was born in the year 1663. and was in December 1679 Married to Charles the
IId. King of Spain.

Of the Prince Elector Palatine.
THere being left alive no more of the Offspring of King Charles the Is It. the
next Heirs to the Imperial Crown of these Realms are the Issue and Descendents
of Elizabeth late Queen of Bohemia, only Sister to the said King, who was on
the fourteenth of February 1612 married to Frederick the Vth. Prince Elector
Palatine of the Rhine, afterward styled King of Bohemia.

Of these the first is Charles, the present Prince Elector Palatine of the
Rhine commonly called the Palsgrave, from the High Dutch Psaltzgraffe, Palatii
Comes, Grandson to the said Queen by her eldest Son Charles Lodowick Prince
Elector Palatine of the Rhine, lately deceased. His Mother was the Lady
Charlotte, Daughter to William the Vth. Landgrave of Hesse, and to Elizabeth
Emilia of Hanaw. He was born on the one and thirtieth of March 1651. and has
lately married the Sister of Christiern the Vth. present King of Denmark.

This Prince has a Sister named Louise, born in May 1652, and now married to
the Duke of Orleans, only Brother to the present French King.

Of Prince Rupert.
NExt unto the Prince Elector Palatine and his Sister is the illustrious Prince
Rupert, Duke of Bavaria and Cumberland, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Earl of
Holderness, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, born at Prague on
the seventeenth of December 1619, not long before that very unfortunate Battle,
there fought, whereby not only all Bohemia was lost, but the Palatine Family
was, for almost thirty years, outed of all their possessions in Germany, till
that in the year 1648 by the Famous Treaty at Munster Charles Lodowick, eldest
Brother to this Prince, had the Lower Palatinate restored to him, for which he
was constrained to quit all his right to the Upper Palatinate, and to accept of
an eighth Electorship, at a juncture of time, when his Uncle Charles the Is It.
King of Great Britain (had he not been embroiled at home by an horrid
Rebellion) had been the most considerable of all other at this Treaty, and the
Prince Elector, his Nephew, would have had the greatest advantages there.

Prince Rupert, at the age of thirteen years, marched with the then Prince of
Orange to the Siege of Rhineberg.

At the Age of eighteen he commanded a Regiment of Horse in the German Wars,
and being at the Battle of Lemgou in the year 1638 taken by the Imperialists
under the command of Count Hatzfield, he continued a Prisoner above three years.

About the beginning of September 1642 he came into England with his Brother
Prince Maurice, to offer his service to the King his Uncle against a factious
Party of the two Houses, then rebelling against him, and being within a
fortnight after his arrival put in command over a small Party of those Forces,
which the King had at that time gathered together, marched with them into
diverse parts of Warwickshire, Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, Worcestershire,
and Cheshire, his Forces still increasing as he marched.

Being about the middle of October following made General of the Horse to the
King, he soon after fought and defeated Colonel Sandys near Worcester; on the
three and twentieth of the same month routed the Rebels Horse at Edg-Hill; and
on the second of February following took Cirencester, and therein eleven
hundred Prisoners and three thousand Arms.

On the fourteenth of April 1643. he recovered Litchfield, taken the March
before by the Rebels; on the eighteenth of June he routed Sheffield and Hambden
in Chalgrove-Field, being the very place, where Hambden, who soon after died of
his wounds there received, first executed the Parliaments Commission for the
Militia against the Kings Authority; on the twenty seventh of July he took the
City of Bristol; he was on the twenty-fourth of January following created Earl
of Holdernesse and Duke of Cumberland, the Male-Line of the Cliffords being
extinct in Henry the Last Earl; and on the two and twentieth of March he raised
the siege at Newark, having got a complete victory over Sr. John Meldrum, who
lay before it with eight thousand men.

On the twenty-seventh of May 1644 he forced Rigby, commander for the Rebels,
to depart from before Latham House, wherein that magnanimous and incomparable
Lady Charlotte, Countess of Derby, had been eighteen weeks closely besieged,
and the next day stormed and took the town of Bolton; on the third of July
having relieved York, wherein the then Marquess, afterward Duke of Newcastle,
had been nine weeks besieged by three Armies, under the command of Manchester,
Fairfax, and Lesley, he fought the great Battle of Marston-Moor, wherein though
at first he had much the better, yet by a wonderful and unexpected Fatality,
the fortune of the day turned, and the Rebels obtained the victory.

On the twenty-second of April 1645 he defeated Massey at Lidbury; on the
seventh of May, fetched off the King from Oxford, which Fairfax was about to
besiege; and on the one and thirtieth of the same month took Leicester by
assault.

In the year 1646, the Forces of the King his Uncle at Land being totally
defeated, he transported himself after the surrendry of Oxford into France, and
was afterward made Admiral of such Ships of War, as submitted to His present
Sacred Majesty, then Prince of Wales, to whom after diverse disasters at Sea,
and wonderful preservations, having been blockt up the most part of one Summer
in the Port of Kingsa^e by Popham, and another in that of Lisbon by Blake, and
having l^ his Brother the valiant Prince Mau^ about the Caribbe Islands by an
Hurricane, he returned to Paris, in the latter end of the year 1652, where now
almost the whole Royal Family of Great Britain were met together.

Departing thence with his Majesty in the year 1654, he went into Germany,
where partly at the Imperial Court of Vienna, and partly at Heidelbergh, the
chief Seat of his Brother the Prince Elector Palatine, he passed his time in
Princely Studies and Exercises till his Majesty's happy Restoration: after
which returning into England, he was in the year 1662 made a privy Councellor,
and in 1666, being joined Admiral with the late Duke of Albemarl, first attackt
the whole Dutch Squadron in so bold and resolute a manner, that he soon put
them to flight.

He enjoys a pension from his Majesty of four thousand pounds Sterling per
Annum, and the Constableship of Windsor Castle.

Of the rest of the Issue of Elizabeth late Queen of Bohemia
AFter Prince Rupert, the next Heirs to the Crown of Great Britain are three
French Ladies, Daughters to Prince Edward lately deceased, a younger Son of the
Queen of Bohemia. Of these the eldest is married to the Duke d' Enguien, eldest
Son to the Prince of Conde, and the second to John Frederick Duke of Brunswick
and Lunenburgh at Hanover. The Princess Dowager, Mother of these three Ladies,
is Sister to the late Queen of Poland, and Coheir to the last Duke of Nevers in
France.

These three Ladies have amongst them a Revenue of above twelve thousand pounds
Sterling per Annum.

Last of all is the Princess Sophia, youngest Daughter to the Queen of Bohemia,
whose eldest Sisters are deceased unmarried.

She was born at the Hague on the thirtieth of October 1630, and was in 1658
married to Ernest Auguste, Duke of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, Bishop of
Osnaburgh, by whom she has three Sons and a Daughter.

She is said to be one of the best Address, and most accomplished Ladies in
Europe.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and to be Sold by Christopher Hussy, at the Flower-de-Luce
in Little-Britain.
A Sure Guide to the Practical Surveyor, in two Parts. The First, Showing how
to Plot all manner of Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champain-Ground,
Wood-Lands, Mountains, and Dales, by the Semicircle, Plain Table, and Chain.
As also, How to find the Area, or Content thereof, with the manner of
Protracting, Reducing, and Dividing the same; and also how to enclose a Manor
lying in a common Field, with the drawing of a Perfect Draught or Map thereof,
and how to deck and beautify the same. And likewise how to convey Water from
any Springhead to any appointed place. The second. Showing how to take the
Ground-Plot of any City or Corporation: As also the Mensuration of Roads,
Highways, and Rivers, with the manner of making a MAP of any County or Kingdom.
The like never before extant. By John Holwell, Philomath.
The Glorious Lover. A Divine Poem, upon the Adorable Mystery of Sinners
Redemption. By B. K. Author of War with the Devil, Psalm 45.1. My Heart is
inditing a good matter. The History of the Court of the King of China. Out of
French. The young Anglers companion. Containing the whole Art of neat and clean
Angling. Wherein is taught the readiest way to take all Sorts of FISH, from the
Pike to the Minnow, together with their proper Baits, Haunts, and time of
Fishing for them, whether in Mere, Pond, or River. As also, The Method of
Fishing in Hackney-River, and the names of all the best Stands there; with the
manner of making all sorts of good Tackle, fit for any Water whatsoever. The
like never before in Print. By WILLIAM GILBERT, Gent.

