AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF Mr. Rogers's Three Years TRAVELS OVER England and
Wales.

GIVING A True and Exact Description of all the chiefest Cities, Towns and
Corporations in England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Twede.

TOGETHER With the Antiquities, and Places of Admiration, Cathedrals, Churches
of Note in any City, Town or Place in each County. The Gentleman
abovementioned having made it his whole Business (during the aforesaid time)
to Complete the same in his Traveling.

To which is Annexed a New Map of England and Wales, with the Adjacent parts,
containing all the Cities and Market Towns, bound in just before the Title.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by J. Moxon and B. Beardwell at the Sign of Atlas in
Warwick Lane, and in Westminster Hall right against the Parliament-Stairs, 1694.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT were a needless Undertaking to offer any Apology for the ensuing Treatise,
its own intrinsic Value being sufficient to raise it both above the reach of
all aspersing Cavillers, and at the same time to recommend it to every
judicious Peruser; but yet it will not be impertinent to give some few Hints,
wherein both its Usefulness and Excellency does consist.

Its Bulk is but small, yet the Matter contained large and extensive, as
comprehending concisely, but yet very conspicuously, an Account of the most
Remarkable Places in this our Native Country, intermixed with many other very
useful and diverting Occurrences: There are indeed voluminous Treatises of this
Nature already extant, which claim a just Praise in their kind, and some of a
smaller Size, that have their Usefulness also; but none, in my Judgment, so
well handled, so complete, and truly recommendable as this; for what they in
larger Volumes have done, you have here contracted into a small compass, but
yet so, as that there is nothing Material, or worthy to be known, omitted, and
what the lesser Tracts have passed over, is here fully inserted. Our Author
has spared no pains to oblige thee, (kind Reader) having spent Three whole
Years of his Life in this his Peregrination, now exposed to thy view: To say
nothing of his Person and Character, his Language is Elegant and Pithy, his
Descriptions lively and airy, his Historical Relations pertinent and
seasonable, and such a pleasing Variety, and engaging Divertisement throughout
the whole Series of the Story, as can do no less than excite in thee a kind of
a Longing-wish that thou had been present with him, and actually perticipated
of the same.

But what signifies what we have now premised, if Truth be not the Standard of
all, and in this regard we must not pretermit in Silence, what so eminently
distinguishes our Ingenious Author from most, if not all, that have gone before
him upon this Subject, in that he presents you here with nothing but his own
Ocular Observations, whereas others, confining themselves to their Studies,
have obtruded upon the World what they have taken upon the bare Credit of
those, who were, perhaps, more slothful than themselves.

In fine, Gentle Reader, Peruse, and Judge maturely, and when thou have so
done, I make no doubt of thy Approbation, and plenary Satisfaction, which will
not be a little grateful to

Thy Compatriot D. J.

A NEW MAPP OF ENGLAND and WALES With the Adjacent parts. Containing all the
Cities And Marcket Towns As also ye Roads Acording to J. Oglebey Esquire. etc.

LONDON Printed and sold by J. Moxon At the Atlas in Warwick Lane. and at his
Shop in Westminster Hall Right against ^ Parliament Stairs

lower half of map

An ACCOUNT OF Mr. R. Rogers's Three Years Travels OVER England and Wales.
FROM London, the Epitome of England it self, we took our Journey through
Middlesex, a County famous for its goodly Edifices, as well wisely Compacted
together upon the Banks of Thames; as likewise for diverse stately Palaces
dispersed in several Parts thereof. The first Town of Note we came to was
Colebrook, which takes its Name from the River Cole; a Town of great Antiquity,
and of a considerable length, and well stored with Inns: We stayed here a small
time, and so set forward to Maidenhead.

MAIDENHEAD is Eight Miles distance from Colebrook, and so we came into the
Confines of Barkshire. It is a County of near equal Length and Breadth; it was
thus Denominated from the Superstitious Adoration that was given to the
British Maid, being one of the Eleven Thousand, which by the Conduct of St.
Ursla, returning home from Rome were all Martyred at Cologne in Germany by the
Tyrant Attila, that most cruel Scourge to the Christians. It Is of no long Date
or standing; and it is certain, as I was credibly informed, That Julius Caesar
making an Inrode into this County did pass over the River not far from this
Place, and by the voluntary Submission of these People here, did soon complete
his Conquest amongst them.

Windsor.
In this County is Windsor. This Place was given away by Edward the Confessor
from the Crown to the Church of Westminster; but William the Conqueror taking a
very great Affection to it by reason of its pleasant Situation, made an
Exchange with the Abbot of Westminster for some other Lands in the room of
this, and so it returned to the Crown again. The Palace in which the King
resides when he comes down hither, is inferior to none for Sight and Pleasure
throughout all His Majesty's Dominions. In the front of it lies a pleasant
Valley, checquered with the various colors of Green and Red Verdant Meadows,
and fertile Tillage, melodious Woods, and the murmuring of the Noble River
Thames. Behind it is a pleasant Prospect of a delightful Forest, designed on
purpose by Nature for Sport and Recreation, whilst she so liberally stocks it
with numerous Herds of Deer, lurking amongst the shady. Thickets; and our Kings
and Nobles did very usually resort hither from the City of London, it being so
fine a Place of pleasure and delight. K. Edward the Third being born at this
Town, did much augment and strengthen the Castle there upon the Hill, which
Henry the First had before erected, fortifying the same with strong Walls and
Trenches, which are now to be seen. After K. Edward the Third had subdued both
the French and Scots, and took their Kings Captive, he Committed John, King of
France, and David, King of the Scots, for some time Prisoners to this Castle,
which is divided into two Partitions; in the first, which looks toward the
East, is the King's Palace, splendid and glorious; in the other, which is the
outward Partition, stands a stately Church, Dedicated by Edward the Third to
the Virgin Mary and St. George, but beautified and illustrated with most rare
and curious Work; K. Edward the Fourth lies enterred therein: But that which
makes it still more Holy and Venerable is, the Body of our Sacred Martyr K.
Charles the First, tha^ Royal Saint of ever Blessed Memory. From hence we w^nt
to Reading.

READING in this County is a Town of very good Note, and not inferior to any in
all that County. It is situated, as it were, on the side of a little Hill, with
a small ascent toward the Marketplace. It is very well watered by a good
River which runs along the one side of it, and has the Noble River of Thames,
which comes within a little distance, on the other side. It has a Mayor for
its chief Magistrate, and it is famous for a very great Market once a Week for
all Sorts of Grain. We stayed here but one Night, having a design to take a
farther view of this County by Wallingford, and so to

ABBINGTON, This is a fair Town in this County; the River Isis after it has
winded it self a long way about in a crooked Channel, makes its approach to
this Town. It is a large and populous Place, and receives its Denomination from
a famous Abbey which was here erected, although this Monastery did, for some
Years, flourish exceedingly, yet it was afterward Subverted by the fury of the
Danes; but through the Bounties and Munificence of King Edgar* was restored
again to its Primitive Splendour and Greatness, and by the Industry and Care of
the Norman Abbots, it grew to that pitch of Grandeur, and so exceeding Rich and
Wealthy, that it began to have an Esteem of it self beyond all Comparison, and
indeed the Ruins too be-speak it to have been a very glorious Structure: As for
the Town, though it had its chief Dependence from this Abbey, yet from the Year
1430, that one John, Surnamed St. Helena, built a strong Bridge of Stone over
its River, and so made a Through-fair and High Road through the Town, it began
to be populous, and much frequented, and ever since has been most deservedly
reputed the eminent, principle Town in this County. The Inhabitants are great
Maulsters, and Barley is the great Commodity of the Market. The Magistrates, by
their Vigilance and Care, do keep up this Corporation in great Honor and
Request, and the Mayor and Aldermen are very Circumspect in the discharge of
their Offices; and for the more great and weighty Matters which are above their
Sphere, the Judges, when they come their Circuit, and keep the Assizes here for
the County, do ease them of that trouble, by giving a final Determination of
all.

FARRINGDON was the next Town of Note we went to in this County, which though
it be situated upon a stony Soil, yet it is now as famous for its great Market,
as it was once Renowned for its Impregnable Fortress, which Robert, Earl of
Gloucester, built here against King Stephen, which the King though with the
loss of a great number of Soldiers, at last by his continual Assaults and
Batteries took and utterly demolished.

But one thing is to be observed in this County; That it is very pleasant and
fertile, watered with the River Isis, adorned with woody Hills and thick
Groves, and in its Eastern parts thereof with fertile Valleys, and in the
Western part, being called The Vale of White Horse, is extremely delightful,
and Nature compensates the Barrenness of the Soil in one place, by her manifold
Gifts she bestows upon it in another.

NEWBURY was the next place we went to. It Is a Town of very good Note, and of a
considerable largeness, governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and has a very
commodious Market-house, which is not much inferior to any in the County. The
Town is situated in a pleasant Valley, and watered by a very good River, called
Newbury River, which runs through one part of the Town near the Market-house;
and in the other part of it is a very find Rivelet, which runs from one end of
the Town to the other, and is mighty necessary for all the Inhabitants. We made
no long stay here, but went to Marlborough in Wiltshire, of which hereafter.

Wiltshire.
MARLBOROUGH is a Town of an indifferent largeness, and is Ruled by a Mayor and
Aldermen. The Buildings of this Town, and the Marketplace, are not much
inferior to any Town in England; but that which is most remarkable, and to be
admired at is, a Mount belonging to the Duke of Summerset, the like is not in
England. The Mount it self is made round, with a Quickset Hedge which is all
entire, and goes several times round about, the Mount rising with a very small
Ascent till it comes up to the top; within this Hedge is a very plain Path, or
Walk, and the ground seems to be so even, that you cannot well perceive the
rise of it till you are at the top, which is of a very great height, and of a
large circumference, but yet as you go down you may easily perceive the ground
fall much. The Gardner there told us, That it is a Mile from the bottom up to
the top, and go the Pathway which leads up to it. On the top of the Mount, is
a very fine level piece of Ground, planted with several sorts of Fruit Trees;
there stands likewise on the top, a very large leaden Cestern, of about 12 foot
square, and 4 foot deep, and is replenished with Water by a leaden Pipe, which
comes from a Spring along the Path that leads up to the top. On the one side of
this Mount is a very commodious Wilderness, and on the other a fine Garden; in
a word, this Mount is the most to be admired, and must have the Respect of all
Travelers, to be the greatest piece of Artificial Workmanship in our own
Nation. We stayed here but one Night, and went to take a farther View of this
County, in which there are many things very observable. About two Miles out of
this Town is a great Down, called Marlborough Downs, where there is an
exceeding Curiosity of Nature's workmanship, it is a huge number of Massy
Stones, they are called by the Name of The Gray Wethers, and show to your
sight, at a distance, like a great number of Sheep, and some of them higher;
but for the great number of them, and containing such a vast distance of Land,
to be all in one and the like posture. It is a large Plain, or Valley, between
two Hills where they stand, and is in breadth almost a Mile, and about six
Miles in length, as we were informed, undoubtedly it has as much need to be
mentioned, as any thing in the Kingdom. Having made some Observations here, we
went to take some account of Stonehenge in this County, of which I shall give
you a short Relation.

STONEHENGE. This place contains in it, within the circumference of three
Hundred foot, a rude and indigested Mass of vast large Stones, rough, and of a
gray color, 25 Foot in length, 10 in breadth, and 8 in thickness; they look as
if they were hewn square, and are joined two and two together, and every
couple has a third Stone lying across, which is fastened by Tennants that
enter into Mortesses, not closed with any Mortar. It appears as if they had
been set in three Ranks going round, as Circles, one within another, whereof
the uttermost and largest is in compass about 300 Foot, but the other Ranks are
decayed, and some of them being fallen down to the ground, it is very difficult to
reckon how many there are; likewise it seems very strange, how such immense
Bulks should happen here, where there is no Stones of any small demension
within the Neighborhood: Whereupon some are of an Opinion, That they are not
purely natural, or had their growth in this place. It Is now generally credited
and believed, that they were a Monument set up by Aurelius Ambrose, in
Remembrance of the Britains that were Slain and Buried there, in the Reign of
Vortiger, at a Banquet and Communication of Hengist, which the Saxons and
British Chronicles testify, That whereas the Saxons about the Year of our
Lord 450. had slain Four hundred and eighty of the British Nobility by
Treachery, under a Color of a Parley and Treaty; this Aurelius Ambrose being
then King of the Britains, desirous to continue their Memory, as well as the
Infamy of his base and treacherous Enemies, caused these Stones to be set up in
the very place of their Death and Burial, the which Stones had been first
brought out of Africa into Ireland, and there placed on Mount Killare, and from
thence, by the Art and Magic of Merlina, a renowned Magician in that Age, were
at length conveyed to this place upon this very Occasion. Others think, that
the Britains did Erect this, as a Monument for Ambrosius himself, to
perpetuate his glorious Name to Posterity, who died afterward upon this place
by the Sword, in the Answer of their Quarrel, and Vindication of their
Liberties; however certain it is, that there are thereabouts certain little
Hills, or Banks, under which there are sometimes found Bones of tall, gigantick
Men, and pieces of Armor; and not far from hence, remains still some of the
Ruins of an old kind of Fortress, which the Romans, as it is probable, did
raise for themselves, during their Possession of these our Territories, etc.

From hence we went to Wilton-House, belonging to the Earl of Pembrook. It is
situated in a pleasant Valley, and has the Town of Wilton on the one side of
it, and a spacious Park on the other side, with delightful Gardens and Meadows
on the other sides, and a fine River running through the Gardens. In this House
are excellent Rooms, and great variety of Pictures, and in the Gardens are
undoubtedly the most curious Waterworks that are in all England. We did not
tarry long here, but went away to Salisbury, of which I shall inform you as
briefly as I can.

Leaving Wilton-House we rode to Salisbury, and in our way beheld the place
where formerly old Wilton, the Metropolis of this County, stood, called Willey.
It Is situated, says Cambden, where the two Rivers Willeybrook and Alderbourne
meet; and here it was that Egbert, King of the West Saxons, in the Year of our
Lord 821, fought the second Battle against the Mercians, so bloody on both
sides, that the River Avon was all over dyed red with the Blood of the slain;
and in the Year 871, Alfred having maintained a long Fight against the Danes,
and upon the first Onset had success, but was at last quite routed, his Forces
defeated, and himself forced to flee away to preserve his life. In the Saxons
reign it flourished mightily, and Edgar built there a Nunnery, and made his
Daughter Editha Lady Governess thereof; afterward being long exposed to the
fury of the Danes, who were its Mortal Enemies, and deserted the Bishops of
Salisbury, who were at first its Supporters, it went to decay, and almost
returned again on a sudden into its first Principle of Nothing; and so old
Salisbury then, and since new Salisbury which has sprang from that, have quite
extinguished its Primitive Luster and Glory. Old Salisbury was situated upon a
Hill, exposed much to Winds and Storms, very dry, barren and uncomfortable* by
reason of the great Defect of Water throughout the whole City; it was well
fortified, as appears by some ancient pieces o^ Walls which are there still to
be seen. The Saxons, in the Year 553, first Sacked it, and took it, and in the
Reign of Edward the Second, Osmund, Bishop of Sherbourne, Translated the Sea
hither, and built a Cathedral Church, though the Danes not long after, having
took and burnt the City, that likewise underwent the same fatal Calamity, and
was levelled with the ground, till both of them were raised again in William
the Conqueror's time; for after that he had made his Progress throughout all
his Kingdom of England, he at last Summoned all the Three Orders of the Nation
to come hither, and here to take their Oaths of Allegiance to him: But
afterward in the Reign of Richard the First, the Citizens being oppressed by
the Insolence of the Soldiers, which then kept Garrison, and was in great want
for Water, resolved to free themselves from these Burdens, by Transplanting
themselves into another Soil, which they unanimously agreed upon, and seated
themselves about a Mile from this place in a more pleasant Valley, where the
flowery Meads, and Chrystial-stream'd Rivers, gave them a more hearty Welcome,
and far better Entertainment than before they were acquainted withal. After a
new Colony was Transplanted hither, Richard Pore, first Bishop of Chichester,
then of Salisbury, afterward of Durham, did likewise Transplant the Cathedral
from the barren, dry place in which it was erected near to the old Castle of
the Earls of Salisbury, and built it in a more plentiful Soil; this most pious
Prelate, for he did not only Transplant it, but (by the Advice and Contrivance
of the most excellent and ingenious Artificers, not only Natives, but
Foreigners, whom he drew hither by his large Rewards) he raised it to that
Splender and Magnificence, that now it matches with the staliest of Structures,
for the rare Workmanship thereof throughout the Nation. The Steeple is built in
the form of a Pyramid very high, and as the Pole Star directs the Pilot at Sea,
so does this Spire direct the wandering Traveller over the Plain, discovering
its lofty head at the distance of 20 Miles, as we were credibly informed; but
the admirableness of the Structure consists in this, That it has as many
Pillars as there are Hours in the Year, and these not close but you may see the
Entertices betwixt them, and shake those that are of the lesser size, and there
is as many Windows as there are Days in the Year, and these very artificially
Adorned, and curiously Painted to admiration; and there is likewise as many
Doors as there is Weeks in the Year, and as many Chapels as Months. Thus did
this great Prelate, which by augmenting it, augment his own Fame, and even
Cannoniz himself: And as the Church was then re-edified, so was the City much
enlarged too by the Citizens, and for the more sweetness, as well as
cleanliness of their Habitations, they made several Channels and Rivolets in
the midst of their Streets very commodious and beneficial to them. Thus, by
degrees, Old Salisbury is vanished away, and very little to be seen in it, but
the Ruins and old Walls of the Earl's Castle, and one small Dwelling House, and
New Salisbury is become glorious and aimable, resorted to, and frequented and
admired by Persons of all Qualities and Degrees; for its Houses are stately,
its Churches magnificent, its Streets clean, its Rivers pleasant and well
stored with Fish, its Gardens delightful and very fragrant, and nothing wanting
in it to please either the Eye or the Palate; it is governed by a Mayor and
Aldermen. Thus have I given you a brief Account of Wiltshire, I could have
wrote much more, for there are many other things very observable in this
County, especially for Travelers to take notice of, which is too tedious here
to relate.

Summersetshire.
The first Place of Note we came to in this County was Wells, the chief City of
the Shire, and receives its Denomination from the variety of fresh and wholesome
Springs which bubble up about it in great abundance. The Houses therein are
well contrived, and built of Stone, the Government safe and regular, but the
chief Ornament hereof is the Cathedral, built by King Ina in honor to St.
Andrew; the Church has been enriched with large Revenues by religious
Benefactors; it was made a Bishop's See in the Reign of King Edward the Second,
and Eadulphus was Constituted the first Bishop here in the Reign of William
Rufus, and in the Year 1092, John, a Turon born, being elected Bishop, united
that of Bath with this; and hence it comes to pass, that he that is Bishop of
this See, is called Bishop of Bath and Wells. This Church underwent the same
Calamities that other religious Places did in this Kingdom, and took away the
Revenues annexed to it; it is a magnificent Structure, and the Quire of it
yields to none for stateliness; if we consider the artificial Bosses very
delicately gilded which adorn it above, or the curious Columns which uphold it
below, or the Bishop's Seat of Marble, set out with most glorious
Embellishments, supported with rich Pillars, and with its towering Piramids,
being the Head and Ornament in a more especial manner of the Quire, as he is of
the Church; to this I may add the variety of carved Images, which almost
environ the Church on the out side, containing the History of the Old
Testament, and the curious Architecture of the Chapter House, supported only by
one large Column which stands in the middle of it. Near unto the Church is the
Bishop's Palace of great Grandeur, which becomes a Reverend Father of the
Church to be seated ed in. But the remarkablest, and which cannot but have the
respect of all Travelers to be the most admirable piece of Nature's
Workmanship in our Kingdom, is a Place called Ochy-hole, two Miles from this
City: It Is a Cave under a very high Rock, situated amongst the Mendippe-hills,
of which I shall endeavor to give a Description as briefly as I can.

OCHY-HOLE. After that we had, with some difficulty, climbed up to the top of a
Rock, we went along the Brow of a Hill till we came to the Mouth of the Cave,
where opening a Door that gave entrance, and lighting 24 Candles of 6 in the
Pound, which we provided for that purpose, we ventured in; being got within it,
we found the Cave very hollow, and so dark, that the Candles there scarce
burning so bright, though there were 24, as two does ordinary in the Night in
one of our largest Rooms; we thought certainly we had been come into the
Confines of the Infernal Regions, or some such dismal Place, and began to be
afraid to visit it, viz. That although we entered in frolicksome and merry,
yet we might return out of it Sad and Pensive, and never more be seen to Laugh
whilst we lived in the World; such dreadful Apprehensions seized upon some of
us; and indeed we had cause to fear some such Operations might have proceeded
from this, as well as the other, since both were equally uncomfortable, by
reason of our deprivation from the least glimmerings of light, and consequently
had the same Circumstances to beget both Horror and Amazement: however we
plucked up our Spirits, and crept in one after another as fast as we could
conveniently: The Cave as we went a long was parted into several kinds of
Rooms, the Names whereof our Guides informed us: The first was the Kitchen, and
at the Door sticks out a large Mass of the Rock, which, they tell us, was the
Porter's head, formerly the Keeper of this Cave; it bears the resemblance of a
Head, and by that lies a Stone which they call The Tombstone, under which, the
Report is, That his Body lies Enterred, and his Dogherd by him in the same
substance; yet their Transformations are not so strange and wonderful, being
something too fabulous to be given Credit to, as the variety which the Rock
affords into which they are incorporated, part of it glistering like Silver,
and part like Diamonds, and both appear very pleasant to the Eye: A little
further on the right hand is another piece of the Rock that bears the
resemblance of a Bell, and on the left hand a Vessel, which they term a But, in
which the Beer of an old Sorceress, (Cousin to the famous Circe, Lady Governess
of this dismal Cave,) used to be worked in; it is a hollow Cestern of a
considerable depth always filled with Water, and now and then flowing over, to
which the drops of Water which continually trickle down from the top of the
Rock add every moment fresh supplies; hard by this stands another Vessel of
hers, in which, they say, she made her Malt, they call it the East Hurdle,
it is likewise hollow, and of a pretty depth. Now appears unto your view the old
Witch her self, heating of her Furnace which seems black and sooty; it seems to
be Alablaster, by reason of its whiteness, though it is most probable to be the
product of Nature, and not of Art, because the place is very unfit and very
unsuitable for any Artist to exercise his Skill in, it being very often so low,
that it is impossible here and there for any one to stand upright in it; and
therefore it was that we were forced frequently to stoop, and buckle almost
double for fear of hiting our Heads against the Rock, until we came to some
Steps which we were to descend, and the Defect thereto was very tedious and
affrightful, for on the right hand the Rock hung down over us extreme low and
sloping, and on the left hand a great Rivolet which runs along through the
Cave, being pretty deep, and making a loud noise in its gliding, yet at length
we came sweating into another Room which is called The Hall, and here, at first
sight, we were entertained with as great a Rarity as Nature has in all her
Storehouses, it is a Cestern almost square, about six Foot each way, and of a
considerable depth, always brimful of Water, supplied by the Drops which falls
from above; but that which is to be admired in it is this, though the Water be
constantly droping, and is continually brimful, yet it never runs over, as our
Guides told us. Round about this Hall hangs four Stones resembling four
Fletches of Bacon, for the outside is blackish and the inside white; in this
place the Daughter of the old Sorceress had took up her Residence, and appears
to your eye like the Statue of a Woman that is great with Child; she is of a
different color from her Mother, being much more dusky than she is: But
nothing more pretty to behold here than those which they call The Organ Pipes
placed upon one side of the Rock, and are very like to those we have in our
Churches, some being of bigger and some of lesser Dimensions, in the middle of
a good reasonable thickness though at the ends sharp and slender. After some
more Difficulties in our Passage, and no less dangerous than before, we came
into another part of the Cave more strange than any we had yet seen. It Is a
place they call the Dancing Room, so well Contrived, and so curiously set
forth, that Nature has wrought here what Art could never do or comprehend,
both above and below; if you look up, the variety of Colors which are there to
be seen by the light of the Candles, and the checquered Configurations of the
Rock, which is now very high above your head; will both feast your Eyes and
refresh your Body, which by that time is sufficiently wearied by the
tediousness, as well as the trouble of the Passage; for there is so great a
glistering, such a Luster as it were of Silver and precious Stones round about
you, that you would be ready to mistake your self, and think that you were in
the Palace of some great Monarch of the Earth, and not in such a dismal Cave;
and if you look down, there you will find no stony, hard, ruggy Tract to
perplex you, but a fine, even, sandy Flower, and indeed beyond expectation,
that we who had beheld such craggy Stones and dangerous Passages should at last
arrive in so spacious and delightful a place; they told us, That it was very
usual for Gentlemen and Ladies, that lived thereabouts, to bring Music and
Dance here, the Music making a more sweeter Melody than ordinary; we paused
and breathed a little here, delighting our selves as well with it, as also with
the resemblance of a Chimney, which we took really to be one, it being of that
fashion, and having in it a kind of black moist Matter, which, if you touch it,
will stick to your fingers, and black them like Soot, and yet no fire was ever
known to be there: But we were not as yet satisfied, though we were above 300
Yards under the Ground, and in a most horrid Dungeon, but went still farther to
a place termed The Seller, that is curiously vaulted, and it is very usual to
carry Bottles of Wine and drink there upon a stone Table which is formed in it
of natural Stone; in this place lies also a great Stone which they call The
Great Gun, the nature of it is this, take it but up in your hands, and let it
fall down to the ground, and a great Gun cannot give a louder Report. We tried
the Experiment thrice, but we thought the very Rock we were under would have
rent in pieces about our Ears, yet they that were half way the Cave, or at the
Mouth of it, heard nothing of any noise at all; this we found experimentally
true, for one of the Persons that accompanied us in our Journey, staying a
little distance in the Cave, being unwilling to venture any farther, assured us
when we came back, that he had not heard any noise at all; we ventured a little
farther, and at the end of the Celler, when we had gone down some few Steps, we
found a great Rivolet several Yards deep, but as clear as Chrystial, and
pleasant to the Taste, but very cold; it gave a Period to our Journey. It runs
under ground, though its Head from whence it first springs is like that of the
River Nilus in Egypt, which is not yet, or at least very difficult to be
discovered, conveying it self out of this Cave, it sets 30 Mills on work after
it comes into the adjacent County, as we were informed. When we had got thus
far, and almost a Mile under ground, as our Guides told us, we began to think
how we should return and get out safe, being afraid to find the same difficulty
and trouble we had encountered with in our Entrance; for though the Place was
somewhat resembling an Infernal Abbyss, and our Passage into it proved so
troublesome and irksome, yet we came back without any toil, or rather with
great facility and pleasure, notwithstanding it is impossible to find out the
way without a Guide, there being so many Turnings and Windings; nor could the
Guides themselves, without a light, find the way out of this forlorn place,
whereby they steer their Course: However, at last, we made a shift to creep up
again to the top of the Rock, just as merry Lucian tells us old Menippus did
out of a hole in Lebadia, after he returned from Hell, and had ended the
Discourses with the Ghosts below. Thus have I given you a small Relation of
this wonderful Rarerity.

GLASTENBURY lies four Miles from Wells, a Place of great Antiquity, as any
whatsoever in the Kingdom; for the Original thereof is deducted from Joseph of
Arimathea, who, together with Mary Magdalen, Lazarus and Martha, was sent
hither by St. Philip the Apostle of the Gauls, to preach the Gospel about 63
Years after Christ, and were buried here themselves, upon which account it was,
in process of time, very much enlarged by pious Princes, King Ina who was the
first here, that caused his Subjects to pay Peter Pence to Rome, rebuilt the
Abbey which was then gone much to decay; to which he added a very fine and
stately Church, dedicated to Christ, S. Peter, and S. Paul; and that which is
very remarkable here, is the Kitchen of the Abbots, being 20 foot high, built
in the form of a Pyramid of pure Stone, and divided into four Angles or
Corners; to each of which were allotted a Window and a Chimney: But all of them
went to rack, and were razed to the ground, and there is nothing left now but
the Ruins to proclaim its former Glory and Magnificence; and to reckon up all
the Kings of the West Saxons that were buried here would be too tedious.

The Walnut-Tree and Holy Hawthorn. But to come nearer to our own days, here
was something not many years since very notable and strange: The Walnut-Tree in
the holy Churchyard, that did never put out any Leaves before S. Barnabas day,
and upon that very day grew rank and full of Leaves; and the Hawthorn in Wiral
Park, that always on Christmas Day sprouted forth as if in May, both deserve
Credit, as well as Admiration: For the truth of both these we were credibly
informed of diverse Persons Inhabitants of this Place; and that these Trees,
through the Malice and Fury of some Person in the late Wars, were cut down and
destroyed: But many things here are very observable, which I have not room to
insert.

BATH. It lying low and all sides surrounded with Hills, the Town is well
watered with Springs, though some of them are sulphurous and bad to the Taste;
environed with a Wall, very commodious for its Marketplace, and handsomely
adorned with three Churches; one whereof is very large and spacious, built in
the form of a Cathedral; the Steeple is apiece, and has a Ring of very
tunable Bells, and a Quire with very sweet Organs; and in it are erected
several ancient and stately Monuments of Persons of Quality, and Bishops of
this See, who have been noble Benefactors to it; it is governed by a Mayor and
Aldermen, and the Assizes are generally kept there in the Summer time: But that
which is most remarkable here, and causes a Concourse in the Summer not only
of the Nobility and Gentry, but of the Commonalty too, from all parts of the
Nation hither, are the Baths, which are not inferior to any that ever Italy or
France could glory in; they have without question cured many weak and feeble
Limbs, and do cure diverse Diseases which are incident and destructive to Humane
Nature; by causing Men to sweat either more or less, proportionably to their
Distempers. Who they were that first found them out is very uncertain, whether
Bleyden alias Bladud the Son of Rudhudibras the Magician, or Julius Coesar, I
shall not undertake to determine the Controversy: However they are of very
great Antiquity, and it is many hundred years since their powerful Virtues were
first discovered, though they are all different in their Nature, as well as
their Operation; as the learned Dr. Stubbs by diverse Experiments assures us.
The Baths are in number six; the King and Queens Baths, the Cross Bath, the Hot
Bath, the Leper's Bath, and the Horse: That which is the Chief is the Cross
Bath, the Water whereof being more mild than the other, the Orders are very
strict and regular. And Persons of the greatest Quality of the Nation choose to
bath themselves here, and to drink the Water thereof; hard by this stands the
Hot Bath, not much frequented save by those who having quite lost the Use of
their Limbs, come hither to seek remedy: Not far from this is that they call
the Leper's Bath, which is believed to be very efficacious against that
spreading Disease: And an Hospital, or Spittle, built by Reginald Bishop of
Bath, for the Use and Benefit of poor, aged, decrepid People. About the middle
of the Town, near to the great Church are the King and Queens Baths, the Water
of the one flowing into the other; and the difference is, that the King's Bath
is large, and the Queens lesser in circumference; and I was credibly informed,
that there has been found here an ancient Statue of Hercules, amongst other
great Monuments of Antiquity, holding a Serpent in his hand; which was found in
the Ruins of a famous Temple, that once stood here, near this place: And it
might be thought very convenient, as well as reasonable, that Hercules, who
exposed himself to such difficulties and manifold dangers, and underwent such
hard and unsupportable Labors, should now and then ease and refresh his weary
Limbs by such Purgations as the Baths could afford him. In this, and other
Baths, hang diverse Crutches of lame and decrepit Persons, which they left
behind them as Trophies of their Recovery, being perfectly cured of their
Lameness and Infirmity, and restored again to their former Health and Strength.
Last of all, that which is called the Horse Bath, is very effectual for the
Cure of lame and foundred Horses, and the removal of some other Distempers.
Thus have I given a short account of the Bath, etc. Many things there are more
in this County very observable for all Travelers to take notice of, which I
think too tedious to relate.

Bristol.
The next Place we went to in these Parts was Bristol, which is undoubtedly the
Second City of England, which if we consider the Stateliness of the Buildings;
or its Natural, or Artificial Fortifications; the Commodiousness of its
Harbors, and its most pleasant Situation betwixt the two Rivers of Avon and
From; its lofty Churches, and its stately Palaces; the great Concourse of
Foreigners, as well as the great Number of Natives, Citizens: Upon which
account, no Wonder if both the Counties of Somerset and Gloucester do contend
which of them may be most glorious and happy, in its Superiority over them; and
yet neither of them can attain to that Honor, it being both City and County of
itself, and having particular Privileges, Immunities, and Laws of its own: It Is
governed by a Mayor and two Sheriffs, twelve Aldermen, with other Ministers and
Officers befitting its dignity; it is environed with a double Wall, and adorned
with two navigable Rivers, Avon at Spring-Tides is 11 or 12 Fathom deep, and
From; over which stands a Bridge beautified with curious Edifices, consisting
of four large Arches: It is very convenient for the Ships and great Vessels to
anchor in, and has a Key in it very commodious for the exporting and importing
of Goods, out or into the Merchants Houses: This returns back into the River
Avon; and so both by their mutual Union enrich this City, and augment its
Happiness At what time it was first built is very hard to determine, but it
seems to have been of latter years, because we find it no where spoken of by
Historians in the times of the Danes, when they made their Invade into this
Nation: And it is supposed to take its rise in the Declination of the Saxon
Empire, at the time when Harold is said to have sailed from Bristol, with a
great Navy, into Wales; which was about 213 years before our Savior's
Incarnation. Robert, Bishop of Constance, made choice of this place first to
begin his War in, which he designed against William Rufus; and did encompass it
with the inner Wall, as some conjecture, part of which in some places is still
to be seen; and from that time it has received great Enlargment, and by
degrees is risen to that we now behold it in: As its Houses are fair, and its
Streets clear; so are its Gates strong and its Churches glorious, consisting of
nineteen Parish-Churches, whereof that which is the Cathedral, and
Mother Church, dedicated to S. Austin, and endowed by King Henry the 8th. with
Revenues for a Bishop's See; yet notwithstanding this, the Church of Ratcliff
in the Suburbs of this City is a more noble Structure, being curiously Arched,
and made a stately Fabric all of pure Stone, without any Addition of Beams, or
Rafters of Timber, no not one Stick to be found throughout the whole Building;
the Steeple is four square, and of a great height, but most artificially carved
with diverse Sculptures, all at the cost and charges of one Mr. Cannius a
Merchant of this City about 108 years since, who in the erecting this famous
piece of Architecture, employed at his own Expense 800 Laborers and
Artificers, besides Masons and Carpenters to the number 300, in all 1100, for 2
years together; until the Work was totally completed; and in it his Monument
does stand in Marble: May his Memory be more lasting, than that Marble which is
set to preserve it; and his Name more durable than any Monument, and remain to
succeeding Generations.

S. Vincent's Rocks. On the Northern side of this City are several high and
craggy Rocks, by which the River Avon gently glides along, till it returns back
again into the Severn; one of the chief whereof is called S. Vincent's Rock,
which has great plenty of pellucid Stones, commonly called Bristol-stones; the
learned Mr. Cambden has observed, that their Pellucidness is beyond that of
the Diamond we receive from the Indies; only the Hardness of the latter gives
them the pre-eminence; and yet certainly Nature never made greater
demonstrations of her Art, having made some of these Stones as smooth as the
most expert Jeweller could have done, as round and sharp, as broad above and
small beneath, as the greatest Artist could have effected; shaping some of them
with four, some of them with six Angles apiece, like the Stones which we
usually set in Rings. To make us still the more admire her Perfections, she
has not given them all one color, but some of them are like Crystal, clear;
and some of a more ruddy color, and sanguine complexion, according to the
nature of the Soil; she causes her Productions not to be unlike their great
Parent.

The Hot Well. There is one thing still here very remarkable, and that is the
Hot Well, which is just at the bottom of this Rock, and at the very brink of
the River Avon; yet it still retains its natural Head, and by its constant
Ebullitions purges away all the Scum and saltish froth it might have
contracted by the Sea; the Water is exceeding wholesome, and very good to purge
away ill Humors, and purify the Blood; and I was there credibly informed that
it has wrought great Cures, and is much frequented and resorted to by several
sorts of People.

Devonshire.
The next County we went to in these Parts, was Devonshire, where we made but
little Stay: The Air is sharp and wholesome, the Soil hilly and woody; and they
use here, as they do likewise in Cornwall, Sea-Sand to mend and enrich their
Land. The chief Commodities of this County are, Wool, Kerseys, Seafish, and
Sea-Fowl; and the West of it is well stored with Tin Mines, and Loadstones have
been found upon Dartmore Rocks of good value and virtue, so at other places in
this County are found Mines of Lead, and some Veins of Silver.

Upon Exmore Forest are such huge Stones, and placed confusedly as they are
upon Salisbury Plain, and one of them has Danish Letters upon it directing
Passengers that way. At Hubblestow in this County was a Battle fought by the
Danes, where their Banner called Reafan, in which they reposed all their
confidence, of Victory and Success, was notwithstanding taken, and Hubba their
General slain.

The People of this County are strong; and well made, and as they have a
peculiar sort of quaking Pudding, which they call Whitepots, so the Women have
a peculiar kind of Garment, which they wear upon their Shoulders, called
Whittles; they are of diverse Colors made like Mantles, with Fringes about the
Edges, without which the common sort of People never ride to Market, nor appear
in public.

In diverse places of this County the ways are so rocky and narrow, that it is
not possible for Wagons to pass, so that the Country People are forced in
Harvest time to carry home their Corn upon Horses in certain Crooks made for
that purpose, which creates no small Toil and Labor to them.

EXETER is the principal City in this Province, situated upon the Eastward by
the Banks of the River Ex, or Ise, upon a little Hill, gently arising with an
easy Ascent to a pretty height, the Pendant whereof lies East and West,
environed about with Ditches and very strong Walls, having many Turrets orderly
interposed, and six Gates which gives entrance into the City, and contains
about a Mile and half in circumference; the Suburbs branch forth a great way on
each side; the Streets are broad, kept clean and well paved; the Houses are as
gay within as trim without; there are Seventeen Parish-Churches, and in the
very highest part of the City near the East Gate is a Castle, formerly the Seat
of the West Saxon Kings, and afterward the Earls of Cornwall, which Baldwin de
Redures the Governor holding out against King Stephen, was by scarcity of
Provisions forced to Surrender, and after the surrendry, he, with his whole
Family was banished that Kingdom. Just without the East Gate are two pleasant
Walks call Southney and Northney, beset on both sides with Rows of high Trees,
which being mounted up aloft afford a curious Prospect to Topesham, the place
where all the Ships and Vessels of the Citizens lie at Anchor, from whence
(since the River was stopped up by certain Dams or Wears that Edward Courtney,
Earl of Devonshire, for some Distaste that he had took from the City, caused
here to be made) all their Goods and Commodities are brought home by Land. In
the same quarter of the City stands the Cathedral founded by King Athelstan in
honor to St. Peter, and Edward the Confessor made it the Bishop's See of
Cornwall and Kirton, and Constituted the first Bishop thereof, who Successors
augmented it greatly both in Edifices and Revenues, and William, the Ninth
Bishop after him, when the Monks were displanted brought in a Dean and Four and
Twenty Prebendaries, to which has been added, in our times, four Archdeacons.
In the Church are Six private Chapels, and a Library very handsomely built and
finished by a Physician of this City; the Quire is curiously beautified and
adorned, especially with Organs, whose Pipes, though they are of a larger size
than any which ever we beheld in any Cathedral besides, yet the Music is
extremely pleasing and melodious to the Ear. All which Additions has been
erected since the Return of K. Charles II.

On the West side of this City runs the River, over which is built a strong
Stone Bridge with four Arches, and about the middle of the City is the
Town Hall, where the Assizes and Sessions are held for the City, it being both
City and County of it self. It Is governed by a Mayor, two Sheriffs, four and
twenty Aldermen, a Recorder and Town Clerk, with other Officers befitting the
Grandeur of so honorable a Place.

Plymouth.
So called from the River Plime which runs along by it, where is one of the
largest and most securest Haven in England, for before the very Mouth of it
lies St. Nicholas Island, strongly fortified both by Art and Nature, and in the
Haven are Fortifications laid on both sides for the safe Riding of Ships, and
the annoyance to Enemies. One the one side is Mount Batton, in which is a
strong Garrison, having twelve Guns mounted upon its Platforms, and on the
other side the Citadel which may, for Strength, compare with most Places in
the Nation, commanding both the Sea and Town at Pleasure; without the Walls of
the Citadel runs a Trench, out of which was dug a certain kind of Marble
with which they were built, being Eleven Foot thick at the bottom, and Seven at
the top, and three quarters of a Mile in compass; upon the Walls are placed
diverse Watch-Towers, and each of them are adorned with a round Ball upon the
top, so curiously gilded and painted with the King's Arms, that they make a
very great glistering show at a distance; and round about are placed between
two and three hundred Pieces of Ordnance. There are two Gates, and as many
Draw-Bridges which gives entrance into the Castle, and upon the Front are
admirably carved the Arms of his Majesty, by which is placed his Royal Statue,
with the Arms of the Earl of Bath who is Governor hereof; within the Walls is
the Governor's house, and diverse Appartments for Soldiers, a Magazine for
Ammunition, and a Storehouse for Provisions: For the Strength and
Conveniences of this Fortress, which is almost impregnable, the Town is much
obliged to the excellent Ingenuity of Monsieur Bernard de Gum, his Majesty's
Engineer.

The Commodiousness of the Harbor oftentimes causes a Fleet of Ships to ride
here; it is now so replenished with Mariners, frequented by Merchants, enriched
by Traffic, that it seems to outvey some great Cities of this Kingdom. It is
Governed by a Mayor, Aldermen and Common Counsel, who have a stately Guild Hall
for their more solemn Conventions, and is adorned with two handsome Churches.

Cornwall.
This place is hilly; one cause of a very temperate heat of the Summer, and the
lateness of Harvest, as its Situation is the cause of the gentleness of the
Winter. Its Hills are parted with short and narrow Valleys, the Earth is but
shallow, underneath is Rocks and Shelves, so that it is hard to be Tilled, and
apt to be parched by a dry Summer. The middle of the Shire lies open, the Earth
being of a blackish color, and bears Heath and Spirry-grass; there is but
little Meadow-ground, but store of Pasture for Cattle and Sheep, and plenty of
Corn-ground.

They have a Stone called here a Moor-stone, found upon Moors and waste
Ground, which serves them instead of Freestone for Windows, Doors and
Chimnies, it is white with certain glimmering Sparkles; they have likewise a
Stone dug out of the Sea-cliffs of the color of a gray Marble, and another
as black as Jet, and out of the Inland Queries they dig Freestone; nor must we
omit what is here observed of some Stones, That the Sea works the Pebbles upon
the shore, by the frequent rolling of the Waves, into a kind of roundness.

They have a Slate of three sorts, Blew, Sage-leaf colored and Gray, which
last is the worst, and all these Slates are commonly found under another kind
of Slate that they Wall with when the depth has brought the Workmen to the
Water. They also make Lime of a kind of Marble-stone by burning it. There are
Copper Mines in sundry places of this County, and the Ore is sometimes shipped
off to be refined in Wales: and though Cicero will have none in Britain, yet
Silver has been found in this County in the time of Edward the First and
Third, who reaped good profit by it: Nay Tinners do find little quantities of
Gold, and sometimes Silver amongst the Tin Ore* as I was informed; but for the
generality the Metal that the Earth abounds with in this County is Tin.

Richard, Earl of Cornwall, Brother to King Henry the Third, was the first that
began to make Ordinances for these Tin works, and afterward Edmund his Son
granted a Charter and certain Liberties, and prescribed withal certain Laws
concerning the same, which he ratified or strengthened under his Seal, and
imposed a Rent, or Tribute upon Tin to be paid unto the Earls; these Liberties,
Privileges and Laws King Edward the Third afterward confirmed and augmented.

In some places on the Sea Coasts there are Pearls found that breed in big
Oisters and Musles, yet though they are great they are not good; here are also
Aget and white Coral, as they say, etc. In the West Parts of Cornwall there are
Bents growing on Sandy Fields, which are knit from over the head in narrow
breadths, after a strange fashion, of which they make Mats: Many other things
here are very observable in this County, but I shall forbear mentioning any
more, because it will seem tedious.

Dorsetshire.
It Is a County of very fertile Soil, well shaded with Woods, enriched with
Pasture, and covered with great Flocks of Sheep.

PORTLAND, although some would have derived its Name for its lying over against
the Port of Weymouth, yet it seems rather to have received it from one Port, a
Noble Saxon, who about the Year 703, grievously infested and annoyed these
Coasts. This same Portland was very much exposed to the Danish outrage, but
after their Wars were over, it fell into the Possession of the Church of
Winchester, when Emma, Mother to Edward the Confessor, being Accused by her Son
with too great familiarity with Aldwin, Bishop of Winchester, and having
cleared herself of that unjust Imputation, by suffering (which in those Days
was a usual Trial of Chastity) in walking bear-foot upon Nine Culters of red
hot Iron, which she did to a Miracle, without any harm or prejudice to her
self; she for a Memorial hereof, bestowed Nine Lordships upon the Sea of
Winchester, to which her Son added this Island, with many other Revenues, to
expiate the Crime of this defamitory Suspicion, and unjust Accusation of his
Mother's Honesty. The Island is about seven Miles in compass, rising up about
the sides with high Rocks, but lying low and flat in the midst, inhabited
scatteringly here and there, plentiful enough of Corn, and very good to feed
Sheep, but great scarcity of Wood. The ancientest of their Inhabitants do find
amongst the Weeds of the Sea a thing growing without Leaves like Coral, which
when it is cut waxes hard and black, but it is very brittle, and if it fall it
soon breaks; it grows amongst that Sea-Weed called Alga; here is likewise
diverse Querries of excellent Stone, which is conveyed into diverse Parts of this
Nation, and especially to London for the rebuilding of Churches; on the East
side there is only one Church, and some few Houses standing close thereto; and
on the North side is a Castle built by King Henry the Eighth, which being well
Fortified, commands the Entrance into the Haven of Weymouth. From hence we went
to Dorchester.

DORCHESTER is about 7 Miles from the Sea, and is the Head Town of the whole
Shire, watered by a small River, but neither very large nor beautiful, being
much decayed, and long since dispoiled of its Walls by the Danes, who raised,
as it thought, certain Trenches, whereof one is called Maumbury being an Acre
inditched, another Poundbury somewhat greater, and the third a Mile off as a
Camp with fine Trenches containing near ten Acres called Maiden-Castle, which,
in all probability, was a Roman Station; but that which argues its Antiquity is
the Coin of the Romans both Copper and Silver found there, and especially at
Fordington, hard by which the common People call King Dorne's Pence, whom by
some Allusion to the Name they think him to be the Founder of the Town. It had
anciently a Castle in that place, where the Grey-Friars built their Convent out
of the Ruins thereof. It has three Parish Churches, and several Almshouses for
the support and maintenance of poor impotent People, and it was formerly a
noted Place for the Manufacture of Cloth, and is now for Sheep, of which there
are huge Numbers to the great benefit and enriching of the County. The next
Shire we designed to pursue our Progress in was Hampshire, of which it follows.

Hampshire.
We went out of Dorsetshire through some part of Wiltshire, which I have
already mentioned, and so came into the Confines of Hampshire, and past through
part of New Forest, where along the East is the Banks of the River Avon.
William the Conqueror demolished all the Towns, Villages, both Houses and
Churches far and near, and likewise rejected the Inhabitants; after having done
so, he made all the ground within the compass of 20 Miles into a Forest, or
Harbor for Wild Beasts, and so it was called New Forest; and this he did,
either that the Normans might arrive more securely in this place (Normandy
lying just over against it) in case new Broils should arise after his
Conquests, or for the Pleasure he took in Hunting, or else to increase his
Treasure; for being better affected, and more favorable to Beasts than Men, he
imposed very heavy Fines and Penalties, yea, and most grievous Punishments upon
all such Persons as did meddle with the Game; but it seems the Children
suffered for the Cruelty of their Father, for Richard, his second Son, and
William Rufus, who Succeeded him, both perished in this Forest, the one with a
Blast of pestilent Air, the other with an Arrow shot by chance by Sir Walter
Tirrel: Henry likewise his Grandchild by his eldest Son Robert, whilst he was
here in the hot pursuit after his Game, was caught up by a Bough, where in a
very short time he underwent the miserable Fate of poor Absalom. The first Town
of Note we came to in this County was Southampton, which is situated betwixt
two Rivers, the one running forth at the West side called Test, and the other
on the East. The Town is fair and has stately Buildings, with two commodious
Keys which do highly adorn it, and the great concourse of Merchants which Trade
to Foreign Parts do mightily enrich it. There are five Parish-Churches, with
one for the French, likewise it has a strong Wall and seven Gates, with a
Castle upon a Mount cast up to a great height built by Richard the Second, and
it was made a Corporation by Henry the Sixth, who Constituted it both Town and
County, which does abundantly dignifie it. It has three Markets a week, and
that for Fish is five Days in a Week; it is likewise of great Note for building
of Merchant's Ships. After some small stay here we went to Winchester, of which
take this following Account.

Winchester.
I find it to have been a Place of great Antiquity, and that it was in great
Request amongst the Romans. In this City was Constance, who, was become a Monk,
saluted Caesar by the Order of his Father Constantine, though afterward he
paid dearly for his Honor by the loss of his Life. This was the chief Seat in
which the Saxons placed themselves, and made it famous by their erecting
Magnificent Temples; in the Time of the Normans too it flourished exceedingly,
until it was almost once or twice quite destroyed by the Sword, but now again
it is very fair and populous, large and stately, and is computed to be within
the Walls above a Mile in length; it has six Gates which give entrance into
the City, though all of them have been very much defaced in our Civil Wars, as
likewise the Castle which formerly has been very formidable for its Strength
and Impregnableness. This is that Castle that Maud the Empress having took,
held it out some considerable time against King Stephen, and being at last
strictly besieged by the Bishop of Winchester then in being, who was Brother to
the King, fearing to be took Prisoner and delivered up into her Enemies hands,
she secured her self by this cunning Way; she commanded it should be given out
for a most certain truth that she was Dead, and was carried out upon a Beir as
if she had been so indeed, and by this means she deceived her Enemies, and
secured her own Person. Upon the Wall hereof hangs the Round Table so much
talked of, and called by the Name of King Arthur's Round Table, whether this
can gain to it self so great Antiquity as is attributed to it, I shall not
undertake to determine, yet certain it is, that those kind of Tables are of a
very long standing; for formerly when there has been great Entertainments
amongst the valiant Champions of this Nation, it was usual for all such to sit
round them, lest any Difference should arise amongst the Noblemen about
Superiority of Place. About the middle of the City stands the Cathedral, built
by Kenelwalchius, King of the West Saxons, who Constituted Ina the first Bishop
there, and it was always had in great Veneration by the Saxons, because diverse
of their Kings was Enterred in it, and was called by them The Old Monastery;
there is a Dean and 12 Prenbendaries belonging to it; the Church is curiously
adorned with Monuments of ancient Hero's and Bishops of that See, William
Wainfleet Founder of Magdelen College in Oxford lies here Entombed with his
Heart in his Hand, and Cardinal Beaufort, and Bishop Gardner, that bloody
Scourge to the poor Protestants in Queen Mary's days, who did so insatiably
thirst for the Blood of Queen Elizabeth, but was always crossed in his most
wicked Inclinations; there lies also the Lord Weston, Earl of Portland, whose
Monument is of Brass, and by him his Father who lies in Marble; here is
likewise preserved the Chair of State in which Queen Mary was Married to King
Philip; the Countess of Exeter is also Enterr'd here; also the Chapel of
Bishop Fox is worth ones observation which he built for his own use, together
with his Study and Press for his Books all in one place. In the Quire under a
plain flat Marble Stone lies the Body of William Rufus, King of England, who
received his Mortal Wound as he was Hunting in the New Forest by Sir Walter
Tyrrel; Sir Walter shooting at a Deer unawares hit him on the Breast on which he
died immediately, and was brought to Winchester and buried in this place,
though afterward his Bones were Translated into a Coffer. At the West end of
the Quire stands in Brass two Statues very curiously wrought, the one of King
James the First, and the other of King Charles the First of ever blessed
Memory; there is another thing also very remarkable in the Cathedral, and that
is the rich and famous Monument of William of Wickham, who was Constituted
Bishop of Winchester in the Reign of Edward the Third: But to return again into
our Discourse relating to the City. We find it not only to have attained a
great Eminency for its Religious Houses, for its pleasant Gardens, for its
Silver-stream'd Brooks and flowery Meadows, for its public and private
Edifices, for its great Hall wherein the Assizes are usually held for the
County of Southampton, not to be paralleled for Length and Breadth by any
throughout this Nation, except Westminster, for the Antiquity of its
Corporation, with the true and exact Rules of Equity and Justice prescribed by
its Governors and Magistrates; it is likewise reported to have been very famous
and renowned by its Sufferings and Ruins of its Palaces, and in the time of
Adelstane, King of the West Saxons, that invinceable Hero, Guy Earl of Warwick,
in a single Combat slew Colbrand the Danish Giant in Hide-Mead near to this
City. After some time spent here, we traveled to Portsmouth, of which I come
next to discourse of.

PORTSMOUTH is about 16 Miles distant from Winchester, and situated in a little
Island called Portsey. It Is a place of great Strength, and of no less
importance by reason of the Dock, where many of the King's greatest Men of War
are built, those impregnable Wooden-Walls of our British Island. It Is
fortified with a Wall made of Timber, and the same well covered over with thick
Banks of Earth; it is likewise environed with a double Trench, over which are
placed two Drawbridges, from which about a Mile distance is another, and at all
of them stands Centuries of Soldiers who are kept in Garrison, with a little
Fortress adjoining to it which leads up the Continent; to the Seaward is a
Castle and Block-houses, which being first begun by King Edward the Fourth,
King Henry the Seventh, as it is reported, did afterward complete; which
Fortifications have of late Years received exceeding great Augmentations by the
succeeding Monarchs, especially in the late King James' Reign. Here is only one
Church, and an Hospital called God's House, built by Peter Roch, Bishop of
Winchester; hereabouts are diverse Saltpanhouses, which make exceeding white
Salt. Much more might have been wrote concerning this County, but this may
suffice for these two Reasons; the first is, The smallness of the Volume will
not allow it, and the second is, That what has been related is the notablest,
and most requisite to be mentioned.

Sussex.
The next place of Note we went to was Chichester in Sussex. It Is a good large
City well Walled, rebuilt by the second Saxon King of this Province; it was
before the Conquest of a small Repute, Bishop Raulf built a Cathedral here,
which before he had fully finished was consumed by Fire, yet by his Endeavors,
and the bounteous Liberality of King Henry the First, it was raised up again,
and is now a Bishop's See. The Church is not very large, but was formerly a
curious beautiful Fabric, having a Spire-steeple of Stone of a very great
height, and an high Tower standing near the West Door, which was built by King
Rinon, as they say. In the South Cross-Isle of the Church was formerly on the
one side artificially pourtrayed and painted the History of the Churches
Foundation, with the Images of the Kings of England on the other; there was
likewise the Images of the Bishops, at the charge of Bishop Sherborne, who
greatly Adorned and Illustrated this sacred Structure. The City is walled about
in a circular round Form, the Lavant, a pretty River, running hard by it on the
South and West sides. It has four Gates opening to the four Quarters of the
World, from whence the Streets leads directly, and cross themselves in the
midst where the Market is kept, and where Bishop Read Erected a fair stone
Market-house, supported with Pillars round about.

We went from hence to Amberly Castle, which is about 12 Miles from Chichester
higher into the County; it was built by William Read, Bishop of Chichester, in
the Reign of Edward the Third for the use of his Successors, and Leased out now
to the worthy Family of the Butlers, who are the present Inhabitants. We stayed
here the space of a Week, where we were generously Entertained with great
courtesy and civility. We went from hence to Arundel, and from thence to
Jews, of which take this brief Account.

ARUNDEL is about four Miles from Amberly, situated upon the Brow of an Hill,
but finding nothing to detain us here but the Ruins of an old Castle, which for
many Generations has successively appertained to the Earls of Arundel, we
traveled on to

JEWS, which was the next Town we came to. It Is situated upon a Rising almost
on every side, and has been Walled, but now there is no great sign of the
Walls; there is several Streets near it as Suburbs, and in the times of the
Saxons when King Athelston made a Law for the coining of Money, he appointed
two Coiners in this place. There are five Churches belonging to it, and this
place was very memorable for that Mortal and bloody Battle between King Henry
the Third and the Barons, in which prosperous beginning of the Fight on the
King's side, proved the overthrow of his whole Army, for whilst Prince Edward
his Son, breaking by force through certain of the Baron's Troops, carelessly
pursued the Enemy overfar, as making sure account of the Victory; the Barons
having reinforced themselves, and giving a fresh Charge, so discomforted and
put to flight the King's Forces, that they constrained the King to accept of
unequal Conditions of Peace, and to deliver his Son and others into their
hands. From hence we went to Pevensey, or Pemsey, of which it follows.

PEVENSEY, or PEMSEY. There is a very low Level which, some are of Opinion,
has been over-flowed by the Sea, and the Town of Pevensey is the noted place
for the first Landing of William the Conqueror, and formerly there was a Haven
and Castle. Hastings is not far from hence, where was fought that bloody Battle
betwixt King Harold and the Norman Duke, which proved so fatal to the English,
and successful to the Normans, which Ground where the Fight was has been
thought ever since to have worn the Conqueror's Livery, because always after
Rain it looks of a reddish color. I could haved cited other Remarks in this
County, but what is related is most material.

Kent.
It Is a County divided into three several Portions, the first of which is
called Health without Wealth, the second is Health and Wealth, and the third
Wealth without Health, to all which Nature notwithstanding has liberally
apportioned so many Blessings, that she compensates the Defects of one thing by
the Collation of another, not suffering any peculiar Place to monopolize all
her Favors at once; but thus, if the Weald be very eminent for Wool, the same
of East Kent shall be as great for Corn, and Tenham, Goddington and Otham shall
be no less cried up for Orchards, and Sheppey for the best Wheat, and Thanet
shall bring forth as good Crops of Barley; but if Dover and Cranbrooke has the
Name for Beer, Tunbridge shall for Water, and if either the fertility of the
Soil, or safe Roads or sure Harbors for Ships, or the broad Streams of great
Navigable Rivers, or the vicinity of a vast and large City can be any ways to
advance it Prosperity, it must needs be one, if not the most flourishing County
in the Kingdom of England: As touching the Customs and Privileges of Kent,
they have been already so fully discoursed of by Mr. Lambert in his Kentish
Perambulation, and what was by him omitted, have been supplied by the ingenious
Pen of Mr. Philipot, so that I shall wave them, and only give a very small
account of it, although I have been in most Towns and Parishes in this County.
Canterbury, because the Antiquity of this City, with all its Liberties and
Privileges, the Beauty and number of all its Churches and Religious Houses
before their Dissolution, the Magnificence of its Cathedral, with all its
renowned Tombs and Monuments are very exquisitely Surveyed and Discribed by
other Pens, I shall not go about to pourtray that in any contracted Landscape,
which has been before represented in so large a Scheme, but referr all such as
desire a particular Account of this City, to those Writters who have pencelled
out every Part and Limb thereof with great Exactness and Accuracy.

Rochester.
A City which, in ancient Times, was eminent for its Strength and Granduer, and
had not those violent Impressions which the rough hands of War formerly defaced
and deminish'd its Bulk, and bereaved it of its Beauty, it might have been
registered at this day in the Inventory of the principal Cities of this Nation.
In the Year 1225, by the indulgent Bounty of King Henry the Third, it was
invested with a Wall, and that this Fortification might be of more concernment,
it was secured or fenced with a Ditch. It was governed by a Port Reeve, until
King Edward the Fourth in the Second Year of his Reign raised it to a higher
Dignit^, and decreed, by his Royal Grant, that it should henceforth be under
the Jurisdiction of a Mayor and Twelve Aldermen, and to this Monarch does the
City owe much of its present Felicity; indeed formerly many and dismal
Calamities did attend it, and that so frequently, that the fury of the Elements
seemed to enter into a Corrivalship, or Competition with the fury of the
Enemies for its ruin, and the Fire and Sword seemed to be joined Confederates
to destroy it. Nevertheless it maugres all these Casualties by the Favor of
the Princes, and their Royal Munificence, it still recruits its Losses, and
survives in Splender. The goodly Skeleton of the Castle, which yet courts the
eyes of the Beholders to an admiration of its former Strength, and built many
hundred Years since. The Cathedral, with the Bishopric of Rochester united to
it, were formerly Established by that pious Monarch Ethelbert, King of Kent,
and the first Bishop to whom was entrusted the Pastoral Staff or Crosier, was
Bishop Augustine, the Apostle to the Saxons. Here is likewise a very fine stone
Bridge built by Sir Robert Knowles over the River Medway, which is fixed and
built upon one and twenty Arches, and coped about with Iron-spikes by
Archbishop Warham, and leads into Stroud.

And because (according to the Orator) every one is obliged to be serviceable
to his Country proportionable to his Abilities, and every one has an inrate
Propensity to love the Native Soil which first gave him a Being, I cannot but
in Duty pay some Acknowledgments of the Benefits I have received herein, both
for my Nativity, and first Education, and indeed I may justly say without any
partially, That it is a Province not much inferior to any in England, being
divided into three several Parts, of which I have made some mention before. It
is in all parts so sufficiently fruitful of all things necessary for the use of
Man, and if we will take the pains to course over the Valleys, we shall find
the Earth groaning under the burdens of bountiful Ceres, and the Fields and
Meadows in contest which should shine most gay and glorious; if we range the
Woods and Hills, we shall hear such charming Melodies by the mutual
reciprecation of Birds and Trees, that we should fancy all had got the knack of
Speaking and Prattling, Groves being now become visible to us; if we be so
curious as to dig into the Entrails of the Earth, and take a view of the
recondite Treasures, we shall find plenty of Iron-Ore in the South parts of
this County, and great Queries of Stone in several places; also toward the
North side they dig out of the Earth plenty of excellent fat Chalk, which they
use to lay upon their Land for the enriching of it, and causes it to bring
forth great Crops of Corn: If we be taken with the harmonious Murmurs of Brooks
and gentle Rivers there are several, the Banks of the Noble River of Thames on
the North side, and the River Medway which comes out of Surrey glides along for
many Miles together on the South side of this County, and takes its course
through almost the middle of the County, and does not run swift in many places,
but glides softly, admiring, as it were, the pleasantness of its Soil; there is
also at Newel in the Parish of Orpington the finest Spings undoubtedly in the
Kingdom, both for the clearness of its Water, and the rising up of it in such
abundance, that within two Furlongs of the Head it drives a Mill, and
afterward is called by the Name of Cray River. Most of the Rivers in this
County do afford several sorts of Fish to gratify the Palate, and all the
Towns and Villages are well inhabited, having a great many very fine Seats of
Noblemen and Gentlemen, in which respect it is honorable; the Churches fair and
uniform, and so it is glorious; the Air in many parts is clear, which renders it
wholesome.

One word or two I must I say in relation to Maidstone. It Is the principal Town
in the County; as in respect of its having the Assizes and Sessions kept in it,
and its being situated near the middle of the County upon the River Medway,
which renders it so pleasant and delightful, that even that alone might be
sufficient to set forth all the other Parts of it. Leaving this place, we soon
after arrived in London, where we only tarried a reasonable space of time to
give our Selves and Horses some Rest and Refreshment, as likewise to visit our
Friends and Acquaintances, and then proceeded on, designing to finish our
intended purposes, and so (with God's Assistance) took Horse and went to

Essex.
RUMFORD is about 10 Miles from London, in the County of Essex. It is well
stored with Inns, and has a great Market for Cattle; the whole County is
populous, having in it diverse fine Seats of Persons of Quality. We tarried here
not long but Traveled on to Burntwood, and so to Ingerstone, both which Places
have no great Remarks worth our tarrying, we rid on to Chelmsford, which place
is situated in the heart of the County between two Rivers which meet here. It
has a great Market for Corn, and the Assizes are generally held here for the
County; here are likewise several Persons of Quality's Seats in and about the
adjacent Places, which do mightily enrich it. We stayed here but one Night, and
the next Place of Note we came to in this County was Colchester, of which it
follows.

COLCHESTER is pleasantly seated upon the brow of an Hill, and does extend it
self in length East and West, and is very numerous for Inhabitants whereby its
Buildings are enlarged, and its Churches increased to the number of fifteen;
but in the late unhappy Civil Wars it had its share of Calamities, for being
close Besieged by their Enemies, the Royalists who were within behaved
themselves so bravely, that they could neither take it by Violence, nor enforce
it to a Surrendry, until at last having blocked up all places whereby the least
Provisions might be conveyed to them, so that they were reduced to that Want
and Exigency, Hunger exercising its Tyranny within the Walls with no less
Vigor than the Enemy did without, that they were compelled by one Enemy to
surrender to the other, by trusting to the a merciless Sword, rather than to
die through griping Hunger: So that the Rebels having got possession of the Town,
they did not only use their utmost Cruelty upon the weaker Sort, who could make
no resistance, but even in cold-Blood did they barbarously murder those very
Persons, who, had they been at the Head of an Army would have made the stoutest
Champion of their Party to give way to them. Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George
Lisle, Persons of as great Integrity and undaunted Courage as any whatsoever,
were cowardly and cruelly Shot to death by the Sanguinary of the insolent
Soldiers in the Castle Yard, on which very Spot of ground where they fell down
dead has never since sprouted up any Grass, as there were wont, the Ground it
self from that time being clad in mourning, Weeds and Grass dreading such
execrable Murders, retires and hides its head within the Bowels of the Earth,
and this Plat of ground is a Monument to succeeding Generations, yet does a
Vault that belonged to the Family of Sir Charles Lucus secure both his own and
his Fellow-sufferer's Bodies from any farther Attempts of the Sons of Violence,
and being wrapped in Lead they were laid in that Church which was next to his
own House, which formerly was a fair and sumptuous Structure, but ruinated by
his Enemies who hated the House for the Master's sake. The Castle which did
stand about the midst of the Town, is likewise now demolished and gone to
decay; and though the Inhabitants showed us a Brazen-gate which gives entrance
into a Vault fifteen Miles under the ground, as some of the Inhabitants tell
Stories of it, yet I think there is no credit to be given to it. Here are other
large Towns, and a considerable many of stately Buildings, but I have not room
here to insert them. From hence we went to

Suffolk.
IPSWITCH is a Town very commodious for its Haven, Enriched by foreign
Commerce, replenished with Inhabitants, adorned with several magnificent
Churches, and being united into a Corporation is governed by two Bailiffs, who
have all other Ministers befitting their Granduer to attend them, though formerly
it has sustained great Losses by the Danes; the Streets are very clean and
well paved, and in the midst of the Marketplace, which is surrounded with rich
Shops and goodly Houses, stands a very curious square Cross which has the
Effiges of Impartiality, bearing a pair of Scales in one hand and a Sword in
the other, a sit Emblem to reminde the Magistrates of the exact Measure that
they must use in the distribution of Justice. The Storehouses which are kept
for the King's Ships do much promote the Trade of the Town. Before the
subversion of the Monasteries, it could glory in four Religious Houses, besides
a magnificent College erected by Cardinal Woolsey, who received his first
Breath in this place, being only a Butcher's Son of this Town.

St. EDMUNDS-BURY, or BURY, a renowned Town; a Place for situation and
wholsomness of Air so excellent, that Cambden says, Sol non vidit urbem situ
elegantiorem* Many of the Gentry live here. There are two Churches in one
Churchyard, where there are Lectures several days in the Week. Here was born
Richardus de Bury, Bishop of Durham, the Governor of Edward the Third when
young, and famous especially for a Work which he Entitled Philobiblos, in the
Preface of which he confesses, Ecstatico quodam librorum amore potenter se
abreptum. He was well acquainted with Petrark the Italian, and other learned
Men of that Age. Bradwardine Archbishop of Canterbury, and Richard Fitzralph,
Armachanus, Walter Burleigh, Robert Halcot, and other most famous Men of that
Age were his Chaplains.

We have been at most of the Towns in this County, and there is five hundred
seventy and five Parishes in it, and the whole County is very fruitful. We went
from hence to Scole Inn in the County of Norfolk, of which hereafter.

Norfolk.
SCOLE is a little Village very famous for an Inn and Sign-Post built by Mr.
Peck, a Gentleman, which thing cost him several Hundred Pounds. The House is of
Brick very neat and uniform, and has great variety of Objects for diversion:
In the Porch, at the four corners, stands two Men playing on Wind-Musick, a
Tapster filling of Drink, and a Mountebank showing of Tricks; on the two
side-Posts Hercules with his Club, and Sampson with his Jaw Bone; on the Front
is the Figure of the Whale vomiting up Jonah out of his Mouth, and on the East
side of the House the Statue of Peace and Hope with an Anchor and an Olive
branch; but that which is most admirable, is the contrivance of the Sign-post
which seems to contain great varieties; on the top of all is an Astronomer
looking through a Quadrant, riding upon an Anchor with the four Cardinal-Vertues
on each side of him, Fortitude with her broken Pillar, Temperance with her Cup
pouring out Wine, Prudence with a Snake in her right hand, and a Horn of Plenty
in her left, and Justice with a pair of Scales and a Sword; along the Sign-post
stands several Images very curiously carved and painted, the first represents a
Huntsman equipped and accoutred with his Horn and his green Jacket, just as if
he were then very hot upon the Chase, and next to him Acteon transformed into a
Stag, with his Pack of Hounds worrying and devouring him, the next is Diana
with an Half Moon upon her head, and the Planets under her feet, her Quiver in
her hand, and her Horn by her side, and before her is a Greyhound, as it were,
in a close pursuit after the Hare; next to this stands old Time with an
Hourglass on his head, a Sithe in his left hand, and a prodigal Youth in his
right, and Death under his Feet with this Inscription, Tempus edax rerum; in
the middle hangs the sign of the White Heart, ingeniously contrived into an
Oval figure, with two Angels and two Lions on each corner, under one of which
are placed four naked Boys treading of Grapes, and under the other a Mountebank
showing of Feats of Activity; on both sides are the Arms of the chief Families
both in Suffolk and Norfolk, and also a Shepherd playing merrily upon his
Pipes, and last of all on each side of the Post which supports the whole
Fabric, stands three-headed Cerberus the Great of the Infernal Court, and old
grisle-bearded Charon with his Boat and Oars wafling a Wench over the Stigion
Lake; the splendedness of this curious and costly piece of Workmanship, is
worthy of any Traveller's observation. The next Town of Note we came to in this
County was

YARMOUTH, which entertained us with a pleasant Prospect, the Haven being as
commodious as the Town is beautiful, and is fortified both by Art and Nature,
for although it be environed almost round with Water on the West side by the
River Yare, from whence it borrows its Name, which has a Drawbridge over it,
and from other parts with the Ocean, unless it be Northward where there is firm
Land, yet it is likewise enclosed with a very strong Wall, upon which, besides
Towers, is cast up a Mount toward the East, and there are likewise planted
several pieces of Ordnance to defend the Town and command the Seas; there is
but one Church, but that is fair and lofty, adorned with a high Spire-steeple,
built at first by Herbert, Bishop of Norwich; there are also diverse clean and
spacious Streets, on each side of which are several Rows of very uniform
Buildings, inhabited by wealthy and gentle Persons. This Town is of no long
date or standing, as appears by Antiquaries, for it received its beginning from
the Ruins of old Garianum which was near this place, after which, in a short
time, as we were informed, built this new Town which grew potent and populous,
and they strengthened it with a Wall, and grew very numerous in Inhabitants,
and there happened a fearful and sudden Pestilence, which in the space of a
Year brought above seven Thousand Men and Women to their Graves, all which was
faithfully recorded in an ancient Table, which formerly used to hang up in
their Church, but since restored to its primitive Luster, and their Wealth has
increased, and it is now a place of great Merchandise and Traffic, but
especially renowned for its Fishery of Herrings of which, at the Season, here
is very great plenty, and by their care and industry are salted and dried in
particular Houses designed and appointed for that very purpose, and do supply
our own and foreign Nations too. The next place of Note we went to was

NORWICH is one of the most renowned Cities in our British Island, for whether
we consider the Wealth of the Citizens, the Number of Inhabitants, the great
Conference of Foreigners, the stately Structures, and beautiful Churches, the
obliging Carriage of the Gentry, and the Industry of the Commons, do all concur
to illustrate and dignifie it. It Is situated on the brow of a Hill, and
environed with a Wall in which are placed diverse Turrets, and twelve Gates to
give entrance into the City, unless it be on the East side, where the River
Yare after it has, with many windings, watered the most part of the City,
having four Draw-bridges for People to pass over, and is a farther defense by
reason of its deep Channel, and high Banks; it is reported to be a Mile and a
half in length, and half as much in breadth. It has had great Misfortunes, and
suffered very much by the Danes when they took their range in these parts, and
after William the Conqueror had settled the British Crown upon his head, it
suffered much more, which is too tedious to relate, but in succeeding Ages it
began to recruit its Strength, and has flourished exceedingly. King Henry the
First permitted the Citizens to Wall their City, and King Richard the Second
gave them a Grant for the Transportation of Worsted, and to advance their Trade
which was extremely eclipsed. King Henry the Fourth renewed their Charter, and
conferred on them the Honor to choose every Year a Mayor for their Magistrate,
whereas by a former Order from King Stephen they were only governed by Coroners
and Baliffs. It contains thirty two Parishes, forty two Chapels and
Churches, of which the Cathedral is the fairest and chiefest, the first Stone
of which was laid by Bishop Herbert, in the Reign of King William Rufus, who
Translated the Episcopal See from Thetford to this place, and procured a Grant
to have it confirmed the Mother Church of Norfolk and Suffolk, endowing it with
great Revenues, and it is a very stately and magnificent Structure, but most
famous for its Roof which runs aloft over the very body of it, on which is
drawn to the life the whole History of the Bible in diverse little Images,
curiously carved and adorned, from the Creation of the World, to the Ascension
of our blessed Savior, or the Descent of the Holy Ghost, with the perfect
resemblance of our Lord's Crucifiction and Resurrection, and diverse other
things. The Market, Cross and Cloister of the Cathedral are the fairest in
England. There is a great House that was the Duke of Norfolk's, now the Earl of
Arundel's, where there are very fine Granaries, and the best Bowling-Alley in
the Kingdom. There is also an Hospital, where an hundred Men and Women are
maintained. The Arms of the City are the Castle and Lion. After some time of
abode in this City, we Traveled to a little Village called

TETTLESHALL, in the Parish Church whereof is erected a stately Monument of
Marble, in honor to Sir Edward Cook, that most famous Lawyer of his time, on
the top are placed his Coat of Arms, with the four Cardinal Virtues to support
them at each corner, his Effigies is of Marble laid out at full length, above
which this Motto is engraven'd, Prudens qui Patiens, and underneath in golden
Characters this following Inscription, The Monument of Sir Edward Cook,
Knight, born at Mileham in Norfolk, Recorder of Norwich and London, Solliciter
to Queen Elizabeth, and Speaker to the Parliament, afterward Attorney General
to her and King James, Chief Justice of both Benches, a Privy Councillor, as
also of Council to Queen Anne, and Chief Justice in Eire of all her Forests,
Chases and Parks, Recorder of Coventry, and High Steward of Cambridge, of which
he was a Member in Trinity College. He died in the Eighty third Year of his
Age, his last Words being these, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done. The next
place of Note we came to in this County was Lynne Regis, of which it follows.

LYNNE, this Town, though its standing be but of latter Years, as receiving its
Original from old Lynne, which is seated in the Marsh-Land, and is opposite
against it, yet it is grown of far greater request, for the commodiousness of
its Haven, and safe Harbor causes a great resort of Mariners to frequent it,
and the Vessels which come loaded with Coals from New Castle, do here, for the
most part, lighten their Burdens, and is conveyed into the adjacent parts in
the Counties. The Town is environed with a strong Wall, the Streets are well
paved and kept very clean; it is, for the most part thereof, divided by two
small Rivers that have fifteen Bridges, or thereabout, over them; it is called
Old Linne, and Linnum Regis, that is, King's Linne; there are five Churches to
adorn it, the chief of which is a curious Fabric dedicated to St. Margaret,
upon the top of which stands a large and stately Lanthorn very admirable for
its rare Workmanship. The Town is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, which have
received great Kindnesses from their Sovereigns, and especially from K. John,
who, for the good Service they had done him in defense of his Quarrel, not only
presented them with his own Sword from his side, (which is continually carried
before the Mayor, when ever he pleases to appear in public) but likewise gave
them a great Silver Cup gilt for the use of the Town, which because they show
it most to Strangers and Foreigners who are of any Note or Repute, they
generally have it filled with Wine to drink his Majesty's and Mr. Mayor's
healths, for which there is a particular Allowance proportioned by the Town:
Most of their little Churches over the County are Thatched. Here are many other
things very observable which I have not room to set down. We went from hence to
Cambridge, of which it follows.

Cambridgeshire
Is an extreme, pleasant, open County, and a place of such Variety and Plenty
throughout, that fruitful Ceres with a smiling countenance invites the
industrious Peasant to behold, with joy, the Fruits of his Labor, whilst she
crowns his Industry with a plentiful Harvest, and this County does in diverse
places make some annual Additions of another Crop, by adorning its Fields with
large Productions of Saffron, through which great Profits continually arise unto
them; here it is that the green Banks of murmuring Rivers and sunny Hills
bedeckt with diversity of Plants and Simples, call forth the Students from
their musing Cells, and teach them Theory, by diving into their Natures,
contemplating their Signatures, and considering their Qualities and various
Effects: In a word, here is nothing wanting for Pleasure, Profit, or Delight;
and though the Northern parts of the County toward the Isle of Ely lying
somewhat low is moist and fenny, yet the gentle Gales which are frequently
stirring, drive away all Mists and Fogs which may seem to annoy it, and by
their means makes it a fit Seat for the Muses to inhabit, and we have no reason
to complain of the Soil, since our wise Ancestors thought good and convenient
to plant a Colony here, and place one of the Eyes of our Nation in this Spot of
ground, the famous and most glorious University of Cambridge, which we could
not, in honor, pass by without a Visit.

CAMBRIDGE was formerly called Grantbridge, from a fair large Bridge made over
the River Grant, which is now called Came, from whence the Town it self receives
its Name. It is increased much by the Ruins of Grancester sometime a famous
City, situtuate a little above a Mile from this place, and the Castle that is
beyond the River, the Ruins of which are still to be seen, was built, as
ancient Records testify, in the first Year of William the Conqueror, or in the
first Year of William Rufus in the Year of our Lord 1092, A Nobleman of the
Norman Blood named Picot, a Vice Comes, or Sheriff, at the Request of his Wife
founded a Church to the honor of God, and Dedicated it to St. Giles, near unto
this Castle, but afterward in 1102, the Canons were removed from hence, and
there is only one College beyond the Bridge sacred to St. Mary Magdalen; on
this side of it are very spacious Streets, adorned with fifteen several
magnificent Colleges and Halls, each of which are liberally endowed with large
Revenues, more or less, in the practice of Religion, and the dilligent pursuit
of all kind of Learning; here are fifteen Churches, besides private Chapels in
every College, the chief of which is called St. Mary's Church, set a part
particularly for the use of the University, and the Commencement is kept yearly
the first Sunday in July, that the Name and famous Memory of our most pious
Benefactors may still flourish and be renowned, for their great Munificence and
most memoral Acts. The Town is a Corporation, and is governed by a Mayor and
Aldermen, and the Assizes, for the most part, are kept here for the County,
which is very profitable to the Town, and it is observable that one High Sheriff
serves for both the Counties of Cambridge and Huntingdon, which borders upon
it; but one thing more is very noteable about it, and that is the great Fair
annually kept within a Mile of it in September, called by the Name of
Sturbridge-Fair; from whence it received its Denomination is uncertain, but
this is most sure, that of all Fairs in England, it is the greatest and best
stored with all kind of Wares and Commodities which the Londoners take special
care to import hither; when you are within the limits, you would rather be
ready to imagine your self in some great Town, by the variety of Shops and
multiplicity of Booths, than in a wide open Field, those Booths are always
built for the time in which it lasts, which is well nigh a Fortnight; neither
are you presented only with Booths upon the Land, but Booths on the Water too,
there being particular Contrivances in the Boats for Rooms and secret
retirements all covered above, for the convenience of Strangers which resort
thither, and indeed here is always a great Resorting of People from most Parts
of this Nation.

Near unto Cambridge on the South East side, there appears aloft certain high
Hills called Gogmagog. On top of them is a very large Fort, entrenched,
strengthened with a threefold Rampire.

There are contained in the Shire, eight Market Towns, and one hundred and
sixty three Parishes.

Having paid our Devotions, and taken a Review of that which affords so great
variety, we, at last took our farewell, and biding it a-dieu we betook our
selves into its neighboring County of

Huntingdonshire
Is joined to Bedfordshire on the South, Northamptonshire on the North and
West, and Cambridgeshire on the East. It Is a very fruitful County both for Corn
and Grass, and is watered by two pleasant Rivers Avon and Ouse. The first
Village we arrived at in this County was Fenny-Stanton, but found nothing
observable, we went from hence to

GODMANCHESTER, a very great Country-Town, and of as great a Name for Tillage;
situate in an open Ground, of a light Mould, and bending for the Sun. There is
not a Town in all England that has more stout and lusty Husbandmen, or more
Plows a going: For they make their boast, That they have in former time
received the Kings of England, as they passed in their Progress this way, with
Nine-score Plows, brought forth in a rustical kind of pomp for a gallant show.

Soon after King James the First came into England, here the Bailiffs of the
Town presented him with seventy Teem of Horses, all traced to fair new Plows,
in show of their Husbandry, of which when his Majesty demanded the Reason, he
was answered, That it was their ancient Custom, whenever any King of England
passed through their Town, so to present him. Besides they added, That they
held their Lands by that Tenure, being the King's Tenants. His Majesty took it
well, and Bad them use well their Plows, being glad he was Landlord of so many
good Husbandmen in one Town.

It is mentioned in History to have been a flourishing City, and the old Roman
Coins which have been dug up there do attest its Antiquity, and that a
Bishop did formerly reside in this place, when it was in that condition.

HUNTINGDON is about half a Mile distant from this place, and is the chief Town
of the County, situated upon the River Ouse, over which stands a Bridge made of
Stone which gives entrance into it; the Houses are fair, and the Streets large;
it is adorned with four Churches. and had formely an ancient Monastery belonging
to it, some of the Ruins are still to be seen. Near the River, upon a high
Hill, stands the remains of a Castle which was built about the Year of Christ
917, afterward David, King of Scots, waging War against King Stephen upon the
account of Maud the Empress, who was his Niece, this then was given upon some
certain Terms to the Scotch King, who did exceedingly beautify and strengthen
it, by making strong Rampers and Fortifications round about it, but Henry the
Second finding it, in process of time, a Cage for Rebels and Ringleaders to
Sedition, at last quite demolished it; from the top of the Hill is a very
pleasant Prospect for some Miles. The Town is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen,
and the Assizes are held here twice a Year for the Shire, and wants no kind of
Provision to entertain Travelers who resort hither out of the Northern parts,
the great Road to the City of London lying through this Town.

In this Town, in the Year 1599, was that Usurper and Religious Cheat Oliver
Cromwell Born and Educated, whom though we have reason to curse his very Name,
and detest his Memory as odious and execrable, yet since prosperous Successes
of the most cruel Tirants, makes others inquisitive after those Persons which
they did so fortunately attend. It will not be amiss to tell the World that
this place gave him his first Being, who, Nero like, destroyed his Father and
his Mother too; the Father of his Country, and his Country too, being a
Murderer of the one, and a Plague to the other, who was of so unparalled and
base a Temper of Mind from his Cradle to his Grave, that nothing could stay
with him, or be pleasing to him long, but what carried even the World before it
Confusion and Ruin. In this little Shire are numbered seventy eight Parishes,
four Hundreds, and six Market Towns. We stayed here one Night, and the next day
we went into

Northamptonshire.
This County is situate in the very middle and heart (as it were) of England.
On the East lie Bedford and Hunting donshires. On the South Buckingham and
Oxfordshires: Westward Warwickshire: Northward Rutlandshire, and Lincolnshire,
separated from it by Avon the less and Welland, two Rivers.

It is a champion County, exceeding populous, and passing well furnished with
Noblemens and Gentlemen's Houses, replenished also with Towns and Churches;
insomuch as in some places there are twenty, and in others thirty Steeples with
Spires or square Towers within view at once.

The soil very fertile both for Tillage and Pasture, yet nothing so well stored
with Woods unless it be in the further and hither sides. But in every place, as
elsewhere also in England, it is overspread, and (as it were) beset with Sheep.

THARPSTONE is twelve Miles distant from Huntingdon, has a great Market for all
sorts of Grain, and well stored with Inns; from hence we went to another Town
called KETTERING, which is of much more Note than it Neighbors, by reason of a
handsome Cross beautified with diverse Images curiously carved; the next place
was HIGHAM-FERRERS. The excellent Ornament of this place was Henry Chichley,
Archbishop of Canterbury, who built All Souls College in Oxford, and another
here, where he placed secular Clerks and Prebendaries, and withal an Hospital
for the Poor.

FOTHERING-HAY-Castle, environed on every side with most pleasant Medows.

Here Mary, Queen of Scots, was beheaded.

There belongs unto this Shire three hundred twenty six Parishes.

Leicestershire.
The next place of Note we went to was Leicester, the Metropolis of
Leicestershire. It Is more venerable for its Antiquity than its comeliness, or
present beauty. I find that about the Year 680, it was a Bishop's Seat, though
in few Years after the Sea was Translated, and the Dignity being taken away
from the Town, it began to go much to decay, but in the time of the Normans it
flourished exceedingly, and increased mightily in Inhabitants, yet afterward
in the Reign of King Henry the Second it was again involved in great Calamities
and Disasters. Here is to be seen an ancient Hospital, in the Chapel whereof
Henry, Earl of Lancaster, and Henry, his Son, the first Duke of Lancaster, lie
Interred, for that Duke being very Aged, and being willing to give some visible
Testimony of his Charity, built this Hospital for the Use and Maintenance of
diverse poor, aged, decreped Persons of both Sexes; and on the other side,
amongst those flowery Meadows which the River Sore enricheth with its bubling
Stream, Robert, the crook-backt Earl of Leicester, built a Monastery very
spacious and magnificent, and Dedicated it to the Virgin Mary, and endowed it
with large Revenues. In the Chapel of this Monastery lay interred the great
and puissant Cardinal Woolsey, who being at first a poor Man's Son of Ipswich
in Suffolk, was raised by King Henry the Eighth, for his great Parts and
Learning, to the greatest Degree of Honor in this Nation, being advanced to be
Lord Chancellor, of England, and presented with a Cardinal's Cap from the Pope,
and the unknown Incomes and Revenues, and by his great Treasures and Mints of
Money, achieved more magnificent Acts than ever any Prelate did before him,
for he erected the Royal Palace of Hampton Court, besides two famous Colleges,
the one at this Native Town, and the other a most glorious Structure called
Christ-Church College in Oxford; and for the height of his Living and
Attendance, it is very elegantly set forth by the writer of his Life: But
notwithstanding he was the Favorite of his Prince, and the Darling of Fortune,
and sued to by Foreigners, and his own Countrymen too, as to be the only
Person to apply to in all accounts, yet true it is, that Fortune very often sets
great Persons upon the Hill of Honor, thereby to precipitate them with the
greater Violence; we find this lofty Cardinal could no way secure himself from
the reach of fretting Envy, and learned by the mutability of his own Condition,
for being retired into the Country, after he seeing his Fortunes began to ebb
at Court, having the Great Seal took from him by the King's Order, and was
afterward sent for by the Lieutenant of the Tower to appear before his
Majesty; and as returning out of the North to the City of London, in his Journey
he fell sick of a Flux at the Earl of Shrewsbury's house in Sheffeild-Park,
which being accompanied with a Fever did so weaken his Body, that when he came
to Leicester Abbey, which way he took, he told the Abbot, after the Solemnities
of receiving him were past, That, indeed, he was come to lay his Bones amongst
them, which accordingly came to pass, for their he died, and after his death,
his Corpse being invested by the Monks with all such Ornaments as he was
Professed in, when he was made Bishop and Archbishop, as Mitre, Cross-King and
Pall, with all other things due to his Order and Dignity, and having lain some
few days in State, to be visited by those who had a mind to pay their last
Respects to his Person; he was buried in their Chapel dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, with great Solemnity, though all perished in the ruin of the Monastery,
Subverted not long after when Popery was banished from the Confines of England.
This Town had its share of Calamities in the unhappy Civil Wars: It is well
furnished with all kind of Grain; it is governed by a Mayor, Alderman and
Recorder, with other inferior Officers to attend them. The Town is
strengthened with several Gates, in one whereof is kept the Magazine; it is
also adorned with diverse eminent Fabrics both Sacred and Civil; the Cross in
high Street is a very excellent Structure; there are likewise five Churches, by
that which is called St. Martins stands the new Hospital, being a stately
Edifice, built and endowed by several Benefactors for the use of diverse aged
Men and Women, with a Chapel, and a Chaplain to read Divine Service, and to be
assistful to those poor People therein, and to this joins their public
Library, which was given for the use of Ministers and Scholars who inhabit
here; hard by St. Mary's Church stands the Castle, where the Assizes are kept
for the County, and by St. Nicholas there is a Wall, which, by the Ruins of it,
seems to be of very great Antiquity, having several hollow places in it of an
oval form, of which the Inhabitants have strange Conjectures concerning them,
as if there had been some place in which the Pagans did offer up their Children
to their blood-thirsty Idols, or that they made them here pass through the
fire, as the Israelites did to Moloch, but of this there is no probability at
all, and these only being conjectural Guesses, I shall leave them, and observe
one thing more concerning this Town. After the fatal Battle betwixt King
Richard the Third, and Henry, Earl of Richmond, afterward Henry the Seventh
King of England in Bosworth-field, about the Year of our Lord 1485, in which
King Richard, with four Thousand Men more were slain, and not above ten Persons
on the other side. The Corpse of the deceased King was brought to be buried
there in great disgrace, as the day before he went out in pomp; for his Body
being rifled by the Soldiers, was carried naked behind a Pursivant at Arms,
and being all over daubed with Mire and Blood, was conveyed to the Gray Friar's
Church, that then was within the Town, and there buried very obscurely and
meanly, whilst Richmond, with joyful Acclamations, was proclaimed King in the
very midst of slaughtered Bodies round about.

CARLETON, all that are born there, whether it be by a peculiar Property of the
Soil, or of the Water; or else by some other secret Operation of Nature, have
an ill favored, untunable and harsh manner of Speech, fetching their Words,
with very much ado, deep from out of the Throat, with a certain kind of
wharling, the Letter R being very irksome to them to pronounce.

Rutlandshire.
It is the least County of all England. Lying in form almost round like a
circle, it is in compass so far about, as a Light-horsman will ride in one day.

It was called Rutland, as one would say Red-land, the Earth in this Shire is
every where red, and so red, that even the Sheeps fleeces are thereby colored
red: The English-Saxons called Red in their Tongue Roet and Rud.

UPPINGHAM, a place upon an high ascent, whence that name was imposed, a well
frequented Market Town.

The Vale of Catmose, a field full of Woods.

Okeham is in the middle of it, so called from Oaks.

This small Shire has Parish Churches forty eight.

Lincolnshire.
A very large County reaching almost three Score Miles in length, and carrying
in some places above thirty Miles in breadth; passing good for yielding of
Corn, and feeding of Cattle, well furnished and set out with great number of
Towns, and watered with many Rivers, having great store of Fish and Fowl.

BOSTON is a famous Town, standing on both sides the River Witham, which has
over it a wooden Bridge of great height, well frequented by means of a
commodious Haven unto it: The Marketplace is fair and large, and the Buildings
are very beautiful; also a most stately Church, with a very high Tower-steeple,
and has as many steps in its steeple from the bottom to the top, as there are
Days in the Year; which Steeple salutes Passengers and Travelers a great way
off, and gives Direction also to Sailers. In the Coat of Boston for the
Corporation, there are three Crowns relating to the three Kingdoms, the Crest a
Ram lying upon a Wool-sack, the Ram signifying the great Sheep-walks in the
Fens round about, and the Wool-sack, that it was a Staple-Town; the Supporters
of the Coat are two Maremaids, signifying that it was a Port-Town.

LINCOLN. The chief City of the County, and is large, well inhabited and
frequented, it is situated upon the side of an Hill, and thence has its Name
from its Situation, or because it has been a Colony. Certain it is a Place of
great Antiquity, and of a very long standing; there are fourteen Churches,
whereof the Cathedral is very glorious, being not much in feriour to any, and
in one of the Steples there is a very great Bell rung by sixteen Men, called
Great Tom of Lincoln.

It Is governed by a Mayor and Aldermen. The Diocese here is the largest in
England, for after three Bishoprics were taken out of it, it contained four
whole Counties, and parts of two; the whole Shire is divided into three Part,
whereof one is called Holland, a second Kestuen, and the third Lindsey.

GRANTHAM, a Town of good resort, adorned with a School built by Richard Fox,
Bishop of Winchester, and with a fair Church, having a Spire-steeple of a
mighty height. There are in this Shire six hundred and thirty Parishes, thirty
and one Hundreds, and thirty Market Towns. We went from hence into

Nottinghamshire.
It is limited Northward with Yorkshire, Westward with Darbyshire, and in some
other parts with Yorkshire. The South and East parts thereof are made fruitful
by the River Trent, with other Riverets resorting unto it.

NOTTINGHAM is built upon a Rock, and is environed by Rocks on one side which
are washed by a crooked winding of a commodious River, and has a very fair
Park of the Duke of New Castle's adjoining to it, with the Forest of Shirewood
bordering upon it. The Streets are large and well paved, the Marketplace very
handsome and convenient, the Churches spacious and well contrived, and the
Houses high and stately, they are for the most part built with Brick, but some
of them are rare pieces as well for Structure as Design; and, in short, the
whole front of their Fabric is beautified with Sculptures and glistering
Balconies, the Inhabitants be very desirous of the new Modes and Draughts of
Architecture. The Castle which is on the West side of the Town is situated upon
an exceeding high Rock, and is supposed to be a place of very great Antiquity,
This Castle held out a Siege by the Danes against Alfred, and it was then
called Snottenham, and now Nottingham. King Edward the Second strenghened the
Town by an addition of Walls, and a new Castle was built by William the
Conqueror to keep the English in awe and subjection, and by Art and Nature
together it became even impregnable. Edward the Fourth illustrated it with
several Dwelling-houses for Commanders and Soldiers, and indeed in the Rock
upon which the Castle stands, are several small Cottages hewn out of it, in
which, at present, dwells diverse poor people; and it is reported, that it never
was taken until it was surprised by Robert, Earl of Derby, in the Baron's Wars,
who having once got this entered the Town, and then used the Townsmen according
to his pleasure; though I find too in the Life of King Stephen, that Robert,
Earl of Gloucester, invaded this Town with a great Power, and when most of the
Townsmen were slain and burnt in the Churches whither they fled for refuge;
there is a Story of one of them who was richer than the rest, and being forced
to return to his own house by the Soldiers that had taken him, to show them
where all his Treasures lay, he bringing them into a Celler, and whilst they
were busy in breaking open Locks and Coffers, conveyed himself away, making the
Door fast after him, and set the House on fire, so that the Soldiers, being
thirty in number, perished all in the Flames, which ketching hold of other
Buildings joining to it, almost burnt up the whole Town: But that which makes
this Castle most signally remarkable, was the Discovery of Roger Mortimore,
Earl of March, and the Imprisonment too of David le Brase, King of the Scots,
who was here confined; the relation of which I shall set down as briefly as I
can.

After King Edward the Second had been Deposed and Murdered by the Plots of his
own Wife, Queen Isabella, and King Edward the Third, her Son, had Reigned about
four Years, a Parliament was called at Nottingham, where this Roger Mortimore,
who was then the Queen's most especial Favorite, was in such Glory and Renown,
that it was beyond all comparison: None so much Lord Paramount, as the Earl of
March: None appears in so great an Equippage, and attended with so honorable a
Retinue, as the Earl of March; so that the King's Train was inferior to his,
and his Majesty's Glory eclipsed, by the Pomp and Grandeur of one of his
Nobles, for he very often would presume to go foremost, and his own Officers, and
was so exceeding proud and haughty, as to make all Persons cringe, and do as
great Homage to him, as to Majesty it self; nay, he undertook to Order and
Dispose of all Persons and Affairs to his own Will and Pleasure; and hereupon
one day he very sharply rebuked the Earl of Lancaster, the King's Cousin, for
presuming to appoint Lodgings for certain Noblemen near the Court, without his
particular License and Assignation, and having dislodged the Earl, with some
other Persons of very great Quality, and removed them a Mile out of Town, he
did by this means so incense the Nobility against him, that they began to pry
more narrowly into his Actions, and being enraged to see his Pride and
Usurpation of his great Prerogatives, they unanimously held against him, and
gave it out amongst the People, That this Mortimore was the Queen's Gallant,
and the King's Master, and sought by all means he possibly could to destroy the
Royal Blood, and to Usurp the Crown; which Report did so work upon some of the
King's most trusty Friends, that they got Robert Holland, who had a long time
been Governor of the Castle, and knew well all the secret Corners therein, to
swear Secrecy to them, and Fidelity to the King, and accordingly to assist them
in those Designs they had in hand: Whereupon one night King Edward lying
without the Castle, both he, and his Friends, were brought by Torch-light
through a secret place under ground, beginning a far off from the said Castle,
('it is the Vault which is still called Mortimore's Hole) till they came even to
the Queen's Chamber, which, by chance, they found open; being armed with naked
Swords, in they rushed, leaving the King in the same posture at the Door; being
entered into the Privy-chamber, they found the Earl of March undressed, ready
to go to bed to the Queen, but they crossed his Design, and cooled his Courage,
halling him away by force, upon which the Queen cried out, Good Son, take pity
upon gentle Mortimore, suspecting her Son to be there in the company: The Keys
of the Castle were presently called for, and every place, withal the Furniture
committed into the King's Hands, and Mortimore was forthwith sent to the Tower,
who, being Tried by his Peers, Arraigned and found Guilty, was hanged upon the
common Gallows two Days and two Nights. The Articles that were brought against
him were diverse, though his Familiarity with the Queen, his Treachery to his
King, and his great Service to David, King of the Scots, was the chief, whilst
he also burnt the Charters by which the Scotch King stood obliged to do Homage
to the King of England, and thereupon ensued a great War betwixt them; for King
David being spurred on by the French King Invaded England, and having made a
great Road into the Northern Counties, and spoiling and burning every where as
they went along, at length, at Durham his Army was routed, and himself taken
Prisoner, being first sent to the Tower, afterward committed to this Castle,
where, during his consinement, he engraved upon the Walls of his Deportment,
the History of our Savior's Death and Passion, the Relicts of which are still
to be seen. After eleven Years Imprisonment, he was restored against to his
Kingdom, by paying a good Ransom for his Liberty; but before he returned, he
was one of the four Kings that was nobly Treated by Henry Picard, a Vintner,
then Lord Mayor of London: These were the four Kings, Edward the Third, King of
England; John, King of France; David, King of the Scots; and the King of
Cyprus, together with Edward, The Black Prince, all bearing him company at the
same Table; this was about the Year 1358. But before I leave this Town, I
cannot but take notice of one thing more memorable in our Age, this being the
first place where King Charles the First set up his Royal Standard against the
Rebels in the late unhappy Wars, and when the King's Forces were forced, to
leave it, the Castle was quite demolished. We went from hence to view the Chair
of Robin-Hood, of which it follows.

Having pleasured our selves with the Antiquities of this Town, we took Horse
and went to visit the Well and ancient Chair of Robin-Hood, which is about a
Mile within the Forest of Shirwood: Being placed in that Chair, we had a Cap,
which, they say, was his, very formally put upon our Heads, and having
performed the usual Ceremonies befitting so great a Solemnity, we received the
Freedom of the Chair, and were incorporated into the Society of that renowned
Brotherhood; but that we may not receive such Privileges without an honorable
mentioning of the Persons that left them to Posterity; know, we must, that the
Patent was bequeathed to the inferior Rangers of this Forest, by Robin Hood and
Little John, honorable Personages indeed, being the chief Lords of some most
renowned Robbers in the Reign of King Richard the First: This same Robin Hood
entertained one Hundred tall Men, all good Archers, with the Spoil he daily
made himself Master of, whom four Hundred, though every way well Accoutred to
give Battle, durst scarce make an Onset. He suffered no Woman to be violated,
oppressed, oa any ways molested; poor Men's Goods he spared, and did relieve
them very liberally with what he got from the rich Carles: He killed none, and
by this means he did, for a long time, keep up the Order of Knight Errants.
Having, for some time, pleased our selves with our new Brothers that very
courteously entertained us, we went from hence into

Yorkshire.
The County of York is the greatest Shire by far of all England, and is thought
to be in a temperate measure fruitful. If in one place there be stony and sandy
barren ground, in another place there are for it Cornfieldsd, as rich and
fruitful; if it be void and destitute of Woods here, you shall find it shadowed
in another place with most thick Forests. The Length extends from Hart-hill
in the South, to the Mouth of Tees in the North, which is near seventy Miles;
the breadth from Flambrough-head to Horn-Castle upon the River Lun is Eighty;
the whole circumference three hundred and eight Miles.

HELMSLEY, a Manor in Yorkshire has two Parks and a Chase in it, said to be
about 146 Miles in compass, and had 40000 Timber Trees, and 200 Acres of Wood.
There are many Freeholders there.

The whole Shire is divided into 3 parts, which, according to the 3 Quarters of
the World, are called The West Riding, The East Riding, The North Riding.
West Riding, for a good while is compassed in with the River Ouse, with the
bound of Lancashire, and with the South limits of the Shire, and bears toward
the West and South: East Riding looks to the Sunrising, and the Ocean,
which, together with the River Derwent, encloseth it. North Riding reaches
Northward, hemmed in (as it were) with the River Tees, with Derwent, and a long
race of the River Ouse.

YORK is the fairst City in all this County, and deservedly reputed the Second
of England; for its Greatness and Munificence, the pleasantness of its
Situation, the Buildings are stately and beautiful. The whole City is rich,
glorious and honorable, both in respect of its being governed by a Lord Mayor,
who moderates in all Cases of Temporal Affairs, as also by an Archbishop who is
Judge in all Spiritual Matters. The River Ouse flowing with a gentle Stream
from the North part cutteth it in twain, and divided (as it were) into two
Cities, which are conjoined with a stone Bridge, having one mighty Arch. There
is a Cathedral Church dedicated to Saint Peter, an excellent fair and stately
Fabric, near unto which there is the Prince's House, commonly called, The
Manor.

York was a Colony of the Romans, Ptolomey and Antonine; and also by a piece of
Money coined by the Emperor Severus, in the reverse whereof we read, COL.
EBORACUMLEG. VI. VICTRIX.

Severus had his Palace in this City, and here at the hour of death gave up his
last breath, with these words: I entered upon a State every way troublesome,
and I leave it peaceable even to the Britains.

There are many fine Seats of Persons of Quality, by reason of the Pleasantness
of its Soil, which abounds in Plenty of all things, and for Pleasure and
Recreation it affords the most of any County in England.

In the North Riding of this County is Ounsbery-Hill, or Rosebery-Topping,
which mountup a mighty height, and makes a goodly show a far off, so often
as the Head thereof has his cloudy Cap on, lightly there follows rain whence
they have a proverbial Rhyme,

When Rosebery-Topping wears a Cap,
Let Cliveland then beware a clap.
I could have particuliz'd several other Towns and Villages in this Shire, but
what has been related is most material, and again the Volume is but small, and
would not bear it. In this County there are 459 Parishes, under which are very
many Chapels, for number of Inhabitants equal unto great Parishes. We went
from hence into the Bishopric of Durham, of which it follows.

Durham.
The chief Town; in Latin, Dunelmum, a County Palatine, and a Bishop's See;
it is situated upon a Hill, and encompassed almost round by the River Were, is
also shaped in form of an Egg, and strongly fortified both by Art and Nature.
There is a stately Cathedral which makes a fine and lofty show, with an high
Tower in the midst, and two Spires at the West end. The County in general is
very pleasant, and rich in its Mountains with Iron and Coals, and its Valleys
with Corn and Grass: But before I leave this County, I cannot omit the
mentioning of a certain place near Derlington, which is 3 Pits full of Water of
a wonderful depth, called by the common People Hell Kettles, concerning which
Sir Richard Baker in his English Chronicles gives this Account, That in the
24th Year of King Henry the Second the Earth in this place lifted up it self in
the manner of an high Tower, and so remained from Morning till Evening
unmovable, and presently after that time fell with so horrible a noise, that
it affrighted all the Inhabitants thereabouts, and the Earth swallowing it up
made those 3 deep Pits, which are still to be seen. The next place we took
notice of was

Northumberland.
The Ground appears to be very barren and rough, and is Mountainous and Rocky
in many parts of it. Toward the Sea and Tine, by diligence and good Husbandry,
it becomes fruitful, but elsewhere it is hard and rugged. By reason of the
sharpness of the Air, and coursness of the Soil, the Inhabitants are looked
upon, and esteemed to be a Warlike People, and excellent Light-horsemen. The
Nobility and Gentry of the North are of great Antiquity, and can produce more
ancient Families than any other Part of England, many of their Gentry taking
date before the Conquest, the rest came in with William the Conqueror.

NEW CASTLE upon TINE, (so called because Robert de Curtois, Son of William the
Conqueror, built there a New Castle out of the ground against the neighboring
Scots) the very Eye of all the Towns in these Parts, enabled by a notable
Haven, which Time makes, being of that depth, that it bears very tall Ships,
and so defends them, that they can neither be easily tossed with Tempests,
nor driven upon Shallows and Shelves. The Town is situated on the rising of an
Hill, adorned with four Churches, and fortified with strong Walls which have 7
Gates in them, with many Towers. It is wealthy, partly by intercourse of
Traffic with the Germans, and partly by carrying out Sea-coals, wherewith this
Place abounds, both into foreign Countries, and also into other parts of
England.

BERWICK is the utmost Town in England, and the strongest hold in all Britain.
It is well near compassed about with the Sea, and Twede together. Upon the West
of Northumberland the Picct's Wall is to be seen of great height, and almost
whole. There are about 46 Parishes in Northumberland.

Cumberland.
This County is like the rest of the Northern Counties, and has a sharp
piercing Air; the Soil is fertile, for the most part, both with Corn and
Cattle, and in some parts hereof with Fish and Fowl. Here are likewise several
Minerals which have of late been discovered, not only Mines of Copper; but
Veins of Gold and Silver too have been found here, as I was credibly informed;
and of all the Shires we have, it is accounted the best furnished with the
Roman Antiquities. Nor it is no less renowned for its high Mountains than for
its Mines, of which there are three, Skiddow, Lanvellin and Casticand, and
these Words goes much concerning the height of them,

Skiddow, Lanvellin and Casticand
Are the highest Hills in all England.
CARLISLE, is commodiously Situated, and is fortified with a strong Wall,
Castle and Citadel; the Cathedral Church there being formerly a very stately
and magnificence Structure, adorned with rare Ornaments. Not far from this
City, is a Trophy of Victory, as is supposed, called by the Country People
Long-Megg and her Daughters, being Seventy and seven Stones, each of them Ten
Foot high above-ground, and one of them is fifteen foot. There are in
Cumberland 9 Market Towns, and 58 Parishes.

Westmorland.
It is so called because it lies amongst Moors and high Hills, and was, for
the most part, unmanured; such barren places the Northern Englishmen call
Moors; and Westmoreland is a Western Moorish-county. The Air is sharp and cold.

KENDALE-KIRKE by Kendale, a very great Town of Trade and Resort, with two
broad and long Streets crossing the one over the other; a place excellent for
Clothing, and for Industry so surpassing, that in regard thereof it carries a
great Name. For, the Inhabitants have great Traffic, and vent of their
Woollen-cloaths throughout all parts of England.

APELBY, memorable for its Antiquity and Situation only. It stands in a
pleasant Site, encompassed for the most part with the River Eden; for its
Antiquity it deserves to be counted the chief Town of the Shire. The Castle is
the common Goal for Malefactors, and the Sessions and Assizes are there kept.

In this Shire are contained 26 Parishes.

Lancashire.
It is a large, populous and well wooded County. The County Palatine of
Lancaster (famous for the four Henry's, the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh
Kings of England, derived from John Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster,) is upon the
South-confined and parted by the River Mersey, from the County Palatine of
Chester, the County of Darbyshire bordering upon the East; the large County of
Yorkshire, together with Westmorland and Cumberland, being her kind Neighbors
upon the North, and the Sea called Mare Hibernicum embracing her upon the West.
Their Kine and Oxen have goodly Heads and fair spread Horns, and are in body
well proportionate withal; but the Ground, for the generality, is Hilly and
Mountainous.

MANCHESTER, a Town of great antiquity, from Main, a British Word, which
signifies a Stone: It is seated upon a stony Hill, and beneath the Town, there
are most famous Quarries of Stone. It far excels the Towns lying round about
it, for the Beautiful show it carries, for resort unto it, and for Clothing:
In regard also of the Mercate place, the fair Church and College.

LANCASTER, or Loncaster from the River Lone, the chief Town of this Region. I
shall now give a short Account of the Seven Wonders, which are as follows,

The First Wonder
Is at the Divel's Arse, near a Village called Castleton, sufficiently Noted
for that wide Subterraneons Cavarn, known by the Name of the Devil's Arse,
which runs under the Hill upon which the Castle stands; and at its Entrance, it
is Large and Capatious, though the further you go in, the more narrower it is
Contracted; within the Mouth of it are several poor Cottages Erected, the top
of this Cave is an exceeding great Height, and appears to the Eye as if it were
Arched above and Checkered with diversity of culloured Stones. At the Entrance
the poor People are very ready to attend with Candles, and Lanthorns, to
conduct Strangers in, though it belonged to Satan's Territories, and it is very
Dark and Slippery by reason of several Currants of Water which runs along the
Cave, which puts a stop to your Journey; there is a Story of a Shepherd that
past over all these Currents, and at last came into a very fair and delightful
Meadow, which savours too much of a Romance to be credited; however, it is
supposed could all these Waters once be gone over, there might be made some new
Discoveries, but it is a dismal place both for its Name and Nature, and has so
near a Relation to the Diabolical Regions.

The Second Wonder
Is Mamtar; it is a high steep Cliff, and from the top of which Cliff or Rock
the Sand though the Air be never so Calm, does continually trickle to the bottom
Night and Day, and now and then great Stones fall down with a very great Noise,
and do much affright the poor Neighboring Inhabitants. On the top of it,
bubbles up a Fountain which in some places streams down the Cliff.

The Third Wonder
Is a Fountain which Ebbs and Flows like the Sea, receiving an influence from
the Moon, and observing the same regular Motions by which the Ocean it self
continually is regulated.

The Fourth Wonder
Is called the Marble Stones by their orderly Dispositions, into several rows,
one row higher than another; it seems rather to be the contrivance of Art than
of Nature, but that we ought not to Derogate from that great Parent, whose
production are continually Rare and Unimitable.

The Fifth Wonder
Is Elden Hole, near unto the Fourth Wonder; it is reputed a bottomless Abyss,
and could never as yet by any Art be Fathomed: The Mouth of it is wide and
craggy, but the inward recesses contracted and intrecate. There is a Story that
they let a Man down by Ropes, and Candles to light him, to give an Account of
this infernal Pit, but paid dearly for his Presumption with the loss of his
life for his Boldness.

The Sixth Wonder
Is Buxtons-Well, about two Miles from the fifth Wonder; it glories in a hot
Well; it is enclosed in a very fair Stone Building, erected formerly by the Earl
of Shrewsbury; the Operation is very near to that of the Cross Bath, having two
Springs of Water, the one within a hand breadth of the other, and one is Hot,
the other cold as Ice.

The Seventh and last Wonder
Is Pool Hole; it is a Hollow Cave under a very high Rock, bearing some
resemblance with that by the City of Wells, called Ochy Hole, but not
containing in it self half so great Varieties. From hence we went into

Cheshire.
It is a County Palatine, and of great Note for plenty of several Commodities;
as also for most excellent Cheese, and the Men and Women are generally Acounted
very Handsome here. There is in this County great store of Salt-Springs,
Metals and Mines, and in the River Dee is plenty of Salmons; on the South part
of Cheshire, Trees are very frequently found by Diging under the Ground, which
is believed have been here ever since Noah's Flood.

The chief Town of this County is West Chester, a City famous for its Antiquity
and Situation, and no less for its Renown; it is Built in the form of a
Quadrant, with very spacious Houses, neat and uniform, and environed with a
very strong Wall, and has a Castle stands upon a high Hill near the River Dee
strongly Fortified. Here are several Churches which are very Ancient and goodly
Fabrics, but especially for the Cathedrals. The Houses are very fairly Built,
and along the chief Streets are Galleries or Walking-places; they call them
Rows, haing Shops on both sides, through which a Man may walk dry from one end
to another.

NANTWICH, which the River Wever first visits, is reputed the greatest and
fairest built Town of all this Shire after Chester. It is called the White-wich
or Salt-pich, because the whitest Salt is there boiled. This Shire contains
13 Market Towns, and 68 Parishes. We went next into

Shropshire.
Or the County of Salop, is for the most part Rich in Corn and Cattle, and
glories in in its most famous City of Shrewsbury, which is compassed almost
round by the River Severn, having two fair Bridges upon it, and is Fortified
both by Art and Nature. It is like a Horse-shew in the opening place, and
doubtless deserves the Observation of all Travelers, more than any Town or
City in this Nation, and is built upon the Riseing of a Hill; the Churches are
very fair and Spacious, it is inhabited with both Welsh and English, speaking
both Languages. One of their Rarities there is their Cakes, such as cannot be
made so well in any other place of England, and many things here is very
observable, which I shall not mention, because they have been already so well
set fourth by other Pens. From hence we went into

LUDLOW, is one of the chiefest Towns in this County, and is of greater
Antiquity than Beauty; it is Situated by a pleasant River, and is famous for its
Castle built by Roger, Earl of Mountgomery, who environed it with a Wall a Mile
in compass; afterward when Robert, Earl of Shrewsbury, and Eldest Son to
Mountgomery, was taken in his Rebellion against Henry the First, and was
banished out of the Land; the King took this Castle into his own Hands; after
this it was given away from the Crown, by King Henry the Second, and came into
the Family of the Lacys and Mortimors, at last to be the inheritance of the
Princes of Wales. And by this means beginning to be in great request, the
Inhabitants erected a very large Church to make it more Famous; and in a little
time, it excelled all its Neighborhood, and out-shin'd them in Luster and
Dignity; for King Henry the Eighth instituted here the Counsel of the Marches
of Wales, in which he Ordered there should be a President, Secretary, Attorney
and Solicitor, four Justices of some of the Neighboring Counties of Wales, and
as many other Privy Counselors, as the Prince of Wales should Elect to be
Assistant to himself in this Court, being erected for his own particular Use
and Service. We staid in this Town but two Nights, and went from hence into

Staffordshire.
Is very Rich in Pasture and Cattle, and enriched by the River Trent, Trigenta
as some will have it; because there are Thirty several Streams or Rivolets
which run into it, or Thirty several sorts of Fish which Swims within its
Streams: However, it is very Advantageous to the whole County; the first Town of
Note we came to in this County was

STAFFORD is situated on a pleasant Soil, sweet Air, Environed with a Wall, and
Fortified with Gates, and adorned with two Churches, and a Spacious
Free School, and a large Marketplace, and the Houses very Handsome and
Beautiful; it is Governed by a Mayor and Aldermen; not far from the Town are to
be seen the Ruins of an old Castle, Situated upon a Hill, heretofore belonging
to the Barons of Stafford.

LICHFIELD. This City is low Seated, of good Largeness, and Fair withal,
divided into two parts with a shallow pool of clear Water; which Parts
notwithstanding join in one by the means of two Bridges, or Causeys, made over,
that have their Sluices made, to let out the Water.

It was beautified with a very goodly Cathedral Church, which being round about
compassed with a fair Wall-Castle-like, and garnished besides with fair Houses
of Prebendaries, and with the Bishop's Palace also, mounting up on high with
three Pyramids or Spires of Stone, making a lovely show, and for elegant and
proportional Building it did yield to few Cathedral Churches, but is now
demolished. There are accounted an Hundred and Thirty Parishes in this Shire.
We went next into

Warwickshire.
It is bounded on the East Side with Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, and the
Watlingstreet-way; on the South with Oxfordshire and Glocestershire; on the
West for the greatest part with Worcestorshire; and on the Northside with
Staffordshire. It is divided into a plain Champion, and a woody Country; which
parts the River Avon, running crookedly from North-East to South-West, does
after a sort sever one from the other.

WARWICK is the principal Town of the whole Shire. It stands over the River
Avon upon a steep and high Rock, and all the Passages into it are wrought out
of the very Stone. It stands in a dry and fertile Soil, having the benefit of
rich and pleasant Medows on the South part, with the lofty Groves and spacious
Thickets of the Woodland on the North. It has a very strong Castle, the seat
in times past of the Earls of Warwick, the Town it self is adorned with fair
Houses.

COVENTRY. It is a City very commodiously Seated, large, sweet and neat, was
fortified with a strong Wall, and is set out with right goodly Houses; among
which there rise up on high two Churches of rare Workmanship, standing one hard
by the other, and matched (as it were) as concurrents; the one consecrated to
the Holy Trinity, the other to Saint Michael. One and the self same Bishop
carried the name both of Coventry and Lichfield.

Leofrick, the first Lord of this City, being much offended and angry with the
Citizens, oppressed them with most heavy Tributes, which he would remit upon no
other condition, at the earnest suit of his Wife Godina, unless she would her
self ride on Horseback Naked through the Greatest and most inhabited Street of
this City; which she did indeed, and was covered with her fair long Hair, and
also a Proclamation was published, commanding all People to keep close within
their Houses, as also their Doors and Windows shut, no Person on pain of Death
to appear in that Street, nor so much as to look into it, whether out of a
Window or otherwise; upon which, as she was riding along Naked, one Man curious
than Ordinary, ventures to peep out of a Garret Window, and being immediately
discovered, was Apprehended and Hanged, as by the Effigies of a Man, that is
continually kept up as a Memorandum, in a full proportion, looking out of a
Garret Window, and called by the Inhabitants, Peeping Jack: And thus she did
set free her Citizens of Coventry from many Payments for ever.

At Gosford-Gate there hangs to be seen a mighty great Shield-bone of a wild
Bore, (or rather of an Elephant, being not so little as a yard in length) which
Guy of Warwick slew in Hunting, when he had turned up with his Snout a great
Pit or Pond, which is now called Swansewell, but Swineswell in times past. In
this County there are an Hundred and Fifty Eight Parish Churches.

Worcestershire.
At the first entering on the Confines of this Shire, we found it a very
Healthful and plentiful County: One part is of Note for its excellent Cheese,
but mostly for its great number of Pear Trees growing all along the very
Hedges, of which the Inhabitants make a very pleasant Drink, called Perry; it is
likewise very full of Salt Pits, and has formerly been admired for the
abundance of Salt-Springs, which have very often been discovered in this County;
but that which makes it most renowned, is the River Severn, which streams along
the County. This, as also the River Avon, which comes out of Warwickshire, are
well replenished with all sorts of Fish, but more particularly seem to have
been designed on purpose, as Stews and Ponds for the preservation of Lampreys;
a Fish of great Esteem in that Country, and sent far and near as a very great
present throughout diverse parts of England. They are called Lampreys, from the
Latin word Lampretra, as if they had their Denomination from licking of Rocks;
they are like Eels, slippery and blackish, however on their Bellies they are of
a bluish Color; in the Spring they are most wholesome and sweet, for in the
Summer the part which is to them instead of a Backbone, waxes very hard:
Naturalist observe that these Fish receive and let in Water at seven Holes, for
that they have no Gills visible at all; the Romans allways thought this a very
Noble Dish, and when any Person of Quality desired a Sumptuous Feast, he would
be sure to be provided with these; and the Italians at this day are very much
delighted with them, and upon that Account are very exquisite in their Dressing
of them, and consequently by their Cookery, make them exceeding delicate to the
taste. The first Town of Note we came to in this County, was the City of

WORCESTER, It is the chief City of this County, and gives its Name to it; the
River Severn, which in other parts of the County runs along in a swift Current
here, glides more softly with a more gentle Stream, admiring as it were this
City as it passes by. It is famous both for its Antiquity and Beauty, it is
supposed that the Romans built it, at that time when they first planted Cities
on the Eastern-side of the Severn, to hinder the Incursion of the Britains, who
were on the other side, even as they did on the South Side of the Rhine in
Germany, to repress the Germans, and keep them within their own Boundaries.
It Is situated partly upon the brow of a Hill, rising with a gentle Ascent, and
has a very fair Bridge over the River, and is of great Repute by Reason that
the Citizens are generally great Clothiers. The Houses are Neat and well Built,
the Streets clean and well Paved, the Churches in Number many, in Order and
Beauty excellent, but especially, the Cathedral built many Hundred Years since;
in this Church are diverse small Pillars, all of pure Marble, which stand in
Rows, and do uphold that vast Bulk and Fabric, somewhat strange to see the
Body larger then the Supporters, that so small props should be able to bear up
so great a Weight. This City has suffered great Calamities by Fire, having
almost been quite Burnt up by the Danes three times, and in the Year 1113. by
an unknown Casualty, and once again in the Reign of King Stephen: And, sure I
am, it is not long since it fell into the Hands of some Barbarous and merciless
Rebels, who were as raging as the Flames, and whose Fury was as unquenchable
as the Fire. Witness the grevious Pressures it groaned under for its Loyalty,
Love and Obedience to the King in the Year 1651. For here it was, That after
His Majesty's long Exile, he arived with an Army of Scots and some English the
22 d. of August, and by the Assistance of the Citizens beat out the Soldiers,
who kept it for the Commonwealth, and being Proclaimed by the Mayor that then
was, and one of the Sheriffs, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland;
nevertheless was attended with the same ill Fortune and Success which had been
too long his Attendance. And having but a small Army in comparison of the
numberless Number of Rebels that were poured in upon him, was totally
Defeated; in this City several of his Nobles slain and took Prisoners, the rest
forced to fly for their Lives, and himself constrained to make his Escape as
privately as he could, and to betake himself into a Wood in Staffordshire,
where he hiding himself in the Shady Bows of a well spread Oak, he found more
pity and security from the Trees and Woods, than from his own unnatural and
Bloody Subjects; who for the fear of God by whom Kings Reign, as well as their
Allegiance which they have sworn to him, ought to have been his continual
Protection and Safe-good: However, it is restored again to its Luster, and like
the Phoenix is raised again out of the Ashes to its native Splender and
Magnificence, being still Governed by a Mayor, two Sheriffs, and a Court of
Aldermen, with other Officers fit to preserve it in that Bravery, to which it
has now attained. From hence we went next into.

Herefordshire.
Having sufficiently satisfied our selves with the Varieties of that City, we
came into the Confines of the Eastern part of Herefordshire, which is very
Rocky and Mountainous at the first; but having passed those Rocky parts, we
began to find the County more pleasant to the Eye. We discovered it to be a
fertile Soil, the Valleys thick with Corn, and the Meadows abounding with
Grass, and well watered with Rivers, the Hills covered with Sheep, and the
Hedges full of Apple Trees, which bear a sort of Fruit, called Red Streaks, of
which they make the best Cider in England; in a word, we found it according to
the usual report which is made of it, to yield to no County in this Nation for
three W. W. W. Wheat, Wool and Waters, to which formerly might have been added
Wood, but the Iron Works have destroyed it very much, and made it now become
less plentiful. The first Town of Note we came to in this County was

LEOMSTER, Is a Town of great Request in this County, and is of great
Antiquity: Some are of an Opinion, that it received its Denomination from
Linen, Hemp or Flax; because, that grows thereabouts in plenty, but it may be
so called from Lana, because it is reported to have the best Wool known by the
Name of Leomster Ore, and is said to make the finest Cloth in England, and as
its Wool makes the finest Cloth, so does its Wheat the purest Bread; and they
say hereabouts, that for Leomster Bread, and Weobly Beer, none can Compare.
Concerning the Town it is Situated in a pleasant Valley, and is Governed by a
Bailiff and Aldermen, and is Adorned with a very handsome Hall, for the
dispatching of public Affairs. We went from hence to

HEREFORD, The chief City hereof, is Situated almost in the Middle of the
County, and Watered by two pleasant Rivers Wye and Lugg, which by their happy
Union not far from this City, advance her Felicity and enrich her Soil:
Antiquaries are of an Opinion, that this City had its Rise from Ariconium,
which at this Day has no form at all of a Town, as having been over-turned by
an Earthquake, as some do imagine it to have been in this Place, which they now
call Lenchester, some three Miles distant from this City, which they conceive
to be so from the Ruins of old Walls that are here to be seen, as likewise
from four square Pareing Stones and thick Bricks, as well as several Roman
Coins dug up in the Earth, though now all grown over with Trees, Bushes and
Brambles: We observed when we went to Visit this place, we saw several pieces
of an old Wall, which do Argue the place to continue in it very great remains
of Antiquity; however, her Sister Hereford, which now is Beautiful by the pains
of others, claims rightly the Pre-eminence before all other places in this
County, wanting nothing for Pleasure and Profit to make her Renowned. She is
thought first to have shown her Head in the time of the Saxon, and it is
supposed to have received great Helps and Increase by Religion, and the
Martyrdom of Ethelbert, King of the East Angels, who when he courted the
Daughter of Offa, King of the Mercians, was treacherously put to death by
Quendred, Offa's Wife; hereupon, being Registered for a Martyr, he had a Church
built and dedicated to him by Milsred, a petty King of this County, which after
the Establishment of a Bishop's See, it grew to great Wealth and Honor, and is
thought never to have suffered any Misfortune until Edward the Confesser's
time, when Griffith, Prince of South Wales, and Algarus had raised a Rebellion
against King Edward, and led away Captive the Bishop, Sacked the City, and
burnt the Cathedral; afterward the Normans, at the East end of the Church by
the River Wye, built a strong Castle, and fortified the City with a Wall, and
by the Trench near the Castle, is a very fine Spring called St. Ethelbert's
Well. Within this City are four Parish-Churches, and Bishop Reinelin, in the
Reign of King Henry the First, founded the Cathedral which now is, being a
beautiful and magnificent Structure, adorned with diverse ancient Monuments of
Bishops and Abbors. The City is governed by a Mayor, (who is annually Sworn
upon Michaelmas-Day, 12 Aldermen, a Recorder, and diverse Common-Councel-Men,
and by their Charter have Privileges for particular Companies and Societies
amongst themselves, who have several distinct Halls and Petty-laws Enacted, for
Regulating and Ordering their Affairs in Trade. It has three Markets a-Week,
in which there are plenty of Corn, and all sorts of Provisions.

About two Miles from this County stands Rotheram, as formerly belonging to the
Family of Boddenham, now in the Possession of the Family of Van Arker, and is
one of the delightfullest and sweetest Seats in all the County having a
spacious Park before it, the River Nigh behind it, pleasant Meadows on the one
side, and fruitful Tillage on the other; and having had such great plenty of
Appletrees belonging to it, as I have been credibly informed by those that then
knew it, That take but one Apple from each Tree, it would make a Hogshead of
Cider.

Concerning some remarkable Things in this County, etc. BONE-well near
Richard's Castle, we went to visit, to take some notice of Nature, who is never
more curious than in her Waterworks, presented us with another new Rarity; a
Well called Bone-well, in the Water whereof are always bubling up several
little Bones, like Bones of Fishes, and although they which be upon the Surface
are, with as great care as can be, taken off, yet others will immediately
succeed in their room.

HOPTON's-well is not far from this, the Water whereof is found very effectual
for the Curing of several Maladies which have seized upon Poor, Languishing,
Decriped Mortals; it has likewise been observed to by very good for the
restoring of Eyesight to the Blind, and is also of great use in strengthening
the Limbs of weak Persons.

SUTTON WALLS. Amongst the other Varieties we were entertanied with in this
County, there were some Remains of Antiquity, called Sutton walls: Near to the
Village of Marden, are the Ruins of some ancient great Buildings, in all
probability, supposed to be the Mansion House of Offa, when Renchester
flourished, or, at least, when Hereford was but in its Infancy: This Offa being
King of the Mercians, having invited Ethelhert, King of the East Angles into
his Palace under color and pretense of bestowing his Daughter upon him in
Marriage; by the Council of his ambitious Wife (in hopes to succeed him in his
Kingdom,) basely and treacherously caused his Head to be stricken off, by one
Grimbert, his Servant, and his Body being buried on the Banks of the River
Lugg, was afterward removed to Hereford, and over it was built a Cathedral by
King Milfred, which was since dedicated to St. Ethelbert. Having sufficiently
recreated our selves with all the pleasure, pastimes and rarities in this
County, we began to think to return toward London, and went from this City to
a place called Ross, in this County, a Town noted for its famous Houses of
Slates and Stones, as also for a great number of Blacksmiths, hammering out
their living upon their Anvells, and when we were past that Town we soon came
into the Confines of Gloucestershire, of which hereafter.

Gloucestershire.
Being within the Confines of this County, we found it most fertile, watered by
the River Severn, and be-set with Woods and thick Groves; it is happy in the
enjoyment of all things which are necessary for the Use and Service of Man; the
very Hedges and Land are well stored with Apples and Pear Trees, and their
fragrant blushing Color invites the wandering Travelers to refresh himself
with their most Wholesome Juices: And as Concerning this County in General, the
Towns stands thick together in most parts of this County, and so it is populous;
the Houses numerous, and well built, the Churches fair and handsome and so it is
honorable; but that which is one of the greatest Blessings of all is, the
River Severn; there is not any River in all our Nation for its Channel broader,
for a Stream Swifter, and for Variety of Fish better stocked, though sometimes
it overflows the Banks, and when it has roved a great way it retires back
again, as it were, triumphing over the Conquest of the Land. This River Severn,
or Sabrina, was so called from Sabenia, a fair Lady, concerning whom there goes
this Story; Loarnie, the eldest Son of Brutus, who came first into Britain,
took to Wife the Daughter of the Duke of Cornwall, but notwithstanding this he
kept a very beautiful Mistress, and by her he had a Daughter, whom he named
Sabenia; whereupon he grew so enamoured of her, that after the Death of his
Father-in-law, the Duke of Cornwall, he put a way his Lawful-Wife, and Wedded
his Mistress; his Wife was so extremely netled at this, that she immediately
repaired into Cornwall, and made her Complaint there amongst her Friends and
Relations, and having gathered a great Power to revenge her Injury, she fought
with her Husband Loarine, and Slew him, and buried him at Trynobant, or London,
afterward executed her Revenge still in the highest Degree: She took the Lady,
with her fair Daughter Sabenia too, and drowned them both in this River. The
first place of Note we came to in this County was the City of

GLOUCESTER. This City is well seated, and as well inhabited, and of a
considerable Trade by reason of the Severn, which being Navigable, Boats of
great Burden come up to their Key side loaded with several Commodities. It Is
governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and is adorned with several fair Churches,
amongst which the Cathedral is the chief and most glorious, Erected by Alfred,
Archbishop of York and Bishop of Worcester, it has been, by the charity of
good Benefactors, much enlarged. King Edward the Second lies here Interred
under a Monument of Alablaster, and in the Quire under a wooden painted Tomb
lies Robert, the Eldest Son of William the Conqueror, who was deprived both of
his Life and Kingdom by his younger Brother. Here is likewise to be seen the
Monument of Lucius, the first Christian King that ever was in England, about
the Year 179. The Pillars of this Church are of an extraordinary thickness,
scarce to be paralleled in any Church in England; but that which makes it more
remarkable, is a place at the East end of the Quire called The
Whispering-place, it is a Pentagone-Arch in the from of a Semicircle 30 Yards in
circuit, and so rare a piece of Art, That if any Person stands at one end of
it, and whispers never so softly, he that lays his Ear to the other end will
discover distinctly the Words he speaks. Then next Town of Note we went to was

TEWKSBURY, a Market Town of good Note, and of a great Trade for Cloth and
Stockins. It Is situated amongst the pleasant Rivers, Severn on the one side
enricheth it, on the other side Avon, and another small River which comes from
the East, over each whereof stands Bridges which give entrance into it. It has
been counted famous for the great Battle fought here between the House of York
and Lancaster utterly Subverted; In the Reign of King Henry the Third, there is
a story of a Jew that lived in this Town Recorded, That falling into a Jakes,
or Privy, on the Sabbath, or Saturday, by no means, for Reverence of that Day,
suffer any Helping-hands to come and pluck him out of that unpleasant Hole,
whereupon the then Earl of Gloucester having some Intilligence of his
refractory Sullenness, gave a strick Charge that no one should dare to take him
out on the Sunday, for the Reverence of that Day, and so the poor
Circumsized-Wrecth perished in that most Loathsome Dugeon through his own folly.
This was about the year 1259. The next place of note we went to was

CICITER, which the River Ornus, or Churne, Rising amongst the Woods near
Corbely, is very commodious for Mills. This Place does appear to have been of
great Antiquity and Renown, The British Chronicles show that this Town was
burnt, being set on fire by a Company of Sparrows through an Invention devised
by on Gurmund; certain it is, that the Inhabitans show a Mount below the Town
which they report this Gurmund did cast up, they corruptly call it Gurmund's
Tower. Hear is likewise to be seen some ruinated Wall of an old Abbey; it is now
beautified with a very handsome Church having a high spired Steeple, and a
Market once a week. Many other things are very observeable, which will be too
tedious to relate. We went from hence to

FAIREFORD, a place well known for its curious Church-Windows, in which are
most rarely pourtrayed in Painted-glass, the whole history of the Bible. From
hence we went into

Oxfordshire.
Which being once entered into, we could not sufficiently enough admire the
pleasantness of the Soil: There it is that Cerces bestows her Gifts most
Liberally upon the Labors of Husbandmen: There it is that the Meadows are
garnished with variety of Plants, allure and entice the industrious and
studious Herbalists into a more strict Inquiry of Names, Natures and Properties
there; it is where the Hills are adorned with shady Woods, and afford most
delightful Bows to the waried Students, whilst the Silver-stream'd-Rivers with
their Murmures nimbly coursing along, do whet their fancies, and screw up their
Intellectuals to the highest pitch. The first Town of Note we came to in this
County was.

Burford.
Is a Town of good Note, situated, as it were, on the side of a Hill very
pleasantly, and if we will give Credit to ancient Records, it is storied, That
Cuthred, King of the West Saxons, when he was no longer able to bear the severe
Tributes and Exactions of Ethelbeld, King of the Mercians, who did most cruelly
oppress him, and began to suck the very Blood and Marrow of his Subjects, came
into the Field against him, and in a pitched Battle routed him totally, taking
from him his Banners on which was painted a golden Dragon, and so raised his
Subjects from their Tributary-Vassalage. The next place we came to was.

OXFORD, a Ford for Oxen to pass over, as is called by the Germans, Oxhenfurt.
It has a most healthy Air, and commodious situation, and is well adorned with
private Structures, as also with goodly and magnificent Colleges and Halls, and
is thought, by Antiquaries, to have been a place of public Study before the
learned Saxon King Alfred's time, who very much angmented it out of his
Princely Favor and Love to Learning and Religion. It boasts in
Univesity-College, founded, at first, by King Alfred, afterward re-edified by
William, Archdeacon of Durham, or, as others write, by William, Bishop of
Durham, in the Twelfth Year of William the Conqueror, and of New-College, built
by William of Wickham, Bishop of Winchester, and the Magnificence Christ
Church, erected by Cardinal Woolsey in the Reign of Henry the Eighth. This City
is adorned with 22 Colleges, besides the curious Fabric of the Schools, and
the admirable Sructure of the Theater, built at the sole Cost and Charges of
the most Reverend Father in God, Gilbert, late Lord-Archbishop of Canterbury;
the famous Library, not much inferior to the Vatican at Rome; the delightful
Physick-Garden, replenished with diverse both of Foreign and Domestic Plants,
surrounded with a strong stone Wall at the sole Expense of the Right Honorable
Henry, Earl of Danby, together with all the Customs, Privileges, Offices and
Dignities, which are already elegantly set forth by the ingenious Author of the
Present State of England: And as concerning the South side of this County, What
can be more pleasant than Thamiss? branching it self forth into several Veins,
gives refreshment to several parts of this County; at last, by several Turnings
and Windings, lodges it self again in its natural Couse. We went from hence to.

DORCHESTER. It seems to be a Town of great Antiquity, and is credibly reported
that this was formerly a Bishop's see, which was Transplanted from this place
to Lincoln by William the Conqueror's dislike, that the Bishop's Seat stood in
so small a City, from which time it began to decline into a low and mean
Condition, and is now only famous for its venerable Relicts and Ruins, and for
the mutable Union of the two noted Rivers Tama and Isis, which here unanimously
embrace each other. From hence we went to Hendly, in this County, of which it
follows.

HENDLY, which the Thames, after it has fetched a handsome compass, enricheth
with its silver streams, the Inhabitants herein being most of them Bargemen,
and get good Livelihoods by carrying of Corn and Wood out of the neighboring
Counties to London; there is now a very large and strong Timber-bridge over the
River, which, they say, was formerly arched, and of Stone, but whether this be
the Bridge that the Romans went over, when Casar pursued the Britains who fled
into these Parts, is hard to determine; however it is very probable that this
was the place. We went from hence into.

Buckinghamshire, or Bucks.
Which might possibly be so called from Beech-trees, there being such great
plenty in that County; or likely from a Country in Germany called Buchonia,
from its great plenty of those kind of Trees. The County generally is of a
plentiful Soil, and passing full of Inhabitants, who chiefly employ themselves
in grazing of Cattle. There is store of Mutton and Beef.

WICKHAM, or Weicombe, situated above a pleasent Valley, by which runs a-long
the Current of a small Rivolet, and possibly from this situation it might take
its Name, for Comb, in the Saxon Language, signifies a Valley, and Wick, any
Turning or Winding of a River or Sea. It Is a Town for Largeness and Buildings
not much inferior to any throughout the Shire, and has a Mayor and Aldermen.
It is a place well known for the abundance of Bone-lace that is made here,
which brings good Advantage and Profit to the Inhabitants. The next Town we
arrived at was.

BEACONSFIELD, a Town better known for that it was formerly the Inhabitants by
Succession to the Lord Scudamore, than for any thing it contains in it self. We
tarried not long here, but went to.

UXBRIDGE, formerly called WOXBRIDGE, a Town built of latter times, and well
stored with Inns. We past from hence to see some part of Harfordshire and
Bedfordshire, which Counties we found very rich in Corn and Cattle; but in
relation to these Counties, and their renowned Towns of Bedford, Dunstable, and
St. Albans, and diverse other Towns, they having been so well set forth by
others, I shall forbear mentioning them. We went to.

WARE in Hartfordshire, where we tarried two Nights. This Town, according to
Writers, was built by Edward the Second, King of the West Saxons, in the Year
914. It Is wartered by the River Ley, and has a great Market for all sorts of
Grain; it is populous, and well Inhabited by Persons of very good Quality, and
lying in the great Road to London, is frequented constantly by Persons of all
Degrees; and although Hartford be the Eye of the County, it is now inferior to
this place; but the most remarkable thing in Ware is the New-River, or
Aqueduct, conveyed above 20 Miles together in a continued Channel from this
Place to Islington, from whence the Water thereof is dispersed in Pipes laid
a-lond in the ground for that purpose, into abundance of Streets, Lanes, Courts
and Alleys of this City and Suburbs of London; the great Contrivance whereof
all the Citizens have daily Experience, and ought to immortalize the Name of
their Inventor Sir Hugh Middleton, who bestowed this most excellent Gift upon
them, and Consummated this good Work so useful and beneficial to the City at
his own proper Cost and Charges. I have not mentioned the County of Surrey
distinctly as yet, and indeed, had almost forgot it, but I will give some brief
relation of it, though not in its proper place.

Surrey.
From the West it boundeth partly upon Barkshire and Hantshire; from the South
upon Sussex; and from the East on Kent; toward the North it is watered with
the River Thames, and by it divided from Middlesex.

It is a County not very large, yet wealthy enough, where it bears upon
Thames, and lies as a plain and champion Country.

FERNHAM, so named of much Fern growing in that place.

GUILFORD, a Market Town well frequented, and full of fair Innes.

KINGSTONE, a very good Market Town for the bigness, and well frequented. It
had beginning from a little Town more ancient than it of the same name, in
which, when England was almost ruinated by the Danish Wars, Aethelstan, Edwin
and Ethelstred were crowned Kings upon an open stage in the Market place,
whence it was called Kingstone.

SHENE, so called of its shining brightness, now Richmond, wherein the most
mighty Prince, King Edward the Third, when he had lived sufficiently both to
glory and nature, died.

King Henry the Seventh built it, and gave it that name of Richmond, of the
Title he bore, being Earl of Richmond, before he obtained the Crown of England.
He had scarce finished this new work, when in this place he yielded unto
Nature, and ended his Life. Here Queen Elizabeth also died.

CROIDON, there was the Archbishop's House of Canterbury: There are Charcoles.

LAMBETH, Canutus, the Hardy King of England, there amidst his Cups yielded up
his vital Breath. It is the Palace of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

This County has in it an hundred and forty Parish Churches.

I have been both in North and South Wales, of which other Pens have already
set forth, so that I do not intend to deliver any thing to the Public that
has been already set forth by others, but only give a short Account of several
things very observable, not yet set forth by any.

WALES.
Flintshire.
THe Air is healthful, without any Fogs or Fenny-Vapours, and the People
generally are very Aged and hearty. The Snow lies here very long upon the
Hills; the County affords great plenty of Cattle, but they are small;
Millstones are also dug up in these Parts, as well as in Anglesey. Toward
the River Dee the Fields bears, in some places, Barley, in others Wheat, but
generally throughout Rye, with very great increase, and especially the first
Year of their breaking up their Land, and afterward two or three Crops together
of Oats.

Holy-Well, or St. Winifrid's-Well.
This County is most remarkable for a little Village called Holy-Well, where is
the Well of St. Winifrid, so famous for the strange Cures which have been
wrought by the Virtue of it, as it is supposed; the Water hereof is extreme
cold, and has likewise a very great Stream that flows from it, which is
presently able to drive a Mill; the Stones which are at bottom being of a
sanguine color, are believed to receive that color from the Drops of Blood
which trickled down from her Body, when she was here beheaded, by the bloody
Tyrant that would have ravished her, and the Moss which grows upon the sides,
and bears a very fragrant Smell, is averred to have been the product of her
Hair, though I find, by some we brought away with us, that in process of time
it loses all its sweetness. Over the Well stands a Chapel dedicated to her
built of Stone, after a curious manner, to which, formerly, was much resorting
by Pilgrims, who came hither out of blind Devotion, and the generality of the
Commonalty hereabouts do believe, That this Martyred-Virgin, and the great
Miracle that was wrought by St. Benno, who restored her to life again, as they
say, by claping on her head immediately, after it was cut off, upon her
Shoulders, which Relation those Inhabitants thereabouts do verily believe to be
true. So having made some small stay here, in which time we conversed with the
Welshmen, and gathered up a true Account of this County, which was as follows.

Radnorshire.
In the East and South parts thereof it is more fruitful than the rest, but is
uneven and rough with Mountains, yet it is well stored with Woods, watered with
running Rivers, and, in some places, with standing Pools; the Air is very cold
and sharp, because the Snow lying long unmelted under the shady Hills and
hanging Rocks, whereof there are many, and upon the Borders of it which lies
next to Herefordshire, runs a-long a famous Ditch, which Offa, King of the
Mercians, with great toil and labor caused to be cast up from Dee mouth to Wye
mouth, for the space of 90 Miles, to separate the Britains from the English:
Several other things there are very observable, which are too tedious to relate.

Brecknockshire.
Lies beneath Radnorshire. It is thick with Hills, and fruitful in the Valleys.

MOUNTH-DENNY, three Miles from Brecknock, is a Hill so called, that has its
top above the Clouds, and if a Cloak, or Hat, or the like, be thrown from the
top of it, it will never fall, but be blown up again, nor will any thing
descend but Stones or Metals, or things as heavy.

LYNSARATHAN-MERE, two Miles East from the same place is a Mere called
Lynsarathan, which (as the People dwelling there say) was once a City, but the
whole City was swallowed up by an Earthquake, and this Water, or Lake,
succeeded in the place; they say likewise, That at the end of Winter, when aftr
a long Frost, and the Ice of this Lake breaks, it makes a fearful noise like
Thunder, possibly because the Lake is encompassed with high steep Hills which
pen in the sound, and multiply it; or else the ground may be hollow underneath,
or near the Lake.

LIVENNY-River. Through this Lake runs a River called Livenny, without mixture
of its Waters, as may be perceived both by the Color of the Water, and also by
the Quantity of it, because it is no greater afterward, than when it entered
the Lake.

CADIER-ARTHUR, or Arthur's Chair, a Hill so called on the South side of this
County; from the Tops resembling the form of a Chair, proportionate to the
Demensions of that great and mighty Person; upon the top whereof rises a
Spring as deep as a Well, four square, having no Streams issuing from it, and
yet there are plenty of Trouts to be found therein.

Glamorganshire.
Has a temperate Air, and is generally the most pleasant part of all South
Wales.

MINYD-MORGAN Hill. On the top of a certain Hill so called, is a Monument with
a strange Character, which the Inhabitants thereabouts say, if any Man read the
same, he shall die shortly after.

The Springs by Newton. Upon the River Ogmore, and near to Newton, in a sandy
Plain, is a Well, the Water whereof is not very clear, in which, at full Sea in
Summertime, can hardly any Water be took up, but at the Ebb it bubbleth up
amain; in Summertime, I say, for in the Winter the Ebbing and Flowing is
nothing near so evident, because of the Veins of Water coming in by Showers, or
otherwise; besides it is observed, this Spring never rises up to the top
brink, or over-floweth.

ABERBARRY Cave. There is in this Shire a Cave so called, under the bottom of a
Hill, and on the top of it a gaping Chinck, where, many times, is heard as it
were a Musical-noise, and sometimes other very strange Noises, which is very
observable for all Travelers to take notice of.

LANDAFF, a small Town, but of good Repute in that it is a Bishop's See, and
adorned with a Catheral-Church.

Carmardenshire.
A most hilly Country, yet it has a wholesome Air, and though the Soil be not
very fruitful in Corn, it is well stored with Cattle, and in some places yields
very good Pit-coal for Fuel: On the South side, the Ocean has with so great
violence encroached upon the Land, that the Country seems to have shrunk back
in a fright, and withdrawn it self more inwardly for security.

The Cave and Well near Carreg-Castle. Near Carreg-Castle are many Undermines,
or Caves of very great wideness within the ground, now covered all over with
Green-sword and Turf, wherein, it is probable, the Multitude unable to bear
Arms, when the Normans made their first Incursion into these Parts, hid
themselves during the heat of the War: There is also a Well that, like the Sea,
Ebbs and Flows twice in 24 hours.

Pembrokeshire.
Has a good temperate Air, considering it lies so near to Ireland; the
Inhabitants are many of them Dutchmen, but by their Manners and Language they
are much like the English, that upon this Account this County is called Little
England beyond Wales.

In the Rocks of this Shire there breeds a rare kind of Falcon which is thus
described, The Head is flat and low, the Feathers laid in rows, the Legs pale
and wan, the Claws slender and wide spread, hooked round.

About 300 Years a-go, it was reported, That for five Generations, the Father
of the Family in the Earldom of Pembroke, their Name was Hastings, never saw
his Son.

At the time when Henry the Second made his Abode in Ireland, there were
extraordinary violent and lasting Storms of Wind and Weather, so that the
Sandy-shoar on the Coasts of this Shire were laid bare to the very hard ground,
which had lain hid for many Ages, and by farther search the People found great
Truncks of Trees, which when they were dug up were apparently lopped, so
that they might see the Strokes of the Ax upon them, as if they had been given
not long before; the Earth looked very black, and the Wood of these Truncks
altogether like Ebony, as the Inhabitants informed us. At the first discovery
made of these Storms, the Trees, we spoke of, lay so thick, that the whole
Shore seemed nothing but a lopped Grove; from whence may be gathered, That the
Sea has over-flowed much Land on this Coast, as it had upon the Shore of many
Countries bordering upon the Sea.

The Salmon's-Leap at Kilgarran. About Kilgarran are abundance of Salmons
taken, and there is a place called The Salmon's-Leap, as there is also in other
Rivers, for this reason, The Salmon coveteth to get into fresh water Rivers to
Spawn, and when he comes from places where the Water falls downright almost
perpendicular, as some such like Places there be, he uses this Policy, He
bends himself backwards, and takes his Tail in his Mouth, and with all his
force unloosing his Circle, on a sudden with a smart Let-go, he mounteth up
before the Fall of the Stream; and therefore these downright Falls are called
The Salmon's Leaps.

St. DAVID'S is in this County, formerly an Archbishop's See: There is a
Cathedral, erected in the Time of King John, and near unto it stands the
Bishop's Palace, and several other Houses belonging the Bishop's See, all
enclosed round with a Wall, whereupon they call it The Close.

Cardiganshire.
Being a hilly Mountainous County like the rest of Wales, was not formerly
planted or garnished with Towns, but little Cottages, as may be gathered by
that Speech of their Prince, who being taken Prisoner and carried to Rome,
after he had thoroughly viewed the Magnificence of that City, What mean you,
said he, when you have such stately Buildings of your own, to covet our poor
small Cottages?

Many other things here might be mentioned in relation to this County, but I
must omit them by reason I have not room enough.

Montgomeryshire.
In this Shire there is nothing more observable than its excellent Breed of
Horses, which (as I have been informed) are of most excellent Shapes and strong
Limbs, and incomparable for Stoutness.

The Hill Plim-limmon. It raises it self up to a wonderful height, and on that
part where it boundeth on part of this Shire it pours forth the Severn, the
greatest River in Britain next the Thames, as likewise in the other parts of it
rises the River Wye, and the River Rideal.

The Hill Cerdon. Upon Cerdon Hill are placed certain Stones, in a round Circle
like a Coronet, in all probability, to commemorate some notable Victory: In
this County are several old Castles, and other things very observable.

Merionethshire.
The Air may be wholesome, but the Soil is very barren, for it is exceeding full
of spired Hills, being the most mountainous place in Wales (except
Caernarvonshire) upon which account it is subject to many and extraordinary
great Winds.

The Pool near Bala. Near Bala is a great Pool of Water that drowns, at least,
200 Acres of ground, whose Nature is such, as they say, That the Highland
Floods cannot make this Pool swell bigger though never so great; but if the Air
be troubled with violent Tempests of Wind, it rises above the Banks: The River
Dee runs into with a swift Stream, and glides through it without mixture of
Water, for in this Pool is bred a sort of Fish which are never seen in Dee, and
in Dee River, Salmons are taken which are never found in this Pool. Upon the
Seacoasts of this County, great store of Herrings are taken at time of Year,
and upon the West side of it the Sea beats so sore and hard, that it is thought
it has carried away part of it.

Caernarvonshire.
In this County the Air is sharp and piercing, and in it are the highest Hills
in Wales, on some of which the Snow lies long, and on others all the Year long,
hard crushed together. It Is affirmed likewise, That on the high Hills of this
Shire are two Meres, one of which produces Fish that have but one Eye, and the
other a floating Island: I do not verify the truth of this, because I think it
mere Fables.

SNOWDEN-HILLS, although they have always Snow lying upon them, yet they are
exceeding rank with Grass, insomuch that they are become a Proverb amongst the
Welshmen, That those Mountains will yield sufficient Pasture for all the Cattle
in Wales, if they were put upon them together; and it is certain that there are
Pools and standing Waters upon the top of these Mountains, and they are so
coated with a snowy Crust that lies on them, That if a Man does but lightly set
his foot any where upon the top of them, he shall perceive the Earth to stir
for several Foot from him, which probably might occasion the Story of the
floating Island before mentioned.

PEN-NEANMOUR, The great stony Head, a Hill so called in this County. It is an
exceeding high and steep Rock, which hanging over the Sea when it is Flood,
afordeth a very narrow Way for Passengers, having on the one side huge Stones
over your heads, as if they were ready to fall upon you, and on the other side
the raging Ocean lying off a wonderful steep depth under it; but after a Man
has passed over this, together with Pen-mean-Lythan, The less story Head, he
shall come to an open broad Plain that reaches as far as the Conway, in which
are bred a sort of Shellfish, which being Conceived of an Heavenly-dew, as is
conjectured, bring forth Pearl.

BANGOR-PENCHOR, so called, is also in is this County, a Bishop's See; the
Church was Consecrated to Daniel, Bishop hereof, but that which is now standing
is but a mean Structure; for Owen Glender, that notorious Rebel, who designed
to destroy all the Cities in Wales, set it on fire, because the Inhabitants of
this Place chose rather to side with the King of England than with him:
Hereupon the ancient Church being defaced, Henry Denry, Bishop hereof, did
afterward, repair it, about the Reign of Henry the Seventh, as we were
credibly informed by the Inhabitants,

Anglesey.
In this Island (which is computed to be in compass 85 Miles, or thereabout)
are frequently found and dug up in the lower Grounds, Bodies of huge Trees
with their Roots, and Firr-tres of a wonderful bigness and length, which Trees,
some believe, were cut down by the Romans, as the Inhabitants do say, That when
the Romans had Conquered this Island, they caused all the Woods to be cut down
and destroyed. This Island was in time past, full of Woods and Timber but
instead thereof now it yeildeth plenty of Corn, Sheep and Cattle. The Air is
indifferently healthful in most parts of it; here are likewise great store of
Millstones and Grind-stones, and in some places a sort of Earth of which they
make Alum and Copperas; also it yields such plenty of Wheat, that it seems to
be deserving of the Title of, The Mother of Wales.

Denbighshire.
The Air is cold, but very wholesome; the Snow lies long on the Hills, being a
hilly Country, the high Hills resembling the Battlements of Walls.

MOILENLLY-hill is the highest Hill in this Shire, having a Spring of very
clear Water upon the top of it.

WREXHAM in this County is about 16 Miles from Holy-well, and is much admired
for its Church-steeple, being a very curious Fabric, contrived according to
the most exact Draught and Models of Architecture, no where to be paralleled in
those parts for Workmanship, of which taking some small view, we passed into
Shropshire, of which I have already made mention.

I having already given a Relation of most of the Shires in Wales, and omitted
Monmouthshire, of which I could not in honor to the County pass by without a
Visit, so staying at Hereford some days, we set apart some time to go see
Monmouth, of which it follows.

Monmouth.
We found the Ways near Monmouth hard and rugged, and that Town to be environed
with Hills on all Sides, the Ruins of its Walls and Castle argue its Antiquity.
It has a fair Church and Marketplace, with a Hall for the Assizes and
Sessions. It Is governed by a Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, and the Inhabitants
do generally speak both the Welsh and English Tongue: They told us there, of
great Immunities and Privileges granted to them by the House of Lancaster, but
for no other thing is it so much renowned, as that it was first the Native
place, and gave Breath to Henry the Fifth, that Scourge of the French, and
glorious Pillar of the English Nation, who Conquered Charles the Sixth King of
France, and all his Army, and made him surrender up his Crown unto him, and
Acknowledge him the triumphant Conqueror: Here we were entertained with no
other Objects but what the stony Rocks, the dangerous Clifts, the towering
Mountains, and craggy Precipices did afford us, being now and then covered with
Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of Goats; the Inhabitants told us, That upon the
Black Mountain there, as they call it, or thereabouts, are some Hills so high,
whose Tops are so sharp, that two Persons may stand upon two different Points
thereof and discourse with one another, and understand each other very well,
although they must be forced to go some Miles before they can embrace each
other, but the truth of this I will not averr; certain I am* there are many of
them of so unconceivable a height, and so steep an Ascent, that they seem, as
it were, Nature's Stair-cases, by which we may climb up to some higher Region,
and have Intercourse with the Inhabitants of the Moon.

Thus have I given a true and faithful Relation of my Travels over England and
Wales, but cannot much commend the latter for their Cookery, yet for their
Linen it was indifferent sweet and clean: I could have mentioned several other
things, but what has been spoke of is most material.

FINIS.

