A PERSUASIVE TO REFORMATION AND UNION AS THE Best Security Against the Designs
OF OUR POPISH ENEMIES.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's- Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

A PERSUASIVE TO REFORMATION AND UNION.
THERE are none at this time, except such as are wilfully ignorant, but are
convinced what danger our established Religion and Government have of late
been, and still are in, from our Popish adversaries.

It is well known what these men have designed against us, and how near some of
their designs were brought toward execution, viz. to assassinate our Sovereign,
to subvert our Religion, to introduce the Popes monstrous tyranny and
usurpation, and probably to massacre all such as were likely to resist them or
oppose their designs. And though hitherto God has graciously disappointed
them; yet in all likelihood their Hopes are still great, and their designs
proportionable. It is true, God has hitherto defeated their conspiracies, and
caught them in the net which they have laid for others. This, as it should
encourage our hope and dependence on the Almighty, so should it excite our care
to be ever under his protection, and by this to endeavor the continuance of
the peace and happiness of this Kingdom. All that lies in the power of private
persons (to whom this discourse is addressed) to effect this, is, to present
their Prayers to God for his Blessing on this Nation, and to be such as God may
hear their Prayers. Let us therefore earnestly petition him, who is the giver
of mercies and safeguard of Nations, to continue his goodness to us in
preserving our Sovereign, influencing and directing public Councils, and
infatuating the designs of such who seek our subversion. But withal, when we
know, that if we regard iniquity in our hearts the Lord will not hear our
prayers; that it is in vain for us to hope for blessings from God, while we
provoke this fountain of blessings by our sins; and that we cannot with reason
imagine that our Prayers should find access to Heaven, while our iniquities
that cry to Heaven for vengeance make a separation betwixt God and us: Hence it
clearly appears, that,

1. Reformation, Repentance, and turning from our evil ways, conjoined with our
Supplications to God, is the chief means of this Nations security: and that
whoever they are, that break from their sins, and much more those that convert
others from the errors of their ways, are highly instrumental to promote this
Kingdoms happiness, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a
reproach to any people. To make this evident, consider (1.) that Sin on two
accounts tends to a Nations Ruin; First, by way of efficiency, as it makes men
brutish and foolish, and unable to understand what is really for their good; as
it dispirits them, and robs them of true courage and valor; and withal, as it
renders them contemptible, and hence first a scorn, and then an easy prey to
their Enemies. Secondly, meritoriously, as it provokes God to inflict his
Judgments, to raise up and prosper Enemies, and to defeat such counsels as have
a tendency to the Nations happiness. Thence was it, that God so severely
threatened the Israelites with calamities if they dared to provoke him by their
sins, Deuteronomy. 28. and so often executed those threats upon their provocations.

2. There are some sins which in a special manner God has threatened to punish
a Nation for, and that do in their own nature call for vengeance: And they are
such as immediately strike at the Majesty of God: For such bold affronts
challenge the Almighty, and call for vengeance upon the offenders. Hence we
find Idolatry, rejecting God and worshipping Idols, chiefly mentioned as the
Reasons of the Israelites desolation and captivity: Both by way of threatening,
when their miseries are foretold by Moses and the Prophets; as also the ground
of particular calamities and captivities, when they have befallen them. Thus
the Reason of the captivity of the ten Tribes is assigned (2 Kings 17.) to be
their making molten Images, worshipping the Host of Heaven, serving Baal,
making their children to pass through the fire, etc. And that for which God was
chiefly angry with Judah, was the sins of Manasseh, 2 Kings 23.26. together
with that mentioned 2 Chronicles. 36.16. But they mocked the messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, till there was no remedy. When men come to such an height
of impudence, as immediately to strike at God and his perfections, is it a
wonder that this jealous God should awake in fury and express his severe
displeasure against such offenders? If men will disown God, or deny his
Existence, or question either his Power or Truth, and dare to scorn and vilify
his Word; is there not Reason for the High and mighty One to vindicate his
Honor, and to manifest himself a God of infinite Power and Truth, by sensible
demonstrations of his Majesty, that have a tendency to awaken secure sinners,
and for ever to silence those that dare impudently to contend with the Almighty?

Let us consider, whether some of these sins are not committed, ay, and with an
high hand, and with monstrous impudence in this Nation. Though God is not
rejected by men's setting up of false Gods, yet he is by their denying the
Existence of him that is the true God. Though he is not dishonored by erection
of Altars to other Deities, yet is he abominably contemned by the profane
neglect of his own Ordinances, and the vile scorn that is cast upon them. Alas!
what a profligate age do we live in, wherein some dare not only say in their
hearts, but have the confidence to utter it with their mouths, that there is no
God, and others to deny his Providence and Superintendency over the world? Nay,
it presages ill, that there are such multitudes whose Actions publicly
proclaim that these are their Thoughts. For who durst profane Gods name by vain
Oaths and Curses, and much more by Perjury; who believes that there is a God,
who will not hold these Guiltless? Who durst be Indifferent in Religion, or
think themselves unconcerned to depend on God for his blessing, or to own his
Goodness in solemn praises; who believe that God governs the world, and that in
him we live, move and have our beings? And lastly, who durst contemn and
vilify such whose office is to be Ministers of Gods worship, and Pastors of
Souls; who believe that there is a God that is to be worshipped, or that they
have Souls that are immortal and capacitated for the enjoyment of endless
felicity? Now when it is too evident that Gods Being is questioned, his
Providence denied, his name blasphemed, his word scoffed at, his worship
neglected by so many, and by others exposed to scorn as the product of folly
and Melancholy, and lastly, his Ordinances and whatever is Sacred is contemned;
may not God say to us, as he did to the Jews, Shall I not visit for these
things, and shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5.9. I
might likewise here have shown, how that these things not only merit
destruction, but also are the immediate causes, inlets and Instruments of that
from which we chiefly fear our miseries: I mean that Irreligion is the chief
means to bring in Popery. For when men are indifferent about Religion, any
Religion is alike to them, supposing it comply with their corrupt inclinations
and interests: Now it is likely they will soonest choose that, wherein they are
deluded with hopes of sinning securely, and yet dying happily.

3. One thing that inhances a Nations sins and hastens their ruin, is, when
they are persisted in after Judgments that God has used to reclaim them. It is
clear that Incorrigibleness is in men's esteem an addition to other offenses,
and renders the person unworthy of pity: And to be sure it is thus in Gods
esteem, Amos 4.6, to 13. Englands case in many respects runs parallel with that
of Israel, beginning at the tenth verse. May not God say to us, I have sent
among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, when my destroying Angel
slew such multitudes in London and other places of the Nation. Your young men
have I slain with the sword. In the late Civil wars I gave the Sword a
Commission to destroy multitudes, when Father was against the Son, and the Son
against the Father, when there were so great confusions brought upon the Land,
when a pious King was cut off, his Son exiled, the Nobles debased, the usurping
government frequently changing, that England being emptied from one Vessel to
another might be purified from her dregs, and yet she continues filthy and
impure: Besides, the multitudes that have more lately been slain in wars with
your Neighbors: Yet have you not returned to me says the Lord. Besides this,
that you might in one dreadful spectacle behold a monument of my wrath against
sin, I have wrought a thing that neither you nor your forefathers ever beheld,
nor could have expected; I have overthrown some of you as God overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrha. I made your City that was your pride and glory, a desolation,
reduced that place to Ashes which made England admired, envied and feared by
her neighbors: And may not God add, yet have you not returned unto me?

4. Another aggravation of a Nations sins is, when they are committed against
signal favors; when we dare to offend him, while he is loading us with his
Benefits. Moses frequently mentions mercies received as a strong obligation to
the Israelites to obey him who had wrought such great things for them. If God
delivered them from bondage, wrought mighty things for them in Egypt and at the
Red Sea; if he provided food for so great a multitude in a barren wilderness,
acted toward them as a nursing Father, chose them for his peculiar people; God
justly expects a stricter obedience from them for whose sakes he had done all
this. And therefore afterward God on this account aggravates their sins by his
Prophets. As Jer. 2.4, 5, 6. Now certainly if God ever dealt graciously toward
a Nation, he has acted thus toward us; and consequently we are a vile
ungrateful people, if we live in Rebellion against him. Has not God planted us
in a fair place, given us a Land flowing with milk and honey, bestowed on us
manifold Blessings which our own Country produces, and by our shipping the
Riches of other Nations? Has he not bestowed spiritual Blessings on us in a
great measure, that we have his Candlestick in the midst of us, that we enjoy
the Gospel so clearly preached, that we are a Church so excellently reformed,
so as to reject the corruptions of Rome, and yet to retain that Government
which has continued from the Apostolic Age? Has not God graciously delivered
us from the designs of those who have endeavored to reduce us under the Papal
Tyranny, and to introduce their corrupt doctrines and superstitious practices?
I might mention Gods bringing to light and disappointing the Plots laid against
Queen Elizabeth, and the Hellish conspiracy of the Powder-Traitors, and other
mercies of ancient date: As also the deliverance of us from sad confusions by
the happy restoration of our Gracious Sovereign. But that which now chiefly
challenges our observation, is Gods discovery of the abominable traitorous
designs of the Papists to murder the King and others that stood in their way,
and hence to subvert our Religion and Government: And that God should discover
this when it was so near taking effect. We cannot but own these to be singular
favors, if we duly considered them; and consequently our selves to be a
wretched unworthy Nation, if notwithstanding all these, we go on to provoke
that God who bestowed them on us.

5. I might have named another circumstance or two which heighten a Nations
Guilt, viz. when sin is committed with an High hand, and wickedness is impudent
and barefaced; as also when the Guilt is universal, when all ranks and degrees
of men are degenerate. But seeing this excellently handled by Dr. Stillingfleet
(in a Fast Sermon on 1 Samuel 12.14, 15.) as also I am not so well able to apply
this as the former from my ignorance of the state of this Nation; I leave
others to consider whether a Spirit of Irreligion and contempt of what is
Sacred has not overspread the face of this Land; and whether from hence many
abominable practices which former Ages would have blushed at, have not been
boldly committed among us. Lay all this together, and we may conclude our Guilt
is great, and our fears of Punishment too well grounded: When our sins are
great, and of such a nature as ordinarily provoke God to plague a Nation; when
committed notwithstanding former warnings and chastisements which he has used
to amend us; when persisted in notwithstanding Gods signal favors, which he
has vouchsafed to us to lead us to Repentance: So that God may say to us, as
he did to the Jews, Esaias 5.4, 5. What could have been done more to my Vineyard,
that I have not done to it? Wherefore when I looked it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? And now go to; I will tell you what I
will do to my Vineyard; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be
eaten up: And break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down: And I
will lay it waste. Lastly, when our Kingdom is so overspread with guilt, and
hardened in iniquity, when they have (as Isaiah speaks, Chap. 5.3.) made their
faces harder than a rock, and refused to return; may we not expect that
sentence to follow which is denounced ver. 9. Shall I not visit for these
things? says the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this?

6. Though we have just ground to fear the wrath of God, if we persist in our
Rebellion against him; yet withal we have sufficient ground to hope, that if we
Repent and turn from our evil ways, iniquity shall not be our ruin, Ezekiel.
18.30. This we are assured of, both from the Promises that God has made to
Returning sinners, and from the Examples of his Mercy in pardoning penitent
persons and Nations. As for Promises, it is sufficient to instance in that of
Jer. 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning
a Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that Nation
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil
that I thought to do unto them. And as for Examples of Gods pity in forgiving
such as have repented, and his forbearing to inflict the vengeance he had
denounced, that in Jonah 3. will suffice. God had there denounced a sentence of
destruction against Nineveh, and prefixed the time of its Execution: Yet forty
days and Nineveh shall be overthrown. When the Inhabitants of that City upon
this message fasted, cried mightily unto God, and decreed that every one should
turn from his evil way and the violence of his hands: We are told, verse. 10.
that God saw their works that they turned from their evil way, and God repented
of the evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not. We
know that Gods hand is not shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy
that it cannot hear: He is both able and willing to do us good, did not our
iniquities separate between us and our God, and our sins cause him to hide his
face from us that he will not hear, when we pray for mercies. But withal we are
assured in such a case, that if we humble our selves and pray, and seek his
face, and (together with that) turn from our wicked ways, that God will hear
from Heaven, and will forgive our sins, and will heal our Land, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
What therefore should each of us do, in order to the securing of this Nation
and the continuance of those blessings we enjoy, but search our hearts and try
our ways, and turn unto the Lord our God? If we would have God to preserve the
life of our gracious Sovereign, to give him a wise and understanding heart, to
direct and bless public Councils, and hereby secure our lives, our liberties,
our peace, our Religion, and other blessings which God has hitherto
vouchsafed; it is our interest to do what God requires, Isaiah 1.16. Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to
do evil, learn to (...), seek judgment, relieve the oppressed -- It follows,
verse. 18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as (...)ol. If ye be willing and
obedient, ye shall eat the good of ^he land: But if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. As
this which I am persuading you to, has an immediate influ^nce on the Nations
welfare, so it has upon each particular persons eternal felicity. Let every
one therefore forsake his evil ways: Let him that stole, steal no more; let him
that has wallowed in uncleanness, learn how to possess the vessel of his body
in sanctification and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the
Gentiles that know not God. Let him that has followed strong drink and has
been mighty to drink wine, take heed lest at any time his heart be overcharged
with surfeiting and drunkenness. Let such, who have vented Oaths and curses,
for which the Land mourns, and by which the name of God is so highly
dishonored, beware lest any such corrupt communication proceed out of their
mouths. Let such, who have scoffed at God and his providence, who have derided
the Holy Scriptures and whatever is Sacred, now live as in the presence of his
infinite Majesty, and manifest for the future as great a Zeal in vindicating
the glory of God, as ever they expressed their folly and madness in opposing
it. I am sensible what entertainment such a discourse as this is, will probably
meet with among these last named, that hate any thing that is serious, and
scorn the most Sacred truths, though consonant to the best improved Reason, and
backed with the highest authority. And seeing such men endeavor to baffle
their own Reasons, and consequently will not be restrained by principles of
Conscience; it is fit they should be restrained by Laws, and those to be new
made; seeing former Ages never supposed such offenses, and thence never enacted
any punishment to be inflicted on such offenders. But I proceed to others who
are more likely to attend. Let me entreat you as you desire Englands
prosperity, and therein the welfare of your intimate acquaintance and friends,
the happiness of your children and posterity both now and when you are dead and
gone, nay, as you desire your own felicity in this world, as well as in
another; take care to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world: discharge the Duties you owe to
God and man. Neglect not the public worship of Almighty God, but be constant
in joining with others in solemn Prayers and Praises, and in attendance on the
word of God as the means of salvation, as also in celebrating the infinite love
of Christ, and partaking of the benefits of his passion in the Lords Supper.
Lest God in justice deny to us the privileges we now enjoy, and suffer such to
prevail, who use an unintelligible way of worship, having their prayers in an
unknown tongue, and a corrupt superstitious way of Worship (not to say any
worse of it) in robbing the people of one part of the Lords Supper, and in
robbing Christ of his mediatory office by substituting other Mediators in his
room. Could I hope that my words would have any influence on the people of this
Land, I would entreat all sorts of men to live worthy of the vocation wherewith
they are called, and to live answerable to the particular calling and station
wherein God has set them. I would beg of the Magistrates that they would
discountenance sin, that they would encourage Virtue and Holiness. Where sin is
punished and offenders restrained, the community ceases to be involved in
guilt. Phinehas executed Judgment and the Plague was stayed. Where Laws are
wanting, or not strict enough (as in the case of Fornication and Adultery) let
new ones be enacted. I would entreat the Clergy that they would both by their
lives and doctrine set forth Gods word; and that they would beware lest by
their loose lives they bring scorn on Gods worship they are Ministers of; cause
those great truths to be slighted which they preach, when they oppose them by
their practice; and lastly, cause that Church to be evil spoken of, of which
they are members and Pastors. But I must not proceed any further in such
requests, when my discourse is chiefly addressed to private Christians. Such
would I entreat both in their own persons to walk circumspectly, and in
reference to others, to endeavor to reduce such as walk in sin, and to train
up such as are committed to their care in the fear of God and in the paths of
Righteousness: that they would teach their children, what Religion that is, and
what the principles and precepts thereof are, to which they were devoted in
Baptism; and withal what obligations they have to walk therein: that they would
restrain what vices they see in their children, and both direct and encourage
them in the practice of Piety. This would tend to make the present and future
generations happy. But I shall conclude this with the words of Samuel, 1 Samuel
12.20. to the last Verse, Fear not; (ye have done all this wickedness:) yet
turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your heart.
And turn ye not aside; for then should ye go after vain things, which cannot
profit nor deliver: for they are vain. For the Lord will not forsake his people
for his great names sake. (Verse 24, 25.) Only fear the Lord, and serve him in
truth with all your heart: for consider how great things he has done for you.
But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your King.

As our Sins are just grounds of our Fears, so likewise are our Divisions and
breaches: which I handle distinctly, not as if they were not sins, but because
on many reasons they have a particular unhappy aspect on these Kingdoms. And
consequently,

II. Union, Peace and Love are a chief means of averting the miseries we fear,
and securing the blessings which we now enjoy. I shall endeavor to make this
appear by considering what influence our Divisions and Animosities have upon
our miseries, and what reasons we have from hence to fear, lest our Jesuitical
Enemies should prevail against us. And that (1.) as they provoke Gods
displeasure against us: (2.) and as they afford our Enemies so great advantages
to hurt and destroy us.

1. Our Divisions may justly provoke the God of love and the Prince of peace to
be displeased at us; in that we find him so frequently and earnestly pressing
us to seek peace and ensue it; and as much as in us lies, to live peaceably
with all men, Romans 12.18. In that he represents that wisdom that is from above,
as first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated -- without
partiality, Jam. 3.17. When likewise we find in his word, that love, joy (or
rejoicing in others good) peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, are
fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. Whereas on the other side, Hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings are called the works
of the flesh, Verse 20, 21. When withal we find Loving one another made a
Character of Christ's disciples, John 13.35. and those that separate themselves
are joined with such as are sensual, and that have not the Spirit, Jude 19. Now
can we imagine that God should act with that kindness which he shows to his
obedient Servants, toward those who disobey his strict command of keeping the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace? Or vouchsafe those favors, which
belong to his people, to such as walk contrary to the Spirit of Christianity?
Strife, Contention and Divisions proceed from the Devil, who has his names in
the sacred languages of Satan and Diabolus, from his Enmity to mankind, and his
false accusing of Gods people: And if it be too severe to make Hell the rise of
these things, yet to be sure they proceed from the worst thing on Earth, viz.
men's Lusts, Jam. 4.1. Now can we suppose that God will own those for his people
or have regard unto their prayers, who do the works of the Devil, and indulge
themselves in the works of the flesh? Have we ground to hope that God will hear
us, when we present our supplications for our King and those that are in
authority under him, that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all
godliness and honesty; when we do not lift up pure hands to God without wrath
and debates? 1 Timothy 2.8. No, we are so far from having reason to expect Gods
favor, that we have just ground to fear that God will deliver us up to suffer
in the same cause under the same Enemies, that then at least we may learn to
lay aside our animosities: As it happened in the differences betwixt those two
eminent Bishops and fellow sufferers in Queen Mary's days, Ridley and Hooper.

2. Our Divisions afford our Enemies great advantages against us. It is an
ordinary, but yet withal a true observation, that civil discords have done more
to ruin Nations than foreign invasions: However, that from hence Enemies have
been encouraged to invade such as are before weakened and prepared for slavery;
such who are so heated against each other, that they will not unite though for
their common safety. This is particularly observed by Tacitus a grave Historian
( in vita J. Agric.) how the ancient inhabitants of this Nation became
subjected to the Romans. Non aliud adversus validissimas gentes pro nobis
utilius, quam quod in commune non consulunt. Nothing more helped the Romans to
overthrow the valiant Britains, than their not agreeing among themselves for
the common interest. I wish some of our Brethren, who pretend to be the
greatest Enemies of the Roman Religion, and decry all they dislike in the
Polity of our Church as Popish, would seriously consider what the consequence
of their Zeal is like to be, while carried forth in opposing them, who are
equally concerned with themselves to oppose that common Enemy. Nay, I wish all
sorts of men among us, who hate the corruptions and usurpations of Rome, would
consider this; so as to abate their heats toward each other, to study those
things which make for peace and union, and heartily endeavor (so far as lies
in their power) the healing of our breaches: lest we become surprised amidst
our divisions, and Britany (which God prevent) be once again brought under the
Romish yoke. It has been long thought, and is now more manifest, that the hand
of the Jesuit is in all our divisions: They send their Emissaries to personate
sometimes one party, sometimes another, hereby to increase our flames, to
heighten our distractions, and to weaken the Protestant interest, that hence
they may the more easily prevail against us. The discovery of the late horrid
Plot has brought to light their devices of this kind; how the Jesuits have
interested themselves in our feuds, and as Preachers among dissenters have
animated them against the established government: and they knew if they could
effect this, we should with greater ease become a Prey to their teeth. Further,
it is well known how they make use of our Divisions to persuade persons to
their communion, where (if they may be believed) is nothing but union and
concord; and not only so, but the readiest means to end all controversies by
the Infallible authority of their Church. Now though the Vanity of this
Pretense has been sufficiently detected by such, who have shown what divisions
are among them, and that the remedy they so much boast of, viz. the Popes
authority, has been so far from healing or allaying their heats, that usually,
when it has been interposed, it has inflamed and exasperated them: Yet these
things many are ignorant of, and therefore our dissensions are made use of by
the Popish factors to seduce poor ignorant persons into their delusions.
Certainly therefore it concerns us to do all we can to deprive them of this
advantage against us, if not by being all of one opinion, (which is impossible)
yet by taking care not to be of different factions and parties.

The Atheist likewise from hence seeks a pretense for his folly: because he
sees such variety of parties in Religion, therefore he will be of none: which
arguing is as foolish as it would be in any to say there is no true coin,
because there is so much that is counterfeit, and therefore he will take no
money. However, it is our concernment and duty not wilfully to afford any matter
of derision to these scoffing Ishmaels, who when they cannot dispute, will
endeavor to laugh men out of their Religion; and think to do that by
blasphemous drollery, which they are unable to do by force of argument. Though
we cannot stop these men's mouths, or hinder their irreligious laughter; yet let
us endeavor by our Union to bereave them of one of their pretenses.

I wish I could as easily cure our breaches, as I can weep over them; or find
out means for our Union, as I can affectionately desire it; or persuade persons
to the use of such means, as I can prescribe them. I know that as the whole
Kingdom would share in the Benefits of such a happy closure, so most men might
be instrumental one way or other to procure or promote it. I know withal, that
as our Governors both in Church and State move in an higher orb, so they may
have a more especial influence in healing our breaches. But yet I am sensible,
that it becomes not a private person, in such a public way as this, to address
himself to them that are in authority, and thence have the stamp of Divinity
upon them: Neither can I suppose that they will cast their Eyes on this
Discourse. I shall therefore only pray for them; that God would inspire them
with true wisdom, that they may in the first place mind the concerns of
Religion, the honor of God, and the happiness of the Church; upon which the
welfare of the Kingdom chiefly depends: and that from hence (as an excellent
means to promote these ends) they may study the things that make for peace and
Union: That as Nursing Fathers, they would so far comply with the infirmities
of their weak children, as may tend to the good of the community, so as in the
mean while the government be not unhinged, nor their authority diminished or
weakened: that God would make them value Peace and Union among Christians, as a
Jewel worthy to be purchased with laying aside many things that are of their
own nature indifferent, supposing no considerable damage or inconvenience
attend such an alteration: In a word, that God would so direct them in the
management of the government, that under them we may lead quiet and peaceable
lives in all godliness and honesty, in all concord and amity.

Leaving therefore my Superiors, I address my self to those in whose power it
very much consists to put an end to our unhappy divisions; and those are my
Brethren of the Separation (for I must esteem them Brethren whatever their
thoughts are of me or carriage toward me.) These I would humbly beg to obey
that Gospel-command, Ephesians. 4.3. to endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace. And that in Romans 14.19. that they would follow after the
things which make for peace. And here let me request of you, who have forsaken
your legally constituted Pastors, who have withdrawn your selves from our
public Assemblies, to do these two or three following things, which as they
are in themselves reasonable, so they are things that make for peace: I mean
chiefly the peace of the Church of God, but together herewith the peace of your
own Consciences.

1. Impartially examine the truth, lawfulness and reasonableness of those
things which you reject, and for the sake of which you have left, or are about
to leave our Assemblies. Condemn not any thing used by us in Gods Worship,
before it has had a legal trial at the Bar of your own Reason, and there be
found contrary to the Laws of our Heavenly King. If you will reject any thing,
without trying whether it be lawful, though it be commanded by the Law of the
Land; or embrace any doctrines, which have not been before heard of, before you
have examined the truth thereof; you are no way secure from giving heed to the
grossest delusions, and in a ready way to be Papists, Quakers, or what not? For
to act thus, is to put out your own Eyes, or however to shut them; and then to
choose your way blindfold: which whoever does, we wonder not if he miss the
right way, or runs upon that which is exceeding hazardous. Consider that what
is performed in our Assemblies are the injunctions of those higher powers, to
whom God requires us to be subject, and that for Conscience sake, Romans 13.1, 5.
Neither are we to disobey them, or to refuse to do what they require, but when
their commands oppose the Laws of God. Consequently we should examine the
injunctions of our Superiors, and not dare to reject them, before we find that
they are contrary to the Law of God. For otherwise we may oppose Gods will,
while we seem zealous for it; and transgress the Command of God which requires
obedience to the higher powers, while we refuse to obey their Laws which we
never found to be any transgression of the Law of God. In this your Trial, make
Gods will your Rule. Be not led by the Examples of others, nor induced to think
any thing lawful or unlawful, true or false, merely because such whom you
esteem pious and Religious are of that mind. For besides, that the best of mere
men are imperfect and fallible in this life; the giving heed to any doctrine or
practice, because men that make great pretenses of piety are of that mind, is
the way to expose you to the worst of Errors. We know that the Devil, and his
instruments too, appear as Angels of light; many Popish Monks are men of strict
lives; some Quakers are persons of great uprightness in their dealings; and
indeed what Heretics have showed themselves in the world, but they have at
first appeared in the guise of extraordinary Sanctity? So that if we should
always give heed to, and follow the ways of every one that appears in the world
under more than ordinary shows of Godliness, we should never be fixed on any
sure foundation; but must be always wavering, always changing. And indeed many
instances might be given of persons, who upon such slender Reasons have
withdrawn themselves from their Parish-Churches, and from thence have fallen
from one Error to another, till at length they have fallen into gross
delusions, and some into Atheism. In this Trial, make use of those helps which
God in his providence affords you: I mean the assistance of able peaceable
Divines and of their Writings. I know if I should direct you to the Friendly
Debate or Dr. Combers explications of our public Prayers, or any other
Treatises of this nature which are written by Conformists, you will with
disdain reject my advice. I shall therefore only desire you to read the
writings of some learned Non-conformists: viz. those of Mr. John Ball against
Separation, and others written long since; and especially Mr. Baxters Cure of
Church-divisions, and Mr. Tombs his Theodulia, which have been published of
late.

2. If upon impartial trial you cannot satisfy your selves, so far as to
comply with every thing that the Magistrate enjoins; yet however seriously
consider whether you have ground enough from thence to forsake the Communion of
the Church of England, and to withdraw your selves from our Assemblies. To this
end consider in what things we and you agree, as well as in what things we
disagree: particularly, whether there be not a full agreement in all the
Essentials and Substantials of Christian Religion. We both own the same Lord
Jesus Christ: we agree in the same Faith, and that not only in the main
fundamentals, but also in lesser matters, there being few (if any)
Non-conformists, who do not approve the doctrinal part of the Thirty Nine
Articles of the Church of England. We both hope to obtain the same Heaven, and
both to obtain it the same way, viz. by Faith in Christ manifested in an holy
conversation. Nay further, we both agree in the main parts of Gods Worship: And
that both in reference to the object of our Worship, and manner of it. We and
you worship the same God, and him alone: We pray not to Saints or Angels: We
pay no adoration to the consecrated Bread in the Lords Supper: We bow not down
to Images. We worship God in the inward acts of our Souls, our Faith in God,
our reliance and dependence on him, our Love to him, our Sense of his infinite
goodness, and the like graces and affections; and by expressing these in such
outward acts, which God has ordained, and you and we own them as his
Institutions, such as Prayer, Thanksgiving, hearing the Word, and the two
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper. Where is the difference in all this
betwixt you and us? It must be therefore in something that is circumstantial:
And is this a sufficient Reason to separate from us? It is evident that God
has not obliged us to this or that Gesture in his Worship, suppose it be but
reverent; that he has not determined circumstances this way or that, but has
left them to humane prudence. I will clear this by one instance. As we both
acknowledge Prayer to be one especial part of Gods Worship; so we hold, that
the chief things we are to request of God, are Pardon, Sanctification,
assistance against temptation, and the like: We both own, that our petitions
are to be put up in and through the same Mediator Jesus Christ: We both hold,
that it is the fervent desire of our hearts, and the representation thereof to
God, that makes our prayers to be indeed such; And that the holy Spirit works
in our Souls a sense of our wants and an earnest desire that they may be
supplied. This is all that concerns the essence of Prayer, and herein we are
agreed. But in reference to the gesture, (supposing it be such as becomes dust
and ashes when they address themselves before the great King of Kings) God has
not determined whether it should be kneeling, standing, or lying prostrate on
our faces; and therefore any of these may be used: In reference to Time,
whether it should be this or that hour for public prayer; and therefore that
time should be employed therein, which humane prudence determines as most
convenient. And the same is true in reference to words in Prayer: For God has
not determined whether our desires should be represented in words premeditated,
or in words immediately conceived: Neither of these are of the essence of
Prayer, neither of them particularly commanded of God, so as to exclude the
other: both have been used by Saints in the Holy Scriptures, and both approved
by God. Therefore when any ask, Where God has required forms of Prayer in
Scripture? I would ask these persons, Where God has required extemporary
Prayers? And when they demand, where our Common prayers are to be found in Gods
Word; I would enquire, where they find therein those particular Prayers which
they and their Ministers have poured out to God? By a serious consideration of
all this, you may easily understand how great our agreement is, and
consequently that those things must needs be small wherein we disagree; And
will you on account of such things separate from us? If any pretend there are
corruptions in our Church, I would desire such to consider the state of the
Churches in the time of Christ's Apostles, and see if they do not find as great
in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia; of Ephesus, Pergamus, Thyatira, (Rev.
2.) and of Sardis and Laodicea, (Rev. 3.) as they do among us: And withal
consider whether it would not have been a sin to separate from those Churches.
See this handled by Mr. Baxter in his Cure of Church-divisions, Chap. 5. I
cannot think of any thing that may be a just plea for Separation but this, That
something that is sinful is required as a condition of our Communion. The chief
thing that is instanced in, is this, that they must worship God by a Form of
Prayer. To make this plea good, they must show that forms of Prayer are sinful;
and to prove that it is a transgression of a Law, and instance in the
particular Law that is hereby violated. But the case is so far from this, that
we have Forms of Prayer mentioned in Holy Scripture, used by good men, and that
as an expression of their Piety; nay, in several cases prescribed by God
himself, or his extraordinary Ministers, as that Number. 10.35, 36. David and
other Psalmists penned Forms of Prayer and Praise to be used by the Church of
God in his Service. Neither was there any thing typical in this thing, nor any
thing that had respect to that legal Economy. And indeed if Forms of Prayer
were unlawful, then (which it would be blasphemy to utter) our Savior sinned,
when he bid his disciples when they prayed to say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11.2.
And when he himself prayed using the same words, Matthew. 26.44. And now I need
not add that the whole Church of God in all Ages and places from the Apostles
time, or however the next Ages after them, have used Forms and Liturgies, till
some few of late among our selves have condemned them. How Protestant Churches
beyond the Seas use them, is too well known to be here insisted on. About this
therefore I would only entreat you to consider (1.) whether any Christian, when
he begs Gods blessing on his meat, in the same words he has used formerly; or
renders thanks to God after his meals, in that form, or those expressions, he
has aforetime used; is he for this guilty of sinning against God? This must
follow if the use of Forms of Prayer be sinful. (2.) If our Nonconforming
Brethren use the same expressions, or the same method; does this involve them
in guilt? (3.) Consider, if Forms be unlawful, it is impossible that Christians
should join together in the same public Prayers to God, in that whatever
Prayer is uttered, though it be extempore in reference to him that speaks it,
yet it is a Form to them that join with him therein, they being tied up to his
words.

It will not be enough for any to make this a plea for their Separation, that
it is required of Ministers to use the Surplice and the Cross after Baptism,
supposing they are not satisfied of the lawfulness of them; much less those
Declarations and Subscriptions which are required of Ministers. For though
these are required in order to the Exercising of their Ministry, yet are they
not required as Conditions of communion with us. Hence our Nonconforming
Brethren may acquit themselves to God and their own Consciences, if upon
sincere endeavors used they cannot satisfy their judgments to do those
things, and therefore lay aside the exercise of their Ministry. Nay further,
this is enough to cause us to judge and act charitably toward them, while we
find them in other things conscientiously submitting to authority: I will
further add, that when we find many such, this should cause us to desire (if it
may seem good to our Superiors) that some means might be contrived for the
admittance of such to the Exercise of their Ministerial Function. Yet on the
other side, when those Subscriptions, etc, are not required of them as
conditions of Communion with us; this cannot justify them, or any other
private Christians, in their separating from our Assemblies; much less in their
setting up congregations in opposition to ours. If our Brethrens Consciences
will not permit them to Subscribe, etc. does their Consciences forbid them to
join in our Prayers, however to attend on the Preaching of our Ministers, in
order to which no such condition is required of them?

Having a little gone beyond my first intentions, (viz. to speak only to
private Christians) I will take leave briefly to answer one Objection that is
made in behalf of our Nonconforming Brethren. If we should do thus, we must
hide our Talents in a Napkin, live unsuitably to that office we are called to,
be unprofitable and unserviceable in our Generation. In answer to this, I will
not repeat what Non-conformists have in this case answered when urged by the
Brownists, especially that published by Mr. Rathband, and recited in the Second
Part of the Friendly Debate, page 183. That the Bishops act is the act of the
Church, that it lies in them to depose that may ordain, etc. But this I say,
first, that as many have, so more might, improve their abilities to the
advantage of Gods Church by their useful writings; others might be highly
beneficial, if in their private converse they instructed the ignorant, resolved
the doubts of them that are under scruples of Conscience, and the like pious
offices which they are not forbidden by the Law. (2.) I add, supposing our
Superiors permit it, they might preach publicly in some parts of this Kingdom
which are ill-provided with Ministers (as I have heard of a worthy person who
thus imploys himself in Wales) and not in great places, that are well furnished
with Preachers. As their preaching in such places might be beneficial, so their
undertaking would be approved by most, connived at by all. (3.) If they preach
in other places, is there any necessity in order to the employing their gifts,
that they preach at those times when our public Assemblies are held for Gods
worship; or are they hence constrained to set up Congregations in opposition to
ours? If God require of them to preach the Gospel, does he also require of them
that they should by their practice oppose and defy the Congregations of Gods
people that are legally established? Lastly, cannot they use their Talent of
preaching without administering the Sacraments in another charge, and without
withdrawing members from the flocks of others? I am sure the old
Non-conformists abhorred these practices, and condemned them in the Brownists:
And we know who were offended at such things in later days when they were
Ministers of Parochial Churches. I wish they would consider, whether those
Arguments, they then used against others, be not now of like force against
themselves.

But leaving this digression, I return to the Pleas which people make for their
Separation. And here I again say, that when there are no Declarations or
Subscriptions required of private Christians as conditions of their Communion,
these things are unjustly urged as Reasons of their Separation. As also the
pretense of the Surplice, when that is not to be worn by you, nor the Cross
after Baptism to be used by you; how can these then be grounds for you to
forsake us? As for Kneeling at the Lords Supper; I know indeed this is required
as a gesture in that Ordinance, but certainly unjustly excepted against. For
what Law of God forbids this, or requires any other gesture? If Christ's example
obliges us, it equally obliges us to celebrate the Ordinance after Supper, in
an upper room, and clothed with a seamless Coat. If we are obliged by Christ's
Example, then we are tied to the particular gesture which Christ used, and that
was the Tricliniary gesture, lying on a bed, etc. As for those that except
against this Gesture, as if herein we complied with the Papists in adoring the
Host; these persons, if learned, speak against their own knowledge; in that the
adoration the Papists pay to the Eucharist, is their falling down when the
Priest lifts up the Host in the Consecration of it: when withal the Church of
England professes (in the Rubric at the end of the Communion Service) that
this is only meant for an humble and grateful acknowledgment of the Benefits of
Christ -- And declares that thereby no adoration is intended, or ought to be
done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received, or unto
any corporal presence of Christ's natural Flesh and Blood. -- (that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians.) Read the rest.

I will only speak to one thing more, which is the chief ground why many
well-meaning persons desert us; We can profit more by hearing Non-conformists
than others, and therefore why should we not forsake our Parish-ministers to
hear them?

I answer, (1.) were this generally true that hereby men are better Christians
than they were before, we have reason to rejoice; in that more honor redounds
to God, and good to their own Souls. Are men hereby more acquainted with the
Perfections of God, so as to live in the sense of his All-seeing Eye, his
governing the world, his supplying us with blessings; so as continually to fear
and love him, daily to offer up their Prayers and Praises to him, and more
frequent in communicating of the Body and Blood of Christ in the Lords Supper?
Are they hereby more dutiful Children, loyal Subjects, obedient to them that
have the rule over them, and watch for their Souls, more faithful Servants,
more loving Neighbors, and as Parents, more careful to educate their children
in the nurture of the Lord? Are they more just in their dealings, more
charitable and loving in their demeanor, more humble and condescending to
their fellow-brethren, less censorious than formerly, less prying and
intermedling with the affairs of others, and in a word, doing the same to
others as they desire others should do to them? Lastly, are they hereby more
heedful lest their hearts should be overcharged with surseiting, drunkenness,
and the cares of this life; are they better able to command and regulate their
passions and affections; less solicitous for the things of this world, and more
ardently breathing after Heaven? I say if these, and the like Christian
qualifications are wrought in men's Souls by the labors of our Nonconforming
Brethren; we do therein rejoice, yea and will rejoice. I wish these effects
were more generally wrought among their Hearers: and that instead thereof many
did not make their Hearing them, and separating from us, a Cloak for their
sins. (2.) Suppose these be generally the fruits of their labors; I wish them
to consider, whether the like would not be produced, if their Preachers kept
their meetings at other times, than those wherein we assemble: and whether the
Hearers be the better Christians, for being hindered from joining with us in our
addresses to God, and attendance on his word. (3.) May not the like gracious
effects be expected in the hearing of their own Pastors that are Conformists?
If not, it must arise either from the insufficiency of the means, or the denial
of Gods Blessing upon it. As for the first, consider whether our labors tend
not to the foresaid ends, and whether the producing those effects is not the
great thing we drive at; and withal whether the greatest part of Conformist
Ministers are not fitted and qualified for this work? And as for Gods blessing,
it may in all reason be expected from those that attend on us; because they do
not offend God by needless separation, by forsaking the lawful Assemblies, by
withdrawing themselves from the Churches of Christ, and by breaking the bond of
peace in opposing them. Gods blessing is then chiefly to be expected by us,
when we walk in Gods ways. (4.) Suppose the Nonconformist you hear may more
warm and raise your affections, nay, suppose his Sermons better fitted to
inform you; if these benefits may be obtained in a lower degree in our public
Assemblies: Consider whether you ought to leave us, when you give so great
advantages to the Common Enemy, the Popish Agents, to destroy both you and us:
when you do so much mischief by your bad Example, in drawing others to
separate, or encouraging them in their Separation: and when from hence you
incur so much danger by Scandalizing others, (for that is Scandal, when we draw
others into sin, or hinder them in the ways of God:) for a woe is pronounced by
our Savior against such, ( Luke 17.1, 2.) and that it were better for him that
a millstone were hung about his neck, and he cast into the Sea. (5.) Consider
whether your practice be consistent with the Duties that God requires should be
performed to your legal Pastors, who labor among you and are over you in the
Lord: These you are commanded to esteem very highly in love for their works
sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. Now do you manifest any esteem or love toward them,
while by withdrawing your selves from hearing them you discourage them in their
labors? (6.) Supposing some N. C. be a more edifying Teacher, what necessity
is there that you should hear him in such a constancy as to reject your
Parish-Minister; or from hence to forsake our public Assemblies, and to
neglect the Sacraments administered in our Churches? Lastly, if this be a
sufficient reason to leave one Preacher and follow another, because he more
affects or pleases you, consider whether this will not be an inlet to all
delusions. If you leave your own Minister, whom you cannot but own preaches
the Gospel of Christ, to hear another who in your esteem preaches more
feelingly; you may on the same reason leave this new preacher, to follow
another and another, and never stop till you fall into gross Errors, to the
dishonor of God, the disturbance of the Church, and the perdition of your own
Souls. As the reason of the thing it self evidences this, so do the Instances
of many, who have run thus giddily, sadly evince the truth hereof. Take heed of
being in the number of those spoken of, 2 Timothy 4.3. who after their own lusts
heap to themselves teachers, having itching Ears. Such are in danger of turning
away their ears from the truth, and turning unto fables, Verse 4.

Having thus largely answered that objection, I again beseech you, Brethen, in
the bowels of love, as you desire the peace of your own Conscience, the peace
of the Church of God, and the prosperity and peace of England, that you would
seriously consider what I have propounded. It is our Duty to keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace: This Duty is not practiced by those, who
without any just grounds separate themselves from any true Church: There can be
no just ground of Separation from our Churches, unless you are put upon doing
something that is sinful in order to enjoying Communion with us: Nothing can be
sinful, but what is a Transgression of some Law of God. Now if any thing occur
to your own thoughts, or be propounded by others, as a violation of Gods Laws,
which is required as a condition of Communion with us; be serious in the
examination hereof, before you forsake our Assemblies upon the account of its
unlawfulness. In this trial I beseech you make Gods revealed will the Rule of
your Conscience, and not the Example or Judgment of such whom you esteem for
their Piety. Several persons remember how many, who before the late unhappy
troubles in this Nation were followers of the Non-conformists, though it is
probable on no other ground, but because they appeared to manifest a greater
Zeal for God than others; how these (I say) fell into monstrous extravagancies
after liberty was given to men to vent their fancies. Some who were at first
eager for the Presbyterian Government, immediately closed with the
Independents, when they appeared and preached more movingly to their
affections, or from such like ground: they in the mean while being unacquainted
with the state of the controversy, or the arguments used on each side. Hence
it is no wonder they joined with the Anabaptists, when they appeared with more
affecting expressions, or pretended new discoveries. Nay, afterward there was
not any newfangled Sect, but these men were ready to become its Proselytes and
Patrons; till at length some became Quakers, others Papists, and many of them
had their Religion to seek; and others were of no Religion, especially such who
had at any time run into the licentious madness of the Ranters. Whence
proceeded this, but from zeal without knowledge; hearkening to every body that
broached something new, and closing therewith without a serious trial? Now
consider what security any of you have from running into such extremes,
supposing the like circumstances as formerly; if you make the judgments or
Examples of others, whom you think pious and zealous for Religion, the Rule of
your actings or opinions?

Further consider, that where there is no necessity to separate, and so to be
of a Party; that this is so far from making you good Christians, that so far as
you are of a Party or Faction you are defective in Christianity. 1 Cor. 3.4.
While one says, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are you not carnal?

Let not any interpret my being larger in opposing Division and Separation,
than I was in speaking against Wickedness and Profaneness, as if I had kinder
thoughts for this than for the former: No, my thus doing proceeds only from my
kinder thoughts to you, my Brethren, who have already or are about to separate
from us. I have justly more grounds to hope that you will consider what I have
written, than such who are debauched and hardened in sin. And therefore I once
more beseech you, as S. Paul did the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.1. that ye walk worthy
of the vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as
ye are called in one hope of your calling; One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father of all. 1 These. 4.11. We beseech you, Brethren, (...), to be
ambitious to be quiet and peaceable, and to be as earnest in promoting unity,
as others are busy in making divisions and factions. This Christ and his
Apostles often require as a Duty; this they entreat Christians to be careful
about, and back their entreaties with the most pressing Arguments. Now if these
will not move you in point of Conscience, nor the danger we are all in from a
common Enemy (which by this means chiefly may be prevented) in point of
interest, I cannot hope that whatever I should urge further should prevail with
you.

My hope is only in God, who has the hearts of all men in his hand, and can
turn them as the Rivers of waters. To this fountain of all mercies will I make
my humble requests, that he would be pleased graciously to incline all our
hearts to desire and seek for peace; that he would sweeten the Spirits of
Christians, that are embittered against each other; that he would remove those
prejudices out of men's minds, which have caused our breaches, and continue to
widen them; that he would make men more careful to approve themselves Christ's
disciples by obeying his commands, than to be the disciples and followers of
men; Lastly, that he would put a stop to our divisions and distractions, and
find out means to bring us in his good time to an happy Union: And I doubt not
but all good Christians will join with me in this Prayer.

GRacious and heavenly Father, who art the God of Love and Peace, look with an
eye of pity upon thy poor distressed, distracted Church in this Kingdom; allay
our unchristian heats, heal our wounds, close our breaches, pour into all our
hearts a Spirit of peace, union and brotherly love; and grant that though we
cannot all be of one mind and judgment in this state of Error and Ignorance,
yet we may be of one heart and affection, so as to follow after those things
that make for peace, and avoid whatever has a tendency to Breaches, Separation
and Faction. Grant that petition, which thy dear Son and our blessed Savior
requested for all which should believe on him, to all Christian professors in
this Nation; that we all may be One, as thou Father art in him and he in thee;
that we may so join hands and hearts, as with one mind and one mouth to
glorify thee, our heavenly Father: That hereby thou may have the glory,
this Nation the advantage, and each Christian the comfort of this Union. Grant
this, we beseech thee, for thy Sons sake, who is the Prince of Life and Peace;
to whom with thee and the Holy Spirit of Peace, be all praise, honor and glory
now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

