A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL Of the Worshipful John Symonds, Late of Great Yeldham
in the County of Essex, Esquire.

Preached in the Parish Church of Great Yeldham aforesaid, on the 24th. of
February, 1692.

By John Brook, A. M. and Rector there.

With a short Account of his Life.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Lancaster, R. P. D. Hen. Ep. Land. a Sacris Domest.
May 25. 1693.
London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
1693.

To my Much Honored and very worthy Friend, Mris. JANE SYMONDS, Widow, OF THE
Worshipful John Symonds, late of Great Yeldham in the County of Essex, Esquire.
Good Madam,
WE live in an Age wherein the Belief of a future state, and of the happy
condition of Good Men in the other World, is, (its to be feared) very weak and
much decayed amongst many: and wherein the good Examples of such as mind this
Future Life, and live in order to it, are too rare and thin. I hope therefore
that it will not be thought Unseasonable by any at this time of day, to set
forth a short Discourse to establish us in the one, and to help us to a view of
the other; and that is the principal design of this SERMON: Which for the
Substance of it was first Preached, and now upon Your Request comes Forth with
some Enlargements; which the straitness of the time then allotted, would not
permit me to insist on: Such as it is, it is wholly devoted to the Churches and
to Your Service. And that it may be of use to support You under your great
Loss, and to induce such as shall Read it, to Believe what is here Asserted,
and to Live thereafter, by Imitating the Good Example that is here given them,
is, and shall be the hearty Prayer of

MADAM, Your very humble and most devoted Servant, Jo. Brook.

Text. REV. 14.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their Labors; and their Works follow them.


THIS Book is styled the Revelation of John the Divine, which hints to us both
the Author and the Nature of the Book.

1. The Author, viz. The Apostle and Evangelist St. John, that beloved disciple
of our Lord, who leaned on his bosom when he eat his last Supper, as we read,
John 13.23. and he is styled here (...), the Divine, (...), by way of special
emphasis; because like an Eagle (the usual emblem that is given him) which
soars higher than other Birds, and looks upon the rays of the Sun with
undazled eyes, (as the naturalist observes) he soared aloft, and writ more
sublimely of the Son of Righteousness, of the Divinity of Christ in this and in
his other Books, than any other of the Evangelists did. Pareus tells us, that
he finds no less than 48 Arguments for the divinity of Christ in this very
Book; and therefore well might he be styled the Divine, since he writ so
divinely of his Lord and Master.

2. The Nature of the Book is showed also by the Title, and so it is termed a
Revelation; so called, because it reveals and makes known, as many hidden
mysteries, so many future events, which should happen to, and befall the
Churches of Christ in after Ages. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God
gave unto John, to show unto his servants things that must shortly come to
pass, as you have it in Chap. 1. Ver. 1. It Is true indeed, this Revelation is
not without a mixture of much intricacy and obscurity: Tot habet Sacramenta,
quot verba (says St. Jerome); It has almost as many Mysteries as words. The
greatest part of it is Prophetical, a prophesy of future events of what should
happen in after Ages, 'till the end of the world: And all prophesies are
difficult and hard to be understood 'till they are fulfilled; till the time
comes, when the things foretold or prophesied of, take effect. Hence the wisest
and most learned of Divines have been very much puzzled and gravel'd in their
Explanations and Expositions of it: and after all their profoundest studies,
and most serious Enquiries, have confessed; That there are many knots here,
which they could never unty; many depths which they could never yet dive into;
many mysteries which they could never unfold: But as the greatest Rivers, so
the most mysterious Books of Scripture run not in the same continued depth;
though in some places they can scarce be sounded, yet in other places they show
their bottoms.

And thus, even thus it is with this mysterious book of the R^velations. In
some places (as it is usually observed of it) an Elephant may swim, in others a
Lamb may wade: some things are laid down so mystically in such dark prophesies
and abstruse Visions, as that the judgment of the Wisest may be much tried and
exercised therein; yea, often overpowered and nonpluss'd: And some things are
laid down so plainly and familiarly, as that the infirmities of the weakest may
be much succored and assisted. The one is done (as one observes) to prevent
contempt, the other to anticipate discouragement. Of the latter sort is my
Text; in which we have Two things considerable.

1. A positive and plain assertion touching the happy estate of such as die in
the Lord; Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, henceforth.

2. A strong confirmation of this assertion in the remainder of the Text; I
heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Write; yea, says the Spirit, that they may
rest from their Labors, and their Works f^llow them.

I shall take these in their order, and accordingly begin with the first of
these generals, viz.

1. The Assertion here laid down touching the happy estate of such as die in
the Lord: in these words of my Text, Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord,
henceforth. In which we have Two things further considerable.

1. The subjects of this Blessedness, and they are said to be The Dead that die
in the Lord.

2. The time whence this Blessedness does in a more especial manner commence;
Henceforth.

1. Then we have h^re the subjects of this Blessedness, and they are said to be
The Dead that die in the Lord. 1. The Dead; to understand which, we must know,
that there is a threefold Death; A corporal or natural death, which consists
in the separation of the soul from the body for a time; A spiritual death,
which consists in the separation of the soul from Gods gracious presence,
from his love and favor in this world; An eternal death, which consists in
the separation of the soul, and indeed of the whole man from Gods glorious
presence for ever in the other world. The first of these is here understood,
the Dead; that is such as are corporally dead, whose souls are separated from
their bodies for a time; not that all such are blessed in the other world more
by far of such (it is to be feared) are rather miserable there, than blessed:
for straight is the gate and narrow is the way, that leads to everlasting life,
and few there be that find it, as our Savior tells us; few alas! in comparison
of those that miss of it: but that such of those dead are happy or blessed,
that die in the Lord: which is the second thing to be opened, viz. what it is
to die in the Lord? And there is some variety amongst Expositors about the
interpretation of this phrase: Some there are that tell us, that (...) is put
here for (...); that to die in the Lord in this place, is to die propter
Dominum, or Domini causa, for the Lord, or in the Lords cause; in defense of
his Truth against Antichrist, as the Holy Martyrs did; and they quote several
parallel places of Scriptures (where the phrase (...), in the Lord, is to be so
taken) to confirm what they say, as Romans 16.12. and Ephesians. 4.1. and do moreover
allege the context, and the occasion of these words for this sense of them.
Others there are, that take these words in their proper sense, as not confined
to the martyrs only, to such as die for the cause of Christ, and do seal his
Truth with their Blood; but as belonging to all that die in the faith and fear
of the Lord: and so to die in the Lord with them, is to die in his faith and
fear; in his love and favor as all good men do: and they do quote also several
places of Scripture to confirm this sense of theirs; where this phraze is so
used; as Romans 16.7. salute Andronicus and Junia which were in the Lord before
me (says St. Paul); that is, which were believers, which were in the faith
before him: and 1 These. 4.14. If we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, i. e. which die in Jesus, will God
bring with him; and to mention no more places to this purpose, see Ver 16. of
the same Chap. The Lord himself (says the Apostle) shall descend from Heaven
with a shout wi^h the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God, and
the dead in Christ shall rise first; the dead in Christ, i. e. those that die
in the faith of Christ; as all true believers do; interested in him, in his
love and favor.

The words in my Text, may be taken, I humbly conceive, in both these Senses;
and though possibly, the first sense given of them may be primarily intended in
it, yet the second is in no sort to be excluded: for though the Martyrs, and
such as die for the truth and cause of Christ, may have the greatest share in
this blessedness, as being most capacitated for it, and most deserving of it;
yet such as die in the faith and fear of Christ, as all good men do; are
blessed as well as they: and that (...), ab hoc tempore; henceforth, as we
render the Original; which brings me to the second thing observable in my first
general, viz.

2. The circumstance of time whence this blessedness does in a more especial
manner commence, comprised in this word henceforth; Blessed are the dead that
die in the Lord, henceforth. Not, but that the dead that died in the Lord were
blessed before this time; always blessed, and that too from the very first
moment of their dying, whatever the Papists talk to the contrary in defense of
their Purgatory, and Limbus Patrum; but that they were so now in an especial
manner, when this Book (I mean of the Revelations) was written; in that they
would by this means, be as it were housed and secured from that severe storm of
persecution; which then hung over the Church of Christ, and which was to be
raised by the Beast and Antichrist against the saints and servants of God; but
so much shall suffice for the explication of the first thing observable in my
Text; the Assertion here laid down touching the happy estate and condition of
such as die in the Lord, in these words of it; blessed are the dead that die in
the Lord, henceforth. I come now to the Second general, viz.

2. To the Confirmation of this Assertion in the remainder of my Text, and we
have it confirmed to us Three ways.

1. By a voice from Heaven; I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the Dead, etc. 2. By the Testimony of the Holy Spirit upon the
earth, Yea, says the Spirit. 3. By the reason of the thing, or the ends that
are given here why good men die; That they may rest from their Labors, and
that their Works may follow them.
1. Then we have this assertion here confirmed by a voice from Heaven; I heard
a voice from Heaven saying unto me, write, Blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord, henceforth. We read in the Scriptures, of several Voices that have been
heard from Heaven to confirm us in the Principles of our Religion, and in the
Articles of our Creed.

The voice heard from Heaven by St. John in my Text, was to Confirm him and us,
in the last Article of our Creed, touching the Happiness of the dead, and the
glorious estate of the triumphant Church in the life to come: and what greater
confirmation can we desire to establish us in any truth, than a voice from
Heaven? since a voice from Heaven tells us, that the dead that die in the Lord
are blessed; we have no reason in the world to doubt of it. For who can know,
who are in Heaven, and what is the estate and condition of those that are
there, better than those that are in Heaven, or have come from thence, as this
voice did? we have no better way to know what is done in China, or in the
East Indies; or how happy the Inhabitants of those Countries are; Than by
talking with one that has been in those parts, or is come from thence: we have
no better way to know what is done in Heaven, and how happy they are that are
got thither; than by talking with, and hearing of those that live there, or
have come from thence: and therefore I say, since the blessedness of those that
die in the Lord has been confirmed to us by a voice from Heaven, we have all
the reason in the world to believe it. But then,

2. We have this truth confirmed to us, as by a voice from heaven; so also by
the testimony of the holy spirit upon earth: I heard a voice from heaven saying
unto me, blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, henceforth; (...); yea,
says the Spirit, viz. the Divine Spirit, or the Holy Ghost (as the word Spirit
does often import in this Book, and in other Books of the sacred Scriptures):
as if the voice, or he that uttered the voice, had said to St. John; it is not
only I, who am, but possibly an Angel, a fellow creature of thine, a bare
messenger sent from Heaven to tell thee, this; that say so: but the divine
Spirit, the Holy Ghost himself, who is equal with God the Father, says so; and
that not only in multitudes of places in the Scriptures, but in the hearts and
consciences of all good men, of all true believers: This Holy Spirit says yea;
to what I have said, gives his (...), his Amen, or v^^^ly to ^t, and has
commanded me to tell thee as much; and therefore thou have reason to believe
it: For what he says and declares, is, as he says it is, and as he declares
it to be; and whatever he promises or threatens shall accordingly in time he
performed and made good. He is, (as we are told) a Spirit of Truth, a faithful
Witness, one that cannot lie, as the Apostle expressly tells us, Tit. 1, 2. his
word shall be made good to a tittle. Heaven and earth shall pass away but not
one Iota, not the least tittle of what he has said shall go unfulfilled; as
our Savior assures us, Mat. 5.18. He is not a man, that he should lie,
neither the Son of man, that he should repent: has he said it, and shall it
not be made good? said Balaam, Numb. 23.19. the sons of men indeed are often
liars; men of low de^ree (says the Psalmist) are vanity, and men of high
degree are a lie, Psa. 62.9. they will say and unsay many times with the same
breath: we have no sure hold of their word, no sure ground to build upon their
assertions; but it is not so with the Spirit of God: we may safely build upon
his word: it is imp^ssible that he should lie or deceive any, as the Apostle
tells us, Heb. 6.18. Truth is of his very nature and essence, and he may as
soon cease to be, as cease to be true: but that is the second ground given in
my Text, why we should believe, that such as die in the Lord are Blessed,
because the Holy Spirit has affirmed it, and gives his yea to it; Blessed are
the dead that die in the Lord, yea, says the Spirit. But then,

3. As the Spirit says so, as it is evident and clear from what the Spirit
tells us in the Holy Scriptures and in the hearts and consciences of all good
men; so the Ratio rei, the reason of the thing speaks as much; or it is evident
that it must be so from reason it self: I might name many, but I shall content
my self at present with what we have in my Text: and we have Two here given for
it: The dead that die in the Lord must needs be Blessed. For 1. They rest then
from their labors. And 2. Their works will follow them.


1. Then, if we consult Reason, Good Men, such as die in the Lord, will be
blessed after death: For then they will rest from their labors; they will then
be at their rest; there the wicked ceas^ from trouble and the weary be at rest
says Job, speaking of the grave or the other world, Jo^ 14.13. There remains
a rest for the p^o^l^ o^ God, says the Apostle Heb. 4 9. And such as die in
the Lord are said to rest or sleep in Jesus, 1 These. 4.14. They shall ^ ter
^^to peace, they shall rest in their beds, says the Prophet, speaking of
righteous men that are taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1. Look what a
bed of rest or sl^ep is to the weary labourer; such is Death to good men; their
dying day is their resting day, they shall then rest from their labors. Not
neither; (for I would not be mistaking here) that the souls of good men after
death, are without all motion or operation, till the Resurrection of their
bodies: not that they turn sleepers till then (as some have im^gined) not that
they dose away all their time, or indeed any of it, from the last breath or
gasp that the body takes, to the blowing of the last trumpet, as some do fondly
dream. For the soul is of such a nature, as that it can no more be and not act,
than the wind can be and not blow, than the fire can be and not burn, than the
sun can be and not shine: its very nature and essence consists in always
thinking, in constant cogitation, as some both of the old and new Philosophers
tell us. They rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty; which was, which is, and which is to come, says St. Jo n of the four
and twenty elders, and so of the souls of just men made perfect; Revel. 4.8.
The resting of the soul then is not a cealing or a rest from all kind of motion
or operation; But a rest, (...); as it is phrazed in my Text: that is, a rest
from all those toilsome labors and troublesome pains wh^^h they are forced to
undergo, whilst here in the body ^oth in the pursuit of their particular
callings as men, and in the pursuit of their general callings as Christians.
They rest from all toilsome labor, with reference to both of these, and that
too, both with reference to all sinning and suffering in either of them: To
mention no more,

1. The Souls of good men which die in the Lord, rest from all their labors,
with respect to sinning; their death puts a period, and an end to all their
sinning, in both; the issue of sin shall then be quite dried up, shall run no
longer. Here the heart of a Christian is like Rebekahs womb; it has, as it
were, twins struggling in it; the old man and the new, flesh and spirit; the law
in the members warring against the law of the mind: The flesh lusting against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary one to the
other, as the Apostle tells us, Gal. 5.17. and by means of this contrariety,
there is a great conflict many times, much struggling and striving; much labor
and trouble in the heart of a Christian: So that the good which he would do, he
does not; and the evil which he would not do, that many times does he, as the
Apostle phrazeth it in his own person, Romans 7.22. his very life, by means of
this, is like a Book fraught full of Errata's; who knows the Errors of this
Life (says David) there is not a just Man upon earth, that does good at all
times, and sins not (says Solomon) Eccles. 7.20. If any man says he has
no sin, he deceives himself, and the truth is not in him, says St. John, 1
Jo. 1.8. And in many things we offend all, says St. James, Jam. 2.3. Our very
righteousness is but as filthy rags, as the Prophet tells us, Isa. 6.4. Our
best graces (says one) are not without their defects. Lord I believe, help
mine unbelief, cries he in the Gospel, Mark 9.24. Our best duties not without
their defaults; When I would do good, evil is present with me, says the
Apostle, Romans 7.21. The purest fire we know has some smoke, the richest wines
some dregs. Sin, in short, will have a being and dwelling in the best of Gods
people here; but when once the Souls of good men are dislodged, and have taken
their flight from their Bodies, this incroaching inmate (as one terms sin)
shall be turned out of doors, shall never have so much as any being or
existence any longer in them; shall never more give them any further labor or
trouble: The death of a Believers body shall perfectly deliver him from this
body of Death, as the Apostle calls sin, Romans 7.23. Christ will present unto
himself in the other world, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it shall be holy and without blemish, as the Apostle
assures us, Ephess. 5.27. And hence the souls of just men, when once got
thither, are said to be perfect, Heb. 12.23. and death is called by one,
Peccatorum sepultura, the burial or grave of sin; and that is one thing that
speaks out the happiness of those that dye in the Lord; they shall then be at
rest from the labor of sinning; which is of all labors and troubles the worst
and greatest, the most afflictive to a good man; whence the Grecians in their
Language, term a wicked man, (...), from a word which signifies with them
labor and pains: To denote, as the labor and pains that wicked men are at
many times to accomplish their wicked designs; for they rest not except they
have done mischief, and their sleep is taken from them unless they cause some
to fall, as Solomon tells us, Prove. 4.16. so possibly to denote that labor and
trouble which sin and the remainders of it, give to good men in this life.
Well, from this labor, from this trouble they shall be perfectly freed and
delivered in the other life; they shall be at rest then from the labor and
sorrow of sinning any more: Yea, I may add here as a supplement to this Head,
the dead that dye in the Lord, are not only at rest from sinning, but from all
suggestions and temptations to it; there will be an end put then to all Satan's
temptations, as well as to our sinning: He is very busy here in suggesting of
bad things to the minds of good men; he is daily dogging them and disturbing
them in every thing they go about; he buffetted St. Paul, we read, he desired
to winnow St. Peter, he stirred up David to number the People, and whiles
Joshua was ministering unto the Lord, he was at his right hand to resist him, as
we are told, Zach. 13.1. and it is no small unhappiness to us, that we are thus
continually followed and haunted with such an ill Ghost; yea, but now Death
will deliver such as dye in the Lord, from this trouble also: It will set them
(...), out of the reach of his batteries and gunshot; though his darts be all
fiery darts, and so its likely he is able to fling them high, (as one says)
yet not high enough to reach the Saints in glory. The Saints on earth indeed
are in a Militant Condition, part of Gods Militant Church, daily sighting with
him, and he with them; but the Saints in Heaven are in a Triumphant Condition,
Members of the Triumphant Church, wholly above him, and more than Conquerours
over him, and over all their other enemies through Christ that loved them, as the
Apostle assures us, Romans 8.37. His walk is indeed to go to and fro on the
earth, as he told God himself, Job. 1.7. but he cannot enter the Confines of
Heaven. When he fell from his integrity, he was turned out of that place of
felicity, and shall never be restored to it again; This great Accuser of the
Brethren is cast down, neither shall his place be found any more in Heaven, as
we are assured, Rev. 12.8. this spiritual Pharoth (as one terms him) may pursue
good men to the hour of their death; and it may be, may then most fiercely too
assault them, may muster up all his forces in Battle-array against them; but at
death it may be confidently said unto them in respect of Satan, what Moses said
once to the Children of Isra^l in respect of the ^^gyptians, Exodus 14.13. (with
which I shall conclude this particular) F^ar ye not, only stand still and see
the salvation of the Lord, which he will work for you to d^y; for the
Egyptians which ye have seen to d^y, ye shall see them no more forever.

2. Such as dye in the Lord shall be at rest, as from the labor of sinning,
and of all temptations to it, so also from their labors in respect of
suffering; their death will put an end to all those sorrows and sufferings, to
which, by reason of sin they are here exposed. God will then wipe all tears
from his peoples eyes, and t^ere shall be no more sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain, f^r the f^rmer things are passed away, Revel.
21.4. and this indeed follows upon the former; for, sublata causa tollitur
eff ctus, remove the cause and the ^ff cts will ce^se; dry up the fountain and
the streams will not run: Sin, the cause of sorrow and suffering being removed,
as you have heard, then it will be; sorrow and suffering the effects of sin,
must needs then cease Now if need be, (says the Apostle) ye are in heaviness,
1 Pe^. 1.6. now men have strong corruptions, and therefore need strong
corrections: Now there is Chaff mingled with our Wheat, and therefore there is
need of Gods Fan to separate it; Dross with our Gold, and therefore need of his
Fire to refine it: Now his Rod and Ch^sti^ements are very necessary to teach us
out of Gods Law, a^ the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 89.32. but at De^th^ the
Scholar in Christ's School will have perfectly learned his Lesson* and herefore
there will be no further need of corre^tion. Thus De th will set good men at
rest from the labor of suffering, as well as of sinning; yea, and that both
with reference to their bodies, and with reference to their souls, that I may
en^arge a little here.

1. Death will set good Men at rest from all Sufferings with respect to their
Bodies: Many and Great are the Su^f^rings which good Men meet with here, by
reason of their crazy and in^irm Bodies, by reason of the great variety of
Disea es that are inc dent in this Life to them; (to mention now none of those
other sufferings which some have been forced to undergo, by reason of the Racks
and Wheels of Persecutors) Jo had, we know, his Botches, Hezekiah his Boil,
David his Sores, the poor Widow of the Gospel her Issue of Blood. One Man
wastes away with a Consumption till all his Moisture is Exhausted, another is
Burnt up with a Fever, a third is as it were Drowned with a Dropsy: In one,
the k^eepers ^f the House (that I may Allude to that Elegant Allegory of
Solomon, Ecl^s. 12.) Tremble; in another the sound of the Grinders is brought
low; in a third, those that look out at the Windows are darkened; in a fourth,
the D^ughters ^f Music are brought down. Phys^cians tell us of hundreds of
diseases at leas^, that are thus Incident to Man's Body; and by reason of these,
he spends his Days many times in Pain, and his Nights in Sorrow. But here is
the comfort of good Men, death will be a remedy against them all: It will
deliver them, or set them at rest from them all; there shall be says St. Jo^n,
Speaking of the New Jerusalem, no more Death, nor any more Pain, R^vel. 21.4.
As the Blind Martyr told the Lame, when they met at the Stake; y^^ may throw
away your Crutches now, if you please, D^^th will ^u^e us both; you of your
Lameness, and me of my Blindness. The great Physician of Souls, the Lord Jesus
Christ, will by Death, cure all the Diseases, and remove all pains from good
Men's Bodies; And consequentially, they shall then be at rest from all
sufferings with respect to the Body.

2. They shall be at rest too then from all sufferings, with respect to the
Soul. Many and Sore are the sorrows and troubles of a Christian in this Life,
in this respect also: Sometimes the Afflictions of the good set him on weeping;
By the Rivers of Babylon we sat down and Wept; when we remembered Zion, Ps.
137.1. viz. The Afflictions and Desolations of Zion and of Gods People, that
had once lived there: Sometimes the Transgressions of the wicked fetch tears
from his Eyes. Rivers of Waters run down my Cheeks (Says David) because wicked
Men keep not thy Laws. Ps. 119.136. Sometimes the Sense of his own corruptions
stabs him, as it were, at the very Heart. When they heard this; they were
pricked in their Heart: And said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles;
Men and Br^th^ren, what shall we do? Acts 2.37. And, O Wr^tched Man that I am,
cries St. Paul, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? Romans 7.24.
Sometimes God hides his Face and he is troubled; thou hidest thy face and I am
troubled. Ps. 30.7. And Tears have been my Meat Day and Night; whiles they
continually say unto me, where is thy God? says he, Ps. 42.3. Thus the
Christians whole Life, here many times is as it were a field of Sorrows; but
now Death will set him at rest from them all: It will be the Funeral of all his
sorrows, and the resurrection of all his joys. The Day of Death is the good
Man's Marriage-day, and at that Marriage day of his, Christ will turn again,
(as one Expresses it) all his Water into Wine, all his Sighing into Singing,
all his Mourning into Mirth. Then indeed shall the ransomed of the Lord return
and come to the Heavenly Zion, with Songs and Everlasting Joy upon their Heads:
They shall obtain Joy, and Gladness, and all Sorrow and Sighing-shall flee
away, that I may Allude to, and Conclude this particular in the Prophets words,
Isa. 35.6. But that is the first reason that is given in my Text, why the dead
that dye in the Lord are Blessed? Because they dye, that they may rest from
their Labors. And that both in respect of all further sinning, and all further
suffering: I come now to the second, that is here given us why they are
Blessed: and that is,

2. Because their works shall follow them; their works, i. e. the good fruits
and good e^fects of their works, or rather the reward of them: the great
reward, that God will then give them, though not for, yet according to their
good works, and this is and will be indeed very great; so great as that no
mortal can declare the greatness of it: for Eye has not seen nor ear heard,
neither did it ever yet enter into the heart of man to conceive, what great
thin^s God has prepared for them that love him, As the Apostle tells us, 1
Cor. 2.9. The Eye of man has seen wonderful things in nature, and the Ear
possi^ly has heard of more, and as for the heart or mind of man, what almost
cannot that conceive? And yet it can no way conceive the greatness of the glory
which God has prepared and laid up in the other world, for those that love and
fear him in this; and yet that has been and will be still done by all that
have love, and shall die in the Lord, and therefore all that die in him are and
shall be blessed. It Is true indeed, this blessedness (that I may prevent all
mistakes) will not, 1. Be given out to all alike; as there are different
degrees of grace upon Earth; so there will be different degrees of glory in
Heaven. There is o^e glory of the Sun, another glory of the M^on, another glory
of the Stars; for one Star differs from anot^er in ^l^ry, i. e. shines more
gloriously than another, so also shall it be (says he) in the resurrection of
the dead, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. And they that be wise says Daniel, (speaking of
the same thing) shall shine as the fi^mament, and they that turn many unto
righte^usn^ss as the Stars for ever and ev r, Dan. 1^.3. Now there are we know
different degrees betwixt the light of the firmament and the light of the
St^rs, and so there will be betwixt the glory of one Saint and the glory of
another in the future life? It Is true indeed, all good Men when once got to
Heaven, shall have glory enough. He that has the least glory there, shall have
enough to make him unspeakably and unconceivably happy; every Vessel of glory
shall be full, but some shall have more of it, th^n others; as being more
capacitated to receive it. God will then and there reward every m^n according
to his w^rks, as the Scriptures do abundantly, assure us. Now look as there are
diversities of gifts and graces amongst Gods people here upon Earth, so there
are of works; some do and suffer more for God, others less, and therefore some
shall have more glory, others less; because every man's glory shall be
proportion^ted according to his works; since men's labors are different in this
world, their reward and glory will be different also in the world to come. This
happiness therefore (I say) will not be given out for degrees alike to all.

2. Nor secondly, will it be consummated or completed to any till the last
day; till the general day of Judgment, when their bodies shall rise again and
be reunited to their Souls, though good men such as die in the Lord are
immediately admitted to happiness after their death: yet not to all that
happiness, that God intends, and has designed for them in the other world;
this is indeed reserved for that great and general day of Judgment so often
menti^ned in the Holy Scriptures, when Christ to whom the Judgment of the world
is committed shall come in the glory of his Father with his Holy Angels to
render to every man fully according to his works, as you have it, Mat. 16 27.
But in the interim, and as soon as they die* they shall rest from their labors
and their works shall follow them; and therefore they are and must needs be
thenceforth blessed. Yea, that I may descend to, and instance in a few
particulars here, such as die in the Lord must needs be truly, though not
completely, blessed and happy immediately after death; for they shall then be
blessed with perfection in resp^ct of their S uls; with the comforta^le soci^ty
of the blessed Angels and Souls of just men made perfect; and which is more
still than all these; with a clearer, more immediate and never more to be
interrupted enjoyment of God and Christ.

1. Such as die in the Lord will be immediately after death blessed with
perfection in respect of their own Souls; their Souls shall be then no longer
clogged down with their bodies. But shall be elevated and exalted to their just
(...), to the highest pitch of perfection, that they are in their separated
Estate capable of, and that in all the powers and faculties of them; as to
instance, and but to instance in them,

1. Their understandings shall be then extraordinarily enlarged and enlightened
to see into those mysteries of nature and divinity, which are now hid from
them. Now I see says the Apostle through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; now I know but in part, but then I shall know even as also I am known, 1
Cor. 13.12. The good man's understanding shall then be nevermore deceived or
mistaken; shall never more be troubled with misconceivings or misapprehensions,
all those mists of ignorance and error, which do now so much cloud his mind,
shall then be scattered and blown over: all those groundless fears and scruples
which by reason of the weakness of our understandings, and the imperfection of
our knowledge, do now so rack and gravel tender hearts, shall then be laid
aside, and for ever abandoned; all those laborious studies, controverted
problems and polemical disputes, which do now steal away so much of our time,
and all to so little purpose, shall then have their final decision and full
determination; and the meanest understanding of them that are dead in the Lord,
shall then probably be able to confute the now ignorant sentiments of the
learnedest Scholars. And as their understandings, so,

2. Their wills shall be then Perfected with a perfect and indefective
Holiness; with an exact conformity to the divine will, and with a perfect
freedom from all servitude to sin; they shall then be no more troubled with
doubtful choice, but with a perfect freedom, shall steadily embrace the
chiefest good, and shall find it too as easy to do good, as to will and desire
it, as one expresses it. And as their wills, so

3. Their affections too shall be then all composed and placed aright, and that
too by an unalterable regularity; in which too they shall receive the greatest
content and satisfaction. All those furious waves, which do now many times rage
in Men's hearts, by reason of the turbulency of their passions and affections:
and do make them too too often, like the Seas, to foam forth their own shame;
shall then be reduced to an Everlasting calm. Ye, all those peevish passions
and brutish affections, which do now so often dethrone Judgment and Conscience
in Men's hearts, and set the whole world as it were on a sire; shall then be for
ever cashiered and abandoned. And we shall love, fear, desire, delight and
rejoice in nothing, but what is good. And as their affections, so,

4. Their memories also shall not then be idle or useless, but they shall
perfectly remember the miseries that they were in; the rock, and shelves, the
dangers that they have escaped; as likewise the mercies and good things which
they met with here on Earth, and all to inhance and heighten the worth of their
Happiness and present enjoyments in Heaven. Thus,

1. Such as die in the Lord are immediately after Death blessed: for they shall
then be blessed with all that perfection, which the nature of the Soul will
admit of in its separate Estate.

2. They are Blessed, for they shall then be blessed too with the happy Society
of the blessed Angels, and of the Souls of just Men made perfect; ye are come,
says the Apostle, Heb. 12.22, 23. (speaking indeed of the members of his
militant Church in the days of the Gospel upon Earth, and therefore its much
truer of the members of his Triumphant Church in Heaven) unto Mount Sion, and
unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of Angels; to the general Assembly and Church of the firstborn which
are written in Heaven; and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just
Men made perfect; and to Jesus the Mediator of the n^w Covenant.

1. Then such as die in the Lord shall after their death be immediately blessed
with the Society of the blessed Angels; ye are come to an innumerable company
of Angels, and how sweet and comfortable, how pleasing and taking their Society
is; the Saints in Heaven can only tell us; but doubtless, it is very lovely and
amiable: they being all creatures of such a noble Extract, and of such an
Heavenly make as they are.

2. They shall then be blessed, as with the Society of the Blessed Angels; so
with the Society of the Spirits of just Men made perfect, as the Apostle tells
us in the place fore-quoted; and this tends not a little to the making up of
their Happiness. The of God are Excellent persons even whiles they are here
upon Earth. The righteous says Solomon is more Excellent than his Neighbor,
Prove. 12.26. And my delight says David is in the Saints, those Excellent ones
upon Earth, Ps. 16.3. Their company even in this life is very taking and
pleasing; notwithstanding, that by reason of that Body of Death, which they
carry about with them here; they are even loaded with many imperfections, which
may and do breed sometimes real grounds of distaste to those that converse with
them. But O how excellent are they in Heaven! How pleasant and taking will
their company be there when they shall be disburdened of all these; when they
shall be made perfect, as then they will be! And shall all join together with
one heart and with one voice, to Offer up Everlasting Halelujahs to God, and to
the Lamb that has re^^emed them; as we are told, they shall and will, Revel.
19.1, 2, 3, 4. But then,

3. And lastly (which is still more than all this) the Dead that die in the
Lord are immediately after their death, though not completely, yet truly
blessed, because they then shall be blessed with the blisful fruition of God
and Christ; they shall come then as to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, so
to God the judge of all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, as the
Apostle assures us, in that place so often mentioned, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.
According also to that of our Savior, to the penitent Thief, Luke 23.43. This
day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And that of the Apostle (to mention now
no more in the fifth Chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians from the
first to the tenth ver. Yea, they shall be blessed then, with a clearer, more
immediate and never-more to be interrupted enjoyment of them.

1. They shall then be blessed with a clearer and more immediate enjoyment of
them; here they see God at best (...), as the Apostle phrazeth it, 1 Cor.
13.12. Through a Glass, as it were in a riddle, (as the Original primarily
imports,) darkly as our Translators have rendered it; but then we shall see him,
(...) face to face. Now they know him but in part, but then they shall know him
even as they are known. They shall see him (...), as he is; as St. John
phrazeth it, 1 John 3, 2. Here the Saints enjoy God indeed, but it is darkly and
mediately, through the conduits and cisterns of his Ordinances. They are in a
state of imperfection, and so do need the assistance of his Ordinances to help
them to a sight of God. But when that which is perfect is come, as it will be
in good measure (as you have heard) to them that die in the Lord; then that
which is thus in part shall be done away, as the Apostle tells us; 1 Cor.
13.10. The Sun shall no more be our light then by day, nor the Moon our light
by night, but the Lord God himself shall be our Everlasting light and our
glory, as the Prophet prazeth it, Isa. 60.19. And as they shall then be blessed
with a clearer and more immediate enjoyment of God and Christ. So,

2. With an uninterrupted Enjoyment of them, Whilst we are present in the body
(says the Apostle) we are a^sent from the Lord. We are so be sure many times;
we enjoy him but by sits and starts, we meet with many Interruptions in our
Enjoyments of him. Now we have him, and anon we lose him; sometimes we meet
with him at an Ordinance, and at another time we are forced to go away without
him; suavis hora brevis mora, (as one of the Fathers says,) a sweet Hour
indeed it is, but it is usually, but a short one; but then we shall enjoy him
without any Interruption or Cessation at all. We shall ever be with the Lord,
(as the Apostle tells us) 1 These. 4.17. His tabernacle shall then be indeed
placed amongst his people, and he will remove it no more. According to his
Promise, Rev. 21.7. They shall be before the throne of God and serve him day
and night in his temple, and he that sits on the throne shall dwell amongst
them; they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, nor any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of waters; as St.
John assures us, Rev. 7.15, 16, 17. Now, Si mediata and momentanea Dei visio
tantum potuit apportare laetitiae cumulum, quantum potuit immediata and
aeterna, says one: If those Beams of Comfort which are reflected upon good Men
here, by getting now and then a glimpse of God's Countenance in this vale of
Tears, do so refresh and revive their Hearts, as they do, What will their Joy
be, when the Lord himself shall be their constant Sun and everlasting Light? If
it be so good to draw nigh unto God upon Earth, as the Psalmist tells us, it
is, Psalm. 73. etc. if they are so blessed, that watch at Wisdom's Gates, and
wait at the Posts of her Doors; as Solomon tells us they are; How good will it
be then to draw near unto God in Heaven? And how blessed are they that wait not
at the Door, but dwell in that House, and that for ever? And yet so shall all
such as die in the Lord do, and therefore they must needs be very blessed: But
so much shall serve for the Explication and Confirmation of of what is asserted
in my Text. I come now to apply it, or to inserr from it. And so,

1. Are the dead that die in the Lord thenceforth blessed; then certainly there
is another Life besides this; and the Souls of Men do not die with their
Bodies, whatever the Atheist phansieth to the contrary; for, N^n entis nulla
sunt praedicata, nullae sunt affectiones; nothing can be predicated or said of
that which is not: But the Souls of the dead that die in the Lord are said to
be thenceforth blessed, and therefore they must have a Being still, and there
must be another Life besides this, where they are so blessed.

2. Then this too lets us see the great Difference betwixt the Righteous and
the Wicked, betwixt good Men and bad in this other Life; for the one are not so
happy, but the other then will be as miserable. It Is true, indeed, in this Life
many times (which is too by the way a good Argument of a future Estate.) All
things come alike to all men; there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked; to the clean and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him
that sacrifices not, as Solomon tells us, Eccles. 9.2. Yea, so are the Affairs
of this Life ordered many times, though they all lie under the dispose of a
Divine Providence; as that it often happens better to the Wicked than to the
Righteous here, at least in outward Respects; there is says Solomon, A just
man that perish th in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that
prolongeth his days in his wickedn^ss, Eccles. 7.15. Just Abel is slain whilst
unrighteous Cain lives and builds Cities; profane Esau stays at home and takes
his Pleasure, whilst pious Jacob is forced to seek his Fortune, and to endure
much hardship in a Foreign Land; N^bal, a Man of B^lial, Feasts it like a King,
whilst David a Man after God's own Heart is in great wants and straits. D^ves,
the rich Fool, riots it and fairs deliciously every Day, whilst poor L^z^rus,
the beloved of our Lord, would have been glad of the Crumbs that fell from his
Table. Yea, our Savior himself, that Holy and Just one, who did no sin,
neither was there any guile sound at any time in his mouth, is accused,
condemned and crucified, whilst Burrabbas, a notorious Murderer, is spared,
released and set at Liberty: In short, so are the Affairs of this Life ordered
many times, as that the Unrighteous and Wicked seem here oftentimes so happy
(as one observes) as if they were rewarded for their Impiety; and the Righteous
and Religious often so miserable, as if they were punished for their Innocence;
but it will be much otherwise in the Life to come; then, indeed, shall men
return and discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked, betwixt them that have
served God, and them that have served him not, as the Prophet tells us, Mal.
3.18. Son remember, says Abraham to Dives, that thou receiv^^st thy good
things in thy lifetime, and Lazarus evil things; but now thou art tormented,
and he is comforted, Luke 16.25. Look (in short, as to this use) what
Difference there is betwixt Bliss and Misery, betwixt Heaven and Hell, betwixt
being Eternally Blessed in the one, and Eternally Miserable in the other; that
Difference there will be betwixt the Wicked and the Righteous in the other
Life. For the wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the
righteous into life eternal, as our Savior assures us, Mat. 25.46. Great
therefore will be the Difference betwixt them.

3. Are the dead that die in the Lord so blessed, then who would not with
Balaam die the Death of the Righteous? Yea, Who would not live their Life, that
they might die their Death? Who would not live to Christ now, that they might
die in Christ hereafter? Bear his Cross in this World, that they might wear his
Crown in the other? Suffer him by his Spirit and Grace to reign in their Hearts
and Lives here, that they might reign with him in Glory for ever hereafter?
Methinks, if there were nothing else in a Godly Life, but the great Happiness
which (you have heard) will attend those that live it after their Death; though
there is much, very much besides. Yet, I say, if there were nothing else but
this, every one that has but the Face of a Man, the least Spark of humane
Reason left in him, should be in Love with it, should heartily and solemnly
devote himself to it, and that presently too without any further delays or
put-offs, as not knowing how suddenly Death may arrest us, nor how soon it may
be our turn to die, and we can never die in the Lord and so be happy after
Death, unless we first live in him and to his Glory. Look, says Cornelius A
Lapide, upon my Text, as he cannot be said to die at Rome that never lived at
Rome, so he cannot be said to die in the Lord that never lived in or to the
Lord; and therefore if thou designest or desire to die in the Lord, and so to
be happy after Death (as thou must do, if thou be but still a Man, and wilt
give thy self leave to consider,) I say if thou designest or desire this, be
persuaded immediately without any further delays to become a good Man, to
devote thy self heartily to the Service of Christ, and to live to his Honor
and Praise.

4. Are the dead that die in the Lord so Blessed? Do they thenceforth rest from
their Labors? And will their Works follow them? Then this may be for Comfort
to all good Men. And that,

1. Under and against all their present Trials and Troubles, their present
labors and sufferings; death will e're long come, and when it comes, it will
put a period to them all You shall rest shortly from all your labors and
sorrows; and your works, i. e. the reward of your good works, will follow: You
have but a step or two more to take, A style or two more (...), as the Martyr
said, and you will be in Heaven at your (...) ^r^sently; and therefore you have
great reason to bear (...) our present labors and troubles with great patience
and ^^^ er^ulness. For how great and how sharp soever they may be ^ey will be
but short: The longest life we live here (you know) is but short; Man that is
born of a w^man is but (...) fe^ d^ys, as Job tells us, Job 14.1. And few and
e^^l have bee^ the d^ys of the pilgrimage of my life, said Jacob, Genesis 47.9.
though he had lived then many more days than any liv^ now; (...), the Life f
Man is but a po^^t, says P^^^arch, yea, (...) ^ctu^ est quod vivimus and adhuc
puncto minus, says Se^^^^; ^^s l^ss than a p^i^t, if any thing can be so; at
least in respect of that Eternity, which is to ensue. Our labors and troubles
therefore will not, cannot, last long; for this l^^e will not last long: and
it is only whiles we live here, that we shall be exposed to them; Death will set
us at rest, free us for ever from them: and besides, all those troubles of ours
(if we be good men) which are but thus for a moment, as the Apostle phrazeth
it, 2 Cor. 4.16. (For no more in deed if compared with Eternity) will not only
in the end, work together in the general for our good, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 8.28. We know that all things shall work together for good to
them that love God: But if born aright by us, they will work for us, as he
tells us, 2 Cor. 4.17. read (...), where the Apostle makes use of such
Rhetoric as is scarce to be paralleled, as is scarce to be met with in any
human Authors; an Hyperbole upon Hyperbole, an exceeding, an exceeding eternal
weight of Glory; whiles we look not (says he) at the things which are seen,
but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal, (and so be sure will the good man's troubles only be) but the things
which are not seen are eternal: So will his reward be, if he bears them as he
ought to do; ver. 18. For we know, says he, in the first Verse of the
following Chapter, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved,
as it will be when death comes, and that will come, as you have heard, shortly,
we have a building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens: And this amongst other Considerations supported them, and kept them
from fainting (as well it might) under all their troubles and afflictions, as
he tells us, 2 Cor. 4.16. But then,

2. This may comfort good men too, as against all the troubles of this life, so
against the fears of death: Why should you be afraid of that which will make
you happy, which will bring you to your rest, and to the end of all your
labors and sorrows, as you have heard your dying will do? It Is true indeed, I
grant, that death to nature is terrible, and to wicked men; to such as are
still in their natural condition, it is, as the Philosopher styles it, (...),
the terriblest of terribles, even the king of terrors, as Job terms it, Job
18.14. that which will bereave them of all their good things, and expose them
to all evil; the very porta Gehenna, as one styles it, that which ushers in
into Hell: The Devils surly Sergeant (as another calls death with reference to
the wicked) sent forth on purpose to drag them thither. Hell follows
immediately, as we read Revel. 16.8. the pale Horse on which death rides, with
reference to wicked men; and therefore such have reason, great reason, to fear
it: But to good men it is the introitus Regni, their entrance into the Kingdom
of Heaven; an outlet to all their misery, an inlet to all bliss, the very
harbinger and forerunner of their glory, a boat sent on purpose to fetch them
off, from the troublesome sea of this world, and to land them safe at the
pleasant harbor of eternal rest; their Fathers Messenger sent to fetch them
home to their Fathers House: And should not such an Harbinger, such a Boat,
such a Messenger be welcome when he comes? Their dying day is their great
resting day, the day wherein they shall rest from all their labors, (as you
have heard) and was ever any wearied labourer unwilling to go to his rest? It Is
their great pay-day, the day wherein they shall receive their full wages, their
reward for all that they have done and suffered here in the flesh; And what
Servant is there that is not well-pleased when the pay-day comes? The Servant
earnestly desires the shadow, as Job tells us, and the Hireling longs for the
wages of his work, Job 7.2. good men have no reason to be troubled, but indeed
to rejoice when the day of their death comes; for then they will find, that
they shall not only rest from their labors, but that their works will follow
them; that they shall then receive their wages; wages infinitely beyond all
their work, beyond all that they can think or conceive; For eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither ever yet did it enter into the heart of man, to conceive
what great things God has prepared for them that love him; as the Apostle
assures us in that place so often quoted, 1 Cor. 2* 9.

3. And Lastly, It may comfort us as against our own death, if we be good men;
so against the death of our godly friends: They are blessed, they do rest from
their labors, and their works do follow them. Their death is their great gain;
and if it be so much their gain, why should it be so much our grief? I know
indeed, and we read in the Scriptures, that great mournings, sore lamentations
have been made at the interment of many deceased Saints: And if ever any People
had reason to make them, we of this place have so now; and yet we must not
over-do here neither, as we soon may; we must be careful that we do not sorrow
as th^^e that h^^e no hopes, as the Apostle advises us in this Case, 1 These.
4.13. weep we may, that will speak us to be men, but yet it must be with
moderation, and that will speak us to be Christians. Our pious Friends have
only left us for a little time, we have not lost them, but shall receive them
again, or rather be received to them at the last: They are the Gainers, though
we are the Losers; their death is but a departure to a better life, and
therefore it would be rather a piece of Envy in us, than of real Piety,
excessively or overmuch to bewail it, especially since we are so well assured
to meet them again in a better World, where we shall never part more, but shall
be together with them, forever with the Lord, as the Apostle does assure us we
shall, 1 These. 4.17. And therefore we that survive may as well comfort one
another with those Words, as he in this Case also advises us there to do.

These things might have been (some of them at least) more enlarged upon, but I
have trespassed (I fear) too much already upon your patience; and yet I must
borrow a little time more from it, if it be only to tell you in a few words,
what kind of Person he was, which we have brought here now to be interred. And
now I have mentioned this worthy Gentleman, I have started as it were another.
Text, and might well give you another Sermon upon it, if I had time and ability
for it. I never indeed took any great delight in making long Panegyricks or
large Encomiums of the dead: For not to mention the frequent abuse of them, I
have ever thought that silent tears are the best Orators at Funerals; and that
the good works which the deceased have done whiles they were living, and the
good names which they have left behind them, when dead, are their best
embalmings; and do speak out their praises more effectually than the tongue of
the Preacher could do: And in this respect I should not have needed to have
said any thing now; for this worthy Gentleman has obtained a good repent
amongst us: And his own works will praise him more in the ^^te^, than any of my
words can do; yet least I should seem to be injurious both to him and to you at
once* to Him, in denying him his due and deserved praise; and to You, in
concealing so Excellent a Pattern for you^ ^^^^ation; I ^^st say something of
him, and the Brief Character which I shall give of him; shall be chiefly in
such things, as mine own knowledge ^^d the great Honor that I do and shall
ever bare to his Name; do both warrant and prompt me to give: And so,

1 To begin with such things as relate to Gods Service and Worship (a due
regard to which does be sure as much commend us, as any thing we can show
regard unto) he was a great lover of his Church, of Gods House and public
Worship; Did constantly attend when at home, unless when he was hindered by
great Sickness, and that both Morning and Evening, upon the Prayers and other
Ordinances here dispensed: And seemed always most a^tentive to, reverent and
devout in all. Yea, such was his zeal always to attend here upon Gods public
Worship, as that he came very often to it, when in the Judgment of others, it
had been fitter for him by reason of his great illness and weakness to have
been at home in his Bed. He seemed always to be greatly offended and angry with
his Friends; when they knowing his weakness did at any time but desire him to
stay at home. Neither was he only thus diligent to come himself, but careful to
bring his Family and Servants also along with him; as resolving with good
Joshua, that what ever others did, that he and his Household would serve the
Lord.

He was likewise a most diligent and devout receiver of the Lords Supper (an
Ordinate God knows is too much slighted. and neglected by too too many:) I do
not remember that for the space of ^0 years and more in which I have had the
Happiness to be acquainted with him, that ever he missed when at home above 2*
or 3. Sacraments, and them sore against his will, being forced to it by reason
of great Sickness or Weakness.

Neither was be only thus careful to Worship God, thus publicly every week
here in his House; But likewise took care to have him: Worshipped daily in his
own, by keeping up a constant course of Family Duties there, ever since I knew
him; which is a thing I am afraid too too much neglected by too too many, not
only of the Vulgar, bu^ of Men of his rank and quality.

Neither did he rest in this; but it was his usual course (as I have been well
informed) to retire Morning and Evening (notwithstanding that crowd of business
which he had Generally upon his Hands) to his Closet or Study, for his private
Devotions: as firmly believing, what our Savior says, that such as Pray in
secret shall be rewarded openly. And as he was thus careful and diligent in the
first place to serve God, in a Religious way; So was he also,

2. To serve his King and Country in a Civil way. He was indeed a Gentleman
that hated Idleness, and loved Business; and seemed to delight in nothing more,
than how he might be useful and serviceable to God in his Generation. Look as
God had well fitted him for public employment, so he delighted in it; And
would Ordinarily Balk no pains nor charges to promote the public good, and to
serve his Country. Witness the great Expenses, the many tedious and dangerous
Journeys, which he made for many Years together to that end; those especially
which he made to Braintree, to quiet the people and to provide for the Poor
there; When that Town was so sorely visited with the Sickness, and when few or
no other Justices durst venture themselves amongst them.

He was a Gentleman, that it may be, has been as useful and as serviceable to
this Hundred, yea, indeed to the whole County, ever since he was Justice of the
Peace; Which is nigh now 30. Years ago; as most in it, and poss^bly may be as
much missed: This Parish I am sure, and the Neighboring Parishes; Yea, the
whole Division, who always had free and easy access to him for Justice, and
for advise in all dubious cases, will much miss him; As also will the Poor
round about us, for his daily Dole and Charity. He was a sound Protestant, and
had more than an Ordinary Zeal against Popery, and for the reformed Religion,
and did much pity those that suffered for it. Witness his Charity to, and most
kind reception of worthy Mr. Schamiere, one of the French persecuted Ministers,
into his House: Who I am confident too might have been with him to this very
day, had not God by Death took him to a better place; He was a Gentleman that
did much and often bewail the many differences and divisions that are amongst
us, especially in the Church, and though he were himself a true Churchman;
Yet he had a great deal of Candor and Christian Charity for all that differed
from him; so be they did but live well, and carried themselves Honestly and
Peaceably.

He was one too, that had a great sense of the Worth of Learning, and of the
great necessity of the good Education of Youth; and therefore was resolved (as
he told me often this Summer, if God spared his life) to repair our School, and
had lately purchased Lands to the value of 16 l. per Annum, (to which I believe
he would have added more too if he had lived) to endow it with, for the
encouragement of a Master; which I hope his Worthy Executors, and Relations
will see performed: And though the Poor not only of this place, but of all
places round about us, did continually partake of his great Bounty and Charity
whiles he lived, yet was he not unmindful of them when he dyed; but gave in his
Will, not only Legacies to the Poor of this Parish, but also to the Poor of two
other of the Neighboring Parishes; besides that considerable Dole which was
given by his Executors to all the Poor that came to his Funeral.

In short, he was, I am very confident, a very good Man as to the main; a great
Hater of all Vice and Immorality, a true Lover of all Virtue and Goodness, an
Understanding Magistrate, a Faithful Counselor, a Loyal Subject, a True
Friend, a Loving Husband, a Kind Master, a Merciful Landlord; and in a word,
all I hope, a very Sound and Serious Christian.

It pleased God indeed for these two years last past, to visit him with much
sickness and weakness; but he gave him withal, much Patience and Submissiveness
of Spirit: I never heard that there fell any word from his lips, that did
bewray the least discontent or impatience, but his mouth was full of submissive
and Heavenly Expressions, under his greatest Pains and Agonies; yea, when his
Pains and Weaknesses were very great, (as they were lateward, and his Strength
small) yet he seemed to bear all with such Patience and Courage, with such
Calmness and Evenness of Spirit, as if he had not much wished to be in any
other Condition than what he was in. His usual Expression, when his Pains or
Sickness were greater than ordinary, (as sometimes they were) That this was but
one Chop more to the Tree that must down, and that he never expected to be well
again in this World, but that he hoped he should be so in the next. It Is true
indeed, when he went off, he went off suddenly; but it was no more, than what
we in reason, considering his great and long Weakness, might well expect; and
what he, I hope, was for a long time, as to the main, well prepared for. The
only Thing which I shall further Remark upon, and which I think is worthy our
Observance, is this, That it pleased God to take him to himself, and so to his
rest, upon the Sabbath or Lord's Day, which you know is a Type of our Rest in
HEAVEN, and ought to be a Day of Rest from all Worldly Labors to us here, and
this too God did, I think, within less than two hours, after he had been
publicly serving and worshipping God here in his House, which was too the
place and work he always seemed to take greatest Delight in, and where we shall
be sure much to miss him: For we shall never, Sirs, have the happiness to keep
another Sabbath, or to worship God with him any more here on Earth; I pray God
we may in Heaven, where I trust he is now gone to keep an everlasting Sabbath
with God, with his Savior, with the Holy Angels, and with the Souls of all
Just Men made perfect, and where he will be at rest from all those painful
Labors, which he did with us, and for us, whilst on Earth, and find his Works,
that is the good Fruits and blessed Reward of them, eternally following him in
Heaven. The good Lord grant, that we may be all so instructed by his Death, as
timely to lay to heart our own, and seriously to prepare our selves for it;
that so when we come to dye, (as God only knows how soon and how sudden it may
be) we may dye in the Lord, as I trust he did, and rest from our Labors, and
be blessed and happy after we are dead, as I believe he is; For blessed are the
dead, that dye in the Lord, henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that they may
rest from their Labors and their Works follow them.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel.
CONVIVIVM COELESTE. A plain and familiar Discourse concerning the Lord's
Supper: Showing at once the Nature of that Sacrament; as also the right way of
preparing our selves for the receiving of it. In which are also considered,
those Exceptions which Men usually bring to excuse their not partaking of it.

Charity directed: Or the way to give Alms to the greatest Advantage.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, at White Hall, the Fifth of
November. 1692. All three by Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

A Treatise of Knowledge and Love compared; In two Par^s: First. Of falsely
pretended Knowledge* Secondly. Of true Saving Knowledge and Love. 1. Against
hasty Judging, and False Conceits of Knowledge, and for necessary Suspension.
2. The Excellency of Divine Love, and the Happiness of being Known and Loved of
God. Written as greatly needful to the Safety and Peace of every Christian, and
of the Church. The only certain way to escape false Religions, Heresies, Sects,
and Malignant Prejudices, Persecutions and Sinful Wars: All caused by falsely
pretended Knowledge, and hasty Judging, by Proud Ignorant Men, who know not
their Ignorance. By Richard Baxter; Who by God's Blessing on long and hard
Studies, has learned to know that he knows but little, and to suspend his
Judgment of Uncertainties, and to take great necessary certain things, for the
food of his Faith, and Comforts, and the Measure of his Church Communion.

Advice to an only Child: Or, Excellent Council to all young Persons.
Containing the Sum and Substance of Experimental and Practical Divinity:
Written by an Eminent and Judicious Divine, for the Private Use of an only
Child, now made Public for the Benefit of all.

The Confirming Work of Religion: Or, Its Great Things made plain, by their
Primary Evidences and Demonstrations. Whereby the meanest in the Church, may
soon be made able to render a Solid and Rational Account of their Faith.
Written by R. Fleming, Author of the Fulfilling of the Sciptures. Now Published
by Daniel Burgess.


