Silent Meeting A WONDER To the WORLD; Yet Practiced by the APOSTLES, And
Owned by the PEOPLE of GOD, scornfully called QUAKERS.

Printed in the Year, 1671.

Silent Meeting A WONDER to the WORLD, etc.
READER;
HAving formerly passed through a twofold Ministry; First, As a Gifted man in
the National.

Secondly, As a Baptist; and now brought to wait on God in silence, it is a
wonder to many; upon which the Lord has led me forth to publish this Paper,
and make it a free gift unto those who desire some satisfaction concerning
Silent Meeting, in which I wait on God for a Purer Ministry, if he please to
bring me unto it; or if I fall short (like Moses to dye in Mount Nebo, Deuteronomy.
32.49.) and only see it afar off, his blessed will be done.

I preaching first in the National Ministry for hire, selling my Sermons at my
best Market, and afterward being took off from that Merchandising, becoming a
Baptist, and preaching freely without selling, did now think my spiritual
condition to be very good; but the Eternal God, Jer. 48.11.
who empties from vessel to vessel, to take away all the carnal taste, did not
suffer me many years in this estate; who by a further discovery of himself,
brought me back to silence, that I should wait with the despised remnant,
called Quakers.

And as one alone from the tumult, or outside of a wood, can easily hear the
clamours and outcries within; so I being come forth of the Forms and Forests of
the world, unto a holy silence, by the power of Jesus Christ within me, could
the better discern to see and view the various Sects and Forms in their
Congregations, how unlike the most part were unto the true spouse of Christ;
which with a heavy burden on my spirit, I beheld their Parochial Assemblies to
appear something like Nebuchadnezzars Image in the golden head, Dan. 2. but
upon a through observation in the Life, Fruits, and Conversation, as the iron
and clay; barren, fruitless and empty, having the imitations and forms of
Godliness, but denying the power of Christ, in leading forth the Creature.

When thus, like the returning Prodigal, ( Luke 15.17.) I came to look on my
self within, I saw how I had sed on husks; but God (my Father) had bread
enough: And al hough Arts, Sciences, teaching for hire, getting of money, with
such carnal delights, quieted flesh a while, as a Rattle or Pipe does a Child,
for a time, without the breast; yet now that immortal part seeing its
emptiness, and coming to the true hunger and thirst after righteousness;
nothing but an eternal God would satisfy, to give that bread, flesh, and drink
of Life, ( John 6.51, 53.) whereby a poor soul may grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of God: But those that live and depend only upon outward Forms, and
visible Things, the same deceive thousands, who thereby fall short of what they
imagine.

I now see that he is no true Minister of Jesus Christ, but who is led forth by
his Spirit, and such we rejoice to hear declaring the things of God: Otherwise
upon meeting we sit silent with the tongue, yet having a heart full of praises,
where we worship God in Spiri and in Truth, John 4.24. 2 Cor. 6.16.
who makes our bodies Temples for the same Spi it: not speaking by hearsay,
and humane Ar^s, but lay all that down: when earthly thoughts, ear hly words,
and earthly works are all laid aside, and the Temple within us is ready, the
Light of Christ shining in it, and the Lord, with a further manifesta ion of
his Love, enters it by his Eternal Power: whereupon we can truly say, That the
Lords presence is amongst us, feeding of his Flock, and making us feel the
power of an endless Life

As one must come forth of the house, which intends to see it round about, so
we, in obedience to God, being separate and come forth from the world, can the
better see how the major part of the People come o their Woe ship as to a
Market, 2 Cor. 6.17.
dressed up in their fashions, with their tongues in carnal discourse, both going
thither and returning back, the eye gazing upon vanity and filth, the ear ready
to receive such stuff as defiles, and the heart as an Anvil to forge within;
whereby they come, not enquring like the Sspouse of Christ, Cant. 1.7. or as a
People to do the work of God; as a true Wise to rejoice in her Husband; but as
an Harlot that wantons and sports her self: yea, if they stay a while for their
coming together, what scoffing, playing, quarreling, carnal talk, unseemly
behavior, and sinful actions are taken up amongst them, woeful experience can
testify?

And among such People I poor wretch did once spend some time, seeing them
words, which they paid for, but did not keep them; using pleasing expressions,
and speaking by hearsay (as others did) and not upon experience from Christ
within me, but by imitation, as Players on a Stage, assume the Name, and act
the Persons of Princes, Nobles, etc. but being come off and unmasked, they are
no such men: yea, I was persuaded ^hen, that flesh must sin, and have its lusts
fulfilled, while I wa^ in the body, not seeing that all filthiness of flesh and
spirit must be cleased, or else holiness cannot be perfected in the fear of
God; 2 Cor. 7.1.
and with comfort I write this Truth, That I have found and felt more of the
Lords presence in one Silent Meeting, than I have done in a hundred Sermons
preached by me in times past, and though then I did deliver them with much
zeal. But this is,

A WONDER TO THE WORLD,

Who have given their money for that which is not bread; Isa. 55.2. buying the
Letter of their P jests, that chide them for sinning, yet say, They must
continue sinner while they are in this Body; telling the People, that God must
do all for them and in them; yet bid the same People to get Faith, get
Repentance, etc. so that the new Creation, in making a New Creature, is a
Mystery unto them that are thus ignorant, 2 Cor. 5.17. which affirm, that
People must live in sin until they die; as if God had laid a necessity upon the
Creature to offend him; therefore they own no Light within, nor Power of Christ
within, 2 Cor. 10. v. 5.
whereby to bring each thought in obedience, but rather like the Athenians,
they mock at what they understand not, Acts 17.18.

Take heed therefore, both you that sell Scripture Letter for money, and you
Hearers which think you buy it; for thus Simon the Sorcerer thought with his
money to purchase the Gift of God, but his deceit deceived himself, and he went
without it, Acts 8.20. And do not think, that speaking, hearing, and reading
the Scriptures, suffices to make you wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy: 3.15. but
consider how it must be by faith in Christ Jesus: So except Christ in Spirit be
within to work Faith and Obedience, the seeing, hearing, or reading the Letter
avails little without us: for the Letter of former Scriptures, the Scribes,
Pharisees, and persecuting Priests had, who crucified Christ; as many now have
the Letter also, yet to little purpose, whilst they seek to destroy the works
of the Spirit. Nor does Christ say, That there is Eternal Life in the
Scriptures, John 5.39. but reproves the Jews, who thought so, yet would not own
him who was the substance of all.

Look therefore, by the Light of Christ within you unto whom ye yield your
selves in your members to obey, as eyes to see, ears to hear, tongues to speak,
hearts to think, etc. for therein you are servants, Romans 6.13, 16.
whether in power for doing good, or under the Devils power by living in sin:
and whether you live after the flesh in the Devils power, or after the Spirit
in Gods power, may be easily known by the mind within of each man and woman:
for upon what the mind is carried with most eagerness, joy and delight, in
earthly things, or upon heavenly things, in that estate you are at present, of
flesh or Spirit, either for Heaven or Hell, Romans 8.5, 6, 7. Yet I advise you
not to take up this or that outward Form, but to seek for that Pearl, and sell
(or part with) all earthly affections to buy or obtain it, Mat. 13.45. even
that Kingdom of God to be within your selves which is in the Sanctified ones:
for God manifests himself in the Creature, Luke 17.21.
making his People Partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. causing things
invisible to be understood, even his Eternal Power, etc. So that he leaves man
without excuse, Romans 1.20. and for that Spirit which leads into these Truths we
silently wait. And this was,

Practiced by the Apostles, Who had from Christ two distinct Commissions for
going forth to preach: The first from Christ in the flesh before his death,
Luke 9.1, 10. which lasted but a time for although they could cast forth
devils, while it held, yet being ended, they could not do it, Luke 9.40. and in
this they went only to the Jews, Mat. 10.5.

The second Commission was to all Nations, Mat. 28.19. both to Jews and
Gentiles; given them by a risen Christ, and confirmed by the Holy Ghost, or
Christ in Spirit, about Fifty days after, Act. 2.1. during which time,
although they prayed, yet they did not go forth to preach unto the people,
until they had that Spirit which they were commanded to wait for, Act. 1.14.
Ephesians. 1.13. as the Seal of their Commission, Acts. 1.4. So they were silent,
as unto Preaching, wherein they waited for that which should lead them into all
Truth, John 16.13. Whence note, It was not the Letter, or Christ in the flesh,
that Jesus said should do it, but him in Spirit, who promised his Disciples to
come again unto them, John 14.28. John 16.22. and although he came again to
them after he was risen from the dead: yet in the several Promises, we may see
how it was the Holy Ghost, or Christ in Spirit should lead them into all Truth,
and bring all things to remembrance; and make them able Ministers of the
Spirit, John 14.26. 2 Cor. 3.6. And such the Holy Ghost teaches, Luke 12.12.
yea, it is said, The Holy Ghost speaks, Mark 13.11. And the Spirit speaks
in them, Mat. 10.20. And what injuries are done to them is taken to himself,
Matthew. 25.41.

Thus being at Jerusalem, all in one place, with one accord, (as they were
commanded to wait) Acts 1.4. Acts 2.1. in that Silent Meeting they received
what they had waited for, which made them able Ministers of the Gospel: and
then Peter began to speak, Verse 14. This being the order of their second
Commission, and is to hold unto all that look for Christ's spiritual coming into
their flesh to make them able Gospel-Teachers, and their bodies a habitation
and temple for the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.19. Ephesians. 2.22. Therefore it is not
Christ's spiritual coming in another Saints flesh, which I feel, that gives me
comfort; but when the same Holy Ghost, even Christ in Spirit dwells in my
Body, I then can witness it, by his Eternal Power within, who is my Light and
my Savior. But this is a strong Lesson to the world, who cannot receive or
know this Spirit promised to be in the Saints, John 14.17. Yet this remember,
that who has not Christ in him, he is a Reprobate: 2 Cor. 13.5. Which
Scripture-Truth, and Gospel-Practice is,

Owned by the People of God, scornfully called QVAKERS: Who coming like Solomon
(Eccles. 2.) unto self-experience, in seeing all our joys, pleasures, profits,
or other things delightful to the flesh, to be but vanity and vexation, we
become silent thereunto, not answering, to obey the lusts of the carnal mind,
but as dead to the world, that we may live unto God: Even then humane Prudence,
in things of the Lord is laid in silence, and fleshly glory is emptied forth;
leaving off to love the world, or the things of the world (1 John 2.15.) as
formerly; being as the great dunghill for the true Convert to keep under his
feet, and not magnified in his heart; knowing that every work and secret thing,
both good and evil, must come to judgment, Eccles. 12.14.

In which holy silence, although the tongue speaks not, yet the Spirit
helps, Romans 8.26. which the heart-searcher beholds: the Body in
Silent-Meeting resting from labor (which is all the rest in a carnal man's
worship) but we go further, with a heart striving to rest from sinful
Imaginations, and entering upon a true rest in God, of which we feel, see, and
taste in its beginnings, as an earnest of our blessed Inheritance; Romans 8.23.
desiring Christ may take the whole Dominion in us, to deliver from that
bondage of corruption, by redeeming the Body from the same, which in part is
begun, and shall be finished when Christ is formed, Gal. 4.19. and the
strongest takes the whole possession; but a time we must wait for this as at
Bethsaidas Pool, until the Lord by his healing-water cures his poor wounded
Creatures.

In consideration of such a spiritual Ministry, note three Things: 1. The work
of Moses. 2. Of Christ in the Flesh. 3. Of Christ in the Spirit.
First, Moses believed and obeyed, seeing things afar off, yet drank of the
spiritual Rock that followed: but his work was not to hold unto the end in a
Levitical Ministry, and paying of Tithes, with material Temple-worship, etc.
for he shows how the Lord would raise him another Prophet to be heard, and who
would not hearken to that Prophet (Christ Jesus) in all things, the Lord would
punish, Deuteronomy. 18.15, 19. of whom Peter and Stephen spoke the same, Acts. 3.22.
Acts 7.38.

Secondly, Note Christ's work in the flesh, who had a glory with God before the
world was, John 17.5. but now assumed a body to satisfy for sinners, and
preached in that body, to be the Light, for enlightening the world, to make
them ain^s, not as if they were such, but that they might be forshewing how his
true Disciples and followers should forsake all to embrace him, John 1.9. and
they belevied he was the Son of God: Yet then, (he being with them in his
flesh) they were ignorant of many things; as the Rising from the dead, Mark
9.10. and understanding of the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. and of Christ's Kingdom,
thinking it should be temporal in Israel, Acts 1.6. and of his Sufferings,
before he entered into his glory, after his fleshly manifestation. Luke 24.21,
26, Yea, John Baptist testified of Christ, yet afterward sent to know if it
was he, Mat. 1.1, 3. Neither does Christ say, that then in flesh he told his
Disciples all things, or lead them in to all things; but left that work unto
his coming in spirit, John 16.13. John 14.16, 26. For, although in himself he
had the Spirits fulness, yet to believers it should not come until he was
gone away in flesh, John 16.17. the vessel of his body being broken, and the
Unction thereof, to fill many therewith: where Note, As Moses Ministry was now
at an end, so also Christ in flesh should depart, and Christ in spirit would
come, to set up a Minstry, and abide with Believers for ever, John 14.16. Heb.
13 8.

Thirdly, Consider Christ's work in spirit, which is to abide for ever; But at
this the Jews stumbled, thinking it was in flesh he should continue always,
and so they looked for a temporal Kingdom, and outward glory, John 12.34. as
many aim at in these days: whereas his Kingdom is not of this world, John
18.36 neither are his Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6.
called New Testament (or new Covenant) Ministers, having that written in their
hearts, before promised, Jer. 31, 3 3. Isa. 54 13. John 6 45. who should not
search Authors, Commentaries, Manuuscripts, as a Shop book, for a Sermon, but
speak from the power of Christ within, as Paul did, Gal. 1.16 and the Apostles
Acts 2. did, having the Word in the Mouth, and in the Heart, Romans 10.8. For the
Scriptures must be preached by the same Spirit that gave them forth, and not
only by humane Learning, for flesh is not able to comprehend the things of God;
and who has not this spirit is none of his, Romans 8.9. from whence we may speak
boldly, That those which have not this Spirit, to preach from it and by it,
they are none of Christ's: and by this Spirit they knew the things of God, who
had received it, 1 Cor, 2.10.12, and this searches the deep things of God: So
it is plain, that True Ministers must have Christ in Spirit, who speaks in
Spirit, Mat 10.20, 40. And who hears or despises them is said to do it unto
Christ, Luke 10.16. Therefore we must pray God to send us such, for men cannot
do it by calling one another Bachelors, and Masters, and Doctors upon humane
Arts and Acts: which is like that of the Jews, John 5.44. wherein one man took
honor of another: And take heed lest it be with you as it was with Jerusalem,
of whom it is not said ye could not, but, ye would not, Luke 13.34. A sad
condition.

And now this 22th day of the 7th Month, the Word of the Lord came unto me, to
warn all you in power; and you National Priests (or Ministers) called Bishops,
Deans, Doctors, or inferior; and you that are Hearers, Know ye, that the Lord
is pleading hi own cause, and has a strong controversy with you; Therefore
take heed what Ministry you plead for; and remember what I answered William
Prynne; That there is no Gospel-Plea for Tithes, nor forced Maintenance, etc.
To you that was; and this is, from the Lords Spirit by me his Messenger.

Now as the Apostles Silent Meeting was in expectation of the Spirit before
promised; so God (in Scriptures) having engaged himself, that in these latter
days there should be flowings forth thereof, we silently wait for it; and
whosoever looks now for this promised Spirit (being a frequenter of Silent
Meetings) must in the power of Jesus Christ, sincerely strive to have these
three things in themselves: 1. A Spiritual Watch. 2. A Spiritual Touchstone. 3.
The Spiritual Scales.


I say unto all, Watch, Mark 13.37. For you know not when the time of Trial is,
or when the coming of the Spirit shall be; it being as the wind, which blows
where it lists, John. 3.8. For flesh loves to break out, and have its will,
and the lusts thereof; therefore the Spiritual watch must be truly kept within,
to see and note what works are in hand, and what words are issuing forth, and
what thoughts are in thee: But those which keep not this Watch, do run hastily
upon action, and their tongues speak unadvisedly, in hasty Questions and
Answers, oftentimes proceeding to Passion and rage, like short fits of madness,
with their hearts wandering out after folly, and carnal objects; by which means
many Professors break forth into filth, yet say, They are Soldiers of Christ,
but keep not a Spiritual Watch under him; so their Tongues are not bridled, nor
have they learned to take heed unto their ways, Psalm. 39.1.

Therefore, if thou seek to reap the pure benefit of Silent Meetings; learn,

First, To come unto a Pure Silence in thine own self, which is to silence all
in thee that is evil, by that Eternal Power of God; so thy Tongue, Heart, and
Hands shall be under the faithful Watch, and the Actions without in the Body,
with thy Actions within of thy mind, as Love, Joy, Desire, etc. will by degrees
be all brought into true Obedience. Which Watch keeping according to thy
measure (or Talents received) sin shall not have dominion over thee; but thou will grow in Grace, and become a Conqueror in him that has loved thee.
Therefore remember what Christ spoke to his Disciples, was also to thee and me,
Watch, Mark 13.37.

Secondly, When the work, word, or thought is thus staid by the Watch, then
bring it to the Spiritual Touchstone, for trial, whether it be good or no; for
oftentimes Satan and Flesh covers Vices under the names of Virtues, and will
either extenuate or lesten a sin, or else flourish it over with some zeal, or
pretense of holiness, therefore we must prove and try them in the Light of
Christ: which the Apostle sets forth by Examination and proof of a man's own
work, 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.4. and thereby is seen what is acceptable to the
Lord: Ephesians. 5.10. Mal. 3.3.
For God by his Spiritual work comes into a man, as a Refiner, to purify; and
unto what strength and heat the Spiritual fire in thee is come, so is the
melting, trying, and refining within, upon the proof of thy actions, and taking
away of dross and filth: yea note in words themselves, how sometimes they are
too many, sometimes unsound and untrue, sometimes too short, in telling but
half a truth etc. Therefore let them first be tried by the Spiritual
Touchstone, before they proceed out of thy mouth, whether they are pure or
impure.

Thirdly, Use the Spiritual Scales, to weigh, ponder, or consider all things to
be spoken or done, before they pass from thee; for man durst not let so many
filthy words drop from his tongue, if first they were weighed and considered
within at the Heart. Yea and Nay, Yes and No, must be the same as they are
spoken, and so speak the same thing intended, and pretended; for otherwise you
are Liars, and Liars are for the Lake, Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.15.
to be amongst, Dogs and Whoremongers without. Yet with many, Lying is common,
who have not learned to speak the same thing intended; as if you ask them, to
eat, to drink, to tarry, etc. they will say No; yet desire them again and they
will accept it; so here they are Liars. Some in Scoffs and Mocks, think it is
witty to speak a Lie in Jest; others being asked the truth of a thing, will
sometimes flourish and enlarge it, making the same too much, or too little, as
in Praising or dispraising, in buying or selling, and account themselves expert
dealers, and cunning Chapmen, because they can use their tongues for advantage;
whereas they are but Liars in it; and such know not what a Spiritual Watch
means: Therefore know, that in all such estates, ye are quite out of the good
old way, or way of truth; and remember, If any such seem Religious, yet they
are not so, seeing their tongues are unbridled, not brought to the truth, and
their Religion is vain or empty, Jam. 1.26. Yet because you are such, I do not
say, you are damned; but declare your being captive in fleshly Babylon, showing
from the Spirit of God, what must be done by you, if ye are saved.

If any are in Christ they are New Creatures, and there is a new Heaven and a
new Earth in them for all the parts, members, faculties, and abilties, are put
to a new use; the new heart, and new spirit is in them, so they speak and act
new things from that law of God written in their inward parts; and such dare
not vent their frothy words, as flesh did formerly, but now there is a killing
of that; as Paul died daily, 1 Cor. 15.31. so the New Creature dies daily to
sin, he is dead as to act in sin, but lively to Righteousness; whereas the
Sinner is quick to sin, but dead and dull in the things of God: So thou shall
see the difference of these Two Estates, betwixt Darkness and Light, when thou
come to use the Spiritual Watch, Spiritual Touchstone, and Spiritual Scales;
according to thy measure in the growth of Grace, to know the power of an
endless life within thee, working and effecting these things; and then thou
may say, I now see what pure silence is, yea, then thou shall benefit by
Silent Meetings.

And those that are come to the pure silencing of flesh, to bridle the tongue,
to wrestle with the spiritual wickedness in the high place of the heart, Ephesians.
6.12. 2 Cor. 10.5. 1 Cor. 10.31.
that each thought may be brought into obedience unto Christ, and whatsoever
they act, do all to the Glory of God; such can witness the power of Christ in
them, and when he pleases to call them by his Eternal Spirit to go forth as
Ministers, they can best declare what God has revealed unto them; As the Man
having the Devils cast forth, published in Decapolis, how great things Jesus
has done for him, Mar. 5.20. wheareas they that preach by hearsay, and humane
study, show, they speak not as the Spirit gives them utterance, but with the
tongues of flesh, from carnal Apprehensions: So that, when they preach unto the
people it might be objected; Jesus I know has the Spirit, and Paul I know had
it, Act. 19 15. but who are ye? upon what account would ye conjure forth sin
out of others, who have not the True Spirit your selves?

Therefore let none assume or own any other Gospel Ministers, than those called
forth by the Spirit of God, as Christ in Spirit, after his Resurrection and
Ascension, confirmed the same, to lead them into all truth, and bring all
things to their remembrence, as able Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the
Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. as Carnal men do, who teach one another Humane Learning,
and then sell it for Divinity, forcing many to pay for it at a dear rate, even
to spoiling of Goods, Imprisonment and cruelty.

But some will Object their Non-Scripture Distinctions of Mediate, and
Immediate, Ordinary, and Extraordinary, etc. saying, That although the Apoctles
were so called of God, yet they ordained others not so called; and so out of
their carnal Inventions they undertake to consecrate or make Steeple Houses,
Masse-houses, High Places, or the Tower-houses to be Churches, and to be
Holy-places, and fit men by their Arts and Degrees to preach in such places,
etc.

Answ. All their pretenses can no more make such Places holy, than a heap of
stones, nor add any more virtue thereby into the Pulpit than into a Tub: For
God is worshipped in Spirit and Truth: Gal. 1.18. John 4.23, 24. 1 Timothy 1.3.
Mat. 16.17.
Nor are true Teachers to deliver any other Doctrine than what the Apostles
did: Therefore see what Qualifications they were to have, 1 Timothy 32, etc. Tit.
1.6, etc. Now it is not flesh and blood that reveals this unto them, nor the
Tongues of Humane Learning which qualifies men thus for the Ministry, but the
same Spirit of God: Therefore it is common to see those having much humane
Learning to be Great Persecutors, and will not take up the Cross to follow
Christ and so cross their own Lusts, Pride, Covetousness, Envy and Filth, but
give way unto it, by which means we find so many cruel Priests; for there is
scarce any Persecution of Saiants, but the Priests are chief Actors therein,
either by instigating or acting.

Now consider Friends, it was that charged on Thyatira, for suffering Jezebell,
who called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce the People, Rev. 2.20.
So these National Ministers call themselves Divines, and Gospel Ministers,
yet lead the People in Error; which we now seeing by the Light of Christ, if we
do not discover, reprove, and oppose them therein, God will lay the same thing
to our charge as he did unto Thyatira; For now Jesus Christ will set up his own
Ministry: And although he forbad not his Disciples to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 23.3. when the Law-Ministry was not ended; yet now having
finished that work in his flesh, his Spiritual Ministry he has set up to
continue unto the end, and no other are we to hear. And this is the Testimony
which the Lord has called me to hold forth, Therefore hearken unto it.

The 23d Day of the 8th Month: 1660. William Britten.

Concerning Gathering in the Name of Jesus.
CHrist Jesus the Second Adam, who came amongst the Sons of Fallen Adam, you
may see the beginning of his setting up his Meetings, when he says, Where two
or three are gathered together in my Name, I am in the midst of them: so you
see here Christ begins with a few, two or three, for there was the gathering of
the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, their Temple and Synagogues: and likewise
there was the gathering of the Heathen to Dianas Temple: And all them that
gathered in the Name of Jesus, came from the Jews Synagogue and Temple, and
likewise the Gentiles, into the Name of Jesus; for they who are gathered in the
Name of Jesus, whose Name is above every name, and there is no Salvation by any
other name under the whole Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus, into which the
gathering is, where all know their Salvation; and so who are gathered into the
Name of Jesus, are gathered into the Power and Authority. For you know when a
Tax or Assessment is gathered in the name of the Head, or Heads of a Nation, it
comes in Power and Authority, that you obey it either actively or passively.

And so who are gathered in the Name of Jesus, they are gathered in the Power,
the Second Adam, whose Power and Authority is above the Power of the first
Adams Sons and Daughters; by which Power, and in whose name their People are
gathered: But Christ, whose Name is above every name, and there is no Salvation
by any other Name under Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus; and they that be
gathered in this Name of Jesus, by the Power in which they know their
Salvation, and they do see there is no Salvation by any other Name under the
whole Heaven, nor gathering by which they gather, they bid farewell to all other
names and gatherings under Heaven, as knowing there is no Salvation but in the
Name of Jesus. And this fulfils Jacobs Prophecy, who says, The Law shall not
depart from between Judahs feet, until Shilo come; and the gathering of all
Nations shall be unto him: So then its clear, if the gathering of all Nations
be unto Christ, they must forsake all that, into which they were gathered: And
therefore that makes all the Heads of the National Ways to be angry, that
holds them up; and therefore with such, The Lamb makes War in Righteousness,
going on Conquering and to Conquer, that he may Rule whose Right it is, that he
might subdue all things to himself; in whose Name all things are to be done,
and in whom all People are to be gathered, whom God has given for Salvation to
the ends of the Earth. And likewise this does fulfill Moses Prophecy, who said,
Like unto me will God raise up a Prophet, whom in all things the People shall
hear, who is the Salvation to the ends of the Earth, to whom the Gathering of
all Nations must be: And they who be gathered in his Name, do and must hear him
in all things, by whom all things were made and created, who was glorified with
the Father before the World began.

G. F.

THE END.

