A SERMON Preached in St. MARY'S Church IN DOVER, June the First, 1694. BEFORE
The Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Romney, BEING The Day in which he Entered
upon the Office of Constable of DOVER-CASTLE, and Lord Warden of the
CINQUE PORTS.

By JAMES BROM, A. M. Rector of Cheriton in Kent, and Chaplain to His Lordship
in the Cinque Ports.

LONDON, Printed for Eben Tracy at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, MDCXCIV.

Mr. BROME's SERMON Preached before The Right Honorable HENRY Earl of Romney,
IN St. Mary's Church in DOVER, June 1 st. 1694.

June 1. 1694.
Dover ss.
ORdered by the Mayors, Bailiffs, and Jurates of the Cinque Ports, Two Ancient
Towns, and their Members, that the Thanks of this Assembly be given unto Mr.
James Brom Chaplain to The Right Honorable Our Lord Warden for his Sermon
this day Preached before his Lordship and this Assembly, and the said Mr. Brom
is desired to Print his Sermon.

Sandwich, Speaker.

Imprimatur, Ra. Barker.
July 9th. 1694.
A SERMON Preached before the Earl of Romney.
Proverbs xxix. v. 2. When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice,
but when the wicked bears rule, the people mourn.
IN all Nations Two things are Causes of a Common Prosperity, good Government,
and Good Obedience; a good Magistrate over a Perverse People is a Sound Head,
as has been well observed, on a surfeited Body, a good Commonwealth and a bad
Ruler is a healthful Body with a Head Aching; A good Governor is a skilful
Ship-Master, that takes the safest and the shortest Course, and continually so
steers as the Rocks and Shelves, which might Shipwreck the State, be avoided,
and the Voyage ever made with the greatest speed, best profit, and most ease;
but a wicked Magistrate is a Wolf made Leader of a Fold, that both satiates his
Cruelty, and betrays his Flock to danger.

Upon which account no doubt it was, that we find Solomon so frequently
advising all in Authority to the constant practice of Virtue and Goodness, as
knowing full well that nothing would prove more Instrumental to promote any
Nations happyness, then Men of such Sober and Excellent Principles: For it is
too visible in the World, that when the Wicked get up into Power, and such as
take no care to oppose the growth of wickedness, and to keep every Man within
the bounds of his Duty, are in Places of Trust and Authority, as they open a
Sluice to all manner of Impiety, so such as are Virtuous must of necessity groan
under the intolerable weight of their grievous Oppressions; but when Just and
Merciful Governors make Virtuous Men by their Example become more numerous,
then does a Kingdom begin to Thrive and grow Happy; then appears a Public Joy
and Satisfaction throughout all the Community, then do all Fears cease, all
Jealousies are laid aside, all dreadful apprehensions of the Peoples Insecurity
do perfectly vanish, the Face of Public Affairs appears Fair and Serene, and
nothing move's eccentrically, but in a Just and Regular Order, which seems to
be the full Sense and Meaning of the Wise-man's Aphorism, When the Righteous
are in Authority the People rejoice, but when the Wicked bears Rule, the
People mourn.

From which words,



Secondly, I shall endeavor to show you, that there is very great reason for
such Public Joy and Exultation, because as God is on their side, so the whole
Kingdom feels the Blessed Effects of it: Prove. 28. 12.
For as Dionysius Carthusianus observes well upon Prove. 28. 12. Ex hoc bonum
Commune, etc. From hence the Common Good and Safety of the People, and the
Glory of God are procured, preserved, and promoted: And St. Austin, whom he
there quotes, agrees with him in his Notion concerning this matter, Illi qui
vera pietate praediti, etc. They who being endued, says he, with true
Principles of Piety, live Good and Virtuous Lives, if withal they have but
attained to any Skill and Knowledge of governing the People, must needs render
that Community extremely happy, where God is so propitious to confer upon them
Authority: But when the Wicked bears Rule, the People mourn, gemet populus,
says the same Dionysius upon the place, timens exactionari, gravari, and
opprimi, etc. dreadfully fearing the great Exactions, Grievances, and
Oppressions, that will most certainly ensue.



First, I shall consider that there is ever great Joy, when Good Men are in
Rule and Authority; for if as St. Bernard observes, Rebus raritas pretium
facit, the rarity of any thing adds a Price and Value to it; then if Virtue in
a Governor appear more Orient than ordinary, the uncommonness of the thing
usually creates a greater Respect and Veneration for the Person.

For Virtue has an Innate Beauty and Comeliness which is very taking, wherever
it is visible, and if in a private Sphere, its Charms are very great; Virtue
and Goodness, when in Men of Birth and Power, like a Curious Picture inchased
with Gold and Diamonds is set off with a far greater Luster.

Men have naturally a great Opinion, Value, and Veneration for true Goodness,
and whatever others may think of it, Vice can never so far change its own
Nature, or so fairly counterfeit Virtue as by the most Alluring Charms or
Features to gain the same esteem.

And although Virtue and Vice are reputed by some Persons only to be Arbitrary
things, founded either in Men's Imaginations, or in the Customs and
Constitutions of the World, and not in the Nature of the things themselves, and
so there is no Good and Evil, but what the Supreme Authority of a Nation
declares to be so, yet it will most certainly appear, that there is a vast
difference betwixt Good and Evil, a Natural Comeliness in Virtue, and a Natural
Deformity in Vice by the Universal Agreement of Mankind about it, and by the
general Verdict of Humane Nature concerning it.

And to make this a little more Intelligible by some particular instances to
this purpose; Will Violence and Injustice, will Perjury and Perfidiousness,
will Unrighteousness and Ingratitude, and such like horrid Crimes pass off with
as great Esteem, Honor and Reputation, as the contrary Virtues are wont to do?
Suppose then the Reverse of all that which we now call Virtue were solemnly
Enacted, and the Practice of Fraud and Rapine, Perjury, and Falseness to a Man's
Word, and all manner of Vice and Wickedness were Established by a Law; I ask
now in the words of a very great and Learned Divine, If the case betwixt Virtue
and Vice was thus altered, would that which we now call Vice in process of time
gain the reputation of Virtue, and that which we call Virtue grow odious and
contemptible to Humane Nature? Is it possible a Man, that by all unjust and
indirect means imaginable takes away from his Neighbor, that which is really
his own, and daily builds his Fortunes upon the Ruins of other Men, shall
either have the same credit while he lives, which he has, that deals fairly
and honestly with all the World, or when he dies, shall leave the same Monument
of lasting Honor and Reputation behind him, which Truth and Fidelity
perpetuate to Mankind?

Nay is it not common with some even of those, who are of the vicious part of
the World, to revile and speak against, and pretend to detest and abhor those
who have been more notorious than themselves for their Crimes and Villainies?

Not but that wicked Persons may be sometimes honored by such as do not know
them to be wicked, and on the other side those that are good may by others be
esteemed and used as the Rubbish and Off-scowring of all things, but this is to
be ascribed to their mistake and ignorance of them; but the generality of
Mankind have heretofore, and still do pay the greatest Reverence and Respect to
any Persons, whom they believe to be Innocent and Virtuous, whereas Shame,
Scorn, and Disgrace is commonly the Lot and Portion of wicked Men, which is
plain from that of Solomon, Prove. 13. 5. A wicked man is loathsome and comes
to shame; which word loathsome denotes all such kind of Persons to be as
nauseous and offensive to the judgment of others, as the most loathsome and
unsavory things are to their Taste and Smell.

On the contrary the Wise Man speaking of Religion says, It shall be an
ornament of grace to thy head, and as a chain about thy neck; exalt her and she
shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor, when thou do embrace her
Prove. 4. 8.
: By which we may see that nothing will sooner raise Men's Esteem, and make them
Great in the World than a Righteous Conversation, for this will render them
illustrious both in the sight of God and Man; For Ps. 84. 11.
the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly; and to this purpose may the words of the Psalmist not
improperly be understood, Psalm. 97. 11. Light is sown for the righteous, and
gladness for the upright in heart: Besides the inward satisfaction, which all
good Men do naturally reap by Virtuous Actions, the Public Acclamations that
do daily likewise Accompany them from those that have received the Common
Benefit of them, are a Public Testimony how grateful and endearing they are in
general to Mankind.

That there is great reason to rejoice when righteous men are in authority,
because as God is on their side, so the whole Kingdom feels the Blessed Effects
of it.

First, God is on their side, and takes the part of such as are Righteous
Governors, and therefore the People have great reason to rejoice under such a
Government: Nothing does more endear Men to God, and render them Gracious and
Acceptable in his sight than an Holy and Virtuous Conversation: Now it is
Natural to take care of, and preserve such things as are of the highest Value
and Estimation, and by consequence good Rulers being God's more special
Favorites, hence has he a more peculiar regard for them, esteeming them as
the very apple of his Eye, and professing it as possible for the Sons of
Violence to come near and touch that, as to do them any Injury by their
malicious Machinations.

Nay still further, as God claims a peculiar propriety in them, so he sets the
highest Marks and Signatures of his Favor and Affection upon them; For they
shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels,
and I will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him. Mal. 3. 1^.


When the Wicked shall arise up in Tumults against them, when they encompass
them like Bees, flaming with Rage and Fury, as if they would presently consume
them, then says God, Mine Hand shall hold them fast, and mine Arm shall
strengthen them, the Enemy shall not be able to do them violence, the Son of
wickedness shall not hurt them, I shall smite down their Foes before their
Face, and plague them that hate them; nay, he will certainly defend them under
his wings, his Faithfulness and Truth shall be their Shield and Buckler.

And what should be the reason of all this kind Care and Regard, of this
favorable Patronage and Protection, which God affords them, but because those
Persons endeavor to imitate God in those his excellent perfections of Justice
and Truth? God as he is the Sovereign of the Universe, and the Great Governor
of the World performs his promises and impartially distributes his Justice to
Mankind, and those who are his Vicegerents and Delegates here on Earth cannot
more ingratiate themselves in his favor, then when Judgment runs down like
Water, and Righteousness like a Mighty Stream; For to do Justice and Judgment
is more acceptable to the Lord than any Sacrifice. Prove. 21. 3.


Secondly, As God does constantly Patronize all such Righteous Officers, so the
whole Kingdom feels the Blessed Effects of it, and this is a further reason for
the Peoples Joy and Exultation: Now we cannot better know the welcome Fruits
of a Righteous Government, then by the Joyful Experience of it, for from hence
it is, that true Religion is encouraged, and kept up, maugre all opposition in
its true Luster and Glory, whilst all Profaneness and Impiety is utterly
discountenanced and suppressed as the very Bane and Pest of all Humane Society;
whereas under Evil Governors Vice grows Daring and Courageous, it throws off
all the Vizors and Masks of blushing Modesty, and becomes Brazen-faced,
Venturous and highly Impudent, and by being openly countenanced by such as are
in Authority, it gains too great Reputation and Authority to it self.

Again. When good Men sit at the Helm of Government, Oaths are not reputed
Withs, nor Laws as Cob-webbs, which every vile Malefactor may be allowed to
break through, the Princes Rights are inviolably secured, and the Peoples
Properties as safely hedged about; Oppression and Violence dare not in the
least peep abroad, nor Perjury and Detraction appear barefaced at Noonday as
Advocates for Truth; Fraud and Treachery sculk about in the dark, and can
hardly escape undiscovered from their watchful Eye. Their Diligence and
Integrity is very signal and remarkable, and all the Wheels of Government being
kept up and preserved in a very regular motion, the good and welfare of the
whole Community is most entirely promoted by their prudent Conduct and
Management of Affairs, by seasonable Debates, and sober Counsels, by serious
Advice and proper Resolutions, and God does many times by his secret Providence
so concur with their Endeavors, so strengthen their Counsels, so prosper their
Debates, and Crown with Success all their Projects and Designs, that they enjoy
such measures of Temporal Felicity, as neither the Plots of Foreign Enemies,
nor the Machinations of Domestic Incendiaries can ever be able to undermine.

Nay God is many times pleased to enrich a Nation with Peace and Plenty, with
Ease and Liberty, and with all the outward Blessings both of the upper and
nether Springs for the sake of good Men, they in their respective Stations
being very instrumental likewise toward the procuring such things; whereas
wicked Men carry a Curse with them, wherever they come, and like the dreadful
Basilisk, dart out nothing but Ruin and Destruction before them; so that no
People are safe where such Persons are in Authority, because all their Policies
and Projects prove commonly Fruitless and Abortive.

And if under all Governments Wickedness has been the main Obstruction to all
the brave Designs and most Glorious Exploits, that have been set on foot, then
Virtue and Holiness is the most prevailing Interest in the World, because God
is ever sure to be on that side; I confess indeed Policy and Courage are the
two great Pillars of any Government, but unless Virtue be the Basis to support
those very Pillars, they will prove like the Earthen Legs of Nebuchadnezzar's
Image, which will at last grow feeble and impotent, and fall away to nothing:
It is therefore both a wise and a true observation of Solomon, which has been
sufficiently experienced in all Ages, Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin
is a reproach to any people. Prove. 14. 34. That is, Religion and Virtue are the
great causes of all Public Happyness, for they raise a Nation to the highest
degree of Temporal Felicity and Glory, and make both Officers and People to
flourish in the greatest Reputation and Renown.

This it were easy to enlarge upon from the Records of Time and Annals of
History: The Jewish Commonwealth is a very signal instance of this Nature, for
whilst both Rulers and People made it the chief of their business to do
Justice and love Mercy, and walk humbly with their God; How did the Jewish
Church triumph, and the State prosper, and nothing intervened to Eclipse their
Glory?

And thus again, whilst Greece flourished, Reges Philosophabantur, and
Philosphi regebant, those Commonwealths being more numerous than their
Neighbors in nothing but in the sincere Exercise of their Reason: And we find
though Lycurgus in Lacedemon, Aristides in Athens, and Epaminondas at Thebes
were not born to Command, their Virtue bestowed on them what their Birth
denied: And when Tyranny and Pride had by wasting these Commonwealths made
place for the Roman Glory, nothing did so enlarge the Conquest of that Renowned
State (whose Center, as one speaks, was Virtue, and Circumference Fame) as
their Heroic Actions: Upon which account Attalus King of Pergamus did by
Legacy leave them his Kingdom, as to those whose Virtues deserved it as a
Reward, which occasioned St. Austin to fall into that Eloquent Expression,
Because God (says he) would not bestow Heaven on the Romans, they being
Pagans, he bestowed the Empire of the World upon them, because they were
Virtuous.

And though Nobis non licet esse tam beatis, though we cannot at present be as
great as other Nations, and such Conquests and Enlargements of our Dominions
are not in this Age as yet the Fate and Portion allotted to us; and more the
pity, that under so Great and Puissant a Prince, who by his Matchless Courage
and Conduct would make us as Renowned and Formidable as ever, our own Vices
should clip the Wings of His Triumphant Victories; Yet would we once be
persuaded to become Conquerours over our selves, and over all our Irregular
Passions and Appetites, we might then at least have this assurance, that we
shall never be Conquered, and triumphed over by those, who now apparently watch
for our Ruin and Destruction.

And if we are not so happy now as we desire to be, it is because we are not so
Virtuous and Honest as is necessary for such happyness, for till our Vices
lessen, our Success will never be great, nor can we hope to retrieve the Renown
and Honor of our Illustrious Ancestors, till we resolve to fetch back amongst
us their Ancient Manners and Heroic Gallantry: And indeed if we could but
recover the good English plainness of Heart and Habit and Integrity of Spirit,
for which our Progenitors were so worthily Renowned, we should then quickly
find the Tide turn upon us with an overflowing Torrent of Glory and Prosperity.

But whilst there is so much Artifice and Guile, so much Treachery and
Selfishness amongst us, while like profane Esau we can be willing to sell all
our English Birthrights and Properties only for a Mess of * Pottage; Genesis 25.
33, 34.
and under the Mask of True English Patriots do our Enemies Work to their
hands, what can we expect indeed at this rate, but to become a miserable and
forlorn People, a Scorn to others, and a Reproach to our selves? Nay what can
we expect, but to be made, as a just punishment for such impardonable
perfidiousness, Tributary Vassals at last without another Miracle of Providence
to the most Domineering Monarch in the Universe?

Since then Prosperity and good Success does usually attend Righteousness, and
such Honest Governors as are the Patrons of it, since Providence resists Vice,
and Vices do not only make Enemies to themselves, but by a Civil War as a Just
Judgment upon them destroy one another, happy must that People needs be, where
God is pleased to bestow upon them so Unvaluable a Blessing, and there cannot
be occasion of greater Joy, than when such Men are advanced into Power and
Authority by reason of that mighty influence, which both their Actions and
Examples have commonly upon all Inferior Persons who are under their
Government.



and what Advantages do accrue both to the City and Country from the Wisdom of
their Counsels and Excellent Administrations? The Voice of Oppression then
utterly cease, and there are no Complaints to be heard in the Streets, when
Justice is Administered, it is done without partiality, and the Poor and
Destitute receive Comfort and Relief, the Widow and the Fatherless find
Patronage and Protection, and their Souls are redeemed from Deceit and
Violence, the Rights of the Injured are with great Equity asserted, and all
things are settled upon the most durable Foundations of Truth and Righteousness.

For the True Statesman is inviolably constant to his most Excellent Principles
of Virtue, and Religious Prudence, his Ends are Noble, and the Means he uses
Innocent, he has a single Eye on the Public Good, and meets it in its several
Pressures with suitable Reliefs. Nay if the Ship of the State miscarry, he had
rather perish in the Wreck, then preserve himself upon the Plank of an
Inglorious Subterfuge; his Worth had led him to the Helm, the Rudder he uses
is an Honest and Vigorous Wisdom, the Star he looks to for Direction is in
Heaven, and the Port he aims at is the joynt-well-fare both of Prince and
People.

So that when such places of Trust are thus carefully disposed of, and such
Noble Ensigns of Honor conferred upon Worthy Patriots, the greatest happyness
does then most certainly accrue to that Community, which they are deputed to
govern, that their hearts can possibly wish or desire.

Secondly, If the Power of good Men administer great Joy, then Self-Interest as
well as the general good of that Community to which they belong should make all
Men in Authority very Active in all such Religious Performances, and Righteous
Practices: Nothing sure can be a more powerful Encouragement to goodness, than
to consider what an Universal Satisfaction it generally creates in the Minds of
Men, for the very Old Men in the Gates will rise up and pay it a just Deference
and Veneration, and the Children cannot but warble forth its Praise in the most
Melodious Acclamations; for every one looks upon a Righteous Ruler as a Tutelar
Guardian to the People, and the greatest Blessing to his Country, whereas they
who are Wicked are the greatest Traitors to their Nation as well as their God,
and they frequently betray both Prince and People into the most Dismal
Calamities by the Crying Sins of Unrighteousness and Injustice.

So that no Man that is a well-wisher either to himself or Country, but will
resolve upon such Virtuous and Upright Courses; for is it not much better to be
instrumental toward a Blessing than a Curse, the first of which is only
attainable by Virtuous Actions? Is it not a greater satisfaction to be capable
to promote the Prosperity of a People, than to hasten their Ruin and procure
their Destruction? Is it not more grateful to the Ear to receive the joyful
applauses of Worthy Achievements, than to be harassed even to Death with the
bitter Taunts and Execrations of a flouting Multitude for the Vilest
Misdemeanors! and to be in the midst of the Congratulations and happy Wishes
of the People, whose Hearts and Affections they entirely possess, then to have
only the Command of their Bodies, and not the least of Charming Empire over
their Souls, which is the more Noble part of Dominion? If Men then in Authority
would but consult their own Interest, they cannot do better for themselves,
they cannot do better for the People, than by an inviolable Observation of the
Laws of Equity and Justice, which some Unfortunate Politicians having neglected
to do, have too often made a woeful Shipwreck both of their Honor and Happiness.

Which brings me to the third and last thing, That whenever God affords us such
Public Blessings by such Righteous Rulers, we ought to give him all the Praise
and the Glory of it: And this is Dionysius Carthusianus his Gloss again, In
exaltatione justorum multa gloria est, exultant enim in Deo: There is great
cause of rejoicing in God, when he sends just Governors amongst a People, for
by that means they glorify God, who confers on them that happyness.

And since perhaps to the very Envy of our Adversaries this is our Case at this
time, Let us not any longer affect to be the most Natural Pictures of such
horrible Ingratitude and Ill Nature, as our English Climate is not usually
acquainted with, nor by a down-look't Male-Contentedness, and Unreasonable
Murmurs, by our repining against Providence, and Carping at the Government
provoke God to deprive us of so great a happiness.

I confess if Ignorance and Blind Devotion, if Superstition and Idolatry, if
Subjection to His Holiness, and a Tame Condescension to his Unjust Usurpations
be things in themselves so desirable and to be admired, if it be a thing so
Meritorious to advance the Interest of Rome, and make this Kingdom again part
of St. Peter's Patrimony, and so to introduce French Dragoons and Popish
Janezaries to be our constant Guests and Companions; if such a new Revolution
will prove so Comfortable a Jubilee, and changing the present Scenes after such
a fashion will become so Advantageous to us, there is reason enough indeed for
our vehement striving and impatient struggling for it.

But if there is a Train of Blessings clear of another Nature, which does
manifestly attend us, if we are now under such an Heroic King, who is as
Tender of our Religious as Civil Rights, under such Wise Councillors, who will
neither flatter their Prince to His Ruin, nor dispense with his Laws to the
prejudice of his People, if under such Worthy Governors, which though Loyal to
the Crown will nevertheless not forget the True Interest of the Subject; then
where is any room left for Murmurs or Complaints? Or what reason is there for
any one to Rail or Revile, to bespatter or Repine against such a Government,
whose Yoke compared with others round about us is easy, and whose Burden is
Light?

Nay if these be such Mercies as would certainly be esteemed so by all but a
few Unthankful peevish Spirits of our own Nation, who do not deserve the
Benefit of what they so basely Despise, let us who have learned better things,
think of nothing else but what we shall render unto the Lord for such benefits
as these which he has bestowed upon us.

Any Nation but we would never think they could thank God enough for them, let
us then not be worse than other People, but let us by our outward Testimonies
of Joy declare our inward satisfaction for the present Government, and let us
turn all our Fears and Jealousies into Prayers and Supplications for the
preservation of it; let us constantly pray for the Welfare and Prosperity of
such as are in Authority, that we may lead quiet and peaceable Lives in all
Godliness and Honesty; and let us have no reserve in our Prayers against any of
them, and hope to come off at last with some such like trimming Apology as that
of Naaman, the Old Syrian Courtier, In this thing the Lord pardon me 2 Kings 5.
18.
, for this is but in plain terms to equivocate with God Almighty, and to pray
backward, as Conjurers, they say, are wont to do when they raise up their
Familiars, or as Bells are wont to ring at General Conflagrations.

To Conclude all, let us zealously endeavor to promote in earnest what we so
fervently pray for, not by Calumnies and Reproaches, not by be-spattering Their
Majesty's, or any of Their Ministers of State, and blackning and defaming the
Established Government, not by rendering every thing both in Church and State
odious and abominable in the sight of all the People by Forgery and Detraction;
but by an unfeigned integrity to God in the first place, by a ready submission
to all our Superiors in the next, by a generous Condescension to our
Inferiors, and by a meek and quiet and peaceable Deportment amongst our
Equals, let us make our Kingdom Glorious, and our selves entirely happy. Which
God of his Infinite Mercy grant we may be for the sake of Christ Jesus our
Savior, To whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Eben Tracy at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
THE Elements of the Mathematical Art, commonly called Algebra, expounded in
four Books, by John Kerzey. Lloyd's Dictionary. Sanderson's Sermons. Mariners
Magazine. Reynold's of Murder. Royal Practical Chemistry, by Oswaldus Crollus,
and John Hartman. All Dr. Salmon's Books. Markham's Masterpiece. De Grey's
Horseman. Norwood's Doctrine of Triangles. The famous History of the
destruction of Troy. Valentine and Orson. Montelion Knight of the Oracle. The
Seaman's Glass. The Boatswain's Art. The Complete Modelist. Waple's Shipwright.
Schamozzy's Architecture. Palladio's Architecture. Safeguard for Sailers.
Pilot's Sea-Mirror. Newhouse's Art of Navigation.

