The PROPHET APPROVED, BY THE WORDS Of his Prophecy coming to pass.

BEING A Declaration of the Message which Daniel Baker received from the Lord
to the Parliament, Counsel of State, Officers of the Army, Mayor and Aldermen
of the City, met together the 6th day of this 8th month in the place falsely
called Christ-Church in London, which day was set apart for Thanksgiving, but
proved a day of persecution, and voluptuous feasting, to the grief of Gods
Spirit.

Also a Letter from Daniel Baker, to the Mayor and Recorder of London.

Published by Thomas Heart.

That people may see the Lord has his Prophets in this land.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

To the Serious Reader.
OFten has the Lord warned the Rulers of these Nations by his Servants and
Prophets, in these late years and months; But they (high and stiff-necked)
have slighted instruction, and cast reproof behind them, even until the
judgment threatened and foretold of, has overtaken them one after the other,
because none of those that succeeded in the Rule and Government have hitherto
laid it to heart, but when the Lord has sent his Servants to them, they have
likewise refused and rejected the Counsel of the Lord, and so have provoked him
against them; often was Oliver Cromwell advised of the Judgment of the Lord
against him and his family, if he did not repent, and when Gods decree was
sealed up against him to cut him off, he was let to know it about a month
before it came upon him, and how the Lord would also stretch forth his hand
against all that was high and lifted up in the Rule of these Nations, even from
the one end thereof to the other, which shortly after came to pass; When
Richard Cromwell came to the Government, he also was warned and foretold of
what at last he found come upon him, likewise his packt assembly was told of
their doom, together with their new house of Lords again established to the
dishonor of the Lord of Heaven; The Army, when the Rule as well as the power
was in their hands, for a little season, before the return of the Long
Parliament, were likewise warned to beware of that spirit which had led them
aside and betrayed them from their first love, even that spirit that is against
liberty of Conscience (which was once clearly asserted by them) they were bid
to remember Amaleck (the Soul murdering, and conscience-binding Clergyman)
and what they did unto them by the way when they were coming out of Egypt, how
they smote the hindermost of them, even all the feeble and week when they were
faint and weary, even Amaleck who feared not God, that his name, even the
spirit and power of persecution in the Clergy man should be by them blotted
from under Heaven; but the Army not hearkening to the counsel of God then
given, drunk a fresh of the Whores cup of sorceries till they reeled and fell
under her feet; of which also they were warned a second time, and foretold of
this hour that is come upon them, as may may be seen in a book tituled Mean
Tekel.

At last the long Parliament being returned by the providence of the Lord to
try them again what they would do for God and his people, were often cited to
their duty, and made acquainted with what the Lord expected from them; they
also turning their backs upon the way of the Lord, and despising the Counsel of
his servants, went on in the way of those the Lord had newly brought down, were
often told, the Lord would rebuke them, and at last when they, with the Council
of State and Officers of the Army, were meet together with the Mayor and
Aldermen of London in the Steeple house (falsely called Christ-Church) as they
pretended to thank God, (but the Lord abhorred their sacrifice) this servant of
the Lord Daniel Baker was moved of the Lord to go to that place, where he spoke
part of what the Lord commanded him, but they would not hear him, but suffered
him to be haled away, and beaten, and abused, and flung into Newgate (by the
rude rabble;) the substance of what the Lord required him to speak to them, he
had writ down just before he went to the Steeple-house, which I here present to
thy view, also the words he got forth amongst them as they were haling him
down, whereby thou may see how the Lord has left them without excuse,
having warned them of what he would bring upon them if they repented not, who
were so far from hearing and fearing the words of the Lord by his servant to
them that the greatest part of them of the Parliament were ready to make or
confirm a law, to keep the servants of the Lord from speaking, though according
to the will and commandment of the Lord, in their steeple-house, like those
that went before them; wherefore especially (and for that they delaied to
deliver the Nation from the oppressor on every hand) has the Lord so soon laid
them aside with dishonor.

Nor let the Army think they shall escape the dreadful hand of the Lord,
breaking and confounding them also if they come not forth with true zeal for
God and his people, and for the general good of all the peaceable people of
this Nation, and deny themselves; I say, if they do not lay forth themselves
for the Lord and his people (especially) and for the good of the whole Nation
in General, but do labor to secure themselves, under and by a corrupt
interest, they shall not prosper, for the Lord will break and confound them,
and they shall be spued forth.

Here follows what the Servant of the Lord had writ down before he went into
the Steeple-house aforesaid.
WHither are ye turning aside, O ye lofty mountains of the Earth, to nourish
your hearts as in a day of slaughter, by which you condemn the Just, and betray
the Innocent who do not resist you.

Wherefore assemble your selves together oh ye great Mountains, that the
invisible everlasting God may pour forth upon your heads his indignation, and
shatter and break you to pieces, and confound and overturn your devises, and
give you up to the deceit and imagination of your own hearts lusts, forasmuch
as you have vexed and grieved the eternal and invisible spirit of the most high
whom you pretend to honor, but too manifest that your own you prefer before
him and his Counsel.

Wherefore hear the Word of the Lord ye strong Oaks and lofty trees, your
counsels are not good, and you have soon turned aside (out of the way)
therefore the Lord of Hosts will meet with you, and with his besom of
destruction will he sweep you all away in his anger, if you yet repent not
speedily, and subject to the spirit of meek men, holy men, and of sound
judgment in you.

Are not the eyes of all the honest hearted in the Nation, looking for this
spirit to break forth in its power and life in the midest of you, and to shine
over the Nations, that the Heathens round about might be amazed, astonished and
confounded, and come to know that the power, and dread, and life of the
everlasting God is in the midst of you?

And is it a time to feed your selves without fear, and to run greedily into
the excess of Riot, to devour the Creatures, and to destroy the Creation upon
your ungodly lusts?

Wherefore the indignation of the Lord as a fire is kindled, [and many of you
shall feel it] against you* And woe be to the Hypocrites, the Lords soul abhors
your prayers and solemn assemblies, the day of your Calamity is at hand, for ye
have wearied the Lord of Hosts with your hypocrisies from time to time; why
should ye be smitten or warned any more, seeing you have thus in the eyes of
all people tempted and evil requited the Lord God, strong and powerful,
dreadful is his everlasting name, who will take vengeance and ease himself of
his Adversaries, who deal deceitfully with the everlasting (the I am, a)
consuming fire.

Hear follows the words which the Lord put into D, Bs, heart to speak or give
forth, which stands a testimony upon the heads of Parliament, Army, Mayor,
Aldermen and Citizens of London met together the 6th day of this 8th month,
being the fifth day of the week, at the Steeple-house (falsely called
Christs-Church) wherein obedience to the Lord, his body was given up to suffer,
and the Testimony was thus given forth from him at that place, saying;
HEar, hear, hear the word of the Lord, oh ye mountains and Inhabitan^s of the
earth; the day, even the day of Gods visitation is upon your heads, for ye have
chosen the way that is not good; wherefore assemble your selves together, oh ye
strong Oaks, that the Lord might pour upon your heads his Indignation, for
deceit and hypocrisy the Lords soul abhors.

As sure as the Lord over-turned them that went before you, so sure will the
Lord overturn you.

Friends,
KNow ye that I am a man freeborn in this Nation (the land of my Nativity) and
have faithfully served my generation in the late wars and commotions from time
to time against the common enemies, namely the Kings, the Dutch, the Portugal,
French, and Spaniard, and what I have from time to time suffered, at present I
mention little; besides the wounds and shedding of my blood, with my bone: shot
and shattered to pieces, and taken out of my body; And there was a time and
times also, in the behalf of the Nation, I could say to one, go, and he goes,
and to ten, come, and it was so; and to a hundred, do this and that, and it was
done: but this is past away as the dust before the wind; but behold I am this
day in bonds for exercise of a pure conscience, in obedience to the invisible
pure Spirit of the Lord God, in my heart, to which my soul is become subject;
for its the higher power, and the most high that searches my heart, knows my
heart, that I speak the truth in his fear and dread in the truth, and lie not.

Now that you may not be altogether ignorant of what you have done, In the Lord
have I freedom now to write to ye, to the end that you might have a more
perfect understanding, what has already been past concerning me, before and
since the time of my imprisonment, and that ye might be altogether left
without excuse in the time of your trial before the throne of the Lamb, slain
since the foundation of the world, whether you now hear or forbear; but if the
eye and ear of a good understanding be opened in you, to hearken to the cry of
the oppressed within you, and without you, and let it go free by breaking the
bonds of wickedness within and without you (Read within and understand) of a
truth my soul, into which the Lord God has breathed his pure breath of life,
and thereby it now only lives; will exceedingly rejoice in the Lord, otherwise
my soul in secret (as hitherto) shall mourn and lament over the oppressed
seed, until the Lord, strong and mighty, arise to render vengeance upon the
head of the oppressor, and to plead in truth with his righteous judgments, the
cause of the innocent, who are the signs and wonders of these latter days, as
in the days of old.

Now if you can believe my words, O ye men that shall dye? hearken and hear,
and bear with me a moment, which I know you will, if you subject to the measure
of that noble, just, equal, pure, meek principle, or spirit that was in Moses,
and behold I tell ye, is in you also, but it is exceedingly oppressed, let it
arise to hear me, for to that only I desire to be manifest.

On the sixth day of the eighth month, and fifth day of the week, tidings came
to me of a feast for the Mayor and Aldermen, Parliament and Army that day, upon
which I weighed and pondered in my mind, whether it were a time to feast, and
the Nation with her freeborn inhabitants, so greatly oppressed under such
grievous yoaks and bonds of wickedness, and so many poor, naked, blind and
lame, that wants bread, and such great things promised by such wise men, (and
whether the Lord God will not visit for these things) and were going to eat and
to drink, and nourish their hearts, as in a day of slaughter; and immediately
the power of the indignation of the Lord stirred within me, and his word, which
is the higher power, I felt to be quick and powerful, moved, and I immediately
subjected to its command, which was to speak these words in the Audience and
presence of you all assembled together, whether you can believe me or not, or
hear, or forbear; these words the everlasting God put into my heart, and in
obedience to his invisible spirit of life, I speak them forth, as ye may
remember, if you did mind, thus, in the old Masse-house, called Christ's Church.

Hear, hear, hear the word of the Lord, O ye Mountains and Inhabitants of
the earth, the day, even the day of Gods visitation is upon your heads, for ye
have chosen the way that is not good, wherefore assemble your selves O ye
strong oaks, that the Lord might pour upon your heads his indignation, for
deceit and hypocrisy the Lords soul abhorres.

And if thus to obey the Lord God be a transgression of any of your Decrees or
Laws, behold here is a body prepared to suffer, let Gods witness, the light of
Christ in your consciences judge, and whether it be not better to obey God
rather then man, judge ye; But if you reply, and say, thou made a
disturbance, thou did disturb the Minister that was praying, and we had a Law
which was founded upon Queen Mary's, that blood-thirsty persecuters Law, which
was three months imprisonment, after due accusation and examination heard, and
conviction of two witnesses before two Justices of the Peace; mark that, to any
one that should on purpose maliciously, or contemptuously disturb the Preacher;
and because her Law was not severe enough for the Priests, Oliver Cromwell and
his Council added three months more to it, but I have fulfilled that Law, by
suffering under it with many more, as a testimony against it, and the Founders
and Builders up of it, for ever; but this late Parliament have made this Law
null and void; However, thou ought to be had to prison, and to suffer; what?
without a Law? because thou disturbest us, and we cannot believe that it is
according to Christ or his Apostles doctrine, though we call the Scripture our
Rule, may ye say in your hearts, and God is a God of order, and he is not the
Author of confusion; To which I answer, he that speaks true and sober words,
in obedience to the moving and commandment of the Lord, without respect of
persons, days, place or time, is not disorderly, nor the Author of confusion;
and if you were in all things guided by Moses, Christ, his Prophets, and
Apostles spirit; yet oppressed in bondage, in you, ye would know it: but they are
disorderly, that break forth into confusion, and are like Bears, Lions, Dogs,
and wolves, in their devouring nature, to rent, tear, and devour, knock down,
dragge, and offer violence, and buffeting a poor single Lamb, or Friend of
Christ, both in and out of the Synagogue, or Masse-house, and dragge the poor
Saints before the Judgment Seat.

Neither is it contrary to the Apostles doctrine, who spoke (by the Spirit of
Christ Jesus the light in him) who said, if any thing be revealed to another
that sits by, let the first hold his peace; and as many poor wise men that were
among you, even they might have seen and felt, that I was not out of the
Apostles doctrine, neither spoke contrary to the pure spirit that gave forth
the Scriptures of truth, but stood up a certain time in the fear and dread, and
power of the Lord God, before I spoke forth the words, so that the Priest had
time to have stopped and held his peace; and if he had done so, together with the
brutish People, or rude multitude, it would have been good order, and
according to the Apostles doctrine, and Scriptures of truth; and after I had
spoken the words of the Commandment of the Lord forth, I know I should have
departed in Gods fear and peace orderly as I came in; yet notwithstanding, I
neither resisted, nor offered violence to either man, woman, or child, and it
would have been a noble thing of any of you Magistrates, chief Captains,
Colonels, or Soldiers, and according to your place, to have called out or used
means to have restrained the disorderly, rude, brutish people, from dragging,
pulling, or tearing me to pieces, or from buffeting me in the face, and from
pulling my hair, and beating, and dragging me, See Act. 23, 9, 10. Even in and
forth of your high place of worship, and from dragging me to prison, contrary
to your Laws without Mittimus, or being called before any of you, who should
without delay have heard a lawful trial, and true witnesses, with due
accusation, that you might then have signified the crimes to the Jailer, and
this had been but reasonable; and in such a matter, him whom the Priests and
professors, and profane of England, call a Heathen, Namely, Festus, was more
noble, and will judge you, See Acts 23.27. verse, but they, who all of them are
called Christians, but more like, yea, and far worse then Heathens, that know
not the dreadful God among them, in their rage and enmity dragged and threw me
into the Goal Newgate, and after they had thus thrown me into the Goal, as if
I had been a dead dog, or swine, they beat me there with a staff, besides, one
unreasonable merciless man struck me over the bare head with a staff, even in
the Idols Temple, being at the same time dragged between four or five men.

And Friends, this was disorder, tyranny, cruelty, oppression, and injustice,
and it had been better you had been found executing true and sound justice and
judgment, without respect of persons, gifts, or rewards; (when shall it once
be?) then to have thus met to feed your selves without fear over the oppressed
seed; and Magistrates, that are to rule for God, will, and in his pure noble
principle in them, should be just men of truth; a terror to evil doers, that
offer violence in the devouring nature against the innocent, (whose praise is
not of men, but of God; and such as rule for and with him) and for these and a
multitude of such like things will the everlasting God of truth visit the
haughty oppressors, and persecuting priests and Magistrates of Englands Nation,
and dominions, whose day of visitation, of salvation, is hastening over their
heads, who to this day have rejected its appearance.

And although there was not found among all the multitude, after I had waited
two days before your Judgment Seat, one man, woman, or child, that did, or
could accuse me of the breach of any Law, except it were one or two of you that
sat upon the Judgment Seat, did accuse me. Now consider (if you be a little
cool) with the spirit of wisdom, meekness, and of sound judgment, whither I
have done or spoken any thing contrary to any Law or Decree (if you can make it
appear, do it without delay; for behold I am yet under your hand, and behold
here is a body in which I am prepared to suffer) as I demanded before all the
people assembled before your Judgment Seat, that it was but reasonable, and an
equal thing to show and convince me by the Law before the people, what evil I
had done either in word or action, but no Law was brought or admitted to be
read to or against me, and so this reasonable thing was denied me; and herein
you cannot be said to be noble, while you thus turn the sword against the
innocent; and the Lord God will plead with you for it; for the Lord is nigh at
hand to try you, and to judge and reward for all your deeds done in every of
your particular body; And thou John Ireton, instead of doing Justice, and
executing true and sound Judgment, after true searching and enquiring into the
nature and ground of a matter, and so to plead the cause of the innocent, whose
consciences are exercised toward God, this would have been thy honor; but
even thou replyedst, and sayedst, Take him away, he is mad. Alas poor man, thou
know not what thou have done, and surely I perceive thou do not yet know
or believe, against whom thou, together with the rest of the persecuting
Magistrates and Priests of England, Scotland, and Ireland, have lifted up your
hands; and behold this testimony I give forth, whether you can believe, or
receive it or nay, that here is three of us in bonds in Newgate Goal; namely,
Humphry Bache, Anne Gould, and Daniel Baker (committed by your order and wills)
who, as sure as the Lord God has given you and all men breath and life, and
all things, so sure are we his Servants and Friends, and worship him in spirit
and in truth; for he who is a most pure, invisible, eternal spirit, has sought
and found us, and we are in him that is true, and so is our testimony, and
therefore cannot lie nor swear, nor give flattering titles to any man, if we
should, the Lord our God, whom we serve, would condemn us, and we assuredly
know, that the whole world lies in wickedness; and therefore in love to the
world on the Lords behalf as his friends, we testify against the deeds and
friendships, and honors thereof, for they are evil; and its enmity to our
God, who is the living God. And this know assuredly from my hand, that is
guided by the good spirit of the Lord, to write these things, that I am this
day in bonds for the testimony of him that saves from sin, and for the exercise
of a pure conscience, who desires that in the day and time of your trial, when
the tribes of the earth shall mourn (and they shall look upon him (the Light)
whom they have rebelled against, and pierced.)

That these things where Repentance unto life is truly witnessed, may not be
laid to your charge, who yet sit in the habitations of cruelty and darkness,
and I am with that which is the condemnation of the unjust, but is the life of
the Just.

Newgate, this 17. of the 8th, month, and 2. of the week. 1659. DANIEL BAKER.

Something after to the Officers of the Army.

Friends, in love to your souls and bodies is this, desiring you to call to
Remembrance the many warnings which the Lord our God has given by his servants
to Protectors (so called) and to Parliaments, that they might escape his
judgment, which (because of their hard-heartedness, and carelessness toward
Gods Council) has overtaken them at unawares. And unless ye repent, and turn
to the measure of Gods Grace, and do the things that are Right, ye shall not
escape. The Righteous lives in everlasting peace, but the wicked are shut up in
darkness, till the great and terrible day of our God, which is at hand;
wherefore, whilst you have part of a day, prize it, and believe the warnings of
the Lord to you, left ye also suffer.

THE END.

