Imprimatur.

Guil. Sill, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a sacris domesticis.
May. 26. 1679.
THE Famine of the Word Threatened to ISRAEL, AND GODS CALL To Weeping and to
Mourning.

BEING TWO SERMONS PREACHED On the Fast Day, November. 13. 1678. AND On the Fast
Day, April 11. 1679.

By JAMES BROM, A.M. Rector of Cheriton in the County of Kent.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

To the Right Worshipful JAMES BROCKMAN, Esquire;, My most honored Friend and
Patron; And his Virtuous Consort Madam LUCY BROCKMAN.
THese Sermons finding so favorable an acceptance at your hands, and being so
generally desired and called for by all the neighborhood, I thought it my duty
to prostrate them both at your feet, and usher them out into light under your
most auspicious Patronage.

These perilous Times into which we are fallen, as they call for a serious
Humiliation on all sides, so do they command our joint-endeavours to promote
it; and if I can be any way instrumental to this good work in the publication
of these Papers; as it is the utmost of my design, so likewise of my desire;
unless it be further to give hereby a testimony of my real gratitude for the
manifold favors so frequently conferred, since I had the honor to be under
your wings, upon

Your most obliged Servant James Brom.

The Famine of the Word Threatened to ISRAEL, etc.
SERMON I.
AMOS viij. Verse. 11, 12. Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I
will send a Famine in the Land; not a Famine of Bread, nor thirst for Water,
but Hearing the Words of the Lord.

And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North, even to the East,
they shall ran to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it.


IT was ever an act of great mercy and kindness in the God of Heaven and Earth,
that he never issued out his Judgments in the World, but he gave timely notice
of them before their approaches, to awaken men's Consciences, either by timely
Repentance to divert them, or else by Vigilance and Prayer to prepare against
them.

I might give you sundry instances that this is the certain method of Gods
proceeding with mankind. Thus before he destroyed the Old World, and washed
away their pollutions by the general Innundation, Noah, the Preacher of
Righteousness, was the Harbinger of that news, and he forewarned them what
would follow their continual disobedience, and perseverance in Iniquity. After
the same manner did he deal with Sodom, with Gomorrah, and with Niniveh.

But I need look so far back; Israel a people of Gods own choosing, had
sufficient experience of his loving kindness, and patience, and forbearance in
this particular. Though that Generation of men were a sort of people so
refractory and stubborn, so stiff-necked and disobedient, so unsufferably
wicked, and such notorious transgressors, that God might in justice have swept
them away with the Beesom of Destruction, without giving them the least space
of time to consider of their ways, or amend their doings; I say, though he
might have opened all the treasuries of his Vengeance, and sent down his arrows
in great numbers upon their heads by reason of their manifold provocations
against him; yet did he never do this, but first by his Prophets and Messengers
for warned them of what would happen: he did not strike till he dealt with them
as the Angel did with Balaam, Numb. 22.31.
open their eyes that they might see the blow was coming; he did not proceed to
sentence till he had first convicted them, and represented their guilt in a
true Mirror before them; he did not make them examples of his Justice, till he
had first declared what it was had provoked him, and what such wilful
provocations did deserve at his hands: thus did God still temper his Mercy with
his Justice, forewarn them, that they might be fore-armed. And for this very
end and purpose was this precaution which God gave Israel in the words read
unto you, Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a Famine
in the Land, not a Famine of Bread, nor a Thirst of Water, but Hearing the
Words of the Lord, etc.

From which words I shall discourse:

1. Of the Nature of that Judgment which is here threatened to Israel, and show
you the dreadfulness of it. It is a Famine, but not of Bread, nor of Thirst for
Water, but Hearing the Words of the Lord.

2. I shall consider the reason of this denunciation, what was the ground and
original of it; and what it was that caused God Almighty to threaten that
people with so severe a Judgment.

3. I shall endeavor to show how they might, and we may prevent the like
Judgment, which seems at this time to hang over our heads.

1. I begin with the first of these, the Nature of that Judgment which is here
threatened to Israel, it is Famine. A sore Judgment indeed, the very name of
which is sufficiently dreadful and terrible, were it but only a corporal
punishment. For if by Famine the Prophet had only meant scarcity of Bread, or
extreme want of Victuals, Genesis 43.1.
such a Famine as happened in Canaan in the Patriarch Jacobs days; or such a
Famine as fell upon Samaria in the days of Elisha, 2 Kings 6.25.
when an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth
part of a Kab of Doves dung for five pieces of silver, that indeed would have
been a sore evil, by the fearful effects that would have followed and ensued
upon it. For to see men and women fainting for lack of Bread, and ready to prey
upon and devour each other, to hear their Children and Sucklings, Lament. 2.11,
12.
rending the Skies with their bitter ejulations, and crying to their Mothers,
Where is Corn and Wine? whilst their souls were ready to be poured forth in
their Mothers bosom; nay, to behold women eating the fruit of their own wombs,
2 Kings 6.28.
and children become a feast to their Mothers that newly bore them, as it has
happened many times through the extremity of hunger; this must needs be a very
doleful calamity which would grieve the heart, and afflict the eyes of all such
as did behold it.

And yet this corporal Famine, though to us it appears to be the greatest of
Evils, is nothing to that Famine which is here threatened to Israel, which was
the Famine of Hearing the Words of the Lord, or the scarcity and want of
Heavenly Bread, by depriving them of all holy Ordinances and Duties. For
certainly this is meant, when God threatens to send a Famine amongst them, that
is, utterly to subvert the whole Jewish Church and Religion, to banish them
from his Temple, and all their legal sacrifices, to deprive them of all their
Rites, and Ceremonies, and Sacraments, which were most dear and precious to
them, take from them the Law, with which before he had entrusted them, and to
divorce and separate them from their Priests and their Prophets, who were the
true and Orthodox Expounders of it. All this is implied by the Famine of the
Word. And so the Judgment will appear indeed to be very dreadful and terrible,
upon these three accounts.

1. Because all intercourse and communion was likely to be cut off betwixt God
and them.

2. Because by this means they would be reduced to a very deplorable condition,
in relation to their souls, by being deprived of all such means as should be
most beneficial and advantageous to them.

3. Because this commonly being the last of Judgments, for God to deprive them
totally of his worship, must needs be most fatal and pernicious to them.

1. By this means all intercourse and communion was likely to be cut off
betwixt God and them. As it was the greatest of honors to the Jewish Nation,
that they were separated from the rest of the World as a People peculiar to
God, to whom he was pleased very frequently to make greater manifestations of
his love and favor than to any other community of mankind throughout the face
of the Earth; so was it still a further enhansment of their glory, that God was
pleased to choose their Metropolis Jerusalem, as his own City, and in that to
accept of a Temple, where he took delight to be called upon and worshipped,
rather than elsewhere; for at Salem was his Tabernacle, Psalm. 76.2.
and his dwelling place in Sion; Psalm. 122.4.
that Temple was his Mansion house and habitation, whither the Tribes went up,
the Tribes of the Lord unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks to the name
of the Lord.

But now when once their provocations were grown so high, and their sins and
iniquities were risen to that degree, as to enforce him to abominate both them
and their Temple, and make him loath and reject both them and their Religion,
what farther hopes could they have of any favor, or of any intercourse and
communion betwixt God and them? In vain was it for them to expect that God
should any longer strive to endear them by any former familiar ways of
kindness, when he was resolved to abandon both them, and their Worship; and all
their Incense, and their Sacrifices became very loathsome and detestable in his
sight. For Religion being the Cement, the Ligament, the chief Bond of Union and
Communion betwixt God and Man; when that is once broken, or dissolved, farewell
to Gods love, to his favor and friendship; no longer does God regard any
persons than they are kept close to him, by the firm ties of Duty and
Obedience. And therefore in this respect a Judgment of this Nature to banish
men from his Altars, to deprive them of his Ordinances, and not to suffer them
any longer to tread within his Courts; I say, such a Judgment of Famine must
needs appear very terrible, because when God rejects men as his Worshippers, he
rejects them likewise for being his Favorites; and no longer than they
continue in his Church or in his service, must they expect any communion or any
friendship from him.

2. Secondly this Judgment was the more dreadful, because by this means Israel
was like to be reduced to a very deplorable condition in relation to their
souls, by being deprived of all such means as should be most advantageous to
them.

As the Jews were happy in all manner of blessings, so were they in that great
blessing which God was pleased to bestow upon them, by sending them his
Messengers early and late to instruct them. These persons were sometimes called
Seers, and sometimes Prophets, and sometimes Priests, but all declared unto
them the will of God, and expounded to them the Law and the Testimony: to these
therefore the people had recourse in all doubts, in all straits, in all
emergencies, and by them all their scruples were solved, and their ignorance
dispelled, and their duty plainly taught and reiterated to them.

But now by this Famine they were like to lose all these, God was resolved to
take away their Prophets from them, to suffer their Rabbis and Doctors of the
Law no longer to instruct them: and then what do we think could follow, but a
Night of Ignorance and Error? what could we expect from them, when these lights
were put out, but that, like their Neighbors round about them, they should all
be invelop'd with the dark mists of Superstition and Idolatry? Mal. 2.7.
though their Priests lips did preserve knowledge, yet if they were not
permitted to seek it at their mouths, they must needs grow stupid and ignorant,
Titus 1.16.
foolish and extravagant, abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work
reprobate, (...), fitless, and unfashionable.

But this is not all, for they were not only like to be deprived of those
persons who expounded the Law, but of the Law it self, with all its Worship and
Sacrifices; and that still enhanseth further the grievousness of this Judgment:
not to have their Priests left amongst them was a great loss, but to be
deprived of Gods Word too, was the greatest Judgment could light upon them: for
now their souls were like to perish for want of food, Gods Word being nutriment
to the Soul as Bread is to the Body; and that being subtracted and taken away
from them which should nourish them up unto eternal life, the means ceasing,
the end could never be obtained; and so by consequence the Soul was not only
like to starve here, but to perish hereafter too, and to lie down in woe and
sorrow to all eternity. A sad Judgment indeed! that God should subtract from
them all means whereby to render themselves happy, that he should snatch them
from their Priests, rend them from his Altars, and by taking the light of his
Word from them likewise, condemn them to a far greater than Egyptian darkness,;
this still renders it more grievous and dreadful.

3. But there is a third aggravation of it still behind, That this is the last
of Judgments which God usually makes use of, when men's iniquities are ripe and
ready for destruction, to deprive them of his true Worship, and to remove their
Candlestick out of his sight.

He that can calculate in how many instances Humane Nature is passive, may
quickly make an estimate of Isreal's calamities, which were so manifold and
terrible, that God Almighty might have seemed even to have emptied his Magazine
of Judgments, and to have discharged them all upon the Jewish race. In all the
History of former Ages, and places, there is no where to be met withal any
Generation of Mankind, with whom God had so many controversies, and upon whom
he did pour down his hottest fury and displeasure dressed up in such various and
dismal shapes, as he did upon this stubborn and incorrigible people. There was
not any manner of Judgment but the Jews were acquainted with; and our Prophet
Amos reckons up a whole Catalogue of sufferings, which succeeded one another in
that rebellious Nation. Cap. 4. v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
He tells us that God did not only cleanness of teeth in all their Cities, and
want of Bread in all places, and withheld the rain from them, so that three
Cities wandered to one City to drink water; but likewise that he smote them with
blasting and with mildew, with the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, with
the Sword, and with Fire as dismal as that which reduced Sodom and Gomorrah to
a heap of rubbish and ashes; and yet for all this they would not return unto
God by reformation and amendment.

And do we think it possible for Gods Spirit always to strive with such a
froward Generation? was it not high time for God to use the last and most
rigorous means, when all other proved useless and ineffectual? Was in not high
time for God quite to cashier them, and cast them out of his sight, when all
other methods, though the Quintessence of the greatest fury and severity could
no way reclaim them? No doubt it was: and therefore to this last of Judgments
he threatens to have recourse; V. 12.
Therefore this will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I will do this unto
thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel; resolving hereby, that because nothing
else would avail, to destroy their Nation, to root up that Vine and Vineyard
which his own right hand had planted, to send a Famine in the Land, not a
Famixe of bread, nor thirst for Water, but of hearing the words of the Lord; by
which they should be reduced to so wretched and deplorable a condition, as to
turn common Vagrants or Vagabonds, and to wander from Sea to Sea, and from
North to East, and to run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and yet
should not be able after all their wearisom journies, after all their narrow
searches and disquisitions to find that Word, that Law, those Ordinances which
they sought and hunted after.

And thus I have acquainted you with the Nature of that Famine, and the
dreadfulness of it, which is threatened to Israel; from whose example it will
become a duty incumbent upon us, to look back upon our selves, whose state and
condition at this day seems not at all unlike to theirs then: for our sins are
of as deep a die, and our abominations as loathsome, and our transgressions as
manifold, and our provocations as daring, and our impieties as provoking as
theirs was before us, and God seems therefore now to threaten us after the same
manner as he did the Jews, with as bad or worse a Famine by reason of such
heinous and abominable provocations.

And that this is too great a truth, will plainly appear to any one that
considers the present posture and state of affairs in this Kingdom; for are
there not at this day a brood of sanguinary, blood-thirsty, and wicked Sons of
Belial, who have endeavored to subvert both Church and State, and reduce us
all to a Famine indeed, to a real destitution of all true spiritual comforts
and refreshments? Had they not almost brought their wicked designs to effect,
and does not our Religion seem still to lie at the stake? Does not Destruction
still hover over our heads? And have we any certain security that we may not
yet become a prey to these merclless Wolves and Tigers? There is more than a
probability that God Almighty may suffer these very persons to become snares
and traps to us, scourges in our sides, and thorns in our eyes. Josh. 23.13.
It Is more than probable that those who so industriously consult our ruin, may
yet attain to their end, and so we may all perish through their malicious
machinations, that our Religion may be undermined, our Churches violated, our
Temples made the Nests and Cages of Popish Superstition and Idolatry, and we
our selves fall a Sacrifice to the Pope and his devilish Emissaries. And if
this should come to pass, which our sins and manifold transgressions do justly
deserve and call for; Alas, into what unspeakable calamities should we be
involved? This would be a Famine of the highest degree, a Judgment the most
grievous of all Judgments, as will appear again by these three following
circumstances.

1. For first this would be a most certain indication, that as the measure of
our iniquity was full, so the cup of Gods anger was full likewise, and that he
was pouring out his utmost indignation against us. If once God should suffer
our Church to fall, and our Religion to be taken from us; if he should once
remove our Candlestick, and not permit us any longer enjoyment of his sacred
Ordinances amongst us, we may be assured that his fury was kindled to the
utmost height, that he suffered all this because he could no longer endure us
in his sight, because our present service was an abomination to him, and our
worship being so extremely tinctured and mixed with hypocrisy, did enforce him
to draw away his face from us.

For as true zeal and piety endear men to God, and render them his Favorites;
so hypocrisy and irreligion estrangeth Gods affection utterly from them; nay,
causes a separation, and sets God at open enmity with them, and when once God
has declared himself an Enemy, then follow his Judgments, then are all the
Vials of his Anger opened, and Sluices of his displeasure plucked up to
overwhelm them; and these fruitless Fig Trees, these unprofitable Servants,
these wicked transgressors are cursed, and made an example of vengeance to
terrify others from the like evil courses.

So that if God should deal thus with us, and punish us after so rigorous, and
so severe a manner, I know not for my part what would become of us; there is no
further hopes of favor, of kindness, of friendship from him, we might have
improved these better to our advantages whilst we enjoyed them; Mat. 21.43.
and if the Kingdom of God, i.e. the Gospel of Christ be taken from us, it will
be given to some other Nation to bring forth better fruits under its enjoyment
than we have done. So that this is the first thing that speaks the dreadfulness
of this Judgment, because it will be a testimony, that God is irreconcilably
angry with us, that he is resolved to destroy us, and root out our memorial
from off the face of the Earth.

2. But secondly, there is another thing which will speak the dreadfulness of
this Judgment, and that is, that it will not only be a means to cut us off
from all hopes of Gods love and favor for the present, but for the future too,
by depriving us of all those means which might be most instrumental to procure
and regain it: for should such a Famine come amongst us, then farewell to Gods
Word and Ministers, and by consequence if these, which are the means and
conduit-pipes of Grace, were stopped up, the way to Heaven would be precluded
and stopped up likewise. Now that this would certainly be our case, should
Popery once more make a step over the Seas, I shall evidence to you in a few
instances.

1. For first, you would have some indeed come amongst you, who would call
themselves the Ministers of God, but you would quickly find a vast difference
betwixt them and those who now are his lawful Ambassadors; for they would not
trouble themselves to preach up the Gospel so much as their own selves, their
own gain, advantage, and filthy lucre: and though it is the misfortune and a sad
fate which attends the present Ministers of the Church of England to be accused
as covetous persons, or hirelings, proud, or imperious persons, men who lord it
over their Brethren, and who encroach too far upon the dues, and rights, and
estates of the Laity, yet should the Scene change, and these men be cashiered,
you would find, that what you accuse them falsely of, would be abundantly
verified in their Popish successors; and you would learn by too woeful
experience, what it is to be Priestridden, as you now call it, when upon every
petty distaste, upon the least injurious usage or affront put upon them, you
should hear them thundering forth, as the Heathens did of old to the primitive
Christians, Christiani ad Lecnes, Away with the Christians to the Lions; so
they to you, Haeretici ad Carbones, Away with these Heretics to Fire and
Faggot. Then would you value those Ministers whom you now despise, and he whom
you are pleased now to esteem the most contemptible man amongst us, would then
be thought worthy of your best words and elogies, when your backs once felt but
the smart of the Romish Rod; and every Parish Priest would be even an Antipope
to command you at his beck, and aw you at his pleasure.

2. But secondly, As the Ministry would fail, so would all true Religion too;
For in stead of Gods Ordinances, humane Inventions should be enforced upon your
Consciences, and Superstition and Idolatry should be imposed upon you, under
the specious titles of Piety and Religion. You should have Prayers indeed
allowed you, but they should be a Compound of Ave-Maries, and of Prayers to the
Saints, and Prayers for the Dead; and that too in an unknown Tongue, and in a
Language which none of you could possibly understand, and by consequence could
never say Amen at your Devotions. You should have the Psalter of the blessed
Virgin, compiled by the Seraphical Doctor S. Bonaventure, presented to you as
more useful than the Psalms of holy David; and a Mass Book clapped into your
hands; but your Bibles claspt up and taken away from you, and you prohibited
the reading of the Scriptures upon the penalty perhaps of eternal damnation.
And in stead of the pure and sincere milk of the Word tendered you by some sober
and rational Divine, you shall have probably one of Johannes Argentus his prime
Catholic Disciples come, and extol in the Pulpit the excellent qualities of
the Virgin Mary's Milk, or one of S. Francis his Fry, crying up the great
Virtues of S. Francis his Slipper; or the healing faculties of S. Veronica's
Handkerchief; or else from some other of those Religious Juglers you shall hear
a long ridiculous story of some miraculous Saint out of their famous Legend,
which shall be as foolish and incredible as the Fable of Garagantua, or the
Wandering Jew. Nay besides all this, you shall not only be compelled to worship
the Virgin Mary, and pray to Saints, and fall down before Images, and pay
reverence to Relics, and prostrate your selves before Pictures and
Crucifixes; but you shall be denied the Cup in the Sacrament, and taught that
the Bread is the very Body of Christ, and under that notion will be enforced to
receive and pay it homage: I say, notwithstanding after it is consecrated by the
Priest, you see, and feel, and taste, and smell that it is still Bread,
notwithstanding you know it is a plain contradiction for one and the self-same
Body to be in a hundred places at one and the same time; yet this you must
believe, and a thousand other ridiculous fancies, as that the Pope is
infallible, that he is Christ's Vicar, the Universal and Supreme Pastor of the
Universe, and is endowed with a Power and Empire over all Christian Kings,
Princes, and Potentates, at the least in ordine ad spiritualia. Further, that
there is such a place as Purgatory, that Confession to the Priest is absolutely
necessary to Salvation, that in the Mass there is a propitiatory Sacrifice both
for quick and dead, that the Saints have a mint and treasury of good works to
spare, which they can lend to others, who want them, upon occasion; that to
doubt in the least of miracles, traditions, and indulgences, the power of the
Pope, and his Priests, or to entertain the least thought of the possibility of
being saved in any other Religion is a most enormous crime; These, and whatever
else the Priest shall bid you believe, that you must believe without making any
scruple, or asking any questions for conscience sake: What days they please to
set apart you must be sure to observe, what penances they inflict you must
patiently undergo, what they think fit to command from you, you must undeniably
grant, or else nothing would make atonement for such contempt and obstinacy,
but your very lives and fortunes.

This would be your case and this your condition, should Popery prevail; and
would not this be a sore judgment indeed to be deprived of your present honest
and good Ministry, and to be enslaved by Popish tyranny? to be robbed of Gods
sacred word and to give ear to fables? to leave the true Religion, and be made
vassals to a Religion which is superstitious and idolatrous? In a word, to
forsake the Fountain of living Waters, Jerem. 2.13.
and to dig unto your selves Cisterns, broken Cisierns that will hold no Water?
How could you hope to find the way to Heaven by such guides, to gain an
entrance by such blind Devotion, to merit glory by such an implicit Faith?
Certainly in such circumstances men must needs run the greatest hazards
imaginable of their immortal Souls, there would be little or no hopes of
Salvation under such means, and therefore a Judgment of this nature must needs
be very terrible and amazing, nay the greatest of Judgments that could befall
this Nation.

3. Especially if we confider in the third place, that when God sends this, it
is the last of all Judgments, and therefore must needs be the most pernicious
and dreadful: When God once works the downfall of a Nation, when he destroys a
Kingdom, or suffers a Church to be buried in ruin, we may be sure God has
poured upon that people the utmost dreggs of his fury, and that there is no
other Judgment to succeed, but the most fatal of all is happened to them, in
which all in general shall be concerned, and have their portion. In the case of
the Sword, the Pestilence, or Fire, it is possible some few may escape the
Divine Vengeance, some may be reprieved till a further opportunity; but when
once a whole Polity is laid in desolation, every one then is a sufferer, the
blow is levelled at all, and there is none but feels the heaviness, and the
smart of it. And then woe, woe to us, should this be our condition, as we have
too great reason to fear it may be still by Gods former proceedings with us,
and our incorrigibleness under all his methods which he has made use of to
reclaim us: we know, it is not many years ago, since the Sword did glut it self
with the blood of many thousands of our native Inhabitants; after that the
Plague came in triumph, and erected its Trophies over all our Kingdom; after
this succeeded a dreadful and terrible Fire, which laid in ashes the Metropolis
of our Nation: And since all these three Judgments have not wrought in us that
sincere and hearty Reformation, which God expected they should, what can we
expect, but that God should give a word of command for the last to come amongst
us, and so trouble himself no longer to punish so refractory and incorrigible a
People? And if so, we can none of us escape, but we shall find the effect of it
to be very direful and terrible; for when our Church is once in the dust, and
our Religion subverted, when all our Rites and Solemnities of Worship are
obliterated and abolished, and Gods Holy Word which should nourish us up unto
eternal Life, is taken from us, it is much to be feared, that God will never be
so far reconciled as to restore them to us again, seeing we managed them so
ill, when we had the happiness of enjoying them: nay though afterward when we
perceive the want of them, we should seek them carefully with tears, and wander
from Sea to Sea, and from East to North to find them, yet shall we be
unsuccessful, and miss of what we desire; lie down we must in the shades of
darkness, where the Sun of Righteousness will no more arise upon us with
healing under his wings.

2. And now what it was that provoked God to threaten such bitter and severe
things against Israel, and upon what particular grounds and reasons we in this
Nation may justly dread the same Judgment, is the next thing I am to give an
account of: Where though Israel, as I might show at large, was a people
notorious for all manner of transgressions against the Law of God, for all
manner of vices which could possibly be committed, so that God had just reason
to complain of them by his Prophet Malachy, Chap. verse. 7.
That even from the days of their Fathers they had gone away from his
Ordinances, and had not kept them, upon which account God might justly execute
the utmost rigor of his justice upon them; yet I shall at present instance but
in three or four things, which as they did extremely aggravate their guilt, so
did they call for, and hasten the greatest vengeance upon their heads.

1. For first, they were a sort of people that mocked, and despised both Gods
Word and Messengers.

2. Secondly, they made no scruple to deprive their Priests of that, which was
set apart by God as their Lot and Portion.

3. Thirdly, they were generally addicted to Irreligion and Profaneness.

4. And fourthly, if they did not break forth into open profaneness, they were
no less blameable for their base secret hypocrisy.

Now when I have drawn the parallel betwixt them and us, and have shown you
that we have equalled, if not out-vied them in all these things; we shall then
find from our selves as great reason to fear that God should pour down in this
nature his utmost indignation upon us, as ever he did upon that wicked and
obstinate people.

1. Israel was a sort of people, that mocked, and despised both Gods Word, and
Messengers: He that confults the History of those times, will find this very
visible in their manners, and practices; in the days of Amos and Isaiah they
were grown to that pass, that they silenced their Prophets, Amos 2.12.
and commanded them not to speak, unless it were such things as tickled their
ears, Isaiah 30.10.
or gratified their humors; but when this would not do, and they found them of
such courage and undaunted spirits, that they did still cry aloud, spare not,
but lift up their voices like trumpets, Isaiah 58.1.
to show Gods people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sin; why
then they began to convert all their Prophets serious discourses into mirth,
and drollery, and made sport with the gravest matters, and concernments of
Religion: they burlesqu'd the Prophet Jeremiah's words, and turned the
expressions he used into ridicule, Jer. 23.33, 36.
crying in contempt, The burden of the Lord, which is called perverting the
words of the Living God: After the same manner did they deal with Ezekiel,
Ezekiel. 33.32. In Canticum oris sui vertun^. Vul. Lat.
whose words they turned into pleasant Songs, or as the Margents of our Bibles
have it, they made loves or jests of the most sacred things, which the Prophet
did utter for their benefit, and advantage: And no wonder that when the Fathers
had eaten sower Grapes, Ezekiel. 18.2.
the Childrens teeth were set on edge; no wonder that when the Fathers had
attained to so good a knack of mocking their Prophets, and were so notorious
for the obloquies and contempt which they passed upon them, that their Children
did so readily follow their examples, and that the Prophet Elisha could not
possibly escape the virulency of their tongues, whose years, one would have
thought, should have rendered them incapable of such vile misdemeanors; upon
which account no doubt it was, that the little Children having sucked in such
prejudices against the Prophets with their milk, and learnt to rail against
them from their very cradles, ventured to clamor after that good man with such
vile and base language (though they paid for it very dearly with the loss of
their lives) when the best words they could afford him were no better than
these, Go up thou baldhead, go up thou baldhead: 2 Kings 2.23, 24.
In fine their own Chronicles have given us so full an account of their
scoffing, sarcastick temper, that we need look no further for a testimony
hereof, for it is said there, that they mocked the messengers of God, 2 Chr.
30.1.
and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his People, till there was no remedy: from which it appears, that
God did for some time forbear the people of Judah, beyond what they could have
expected, waiting for their amendment until they added impudence to their
obstinacy, and made sport with the Prophets, and laughed at every thing that
was sacred and religious; then the peremptory Decree came forth, and there was
no hopes of escaping, Lament. 4.16.
then did the anger of the Lord divide them, and he did no more regard them,
because they regarded not the persons of the Priests, and favored not the
Elders.

And indeed, as nothing does more provoke God, than such a scoffing humor, and
such a contemptuous usage of his Servants, and Messengers; so nothing does
sooner precipitate his Judgments, nay nothing can be a more certain
prognostic, that they are even at the door, than that is: for there can be no
worse symptom to a people, than to laugh at the only means to cure them, and if
this once grow common, it must needs make their condition desperate; for then
it comes to Gods turn to laugh, and to mock too; Because I have called, and ye
have refused, Prove. 1.24, 15, 26.
I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught
all my counsel, and would have none of my reproof, I also will laugh at your
calamity, and m^^k when your fear comes.

Now if this was one reason, why God resolved to send a Famine of the Word
amongst the Jews, to abolish their Worship, and banish them from their Priests,
because they made so light of them, nay did even take a pride to despise, and
contemn them, to vilify and abuse them, what can we expect less in this
Nation, who have far surpassed that people in this scoffing vein? Search the
Annals of all History, and compare the manners of all the Nations of the Earth
with ours, and you shall find this vice, no not even amongst Turks and
Heathens, so predominant as it is in ours: and he that considers the base and
unjust accusations, the vile and ignominious obloquies, the sordid and unworthy
aspersions, the black and malicious calumnies, in a word, the general despite
and contempt, that is thrown upon the present Ministry of the Church of
England, may cause him justly to believe, that God has very great reason to
revenge this injury by depriving them of such Pastors, whom they use so
despightfully, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
and to send them strong delusions to believe a lie, that they might all be
damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness: I wish
that this mischief had not spread it self so universally over the face of this
Nation, but (alas) the disease is grown now so Epidemical, that the Priest
affords matter of sport for all companies, and he that can be so ingenious to
have a fling at him, shall be cried up for a man of great wit and seize,
though in other things he is looked upon as very mean and inconsiderable; nay,
our Children too (like the Jewish I mentioned before) have drawn in these
prejudices with their very breath, for a man can scarce walk the streets in
many places, but he shall hear some of them speak something contemptible of a
Minister, if he chance to pass by; as if those, who were formerly reputed the
glory of Christendom, were now to be esteemed the very refuse of the people;
nay, the offscouring, catharmata, and ludibria, the laughing stocks, and the
most hateful of all mankind.

I remember, that it was part of the Liturgy in the Greek Church of old, to
praise God, that out of his infinite condescension he had given them Ministers
and Teachers, not only of the same nature, and infirmities with themselves, but
also of like guilt, and under the same condemnation; because, thereby having in
themselves a sense of their own infirmities, and knowing the burden of sin, and
the subtilty of Satan, they might the better know likewise how to offer up
Sacrifices and Oblations, both in behalf of themselves and the people: but how
is the scene altered! when instead of prayers, we meet with curses, and the
failings of some are either imputed to all, or else magnified to so high a
degree, as if we were the Pests and Grievances of the Nation! And now if God
look upon the dishonor done to his Ministers, as done to himself, if St. Paul
speak true, 1 These iv. 8.
that they who despise them despise not men, but God; according to that usual
saying, Every man's messenger is as himself, I cannot see why God should any
longer suspend his judgments from us, who stand guilty before him of so foul a
misdemeanour: why should he not deprive us of those persons whom we thus set at
naught, and use so contumeliously? and it may be some of us would be glad if
God should do so; but should this happen to us, I dare very confidently affirm,
that we should find it by too woeful experience the greatest curse yet that ever
befell this Kingdom.

2. A second reason, that might enforce God to hasten such a judgment upon
Israel, by rooting out their Religion, was their depriving the Priests of that
Lot and Portion which he himself had set apart for their use: whoever knows any
thing of the Jewish Economy, cannot possibly be ignorant, that the Jews, by a
more especial injunction of God himself, were commanded to pay the tenth of all
their substance to the Priests who served at his Altars, which tithes God was
pleased to call his own, and to sanctify himself, commanding that no part of
it, Levit. xxvii. v. 30, 31.
whether it was good, or whether it was bad, should be so much as changed by
any of the people: now notwithstanding all this, so covetous and worldly minded
were the generality of the Jews, that they made no conscience to defraud God of
his own, and the Priests of that which was allotted for their share: and
though, when God reproved them for their unjust and fraudulent dealings toward
him, they did justify themselves, and expostulate the case with him, and were
so insolent as to ask him the question (notwithstanding they could not but know
their guilt) Wherein they had done him any injury? God deals very plainly, and
tells them, that it was in robbing him of his Tithes and his Offerings: Will a
man rob God? Mal. iii. 8.
yet ye have robbed me; but ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and
in offerings: Well, but what was the fatal consequence of such filthy
defraudations? what did they get by their Rapine and their Sacrilege? the next
verse tells you, the curse of God was their reward, Verse 9.
Ye are cursed within curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation. And
may not we justly dread the same curse, whose defraudations are as great, and
Sacriledg as insufferable? for though there is a certain portion of tithes set
apart for our present Ministers under the Gospel, which our pious and good
Aucestors have bestowed upon the Church, and the Laws of our own Nation have
ratified and confirmed, and God himself under the Gospel does allow and
commend, yet such is the unsatiable avarice of some worldlings amongst us, that
they make no conscience to defraud the Ministers of their due; nay, have the
impudence, in their vulgar discourse, to assert very commonly, that it is no
sin to cheat the Parson; as if the taking away the Corn which belongs to me,
were not as directly a breach of the eighth Commandment, which says, Thou
shall not steal, as the taking away a Horse, which does not belong to me, would
be from another man: and now, when that which ought to be our shame is our
Glory and our Triumph, when fraud and downright cozenage is so plausibly
swallowed down, and they who are guilty of such things, yet lay their hands on
their mouths, and say they are innocent, Jer. v. 29.
Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, shall not my soul be
avenged of such a nation is this?

It was St. Austins complaint of old, Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 219. Hom. 48.
that the covetous coldness of some Christians in his time persuading them to
rob God, and to withdraw part of his portion, Tithes, from the Ministers, was a
grand presage of Wars and Calamities coming upon them in Africa, (as indeed
they did soon after) when the hand of violence would revenge the injury of
Sacrilegious avarice, with the Soldiers Rapine, says he, or the Exchequers
confiscation will take what was grudged for Christ and his Church: I pray God
the same injurious usage from the Laity, at this day, do not portend to this
Nation the same, or worse Calamities, that the Popish Harpies do not come in
amongst us, and revenge our injuries upon those persons who have dealt unjustly
by us: I pray God (I say) that this sin be not so far laid to their charge, as
that some of that rapacious crew do not make as great a prey of them as they
have done of us; for although it would be but a just one, yet it would be a
curse indeed, a punishment very grievous.

3. But I hasten to a third thing, which might precipitate such a judgment upon
the Jewish Nation, and that was their unsufferable degeneracy into all manner
of irreligion and profaneness: if ever God had any right and title to worship,
and service from any people, it was certainly due from the Jews, who were so
far his favorites, that he was pleased to entrust and deposit with them (...),
as the Apostle calls them, his Holy Oracles, the Divine Law written with his
own finger; nay, further he did manifest himself to be a God who highly merited
their true and sincere service, by the manifold deliverances he wrought for
them, and the wonderful mercy he conferred daily upon their Nation: and yet so
inconsiderate, insensate and stupid a people was this, that they were so far
from calling to mind those signal favors, wherewith he endeavored to oblige
them, and from those considerations return him, in lieu thereof, a just and due
proportion of duty and obedience, that instead of that they were arrived at so
great a height of boldness and impiety, Mal. i. 13.
as even to snuff at Gods service, and grew weary of it, and thought it a
burden and a grievance to them; and therefore upon their Sabbaths and Festival
days, when they should have paid God the most solemn and serious Devotion, they
began to think those days most irksome and troublesome, because they seemed to
hinder their gain and their Merchandise, and had the confidence to cry out,
Amos viii. 5, 6.
When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn, and the sabbath, that
we may set forth wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and
falsifying the balances by deceit? That we may buy the poor for silver, and
the needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat? nor did
they stick here, but they became still greater proficients in that hellish art
of irreligion, for the Prophet tells us again that they profaned the name of
the Lord, saying, The table of the Lord is polluted, Mal. i. 12.
and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible: now upon these terms it
was not possible for God any longer to withhold his hand, when he saw his
Worship neglected, his Ordinances spurned at, and his Holy Name profaned: the
next thing he could expect was to have his very Essence questioned, and his
Sovereignty over them openly disowned, and therefore it was high time for him
to exert his power, and make them smart for their impieties.

And if we be convicted; and found guilty of as evil courses, we likewise can
expect no less favor or mercy: Now that this is our case, the Atheism and
Impiety of the present Age does abundantly verify, for men are not content to
be modest Atheists, and to say secretly in their hearts, with the fool, that
there is no God, but impiety appears with a brazen forehead, and disputes its
place in every company, and without any regard to the voice of nature, to the
dictates of conscience, and the common sense of mankind: men peremptorily
determine against a supreme Being, account it a pleasant divertisement to droll
upon Religion, and a piece of wit to plead for Atheism: nay, as though the
fountain of the great deep was broken up, and Hell were let loose, and the
Prisoners there had shaken off their Chains and came upon the earth,
profaneness and all manner of wickedness grow so impudent and barefaced, that
men do not only reproach, but totally neglect all Religion and Goodness.

Indeed in former Ages it was for the honor and glory of the English Nation,
that as their genius prompted them to be very devout and religious, so they
never omitted any opportunity to show that real love they had for the Worship
of God, and how mightily they delighted in a continual veneration of his most
Sacred Person, and in a constant performance of all the holy Offices which were
enjoined them by Christianity: But since Atheism has flown over the Seas, and
infected this Kingdom; Good God! what a strange degeneracy is in men's natures
and inclinations? For if they do not openly discard all Religion, yet they have
so small a regard and esteem for it, that it may justly provoke God to take it
from them, and let them feel the want of it: When we see some so careless, and
indifferent in performing all manner of religious Duties, that they care not
whether they serve God, or not, when we see some absenting themselves from his
Worship, and making every idle excuse serve to cover their negligence, others
absenting themselves from the Sacrament, and running away from the Lords Table
with as much eagerness, as if the Plague would break forth upon them, and
consume them; others cavilling at the Liturgy, and Offices of the Church,
because not dressed up, nor shaped according to their fancies: in fine, when we
see Gods Houses deserted, his Altars unfrequented, his Sacred Days profaned,
his Word despised, and all manner of true Zeal and Devotion quite difcarded in
our daily assemblies; shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall
not my Soul be avenged of such a Nation as this? I am sure we have all the
reason to expect he should, when we give him such just reason to avenge himself
of us.

4. Especially if we consider in the fourth place, that there is something
still behind, which as it does aggravate ours, and Isreal's guilt, so it will
likewise hasten our punishment, as it did theirs before us; and that is
Hypocrisy, a sin of so deep a dye, that nothing does more incense God against
a Nation than this does: that no people could possibly be more addicted to
this, than the Jews, is very evident from all their Prophets, they made nothing
to commit the greatest villainies in the world, and defile themselves with the
blackest crimes, and under a specious pretense of piety and innocence, cry out
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jerem. 7.4.
the Temple of the Lord are these: They pretended great zeal and love for Gods
Worship, and Sanctuary, and varnished over all their evil actions with the
false colors of Sanctity, and Holiness: But behold how God, who sees through
the thickest veils of Hypocrisy, the most secret imaginations of the sons of
men, reproves them for it: Will you steal, murder, and commit Adultery, Verse.
9, 10.
and swear falsely, and burn Incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods, whom
ye know not, and come, and stand before me in the House, which is called by my
Name? As if God had said, Do you think that though you are guilty of all these
abominable sins, yet your coming to my House, your treading in my Courts, your
calling on my Name, shall make an atonement for them? So far are such dealings
from pacifying my wrath, that it will but kindle it the more against you, for,
thus says the Lord God, Behold, Verse. 20.
mine anger, and my fury shall be poured out upon this place, upon man and upon
beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground, and
it shall burn, and not be quenched: And therefore no wonder again it is that
you find him by his Prophets Isaiah and Amos, Isaiah 1.11, 12 Amos 5.21.
rejecting all their Sacrifices, and Oblations, and Assemblies, and professing
that he hated all their New Moons, and appointed Feasts, and that all their
Worship was an abomination to him, when he found it so extremely mixed with
Hypocrisy; for when men pretend to be what they really are not, when they draw
near to God with their lips, Isaiah ^9.13.
but their hearts are far enough from him, when they think to put a cheat upon
him, and their own Souls, and make Religion a cloak for all manner of impiety,
this does so far separate betwixt God and them, that it causes him to hide his
face from them, till at last he appear very formidable in his robes of
vengeance, and then misery, and confusion is their inevitable lot and portion.

And if so, then in what miserable circumstances are we in again of this
Nation, whose hypocritical actions do still keep pace with such deceitful
Jewish Worshippers? How ready are many of us to come and stand before God, to
visit his Courts, and to worship him in his Holy Temple? But we hope that it is
no offense to bring our sins along with us, that our Fraud and Oppression, our
Pride and our Covetousness, our Lying and our Slandering, our Malice and
Uncharitableness may bear us Company to the Church, and yet we our selves are
no less acceptable to God Almighty, as if God was obliged to us for the outward
formalities of his Worship, and might very well afford to let us have our sins
into the bargain, as if Sacrifice was better than Obedience, and the labor of
the Lips was much to be preferred before the true homage of the Heart: And that
this is too true, daily experience may convince us, for may we not see some to
day in the Church, complementing God into a belief, that they are his Servants,
when behold to morrow we shall find them either the Devils slaves, or the
Worlds drudges? May not we observe some to day very devout toward God, whom to
morrow we shall find ready to devour their neighbor? Blessing God to day, and
cursing men to morrow? Praying to Christ now perhaps with some fervency, and
anon with no less vigor belying and backbiting, or oppressing their
fellow-Christian? Hearing a Sermon one hour, and the very next resolving to act
and do clear contrary to what they hear? And can we think that God will accept
of such worshippers as these? That such monsters made up of light and darkness,
shall be as dear to him as his Children, or that such a form of godliness will
be as grateful as, the power of it? if we do we are strangely mistaken, for
believe it, such things as these are the highest provocations, and if we in
this Nation persevere and continue in them, if we take a delight in playing the
Hypocrites, and make Religion a cloak for the foulest abominations, it is but
just for God to take from us that Religion which we so grossly abuse, to lay
open our fallacies, and discover our secret wickedness, and make us appear by
the dreadfulness of his judgments upon us, to be what we really are, a
deceitful, impious and incorrigible Generation.

3. This, I say, God may and will do if we do not timely prevent it, but, God
be thanked, there is yet a possibility that this may be done, God, I hope, has
not past an irrevocable Sentence upon us, but we may yet reverse it, if we
please, our selves; now by what means and methods this may certainly be
accomplished is the third and last Head of Discourse I am to speak to.

And here, though I might instance in diverse things which would be very
effectual to this purpose, yet I shall contract them all to three, and leave
them then to your serious consideration.

1. It will be very requisite for you to set a due value and estimation upon
that Church and Religion which is now established.

2. To humble your selves before God, and be incessant in your prayers and
supplications to him.

3. To cast away all those sins and abominations, which, by reason of their
heinousness, cry to Heaven for vengeance, and may justly provoke God to plague
us with such a judgment.

First, Learn to set a true value and estimation upon that Church and Religion
which is now established amongst us, for that will be one means for God to
preserve and to continue it to us. He that duly weighs and considers with
himself, not only the present way of worship which is established in our
Church, but the purity of its Doctrine, and the excellency of its Institutions,
as he will find, that it is not possible for him, in any other Church of the
World, to be a more honest man, a more dutiful Subject, and a better Christian,
than he may be in the Fellowship and Communion of the Church of England; so
ought he upon such considerations to have the greatest esteem, and honor and
kindness for this Church, which does the best deserve it.

Now because this regard and esteem cannot be better expressed than by laying
aside all unjust and undue prejudices against it, and by an unanimous embracing
all its holy sanctions, therefore must these two things be carefully observed
by him.

First, It is very necessary, in order to the settling men in a due regard and
esteem for our present Church, to lay aside all unjust prejudices against it:
it was ever for the honor of the Church of England, that her Principles and
Doctrines were always found true from error and falsity, that in matters of
faith she still kept up to the Primitive Rule, and never enjoined any thing to
be received as a truth, but what the word of God did sufficiently confirm, and
the first and purest Ages of Christianity did assert and maintain to be so: and
for what concerns all her outward Rites and Ceremonies, all her Government and
Institutions; although some of her unnatural and disobedient Sons have, upon
this account, bespattered her reputation, and flung dirt in her face, and have
endeavored to pollute her Garments, and subvert both her Order and Discipline,
and like the Children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, Psalm. cxxxvii. ver. 7.
have cried, Down with her, down with her even to the ground; yet these have
been so fully evinced to be only the effects of the deepest malice and envy,
that we find the judicious Hookers assertion, in his Preface to his
Ecclesiastical Polity still abundantly verified: That surely the present form
of Church Government, which the Laws of this Land have established, is such, as
no Law of God, no Reason of man has hitherto been alleged of force sufficient
to prove they do ill, who to the uttermost of their power withstand the
alteration thereof; and contrariwise, the other, which instead of it we are
required to accept, is only by error and misconceit called the Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, no one proof as yet brought forth, whereby it may clearly appear
to be so in very deed, And if so, why should any one be prejudiced against that
Church, which does not command any thing contrary to the word of God, or which
is not agreeable to the first and purest Ages of Christianity? Why should any
one be so unreasonable to separate from a Church, which is stupor mundi, the
amazement of the world for Piety, Learning, and true Religion, only by reason
of a few outward modes and Ceremonies, when nevertheless those very Ceremonies
contain nothing in them, which is any way inconsistent with the substantial
parts of Religion, but are very useful and necessary to beautify and adorn it?
I say, who would any longer desert this Church upon such grounds as these are,
especially when we consider that such prejudices as these give the greatest
advantage to our common Enemy, the Pope, whilst by our difference about
trifles, he takes an opportunity to open the gap wider, to foment our
Divisions, and increase the Schism, and come upon us unawares whilst we are at
variance amongst our selves, and so work the ruin and downfall of us all?

And then tell me, whether would the yoke of the Church of England or of Rome
be more intolerable? Which do you think would be more easy to you, the bloody
Court of Inquisition, or the Consistory of our Bishops? Which would be most
grateful, a few innocent Ceremonies in our Church, or the constant practice of
superstition in theirs? Which would be most acceptable, a grave Liturgy of
Prayers directed to God alone, in a Language which you all understand, as it is
in ours, or an extravagant Form of Prayers to Saints and Angels, and in a
Tongue too of which you are ignorant, as it is with them? in fine, whether, had
you better adhere to a Church which is guilty of the greatest corruptions, both
in faith and manners, as it is at this day evident in the Church of Rome, than
submit to a Church which is free from all such things as it is at this day with
the Church of England?

And now if these things strike a dread and terror into you, if the Popish
Tyranny does affect you with horror, and you tremble to think of their
cruelties and persecutions toward those who do not embrace their monstrous
Tenants and Doctrines, have a care you provoke not God to deliver you up once
more to their power, and leave you to be inslaved and tortured by the
Janissaries of Rome, for your uncharitable practices toward the Church of
England, let not your unjust cavils and aspersions, your prejudices and ill
will you bear toward it enforce him to take it away from you, since you know
not how to value the blessing you enjoy by the establishment of it, and leave
you to be blinded with the spirit of Error and Idolatry; but be at last
persuaded to open your eyes, and have but once a due regard to that Churh,
whose Docttines are so sound, whose Principles are so firm, and whose integrity
so unquestioned.

And when once you have so far considered its worth and excellency, as to
esteem and value it as you ought to do, by laying aside all your prejudices
against it, you will then quickly be persuaded with one heart, and one mind, to
embrace all those sanctions and institutions which she thinks fit to enjoin
you, which is the second thing I shall propose to you.

Unity is the very Bond, and Cement of all Christian Society, and it is
impossible to make a rupture in that body which is tied, and kept close
together by this holy Ligature, and this our adversaries know very well, and
therefore though they endeavor unity as much as in them lies amongst
themselves, because it renders them very strong and formidable, yet they have
so far experienced the old Maxim, Divide and Impera, that it has been their
business to cause their business to cause the greatest divisions, and
separation amongst us, that so they may make a prey of us, and like the Kite in
the Fable carry away the feeble combatants whilst they are pecking at one
another with bents and bulrushes: and to this purpose it is, that they are
creeping into all houses, and transforming themselves, like Proteus, into all
shapes, hence it is that they counterfeit any manner of Sect, and cant in all
tones, and adapt themselves to all humors, and become all things to all men,
though in another sense that S. Paul did, even to seduce all. And now though we
know this to be their project, and design to subvert Church and State, and are
sensible they can no way better do it than by widening the breach of
separation, yet are we so foolish to hearken still to the bewitching charms of
these Sirens, till they draw us at last into the sea of destruction? Has not
the wisest man that ever lived told us that a Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand? Luke xi. 17.
And did not the ancient Britains experience this truth in this Nation, when by
their mutual feuds and animosities they fell a Sacrifice to their foreign
enemies, for, dum pugnant singuli vincuntur universi? Nay have we not great
reason to believe what some considering persons have affirmed upon very
probable conjectures, that if ever Popery came in amongst us, it would most
certainly creep in through the back door of Separation? And yet for all we
know, and are forewarned of this, shall we give the opportunity to these
Philistines to bind us, and take from us our strength by cutting away the locks
of Unity that would make us invincible? Were you ever in more danger than at
this time? Do you not see these mad Bulls of Bashan ramping and roaring, Psalm.
xxii. 12, 13.
and gnashing upon you with their teeth? Upon which account there was never a
more absolute necessity to forget all animosities, to lay aside all unnecessary
cavils and scruples than now, and to join your forces together with one
consent, John xi. 48.
lest the Romans should come and take away both your place and Nation. Join
therefore your hands and hearts together, and become as one people, for such a
blessed Union would frustrate all the designs and plots of our enemies, it
would become a brazen wall of defense round about us, which they would never be
able to undermine, or cast down, it will put them quite out of heart, and dash
all their hopes, it would take away from them all advantages, and put them to
their last shifts; nay in fine, it is the only way to continue peace and
happiness to the Nation: for God who is the God of peace, of order and unity,
would then begin to take a delight in us, and protect us under the shadow of
his wings from all the outward violences and secret machinations of the sons of
Belial, and if we could once be persuaded to arrive at so good, and holy a
temper of mind, as with one heart, Romans xv. 6.
and one voice to glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, this
would so far endear him to us as to ensure him on our sides, and to gain his
Patrouage; and then let men or devils combine against us, and threaten our
Church with ruin and desolation, He that sits in the Heavens would laugh
them to scorn, Psalm. ii. 4.
the Lord would have them in derision: and as he would defeat all the evil
contrivances of our enemies against it, so would he raise it to greater beauty
and luster, and establish it upon such firm, durable and lasting foundations,
that the gates of Hell should never be able to prevail against it: Since then
these would be the joyful effects of Unity, since this would make God to be our
peculiar Guardian, and us to be his more especial favorites, since this would
be a means to secure us from all our enemies, and reduce us to a blissful, and
a flourishing condition, if either you desire to desire to promote the common
interest of your Religion, or your Brethrens welfare, or your Nations
happiness, let S. Paul's advice sink down in your hearts, and appear practicable
in your lives; I beseech you, Brethren, 1 Cor. i. 10.
by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same things, and
that there be no divisions amongst you, but that you be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

2. Secondly, as united hearts, minds, and judgments would become one very
instrumental means to divert Gods Judgments from us, so would our joint
concurrence in humbling our selves by Prayer and Supplication be another
excellent way to move God to commiserate our condition, and preserve us from
destruction. When Jonah came with that severe message to Niniveh, that in forty
days God was resolved to destroy it, both nature, and the present danger they
were in suggested it to them to address themselves in all humility to the
supreme Being, who had sent his Prophet to denounce that Judgment against them,
and both King and People, Man and Beast was covered with sackcloth, and they
lift up their voices with one accord, and cried mightily to God to deliver them
from that evil, which he threatened against them, and we find that they met with
success suitable to the importunity and fervency of their prayers, for God
repented him of the evil, which he said he would do to that City, Jonah 111.8,
9.
and did it not.

O let us follow the same method at this day, let us humble our selves before
Almighty God, and if there be ever a Jacob amongst us, any who can wrestle and
prevail with God, let him forthwith set about so glorious a work, for never was
there more need of such pressing intercessions: Alas, when we see our enemies
ready to devour us, when we find they are restless in their plots and
conspiracies against us, it is sure high time for us to fall to our prayers, and
be as restless in our supplications to God Almighty to disappoint them: and
indeed if we were but once really sensible of our danger, as it would melt the
strongest heart living, and make it bleed to consider the miseries that would
ensue from hence, so would it make us fly forthwith with the greatest speed to
Gods Sanctuary, and there implore the Auxiliaries of Heaven to succor and
relieve us: and since we know not how long we may enjoy the blessed opportunity
of treading in Gods Courts, and calling upon his name, and deprecating his
judgments, as blessed be God, we do yet for the present; since we are not sure
how soon we may be banished from his Temples, be abridged of his worship, be
deprived of his word, and made to wander to and fro from this place to that
place, from this City to that City, to seek that word, which yet we shall not
be able to find, why do not we make the best use of it whilst me may? Why do
not we assemble more unanimously together, and with whole Volleys of Prayers
storm the gates of Heaven, and enforce God to stand up for us, and to become
our defense and refuge? If your Houses were like to perish in a general
Conflagration, would you not all run to quench the fire with the greatest
celerity? And when the whole Kingdom is ready to be put into a flame by a
company of turbulant Popish Incendiaries, will not you be as ready to use all
possible means to obstruct and allay it? Now since nothing can be more
effectual to this purpose than Prayer, why are we so back ward in the
performance of this Holy Duty? What is the reason our petitioners are so few,
and the House of Prayer so empty and unfrequented? Alas, Can we think that God
will do what we would have him, though we say nothing at all to him, or that a
short, slight, sleepy-hearted address now and then, when we please, will serve
the turn? Can we hope to bind Gods hands with withs and straws, to arrest his
vengeance with weak and feeble Assaults? What our Savior said in another case,
that this kind, speaking of such Devils as had got possession of men's bodies,
The Archbishop of Canterbury in his late Sermon before the House of Lords.
goes not out but by Prayer and Fasting; may be said of the Jesuits, the
Devils of Sedition and Faction, of Treason and Rebellion, those Familiars of
Rome, and Rhemes, and St. Omers, as they are justly styled by the greatest
Prelate in this Nation, which have so long possessed and agitated a wretched
part of this Kingdom, they are not to be quelled easily or driven out from
hence, but by the most serious humiliation, and by the most fervent prayers and
supplications of holy Votaries: then let our hands never wax heavy, but be
always held up like Moses, in a devout importunity; let us consider, and lay to
heart what great need we have now more than ever, to be constant at Church, and
devout at our prayers, and from thence be persuaded with one accord to perform
this so acceptable a duty, let us lift up our hearts and voice in some such
petition as that of Holy David, O, Psai. lxxiv. ver. 19.
deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove to the multitude of the wicked, forget
not the congregation of the poor for ever. Arise, O God, plead thine own cause,
remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily. Forget not the voice of
thine enemies, the tumult of those that rise up against thee increases
continually.

3. Now if to such ardent Petitions as these we add in the last place a true
and serious Reformation of what is amiss amongst us, then will God be entreated
for the Land, and become gracious unto us: but indeed without this there is
very little hopes of it; for can we think that when continual provocations are
offered to him, he will still connive at them, and bear with them? Can we
imagine that when the blasphemies of the profane, the sensualities of the
voluptuous, and the mockeries of the Hypocrite send up daily challenges to
Heaven, this will not at last overcome Gods patience and long-suffering, awake
him to vindicate the honor of his name, and not suffer it any longer to be
thus prostituted and polluted? Will the deepest sighs, or the loudest clamours
to Heaven be able to drown our impieties, or the most importunate Petitions
make an atonement for our transgressions? no, the wise man has told us, Prove.
xv. 8.
That the prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, and it was the
blinds man's Divinity in the Gospel, Joh. ix. 31.
Now we know that God hears not sinners; and therefore it was well observed
by St. Cyril, that it was very absurd, for those who come by Prayer to obtain
mercy, to provoke the Divine Lawgiver another way by not doing what he
commands. The only way to have all our supplications answered by God with a
gracious return, is to make our lives the transcripts of our Prayers, not only
to pray against sin, but to endeavor to relinquish those sins we pray against,
not only to beg of God that he would enable us to perform his Holy Laws, but
actually to set our selves about the performance of that which we crave of him:
and unless we do thus, our Prayers are but the labor of the Lungs, which, like
bellows, make the fire of Gods anger burn fiercer, but do not blow it out:
therefore, says God to the Jews, When you spread forth your hands, Isa. 1.15.
I will hide my face from you; when you make many Prayers I will not hear, and
what was the reason of this? the following words tell you, your hands are full
of blood: As if God had said, you come and worship in my Temple, and offer up
the Sacrifice of Prayer to me, but you keep your old sins, and stick close to
your former transgressions, and this makes me hate and abominate all your
service; but then, as he reproves them severely for such Hypocrisy, so in the
next place he prescribes them a way to regain his favor. Verse 16, 17, etc.
Wash you make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed,
judge the fatherless, plead for the widow; Come now, and let us reason together,
though your sins be as scarlet they shall be white as snow, though they be red
as crimson, they shall be as wool. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat
the good of the Land, but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be destroyed by the
sword: The same advice is given them by Jeremiab, Jerem. xvii. 4.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. For if ye thoroughly amend your ways and
your doings; if ye thoroughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbor;
if ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless and the widow, and shed not
innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other Gods to your hurt; then
will I cause you to dwell in this place in the Land that I gave to your fathers
for ever and ever.

So that you see upon what terms it is God suspends his judgments, it is upon
repentance and amendment, and therefore we find in the instance I gave you
before of Nineveh, that when they there did turn away every one from his evil
way, and from the violence that was in their hands, God had mercy on them, and
destroyed them not; by which we may find what we of this Nation are now to hope
and trust to; for the result of all in this, if we persist in our disobedience
and impenitency, in our contempt of God and Religion, in Profaneness and
Hypocrisy, such things will most certainly make us ripe for Gods vengeance,
but if we reclaim our evil ways, and reform what is amiss; if we worship God
more devoutly, and pray unto him sincerely, and repent unfeignedly, then will
God preserve us still from our enemies, all the Jesuits and Emissaries of Rome
shall never be able to do us any prejudice, but our Church shall still
flourish, and our Kingdom shall enjoy greater measures of happiness, and we
shall all sit under our Vines and our Figg-trees to eat the fruit of our labor
in peace and tranquillity.

I will conclude all therefore with the Prophet Zephaniah's advice, and let us
all endeavor to treasure it up carefully in our hearts: Gather your selves
together, Zeph. ii. 1, 2, and 3.
before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the
fierce anger of the Lord come upon you: Seek ye the Lord, all the meek of the
earth, which have wrought his judgment, seek righteousness, seek meekness: it
may be you shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger.

GODS CALL TO Weeping and Mourning.
SERMON II.
ISAIAH xxij. 12, 13, 14. And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to
weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth.

And behold, joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating Flesh,
and drinking Wine: let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, Surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts.


IT is not long since we kept a Day of Humiliation to implore Gods Mercy, and
deprecate his Judgment, which seemed to hang over our heads, by a bloody Plot
contrived by Papists, to murder our King, to subvert our Religion, and enslave
our Kingdom by reducing it again under the Romish Yoke, a Yoke which neither we
nor our Forefathers were able to bear.

And he that considers with himself how ready and active the Devil is, who was
(...) a murderer from the beginning, John viii. 44.
still to instigate and spur forward his Agents, to set Kingdoms in flames, and
make the Streets swim with the Blood of good and holy Christians; how willingly
the Jesuits, who be his chiefest Factors, do obey such diabolical motions,
under what unhappy circumstances we of this Nation are for the present by
reason of our manifold and potent enemies abroad, our private feuds and
divisions at home, and above all our open daring and notorious sins and
abominations, which justly call aloud to heaven for vengeance upon us, will
certainly be persuaded that a second day of Humiliation is no less necessary
than the former, which it is much to be feared was not observed with those
hearty resentments of indignation against our sins, with those sincere
testimonies of outward and inward contrition, and with those cordial
resolutions of future reformation and amendment, which the grievousness of the
Judgment, and the greatness of the danger impendent over us did justly require
at all our hands.

And now that the drowsy may be awakened, the ignorant instructed, the
negligent excited, the improvident forewarned, and all of us deeply affected
with a true sense of our condition, and by a timely repentance prevent those
calamities which threaten the extirpation of the Ecclesiastical and Civil
Polity amongst us, I have made choice of these words of the Prophet, wherein
God seems now to give us as seasonable a call, as he did then to the Jews: And
in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, etc.
From which words there are three things will fall under our consideration.

1. The unspeakable Mercy and Kindness of God to the Jews, in calling them to a
solemn and serious humiliation; Ver. 12. In that day did the Lord God of Hosts
call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloth.

2. The horrible Ingratitude of the Jews, who instead of humbling themselves
before God, went on in their former habituated courses of voluptuousness, and
sensuality: For behold ver. 13. joy and gladness, etc.

3. The astonishing Resolution of God upon their not harkening to, and obeying
that gracious call, viz. to root them out and destroy them: Ver. 14. Surely
your iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die, says the Lord of
Hosts.

I. I begin with the first of these, the unspeakable mercy and kindness of God
to the Jews, in calling them to a solemn and serious Humiliation: In that day
did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, etc. Whether this call
was by his Prophet threatening them with some severe Judgment for their
perseverance in iniquity, or whether by some smart Judgment which God thought
fit to lay upon them, he endeavored to reclaim them from the evil of their
ways, and bring them to a sight and sense of their follies before their final
extirpation, it is certain that either or both of these calls were very
expressive of his loving kindness toward them.

1. For first, it argues the great Care and concernment God had still for their
Nation, how sollicitous he was to preserve, and to continue it, to protect and
to defend it, to make them still a glorious and a flourishing people, happy in
themselves, and a terror to their enemies.

2. And secondly, it was an argument of his Patience and forbearance, in
sparing and reprieving them from punishment when they most deserved it.

3. And thirdly, it was an incentive to their Duty, a memorandum to put them in
mind, what course they should take under such gracious methods, namely to fall
to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth;
that is, by such outward lugubrious gestures of body, as well as an inward
anguish and vexation of spirit, to declare their sincere hatred of all sin, and
resolution of amendment.

So that from hence here will be three things to be insisted upon.

1. The Providence of God in taking care of Kingdoms and Communities of
Mankind, he suffers not things to go at random in them, but he disposes of
them as he thinks fit, and when there is a necessity he calls to them.

2. His Patience and forbearance, he does not punish without giving them
notice, he calls them first, and then he strikes.

3. The End of all his gracious calls, it is to work in them a thorough
humiliation for their transgressions.

1. First, I shall consider the Providence of God in taking care of Kingdoms,
and Communities of Mankind, where all things do not happen by chance, but the
divine disposal of God Almighty, who calls to them, and exerts his power
amongst them when there is occasion for it. It was a fond and strange opinion
of the Epicureans of old, that God was so taken up with the contemplation of
his own excellencies and perfections, that he would not so much as vouchsafe to
cast one glance down upon these Sublunary Regions; that it was below the
Majesty of Heaven to be concerned in the pitiful affairs of poor earthly
miscreants, and to be angry at their follies, or seem to applaud their actions,
was irreconcilable with the Divine Happiness, which was unmixed and pure, free
from any thing that might disturb or disquiet it: a fancy no doubt which Lucian
gathered from their Schools, (in which he was no small proficient, as a learned
and worthy person tells us) for he brings in old Japetus and Saturn tippling
Nectar together, Archdeacon of Canterbury in his Book De Deo and Providentia.
and spending their time in telling old stories, Saturn confessing that he was
gouty, which gave occasion to the Poets to write, that he was fettered by
Jupiter, to whom as being the younger, and more active, he resigned the
thunder, and the Kingdom, not troubling himself with hearing men's prayers, and
punishing their offenses, that being a troublesome and irksome piece of
service. But if God Almighty be thus confined to Heaven, and his Providence
does not expand it self over all the Universe, what account can be given of the
establishment of one Kingdom upon the ruins of another; that one Nation, whose
Senators are wise and politic, whose Armies are strong and numerous, whose
People are warlike and courageous, should fall a prey to another which is far
inferior to them, either in wisdom or conduct, in strength or policy? How can
this possibly be solved but by admitting that it is God who weakens and
infatuates the one, and strengthens, and gives assistance to the other, and by
that means declares himself to be the Person alone that sets up one Kingdom,
and plucketh down another, as it shall seem good to him in his wisdom and
justice. Look we but abroad into the revolution of some of the grand Empires
and Kingdoms of the world, and we shall find this truth abundantly verified.
Tell me, what could make Cyrus the Persian so puissant and victorious over the
fierce Nations of the East, but that God who raised him up, and called by his
name long before he was born, was an assistant to him, and crowned him with
success by leading him into Babylon, when that City was most secure, full of
wine and jollity, at an anniversary feast, by a way they little dreamed of? And
what could entitle the Macedonian Prince Alexander to so great Victories over
the Persians, but that God infatuated their Counsels, and gave him such
advantages, which if he made but use of, he could not fail of success? It might
seem strange to some, that the cowardly Goths, and barbarous Vandals, and
despicable Hunns, should make such devastations in the Roman Empire, which had
been a terror to the greatest part of the World, and that in fifty years time
more of it should be lost and destroyed, than had been conquered in a thousand;
but when again it is considered that the hand of God was in this desolation, and
that something which was divine overruling all the Counsels and Stratagems of
the gravest Roman Senators, made that Nation at last improsperous in all their
enterprises, we may justly cease our wondering, and conclude with Solomon, that
the race is not always to the swift, Eccles. ix. 11.
nor battle to the strong, but that God orders and disposes all things as
seems most expedient to his infinite wisdom.

But to come nearer to the Text, how often did the Jews, with a handful of men,
work miracles against their strongest enemies? How many Cities did they
destroy? How many Fortresses did they demolish? What Armies did they put to
flight, and how many Nations did they subdue, and that many times by such
unlikely means, by such weak forces, and under such unhappy circumstances, that
nothing can be plainer, that if so be God had not presided in their Councils,
inspirited them with courage, removed all difficulties, and fought their
battles, it had been impossible for them to have effected such wonderful
exploits: but now although he had taken so great care of them, had subdued all
the Nations under them, and given them the Land of the Heathen for an
inheritance, yet to show them likewise that he had still the same power to
dispose of them and their Kingdom to other people, as he had done of other
Kingdoms to them; he calls to them to learn so much duty from his care and his
providence over them, as to humble themselves under his Almighty hand, lest he
should make them as great a prey to their Enemies as their Enemies had been to
them; Deuteronomy. ix. 4, 5.
for as it was not for the righteousness or the uprightness of their hearts,
that God gave possession of the Land of Canaan to Israel, but for the
wickedness of those Nations did the Lord drive them out from before them, so
would he deal with them, and by the same Arm of providence destroy them before
the face of the Heathen, if they did not forsake the evil of their ways, and
become obedient unto the voice of the Lord their God.

You see then how far the Providence of God is pleased to interest, and concern
it self with Societies of mankind; as there is no Nation, which is out of its
reach, so there is none but has felt the effects of its influence, and if we
will but take the pains to trace it in those footsteps which are visible in
this our Kingdom, we shall find such evident marks, and notices of it amongst
us, as will justly call us to a serious humiliation for the further continuance
of such mercies toward us: that for these many years now together we of
England have enjoyed a blessed and a glorious peace in our Nation, whilst all
Europe beside has swom in streams of blood; that we should all be exempted
from the misery of War, whilst our Neighbors round about us have been
continually spoiled and harassed by the rapine and cruelty of the insolent
Soldiery, that the black Clouds, and frightful Hurricanes, which the Jesuits
have conjured up, should not fall down in showers of blood and vengeance upon
our heads; that all the bold Popish Confederates, who, like St. Paul's
Assassinates, had bound themselves under the most solemn vows and obligations,
that they would murder our Sovereign, massacre his Subjects, subvert our
Church, and undermine our State, should as yet be disappointed and defeated in
their machinations; to what can we justly ascribe all this, but to the gracious
Protection and Providence of God Almighty? Indeed, did not he spread his shady
wings over us, and protect us, we should soon fall under these Popish
Cormorants clutches, so secret are their Plots, so cunning their Contrivances,
so politic their Agents, and so numerous and resolute are they in all their
enterprises: and could their stratagems prevail, and their devices take effect,
how joyful would they be at such an accomplishment of their designs! What
Jubilees would be kept, could they but gain this Kingdom, or could they but
once seize upon the Vineyards of our Naboths, how willingly would they feast
and glut themselves with their blood into the bargain! but, God be thanked,
that we are as yet out of their power, that we are still under the arms of Gods
gracious Providence, that God is pleased to call us to humiliation, that so he
may continue his protection over us, that he is pleased to give us notice upon
what terms we may expect his further patronage, upon what conditions he will be
a Patriot to our Country, a Guardian to our Church, a refuge to us all in our
greatest dangers and extremities: and this is the first thing observable from
Gods Call, the great care and concernment he has for communities of mankind,
by calling them to repentance, that so they may become fit subjects for his
Patronage and Protection.

2. A second thing observable from Gods Call is his Patience and Forbearance in
calling to men before he strike: though their provocations are high, their
wickedness very heinous, and their sins ripe for vengeance, yet he frequently
defers punishment, and gives them timely notice to prevent it by repentance. In
the Patriarchal Age before the Flood, though wickedness was grown rampant, and
the manners of men very corrupt and vicious, God did not presently pour down
the vials of his wrath, but upbraid them first for their crimes by Enoch, who
was an eminent Prophet in those days (a fragment of whose Prophecy is still
extant in St. Judes Epistle) and only threaten them with vengeance upon their
perseverance in impenitency. Afterward when the world grew worse and worse,
and wickedness appeared with a brazen forehead, and violence had covered the
face of the earth, when the promiscuous mixtures of the Children of Seth and
Cain had produced Giants and mighty men, men strong to do evil, and who had as
much will as power, (...), as Josephus calls them, a race of men insolent and
ungovernable, scornful and injurious, and who bearing up themselves in the
confidence of their own strength despised all justice and equity, and made
every thing truckle under their extravagant lusts and appetites, a character
which Lucian gives the men of this Age, speaking of the time of Deucalion
(their Noah) and the flood, for says he (...), etc. they being men exceedingly
contumelious were guilty of the most enormous and unrighteous actions,
violating all oaths and covenants, throwing off kindness and hospitality, and
rejecting all supplications and addresses made to them: I say, when mankind was
grown to so prodigious a height of impiety, and this infection had spread it
self over all parts, and was become so epidemical, that all flesh had corrupted
their ways, and scarce any but Noah left to keep up the face of a Church, and
the profession of Religion: things being come to this pass quickly alarmed the
Divine Justice, and made the world ripe for vengeance; the patience of God was
now tired out, and he resolved to make mankind feel the just effects of his
incensed severity: but yet in the midst of judgment he remembered mercy, for he
tells them, although he would not suffer his patience to be eternally
prostituted to the wanton humors of unreasonable and wicked men, and although
his spirit would not always strive with them, disceptabit, as some Divines
render it, dispute, Genesis VI. 3.
and reason with them, yet that he would bear with them 120 years longer, in
order to their Reformation; so loath is God to take an advantage of the sins of
men, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come unto
repentance. Well, thus it was in the Antideluvian Age; and when the world was
replenished with new inhabitants, who tempted and provoked the most high God
afresh, by such sins and abominations as were of the deepest dye, yet God did
not presently open the treasuries of vengeance, and speak their ruin, and
decree their destruction, but still endeavored to reclaim them by seasonable
precautions, and deferred his punishment, and waited patiently for their
amendment: and to instance in Israel, who was a people as signal for their
perverseness and rebellion as for the manifold favors they received from the
Almighty, under the Parable of the Vineyard, God is pleased to give a clear
demonstration of the tender care, and regard he had still for them
notwithstanding their reiterated provocations against him, for he made this
Vineyard upon a very fruitful Hill, Isa. v.
and he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the
choicest vines; nay, he dug it, and dunged it, pruned it, and watered it,
used all the art of cultivation, that might cause it to be fruitful, hoping and
looking still for some productions proportionable to his care and industry
concerning it; nay, and when it still, year after year, disappointed his
expectations, and brought forth wild Grapes instead of Grapes, he was loath to
withdraw his kindness from it, but continued to dress and to manure it, and
suffered it, Luke xiii. 7, 8, 9.
like the Fig Tree in the Gospel, (an Emblem still of the same People) further
to trespass upon his patience, and would not destroy it till there was no hopes
of its improvement.

And to apply this to our selves: Has not God planted as choice a Vineyard in
this Nation, and evidenced his Providence and his loving kindness toward it by
cultivating and preserving it for many years together in as ample a manner, as
he did that amongst the Jews? Has any Church of the world received greater
notices of his favor, more peculiar marks of his affection, or more signal
testimonies of his care on it, than the Church of England, of which we profess
our selves to be members? Has not the Divine Omnipotency interposed it self
many times miraculously for its deliverance, and have we not been as
firebrarnds plucked out of the fire, rescued from the most apparent dangers,
snatched from the very jaws of death, and the pit of destruction? How
frequently have the crafty Foxes of Geneva endeavored to undermine us, and the
wild Boars of Rome to root us up, and devour us; and yet notwithstanding all
their secret Cabals, their sly insinuations, and politic projections, have
been disappointed of their hopes, and frustrated in their expectations? As
nothing could be more cruelly contrived, than the present Popish Plot, so
nothing could be more secretly managed, for as if the Devil and the Jesuits had
laid their heads together, and joined in a league to ruin and dispatch us,
nothing could seem more to favor their barbarous enterprise: they had
strengthened themselves against us with Foreign interests abroad, they had
drawn into the confederacy many of their friends at home, a general Massacre
was resolved upon, and most of us to be entombed in the ruins of our Kingdom,
whilst they erected triumphant Trophies upon the piles of our murdered and
mangled Carcasses: but behold, when they thought themselves most sure, when
they were pleasing themselves with the thoughts of a prosperous success in
their designs, the Lord in mercy looked upon us by discovering their wicked
intentions, by defeating their cursed projects, and bringing to light their
mischievous practices and machinations against us; and though in justice, by
reason of our manifold offenses against him, he might have suffered us to be
taken by their wilyness, to be ensnared by their devices, and fall a prey to
these malicious and blood-thirsty Boutefeus, yet he has reprieved us for some
longer time from their tyranny and cruel dealings, and is resolved to try what
effects this his gracious and merciful providence will have upon us, hoping
still that this his patience and forbearance will lead us to repentance.

3. Which brings me to the third Consideration I proposed from the Text, the
end of all Gods callings to mankind, it is to work in them a thorough and
sincere humiliation for their transgressions; In that day did the Lord God of
Host call to weeping and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with
Sackcloth: now although these put together are but the exterior superficies of
repentance, yet they are very good signs and symptoms of the reality of its
performance, and necessary in order to its acceptance with God Almighty: a
weeping eye and a blubbered cheek, a mournful heart and an afflicted spirit, a
mortified body and a penitent soul, (which I confess must be indispensably
superadded to all the rest) must needs become Sacrifices acceptable to God, and
will at any time, no doubt, be very available to avert all present danger, to
prevent all future punishment, or at least to secure such safety and
deliverance, as may be most necessary, and expedient in the dismal times of
calamity.

1. Such humiliation is very necessary to avert all present danger: though the
hand of vengeance be lifted up, this can hinder the stroke, though the sword of
justice be drawn, this can hold it back, though the decree be issued forth,
this may prevent the execution; for so says Jeremiah, Chap. xviii. 7, 8.
At what instant I speak concerning a nation and concerning a kingdom to pluck
up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, then I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do unto them. I cannot give you a better instance than in that of Nineveh,
God sends his Prophet to them to assure them, that they had but forty days
space allowed them either to repent in, or to be destroyed: Jonah iii. 3.
upon this they being immediately struck with the guilt of their own sins, and
the terror of this judgment set a part a solemn day, without any further
delays, for fasting and humiliation, for they put on Sackcloth from the least
to the greatest, and caused their very beasts to fast as well as themselves,
that so, as St. Gregory observes, the bleating of the Sheep, and lowing of the
Cattle, with such other doleful notes might move the hearts of men still to
further sadness, which is a great preparative to repentance: and how did they
speed upon this? What success did their contrition and humiliation meet with,
even with the greatest their hearts could wish or desire, for God altered his
purposes forthwith concerning this people; the Text says, Verse. 9.
He repented of the evil he said he would do unto them, and did it not.

We are all alarmed at the news of great dangers which hang over our heads,
and who is so obdurate and insensate amongst us, as not to be affected with the
horror of them? I am apt to think that the yoke of Rome is as dreadful to us as
ever that of Egypt was to the people of Israel, nor did they more tremble at
the name of the Egyptian Taskmasters, than we do when we hear of the leagues
and frauds, the treacheries and conspiracies, the seditions and insurrections,
the butcheries and massacres of the Popish Emissaries: but will our fears
prevent our dangers, or our jealousies become a bar to our miseries? Will a
bare antipathy against them keep us out of their reach, or a few weak sighs, or
insignificant groans, blow away those storms that threaten both Church and
State with inevitable destruction? No, the only certain way to be eased of our
cares, and have our fears abated, is to gain God on our sides by a timely
humiliation, and then we need not fear what the malice of man can do unto us:
indeed we are too apt to rely upon a weak arm of flesh, to confide in the
strength and the policy, in the counsel and advice, in the consultation and
resolutions of those who preside over us; thus we feed our selves with fancies,
that if our Senators be but quick and sagacious in making a thorough discovery
of these wicked incendiaries, if our Magistrates be but speedy in the execution
of the Laws against them, if these Traitors be but brought to condign
punishment for the present, and severe Laws be enacted for the security of the
King, and the preservation of the State for future Generations, all things yet
will go well, and we may hope still for glorious days of peace and
tranquillity: but then we do not consider, that when those are dispatched we
have Traitors still amongst us at our own homes, within our own breasts, I mean
our Sins, which, if not executed likewise with no less rigor and severity,
will open still a door, and let in others from abroad no less dreadful and
pestilential than those are, when we think our selves most secure and out of
danger. It was a smart answer which an English Commander gave a French Captain
in Normandy, who asking him, when he thought their Forces, which were called
back for England, by King Henry the sixth, would return into those parts again,
replied, When their sins called for them. Yea, it is they which are the inlets
to all the evil in the world, it is they make a gap, open the avenues for our
Enemies to come upon us armed, and never believe the Seminaries of Rome will
desert this Nation, till by unfeigned repentance we have obstructed their
passage, and God, by reason of that shall think fit not to suffer them any
longer to torment, and persecute us: Humble then you selves under the mighty
hand of God, it is the best way to avert present danger.

2. It Is as expedient likewise to prevent all future punishment; Repentance is
not only an antidote against present evils, but a most certain defensative
against all future calamities: we are very ready to believe, that if this Plot
could be but thoroughly fifted; if the bottom of it could be dived into, the
chief Abettors of it discovered, the Confederates laid open, the Associates
brought to light, the whole Popish Faction would be so bafled and disappointed,
and their motion for the future watched with such vigilance, and caution, that
they could never be able to do us any more prejudice: But put the case this
were true, suppose we could obviate all their designs, countermine all their
Plots, be privy to all their Cabals, and receive weekly Bills of Intelligence
from all their Consults in Spain, Italy, France or Flanders; suppose they
should still be so infatuated in their Counsels, divided in their interests,
and so weakened by their ill success, as nothing could come to any maturity
which they projected against us; yet can we be so foolish to imagine that God
has no other workmen to make him Darts and Arrows than Papists, or no other
executioners of his vengeance but Jesuits? Alas, if our offenses require it,
there are instruments enough befide to serve God in his purposes, he can raise
up wicked Agents within our own Kingdom to ruin and destroy us; he can, if he
please, make a Synedrial Classis of Geneva become as fatal to us as a Conclave
at Rome, and permit a trumpet of Sedition in order to our downfall to be blown
as loud out of a Fanatic Conventicle, as a Jesuits Cloister: he can crumble us
into Factions and Divisions amongst our selves, and make every Schismatical
Sect amongst us become his rod and scourge to chastise our wickedness and
folly: nay, he need not go so far for executioners to dispatch us, for he can
raise up within our own bowels Ministers of his wrath, as he served Antiochus
and Herod, to put a period to our lives and sins together: and nothing but a
serious and sincere Repentance, though perhaps we do escape now, can give us
any assurance that we shall not fall, for the future, by one or other of those
direful Assassinates.

It Is observable in all the States and Kingdoms of the world, as in Egypt,
Babylon, Jewry, etc. whom God enforced to drink the dreadful cup of his fury,
that their final impenitency was the cause of their destruction, and they might
perhaps yet have flourished and been in vogue in the world, had not their sins
intercepted the Divine Favor, and hastened their ruin. There is nothing can
make a Nation firm and durable, lasting and permanent, settle it upon such
foundations, as that when the rain descends, and the floods come, and the winds
blow, they shall not be able to shake it, but Repentance alone, which will so
fortify and strengthen it, that the gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail
against it: upon which account, if we would for ever promote the universal
happiness of out Nation, prevent all future attempts and designs of its Enemies
against it, and establish it upon such solid and lasting foundations, as no
shocks of the most puissant assailants shall be able to demolish it, let us
answer Gods Call, and fall to weeping and mourning.

3. By which means, I dare assure you, that if we could not avert present
danger, nor prevent future punishment, yet we may thirdly, without all
peradventure, deliver our own souls; yea, this is the comfort that the truly
penitent man receives, though Gods judgment fly abroad to the terror of the
wicked, Psalm. lvii. 1.
though the storms and billows of affliction do arise, yet either under the
shadow of his wings will hide him, 1 Cor. x. 13.
until those calamities be overpast, or else with the temptation make a way to
escape, that he may be able to bear it: if the old Dragon cast out a flame of
fire to destroy the Church, if the Clouds of persecution fall in showers upon
the penitent man's head, yet behold, Isa. xliii. 2.
When he passes through the water, God will be with him, and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow him, when he walks through the fire, he shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon him: nay, God has decreed to
set a mark upon his head, that so he may escape the fury of the destroyer; Set
a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the
abominations, that are done in the midst of her; Ezekiel. ix. 4.5.
and to the others he said, Go ye after him through the city, and smite, let
not your eye spare, neither have pity, slay utterly both old and young, both
maids and little children, and women, but come not near any man upon whom is
the mark. You see then upon terms, you may hope for safety in the gloomy days
of Calamity; if your returns be proportionable to Gods gracious calls, if you
exercise all the acts of true penance and contrition, though your Nation should
be consumed in the day of the Lords anger, yet your repentance shall render you
so grateful a Sacrifice to him, as will cause him, not only to accept your
persons, but to secure and protect them, to be your shield and buckler, your
high tower and defense in the greatest extremities.

And now this being the design of Gods gracious call to Israel, one would be
apt to think that such endearing methods of kindness should have met with some
suitable returns of duty, that such cords of love should have drawn the Jews to
a compliance with Gods desires, and such Philtrum's of mercy charmed them into
good nature, and a complaisant obedience; nay, one would believe it almost
impossible for intelligent beings, who had but any spark left of the sensitive
part of humanity, not to be armed against future danger upon such fair
premonitions, and be persuaded from thence to provide for their own safety, and
consult their own security, much less to be guilty of such oscitancy and
supineness, such obduracy and perverseness, as neither to be won by love nor
awed by fear, but to set up themselves in opposition to God, their own ways in
contradistinction to his, and resolve, that because God will have one thing,
they will be sure to act clear contrary to the Divine Pleasure: and yet this
was the case of the Jews in the Text, which brings me to the second observable.

II. To consider their horrible Ingratitude toward God, who as it were, in
defiance to his Almighty hand, called to joy and gladness, when God thought it
most necessary to call to weeping and mourning; to slaying sheep, and killing
oxen, when God thought fasting and abstinence to be most proper for them; nay,
to eating and drinking, even downright luxury and profaneness, when God
expected, by a mortified body and a penitent soul, to have received the earnest
from them of a thorough Reformation.

From which unworthy procedure of this people toward God, there will three
things again fall under consideration.

1. The base Nature and disingenuous Temper of the Jews, thus boldly to thwart
God in all his gracious designs toward them.

2. Their carnal Security which made them deaf to the loudest Calls, and
regardless of all such things which were of the greatest moment and concernment
to them.

3. Their prodigious Luxury and Voluptuousness, which laid their consciences
asleep, and made them incredulous, hard-hearted and remorseless, unfit to
relent at any thing, which was threatened against them, or to receive any Divine
favor or kindness that was offered them.

1. I shall consider the disingenuous Temper, and base Nature of the Jews, thus
to thwart God Almighty in the most gracious designs, and purposes concerning
them. It Is the opinion of some Divines, that one reason why God was pleased to
make choice of the Jews, as a peculiar people, and select them from all the
rest of the world beside, was indeed out of mere pity and compassion toward
them, because he knew they were a sort of men of the most obstinate, refractory
and unmanageable temper beyond all other Nations throughout the Universe, and
therefore stood most in need of it: and indeed had they not been of so
untractable a disposition, and of a mold quite differing from all the race of
mankind beside, it is hardly supposeable, that under such happy circumstances,
as God was pleased to place them, they could ever have miscarried, and become
at last the offscouring and the contempt of the world, had not their own
unparalled ingratitude opened a way for their ruin, and their
incorrigibelness under all means exposed them to such misfortunes; and really,
though they appeared in the shapes of men, yet that they seemed to be divested
of the common sentiments and principles of humanity, will be too apparent to
any one, who considers, that the most signal marks of the Divine Care and
Providence left no more footsteps, nor made any more impressions upon their
minds and consciences, than if they had been nothing else but mere stocks and
stones, Statues of Brass, or Pillars of Marble. Who would not be persuaded,
that in the age of miracles, when God had delivered Israel out of the hand of
the Egyptians by a mighty hand, and an outstretched arm, by causing the Red
Sea to be a Fortress to them, and a Grave to their enemies; this being an
everlasting monument of Gods peculiar respect and regard to them, would not be
likewise as lasting a memento of duty and obedience to them and their Posterity
to all succeeding Generations? And yet no sooner is the Song of praise for that
deliverance out of their mouths, but they fall a murmuring and repining at the
Author of it, as if he who had divided the Sea for their sakes, could not as
well open the treasuries of Heaven, or soften the iron ribs of rocks to supply
their exigencies; and when this was done too by miracle, and God had smote the
rocks, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed, When he
commanded the clouds from above, Psalm. lxxv.^^. 23, 24, 25.
and opened the door of Heaven, and had rained down manna upon them to eat, and
had given them of the corn of Heaven; yet for all this they sinned still, and
the next news we hear of them, is, Psalm. cvi. 19.
that they chose to worship a molten Calf before this God who had done so great
things for them; by this means involving themselves in the grievous guilt of
idolatry, and provoking God to anger by such extravagant inventions: I might
give other instances to make good the Psalmists character of them, Psalm.
lxxviii. 8.
that they were a stubborn and rebellious generation that set not their heart
aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God, but the Text does it so
fully, that I need not go further; for that when God appears in his bloody
robes of vengeance, and shakes the sword of Justice over them, they
nevertheless should take so little notice of it as not to abate one inch of
their jollity, but continue as merry and frolicksom, as if all was well, is an
argument of the most perverse incorrigible humor in the world.

And I wish we be not found guilty of as base and unworthy requitals: we are
all mightily surprised at the rumor and noise of a bloody Plot against us, and
this heightens our fears, and increases our jealousies: but is our deportment
suitable to such dreadful apprehensions, or do we behave our selves as men,
whose present fear of danger is the genuine issue of the heart, and not barely
of the tongue? does the dreadfulness of such a judgment cause any alterations
in our persons, becloud our countenances with sorrow, bedew our cheeks with
tears, or affect our hearts with such passionate regrets, as the ruin of our
State, the subversion of our Church, and the horror of death or slavery may
justly call for at all our hands?

Alas, is not a quite contrary behavior more discernible amongst us, and does
not our uninterrupted jollity, our unseasonable mirth, our excessive joy and
gladness under all these circumstances speak our fears to be but counterfeit,
or our jealousies superficial, and that whatever we may profess, we are not
really concerned for the good and interest of our Country? Is it an argument
of any real care or sincere affection in that Son, who when his Parents shall
lie sick, and are upon the very confines of Death and the Grave, shall follow
his sports, and indulge himself in pleasure, shall frolic and carouze it, and
be as brisk and bonny as if they were well and out of all fear of danger? And
when the King, who is Pater patriae, the Father of our Country, when the
Church, who is our Mother, when our Laws and Liberties seem all to lie at the
stake, and are in the most apparent and imminent danger imaginable, can it be
fitting or decorous for us to be guilty of such things? Believe it, that is one
way to force God to laugh and mock too, and then our laughter may chance to end
in the most dismal of all sorrows, even in weeping to all eternity, and in
wailing and in gnashing of teeth. Let us take heed then that this be not the
result of our mad-brain'd jollity, but let us endeavor to prevent it by
mourning both for our own and the sins of the Nation; if we cannot redress
them, yet let us heartily bewail the mischiefs which we fear, and if the Church
must perish, at least give her Funeral Rites, and if we cannot quench her
flames, bedew her ashes with our tears: thus we shall to good purposes invert
the Jewish preposterous method, for which they are justly stigmatized, who,
when God called to weeping and mourning, called aloud to joy and gladness,
which argued the Baseness and Perverseness of their nature: and that is the
first.

2. The second thing observable from hence, in the Jews, is their carnal
Security, who were utterly unconcerned at all Gods Calls, and regardless of all
such things as were of greatest consequence and importance, and thinking
themselves out of danger, when destruction was at the door, call to joy and
gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, etc. It has been a sad fate which
has attended many people, to be infatuated with the greatest hopes of safety,
and promise themselves the greatest measures of tranquillity, when destruction
has been coming upon them like an armed man: it seems the Jews had still so
great confidence in Gods favor, that they thought the most daring provocations
could not possibly intercept it, and therefore still cried Peace, Peace, when
the dangers were most apparent, and their ruin just at hand: but many Ages
before them the spirit of security had so seized the hearts of men, that
nothing could remove those Torpor's which had benumbed them, and notwithstanding
the fearful menaces, and thunderclaps that were sent to awaken their
lethargical consciences, yet they went on in their old habituated courses of
sin, being no more concerned at Gods voice, though it breathed out such severe
threatenings, than if it had approached them with all the calmness imaginable,
for they eat, Luke xvii. 27.
they drank, they married wives, and were given in marriage. Let Noah, the
Preacher of righteousness, say what he would to the contrary, until the very
day that Noah entered into the Ark, and the flood came and washed away all their
filthy pollutions: Verse. 28.
And so again in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they
sold, they planted, they built, and when righteous Lot went to some of his
friends to forewarn them of the evil which was coming upon them, Genesis xix. 14.
his words seemed unto them like some idle story or feigned Romance, and they
would give no credence to the message he delivered, till they felt the flames
about their ears, and themselves perishing in the ruins of their City.

And should we calculate the number of such like persons amongst us, I am
afraid we should find so large a roll of them, as might justly induce us to
believe that their great Security is too fatal a Prognostic of our approaching
Destruction: for some there are, who, unless they saw with their eyes the Popes
Standard set up in England, and the Jesuits washing their hands in the reaking
blood of those who are its Natives, will not believe that those Religious
Persons by any means can be such sanguinary and cruel Butchers, notwithstanding
the killing of Heretics (and we know whom they are pleased to asperse with
that title) is a Doctrine taught in their Schools, justified by their
practices, and maintained in their writings, as might be made appear from
Ribadeneira, Becanus, Windeck, Stapleton, and the rest of that lawless herd of
Ignatian Casuists: nay, is a Doctrine whose bloodiness they can neither be able
to conceal, nor wash off from their Church, whilst the Triumphant Oration of
Pope Sixtus the fifth continues extant in the world, which he made to his
Cardinals in the Consistory at Rome, upon the barbarous Assassination of Henry
the third of France, after he was stabbed to death by Clement the Dominican
Friar.

But others there are, who though they are persuaded, that if indeed the power
of the Jesuits was as extensive as their malice, and their interest as strong
as they could wish it were in England, both King and People might then suffer
indeed, as the Protestants in France and in Ireland have done before them; but
it being next to an impossibility for them ever to effect what we imagine they
design, their caballs being now so narrowly watched, their secrecies disclosed,
their interests weakened, and their own parties many times countermining their
projects, besides the grand and most certain opposition they would be apt to
meet withal from the greatest part of this Nation, who it is to be hoped will
never more be reconciled to their monstrous Doctrines and Tenants. These things
being considered, and they upon these grounds having such unlikely hopes of
success, why men should afflict themselves with the terror of them, or dread
their power, or be uneasy, and concerned at their wild and extravagant
attempts, argues too great levity and imprudence in them that do it, and
therefore they resolve, as for their own parts, let the Pope do his worst, to
consult still their own ease, and gratify their own humors, and follow their
own ways, Judge. xviii. 7.
and like the men of Laish live careless, and remiss under all the revolutions,
that may happen in the Kingdom. To such men I answer, that such Security is the
readiest inlet to the mystery of Jesuitism, for supposing that every body was
as supine and careless as they, who would be left to search into the intrigues,
to obviate the designs, or to countermine the plots of these politic
adversaries? And then indeed would they triumph over our carelessness and
security, and we should as easily fall into their hands as they could desire,
and nothing could prevent this, but omnipotency it self; but why God should
take care of them, who are so unwilling to take care of themselves, why God
should not suffer them to make use of such advantages as we afford them, but
interpose his providence betwixt our Security and Ruin, is no way to be
answered, unless we will admit God to be the Patron of the slothful, or a
Protector of those who yet by their supinity fling themselves out of the covert
of his most sacred Wings: so that if upon such terms as these are men will
promise themselves safety, they are farther from it than they suppose or
imagine; for if a man will still compose himself to sleep, when the floods are
rushing in upon him, he must needs perish by his foolish security, and if, when
dangers are impendent, men will feed themselves with hopes of escaping, and
avoiding them, and yet use no means in order to prevent them, and though God
calls to them, will not step one inch out of the way, not part with one sin,
not relinquish one lust, not abandon the least pleasure, though they are sure
to gain thereby Gods favor and protection, no wonder he at last suffers them
to fall by their folly, and to perish in those calamities of which they thought
themselves most secure; this was the Jewish crime, for which God did justly
upbraid, and punish them, and is a second aggravation of their Ingratitude
toward him.

3. The third thing to be taken notice of, was the insufferable height of
Voluptuousness and Luxury to which they were arrived: the most powerful calls,
the most amazing judgments, the most awakening menaces could not reclaim them
from such abominations, but being resolved to take their fill of pleasure
before God cut them off, in defiance of him they give their wills the full
swing, indulge themselves in all manner of sensuality, crying out in the
Epicurean dialect, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die.

But he that considers how far the doctrine of Epicurus has prevailed in this
Age, how Gods Judgments, which have been very dreadful and astonishing amongst
us, have wrought clear contrary effects, to what they were designed, and having
wasted the Seeds of natural Piety in us, have erected Academies of downright
Atheism, and Voluptuousness in the room, may justly conclude, that as we have
out-vyed all the Jewish race of sinners, so ought we likewise at last to
transcend them in our punishments. Look we but upon the practices and manners
of this Nation, and we shall find this truth too sadly exemplified, that the
generality of men look upon themselves, no otherwise than as creatures sent
into the world, as the Leviathan into the deep, to take his full career of
pastime and pleasure in it; that they make it their business first to excite
and cloy the flesh, to spur it on to riots even beyond its own propensions, by
which means the year becomes but one mad Carnival, and all the Elements are
mustered up, and yet (nec Aer, nec Aqua, nec Terra sufficit) all are not enough
to caress and satisfy their craving appetites: Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris
and carcere dignum,
Si vis esse aliquid --


To be aggrandized for wickedness was not only the great ambition of many
Romans in Juvenal's days, but is the desire and chief aim of too many amongst
us, and he is reputed a man of excellent parts, a person of a very refined and
delectable conversation, who dares venture to pull down the pale, or lay open
the enclosures of Religion by the hellish art of scoffing, or profane jesting
at it: nay are there not some who are so bold as to ungod the world, and
out-hector the devil, and reduce both to nothing, but imaginary phantasms? Who
endeavor to make Hell no more than some painted fire, and a future state pass
for an imposture of the Priest, and level all discourses concerning it with the
poetical description of the Fairy-Land! And in these circumstances no wonder,
that the evil communications of such men corrupt all good manners, no wonder
that the empire of debauchery is so large, and that iniquity goes down with so
great satisfaction and delight, no wonder, that when men are willing to imbibe
such principles, their hearts and foreheads grow as hard as brass, Jerem. vi.
15.
blush not, nor are ashamed of the most filthy abominations, but publish their
sin like Sodom, and glory in such things as have the greatest turpitude and
deformity: but if this desperate condition was the most certain Symptom of the
Jewish desolation: if the poor Britains of this Nation were then invaded by the
Saxons, when they were grown to such a height of luxury and profaneness, that
as Gildas says, they were not only strangers to Religion themselves, but hated
those very persons who had any sense of it amongst them; then may we justly
dread the same fate will attend us, that our Atheism and Licentiousness, our
Pride and Voluptuousness, will open a door, either for the Papists, or some
other executioners of Gods vengeance to come in upon us, and destroy us.

And this we may be convinced of to our eternal sorrow and confusion, if we
consider Gods manner of proceeding against all obstinate and incorrigible
sinners, which brings me to the third Observable.

III. The astonishing Resolution of God toward the Jews upon their not
hearkening to, nor observing his gracious Call, namely, to devote them to the
most bitter Plague of Death it self: And it was revealed in mine ears by the
Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die,
says the Lord God of Hosts.

By which we may learn that the mercies of God, when once they are abused, are
always converted into the most direful plagues and punishments: God is said in
Scripture to have two rods, a rod of men, and a rod of iron, if the one cannot
work upon our stony hearts, he will break them with the other; if men will not
be bettered with the bread of affliction, he will feed them with wormwood:
though, Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7.
it is true, God has proclaimed himself merciful and long-suffering, yet he
adds too, that he will by no means clear the guilty; though he be (...), a
compassionate lover of all mankind, and endeavors to draw them to him with the
cords of love, yet if this will not do, he will chastise them with Scorpions:
he punishes first gently, to try if that will work a reformation amongst
sinners, but if such mild punishments avail nothing, he then pours down upon
them the utmost dregs of his fury: when they once come to such a pitch of
insolency, as even with the Gigantick race of Rebels of old, (...), to fight
against Gods Sacred Majesty, he then makes their arrows recoil back upon their
own heads: It Is observable, Genesis xiv. 10.
that before the fatal judgment fell upon Sodom and Gomorrah, God sent some
smaller punishments by the Invasion of the Eastern Kings, who came against
them, and discomfited them; and thus he dealt with the Jews before their final
Captivity, he afforded them smaller instances of his displeasure, to tell us,
that if little notices prove insignificant amongst us, greater marks of his
fury shall leave deeper impressions on us; hence God is said to have treasuries
of judgments, that will never be exhausted whilst men prove so expensive in
their sins.

Now that this way of proceeding is very just and equitable toward all
incorrigible sinners will appear very evident upon these accounts.

First, Because there is no other way to deal with such men but to make them
the most formidable examples of his Justice; when men arrive at so great a
degeneracy, they are past all sense, and there is no hopes of recovery, they
are altogether dead in trespasses and sins, and their consciences are so
obdurate; so frozen and so benumbed that there is nothing can awaken, soften or
mollify them, no other means left to satisfy the offended justice of God but
utter excision and desolation: nay, there is no other way to deter others from
such habituated courses of sinning, as will in time induce such fearful
Lethargies upon the soul, than by inflicting the most heavy hand, and the
severest rod upon the back of such offenders, nothing will sooner bring men to
a sense of their follies, and the practice of true Religion and substantial
godliness, than such terrible marks of the Divine vengeance, for when Gods
judgments are so visible in the earth the inhabitants thereof will learn
righteousness. Isaiah xxvi. 9.


Secondly, there is no other way to give any tolerable satisfaction to the
abused mercy of God, but by such severe proceedings: the greater the mercy, the
greater is Gods resentment of it, when abused, and consequently the greater
must be the punishment, and the more smart the retribution for the abuse of it:
if God do multiply his blessings upon men, and they debauch them to the worst
ends, what compensation can he receive for the violation of such kindness, but
by making them the utmost objects of his fury, who spurned at all the bowels
and the tenders of mercy? If a City should fall into open rebellion against its
King, and after all the gracious overtures of Peace and Reconciliation, still
hold out against him, and deny him admission till his Sword forced the way
through; would not this so far incense his abused patience and goodness, and
make him to resolve upon its utter desolation? And when we still continue our
provocations against God, notwithstanding all the gracious terms and conditions
he has proposed to us, will not his loving kindness, which is tired out,
convert it self into the hottest flames of indignation to revenge the injury?
Remember again the Parable of the Vineyard when God saw that after all his
care, and his providence over it, it was not bettered by his pruning, and
brought forth nothing but wild Grapes, behold what severe things he threatens
against it; Isaiah v. 5, 6.
I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down
the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; and I will lay it waste, it
shall not be pruned, nor dug, but there shall come up Briars and Thorns: I
will also command the clouds, that they rain no rain upon it. Believe it, there
is no sury so extreme, as that which is bottomed upon repelled and irritated
love; and God is then always moved to the highest wrath, when men take courage
to sin, because grace does abound.

3. But lastly, such wilful wickedness always enhanseth the guilt, and
hasteneth the punishment. Thus when the Jews had beyond measure incensed God
Almighty by continual provocations, the judgments which fell upon them were
proportionate to their offenses, and it would make ones heart ache to read the
History of their Times, when in the space of less than seven years there
perished of the Jews, at home and abroad, both in their Civil and Foreign Wars
(as Lipsius has computed the number) no less than duodecies centena and
quadraginta millia, twelve hundred and forty thousand men, De Constantia lib.
2. cap. 21.
to fulfill the tenor of those threatenings which had so frequently been issued
out by their Prophets against that Nation.

And now since the mercies have been as great which God has vouchsafed to us,
and our incorrigibleness as remarkable under the greatest of them, what remains
for us, but a fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation to devour
all Gods adversaries? What can we say for our selves, that God should not
suffer us to fall into their hands whom we most fear; since we have trampled
upon his goodness, whom we have most reason to love? It is but just with God to
punish one sin by another, and so fit us for destruction by the permission of
it, to change our indifferency in Religion into a blind Zeal, and superstitious
practice of it; our open Profaneness into professed Idolatry; our contempt of
Order and Discipline into rigorous Censures and a bloody Inquisition; our
despising of Dominion and speaking evil of Dignities, into a Yoke of Tyranny
and Romish Usurpations. And I know not what can any way avert the one, but our
hearty and sincere resolutions to retract and utterly forsake the other, and
with prostrate bodies and contrite souls unanimously to implore the divine
mercy in that excellent Form of Prayer which our Church affords us for this
occasion.

GLORIOUS and gracious God, whose judgments against obstinate offenders are
most severe and terrible, but thy mercies insinite to all, that with hearty
repentance and true faith turn unto thee: We sinful people of this Land do
acknowledge before thee, to thy glory, and our own shame, that never any Nation
had more experience of thy goodness, nor yet did ever any more unthankfully
abuse it: when thou gave us great and long prosperity, we fed our selves to
the full, waxed fat, and kicked against thee: when thou threwest us into horrid
confusions, from which we saw then little hopes of arising, even in the time of
that distress did we trespass yet more against thee: when by miracles of mercy
thou had turned our captivities, we soon returned to folly, to our vomit, and
to our wallowing in our former, or greater filthiness. Even while thou have of
late appeared for us, by discovering the Plots and Contrivances of our
implacable enemies of the Romish Faction, we have been in the mean time by our
sins sighting against Heaven, and against thee. And now we are no more worthy
to be called either thy sons or thy servants, whom neither thy fear has
driven, nor thy goodness led to repentance. In mercy awaken our drowsy
consciences, and subdue our hard hearts into deep contrition. Pardon the many
great offenses of us thy servants, and the crying sins of the whole Nation.
Remove the evils we now lie under. Avert the judgments which we justly fear,
because we most justly deserve. Discover more and more the snares of death. and
Popish treachery, and let us never fall into the hands of those men, whose
mercies are cruel. Unite all our hearts in the profession of the true Religion,
which thine own right hand has planted amongst us, and in a holy conversation
answerable therete. Pour out thine abundant blessings upon our gracious King,
and his great Council the present Parliament, Keep him as the apple of thine
eye, hide him under the shadow of thy wings. Inform his Princes after thy will,
and teach his Senators wisdom: And grant that all their counsels, resolutions
and endeavors may tend to, and end in the glory of thy great Name, the
preservation of the Church and true Religion amongst us, and the security,
peace, and prosperity of these Kingdoms. All which we humbly beg in the Name,
and through the Mediation of Jesus Christ thy Son, our Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

