A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT Hampton Court, MAY the 12th.
1689. By ROBERT BROGRAVE, M. A. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.
Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIX.

Mr. BROGRAVE's SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN AT HAMPTON-COVRT.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen At Hampton Court.
MATTHEW. V. xvi. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good
Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.


THESE words are part of our Savior's Sermon upon the Mount, and if you please
to cast your Eye from the 13th. Verse to the 16th. which I have here chose, you
may observe they make up one Section of that Sermon, and carry an entire sense
within themselves.

It Is at the 13th. Verse, Ye are the Salt of the Earth, (i. e.) the Christian
ought to have those useful and beneficial qualities of Salt, as it seasoneth
and gives a grateful relish, and preserves those things it is mixed with; so the
Christian, by the virtues of a good Life, must be a means of preserving those
about him, to keep them from Corruption and perishing by Sin.

At the 14th. Verse, it is, Ye are the light of the World: A City that is set on
an Hill, cannot be hid. Signifying that height and eminency of the Christian's
Virtue, which as the Sun that enlightens dark places, must guide such as are in
Ignorance; both their Knowledge and good Lives must be instrumental to bring
Men to the Gospel, and to recover them from that Darkness that over-spreads the
Minds of Men.

At the 15th. he is compared to A Candle set on a Candlestick, and it gives
light to all that are in the House: He is not to be a private and solitary
Professor, but the Advantages of his Gifts and Graces must extend to others,
and be imparted for the benefit of all about him; then follows it in the 16th.
Verse, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

You now see from this part of our Savior's Sermon, is intimated to us a Duty
of so Public a Nature, as seems not confined to those Private ends of a Man's
own Happiness, but which is interessed in the Common Salvation of those about
him. We are to be Virtuous, not for our selves only, but that others may see
our good works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Just as one, by
whose Light the Seafaring Man is directed through a straight and dangerous
Passage: Or like the appearance of a Star to the Weather-beaten Mariner; or as
the presence of a sure Guide to the bewildered Traveller; or like that
Miraculous Pillar of Fire, which safely conducted the Israelites through the
unknown and unfrequented Passages of a Wild Desert; all this is the Christian
before us, by whose Example Men become acquainted with the way of Virtue, and
are able to walk in it, without being misled into the bypath of Sin and
Folly; an Example which becomes of universal Benefit.

Happy is the Man, who by thus being careful over his own Life, shall give
Encouragement and Direction to others to be like him, whilst his good Example
shall be attended with this Blessing, That by doing thus, he shall save both
himself and others.

But alas! I am sensible of the disadvantage I lie under, whilst I am exhorting
you to a Duty, which I am fearful not only exceeds the Practice of the most
part of Christians, but even their Belief that it is absolutely necessary; for
if there be few upon whom the Promises of the Gospel shall be able to prevail,
but few who for their own sakes will endeavor to be saved; what shall the
number of those be, who act that public and generous part of Religion, who
live well for their Neighbors sake, as well as their own.

So great indeed is the Duty, so Divine and Heavenly the Motive, that this
passage seems only suited to the perfect and accomplished Christian; and has
been thought by some to belong only to the Apostles, and such who succeeded
them in the Offices of Teaching and Instructing Men: Indeed our Savior in this
place spoke to all the Disciples in common, and the same whom he taught in the
verses before, to be meek, ver. 5, 7, 8, 9.
to be merciful, to be pure in heart, to be Peacemakers; the same are here
taught to be of exemplary Lives to those about them, and not only the Apostles;
for as yet the Apostleship, or Solemn Mission, and instating that Authority on
his Disciples, was not begun at the time of Christ's Preaching this Sermon, nor
till after his Resurrection, or rather his Ascension; but 'twas to all the
Disciples, to all Christians who undertake to follow Christ.

Though thus much must be allowed, that all such who according to the excellence
of their Dignity, and their stations in the World: All such who have the many
Advantages that attend the greatness of Fortune and Power, all such whose
Actions are of great influence upon those beneath them; who do, as 'twere, give
Authority to Virtue, by living up to it themselves; all such are in far greater
measure concerned in this Argument, and I must be pardoned, if in this place I
purpose chiefly to treat of the Subject with respect to them, and beg the
freedom of offering my thoughts to you, who are so eminently concerned in all
the respects abovementioned, promising my self withal to be thus far useful
to those below you, as to become your Remembrancer, that not only by your good
Government they may live peaceable Lives, but by your Virtues they may be
taught to live in all Godliness and Honesty. Whilst your Light shall so shine
before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which
is in Heaven.

The words are an Exhortation to show forth an Exemplary Virtue, and I will
endeavor to enforce it from the four following Arguments.

I. From the Excellency of a good Example.

II. The Obligation that lies upon all Christians to show it forth in their
Lives.

III. From that Force and Power which by their good Examples they will have
upon Men to make them Virtuous, and to be ashamed of Sin.

IV. And lastly, From the mischief of evil Examples, both with relation to Men's
selves and others.

These Particulars will lead me to encourage a good Example in all such whose
influences are powerful upon those about them, to set it before you with its
true Advantages, and to show you how far the Blessing becomes Public and
Universal. It Is not to flatter any ones Person, but to invite you to it, and to
persuade others to an imitation wherever they behold it.

They lead me further to discountenance Sin and Error, especially where it
becomes open and Notorious, the Scandal it gives the World, the Reproach to
Christian Religion, the many occasions it affords to others to go on in the
same evil course, but (I can sincerely speak) without censuring any Man's
Person; God knows it is for no other design, but to remove that stumbling block
out of our Brother's way, which is so great an Offense, and a Temptation to
Sin; and I hope we live not in an Age so degenerate, or so jealous of
themselves, that we dare not discredit Vice, without being thought to Wound
some body; let it rather be the Glory of great Men, that we may openly make War
against Vice, as against an Enemy, and not of our own Party.

1. The first Argument whereby I am to persuade you to this Duty, is from the
Excellency of a good Example, and this is in some measure seen if we look upon
the many Allusions in this Parable, as it is compared to Light, or to the Sun,
what these have extraordinary in them, with respect to things Natural, and the
common Benefit of Mankind, the same is a good Example in things Moral and
Religious: Hence the Hebrews used to say, That Wise and Good Men were as the
Lights of Heaven, meaning such who were so by their Instructions and good
Examples. So Dan. 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the stars for ever and
ever. But I will not insist upon these Allusions, to represent it to you, but
will rather choose to show its Excellency from these two Observations,

From the Usefulness of good Examples to those about them,

And from the Reputation they have in the World, even among those who are
Enemies to Virtue.

First then, Its Excellency appears from the Usefulness of good Examples to
those about them, and the manifold good Effects they have among Men. For when
Men become Exemplary in a course of Virtue, they prove the most effectual means
to direct those that are about them, and that go astray. They are as Public
Blessings to Instruct the World in that way they must choose, in those Virtues
they must prctice, in that Religion they must adhere to. We may have many
Ignorant among us, here will they see the Paths of Righteousness. We may have
many weak and wavering among us, by such Examples will they be confirmed and
settled; we may have many Enemies of our Church, they will see the Excellency of
our Faith, by the Exemplary and Holy Lives of those who profess it; these are
the Fruits that the World will reap, when a visible and exemplary Piety dwells
in it; when every Man shall have within his view such who are worthy to be
followed, and shall be animated to a Constancy and Peseverance in the Duties of
Religion, when he shall have before him such, whom, should Religion quit the
whole World, would yet preserve it in their own Breasts.

What a Generous design then would this be in the Christian, to live well for
his Neighbors sake as well as his own, to be firm to the Truth, that he may be
secure from Error, to be constant and persevering, that he may become the
Preservative against his falling off: This is the Noblest sort of Friendship,
the greatest Charity; a Charity to the Souls of Men, in preventing them from
falling upon Rocks; whilst Men by their Public Virtues, resemble those
Watch-Towers, which guide Men to safe Harbor, but it is sin when it is become
open and public, that like a Rock dashes them in pieces.

A Second Observation that will show us the Excellency of a good Example, is
from the Reputation it has among Men, even among those who are Enemies to
Virtue. There are hardly any Men but are so just to Virtue, that how great
Strangers soever they are to it themselves, yet they have great Veneration for
it in a good Example; so that 'twas an ill Character in the last degree which
the Historian gives of the Grecian Court, which scoffed at the good Patriarch
Theodorus, for using Goodness, when 'twas out of Fashion, and for being
virtuous by himself. Such an Example would have struck the Heathen World with
delight and admiration, who, though they cannot be supposed to have been the
greatest Friends to Virtue, yet they constantly employed their Panegyricks upon
such who excelled in Goodness.

Thus thought their Philosophers who had so great an Opinion of Virtue, that
they imagined, if it could have been visibly represented to the Eyes of Men,
and painted out in its true Colors, and to the Life, 'twould draw all Mankind
in admiration after it: That doubtless which they understood by the visible
representation of Virtue, was a completely virtuous Example, one that was
accomplished in Goodness, and void of all mixture of Sin and Evil.

'Twas from the Reputation that such Examples have in the World, that put the
Historian upon the Character of Marcus Cato, so as to represent him a fit
Object for the love and delight of Mankind. Velleius Patere.
Cato (says he) was Virtue drawn to the Life, and so exact was the resemblance,
that 'twas hard to say, whether Virtue animated Cato, or Cato gave life and
subsistence to Virtue; nay, such was the unshaken greatness of his Mind, and
the Purity of his Life, that he seemed more to partake of Divine Perfections
than of Humane Frailty, for he was so far above all Temptations of doing Evil,
and also free from the Allay of mean ends and designs of doing Good, that it
seemed a kind of Necessity of Nature in him to do well. This was such an Idea
of a great Virtue, that however 'twas the Creature only of a warm Fancy and
Imagination, and not really visible in the Person, yet it serves to show what I
have hitherto urged (viz.) the Reputation that Virtuous Examples have among
Men, when they think it the best way of recommending a Man's Memory to
Posterity, by setting him off with the Character of an Illustrious Example.

I will not say more to show you the Excellency of a good Example, possibly you
may already be so far persuaded of it, that it may prove some Advantage to that
which I am goto speak upon the

Second Particular,

And the force of this Obligation appears from one of the main ends of the
Gospel, which is to raise Men to a perfection of Life, as far above the rest of
Mankind, as it exceeds all other Religions of the World in the innocence and
purity of its Doctrine, that so they may dispose others to think well of that
Faith, and be ready to give up their lives to it, and to be guided and
influenced by it.

'Twas for this reason St. Peter exhorted his followers to be exemplary, that
they might gain such who had lived contrary to the Gospel, Having your
Conversation honest, 2. Pet. 2.12.
(says he) that they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify
God in the day of visitation, (i. e.) that they may give God the praise for
such good Examples, whereby they have been converted unto him.

For 'twill be natural in Men who are enemies or strangers to the Gospel, very
strictly to observe what those Men are who pretend to such an elevated Doctrine
beyond other Men, to see whether their Lives are raised to a height that bears
proportion with their Pretenses to Religion, and to judge of it by the Fruits
it produces. And therefore 'twas very observable in that Soldier under
Constantine, who when he was marching with the Army through a City, that had
heard they were almost starved, for want of necessary Provisions, of their own
charity they relieved them speedily and freely; the Soldier was surpised at
so unaskt for a bounty, and enquired what kind of People those were who were so
extremely good and charitable, he was told they were Christians, whose
profession was to hurt no man, and to do good to every man, the Soldier was
convinced of the excellency of that Religion which produced such good and pious
People, he presently became Christian at so sensible a demonstration, being
from hence persuaded of the Purity of its Doctrine.

What but this gave such success to St. John the Baptist's Mission, when he
came preaching a Doctrine the World had not before heard of, they presently had
recourse to his Life, found him to be a Man of a severe Virtue, of strict
Piety, a Pattern of Sanctity and Holiness, 'twas then they had an opinion of
what he taught, and cried out he was a Prophet.

You therefore, O my Brethren, with much ease will our Doctrine become
fruitful, when the World shall have reason to approve our Lives; the good
Example of the Preacher, is the most prevailing Homily, his Life, is his best
Sermon; for is it to be imagined that his Discourse should work more upon
another, than himself? How specious therefore soever may be our Arguments, yet
they will appear Fallacies if they have no Faith with us, nor can we ever persuade
men of the Necessity of Temperance, Chastity, and the like Christian Virtues,
when we who tell men so, see no need of them our selves, but hope to go to
Heaven without them; just so have we seen Statues in doubtful and uncertain
Roads which point out the way to others, without moving themselves; only let us
live up to our Doctrines, and our good Works will convince and persuade men
more then Miracles.

But the Argument I have hitherto insisted upon, lays before you an obligation
to become exemplary, which is equally pressing upon every Christian, but there
is a Consideration or two which I must take the freedom to speak of in this
place, and which I find my self more concerned to offer, inasmuch as you are
more especially engaged to show forth an excellent Example,

Both from the Advantages of Fortune, of Power, and Authority.

As also from the Many powerful Influences you have upon those below you. The

First Engagement to it, is from the Advantages of Fortune, of Power, and
Authority, all which will afford the greater opportunities of showing a more
excellent Piety, than that of private persons, such a Piety which seems not
confined to the endeavors of making your selves happy, which is the utmost
that private persons can attain to, but which gives security for the common
happiness of those about you, a Piety great to the proportion of your Talents,
for unto whomsoever much is given, Luke 12.48.
of him shall be much required, and to whom men have committed much, of him
they will ask the more; Private Men can only grieve and lament at the Vices of
the Age, You may utterly discountenance them, may make Virtue graceful, and put
Vice into neglect; for Vice has no force or vigor of it self at all, all its
strength is from great Examples, who as 'twere put Arms and Weapons into its
hands, whereby it conquers and subdues the World.

Private Men may rejoice and delight to see Virtue flourish in our Land, and
the utmost they can do, is to add one to the number of good Men; You by a Zeal
proportioned to your opportunities may encourage and support it, and by being
Examples your selves, you will have Multitudes follow after.

You are therefore to consider, that the temporal advantages of life, are not
always to be esteemed blessings, when they are misused they serve only to
heighten and increase that Account which we must all give to God; but would you
know when it is they descend from above, when it is that they are truly the gifts
of God, and bestowed in kindness in love and favor, it is when they are
employed to God's service. It remains therefore that you promote Holiness in
the Court and in our Land; you may so far contribute toward it, that when you
shall advance the Standard of Piety, a numerous train will come in.

And that the more from the

Second Engagement, to be Exemplary: from those powerful Influences you have
upon those about you. The Historian, Vell. Patere.
speaking of the Power of Princes, places it chiefly in their Example, rather
than in an absolute Command, or in the power of the Sword. A good Prince, says
he, shows the way of doing well unto his Subjects by well-doing himself, and
tho he be great in the title of Power, yet he is greater and more potent by the
force of Example. Consonant to which was Plutarchs observation concerning the
influence Caesar had upon his Soldiers, that the very same Men who when they
were in service under other Commanders did not exceed the ordinary rate of
Courage, did yet when he led them become irresistably valiant, being animated
and inspired by the Courage and Conduct of that great Man.

It Is the very same in Religion; the Actions of private Men are seldom known,
or but to very few, and when they are, they bear no stamp of Authority, and
have little impression upon those who regard them; but the good or evil Actions
of great Men determine a Nation and People. Thus Israel fluctuated betwixt
Obedience and Idolatry, according to the succession of its Princes, and when
Jereboam the King sinned, he then by his influence and example as well as his
command made Israel to sin too; and were we to look into the Courts and
Kingdoms, that have been established in Righteousness, we need only review the
Chronicle of Pious Princes.

Complain not then if you create nor a New World, where Righteousness and Truth
shall inhabit, if Vice be not banished from the Earth, and Virtue made again to
return among Men; upon your influences will depend much of the course of this
inferior World; if they be good, they will bring Life, and Solace, and Health
unto the People. The Church therefore extends her hands out to you, and
imploreth the aid of your Authority and good Examples: You are among Men as
Mountains over Valleys, be like those Mountains Solomon speaks of, Mountains of
Myrrh, and of Perfume to the Neighboring Borders. You are elevated in the
World, be as Lights and Watch-Towers, to give Comfort and Direction to the
doubtful and unwary Traveller: The People are as the Sea, you the Winds that
raise or depress them as you please; the People have Hearts of Wax or Clay, you
under God the Workmen that give them their Figure and Proportion; and they are
in some measure made Vessels to honor or dishonor, according to the
Influences and Impressions they receive from you.

Hence Seneca truly said, That no Man erreth or is virtuous to himself, either
of which ways he takes, he carries many with him.

It remains therefore that you be Holy, not to your selves only, but to the
degrees of an Excellent Example.

A Third Argument to persuade you to a Good Example, Life and Conversation of
good Men, which insinuate gently, and insensibly brings them on Virtue's side
before they are aware, which provokes an Emulation in Men, and shames their
sloth; which relieves men's Modesty, and presses upon Ingenuity; in a word, it
recommends the Excellency, and demonstrates the Necessity and Possibility of
Virtue; here lies the strength and power of a Good Example: Out of these will I
choose an Instance or two to represent it to you.

First, The force and power of Example lies much in this, that it relieves men's
Modesty, and gives them confidence to do that in Company, which otherwise they
would have declined, for fear of being Singular: Virtue it self when it becomes
singular, meets with few who have courage enough to live up to it; Men do, as
'twere, take Sanctuary in Vice, when it once appears to have all of its side.

St. Confess. 2. c. 3.
Austin was extremely troubled at this in himself, and 'twas one of the Evils
he bewailed in his Book of Confessions: He there tells us, that he did evil as
others, not so much from an Appetite and Inclination to it, as not to be
Singular; nay, it often happened, that he counterfeited the Evil he did not,
doubting lest by being innocent, he should be accounted a Man of no worth; and
fearful of being esteemed Chaste, lest Chastity should make him contemned in
the World.

The truth is, Virtue loves not in young beginners to stand by it self, it is
those only who have been long and well accustomed to it, that dare be Virtuous
by themselves, it must become fashionable before 'twill be universally
followed; raise it up but a few Examples to give it countenance, and the Age
will presently be Reformed.

Secondly, The force of Example is seen by that Zeal and Emulation it enkindles
in Men, and gives secret reproaches of sloth to our Hearts, such which provokes
us to an Imitation of the best and greatest Examples; it is an Emulation which
makes us uneasy to stay behind; whatever good we observe in any Man, we are
impatient till we have overtaken him: It Is to this the World is indebted for
all that Excellency of Spirit, that Improvement of Mind, which raises Men above
the Ordinary Rank; whatever things are Excellent, whatever is Praiseworthy,
it is this in great measure has produced it, this has finished it.

This is the Language of Emulation; Shall another of like Infirmities with my
self, be raised to an Illustrious Virtue, consecrated to Posterity by a lasting
Fame, and shall I continue an inglorious Life, plunged in Misery and Sin? Shall
a Joseph bravely resist and overcome, and shall I be bafled? Shall a Job be
stripped of all, and be content, and shall I be discomposed? Shall an Abraham, a
David, a St. Paul be Renowned to future Ages, and shall my Memory dye with me?
God has given me Capacity, and has not refrained from me the means of
pleasing him, I will therefore strive to become as good, as commendable, as
happy as any Man; this is the voice of Emulation, that mighty Passion.

'Twas therefore a very good Advice which Seneca has left to the World, Sense.
Epist. 11.
that every one should propose to himself the Example of some Wise and Virtuous
Person, such as Cato, Socrates, Plato, and the like, and imagine him to be
present as a Witness to his Actions, and the Rule to conduct his Life by; but
however excellent the Advice was, yet they had none to propose as Examples, but
who had great allays of Evil, and could be Exemplary but in very few things.
Senec. Ebrietas Catoni objecta est.
Cato was a Wise Man, but by Day only, at Night he was reported to drink too
freely; Plato was remarked for Incontinency: So that the Advice seems rather
reserved for a Christian People, among whom there cannot be supposed such a
degeneracy, but that we may be furnished with many Precedents, whose Virtues,
as St. Paul said of the Zeal and Charity of the Corinthians, may have provoked
very many. But especially while we have before us the Life and Example of our
Savior, in which that single Grace of Humility, in washing his Disciples Feet,
had so sensibly wrought upon the Spirit of one who was attentively considering
it, that he cried out, Thou have overcome, O Lord; thou have overcome the Pride
and Haughtiness of my Heart; I am conquered by this single act of thy
Self-denial, and yield up my self thy Servant and Disciple.

The Fourth and last Argument to persuade you to this Duty, Argument, and I
would willingly be persuaded, that what I have already said of its Excellency,
and its Obligation upon all Men to show it forth, will prevail with all
ingenuous Minds, rather than to work upon their fears, by showing the danger of
an ill Example; so that I promise my self that it is rather to perfect and
complete the Subject, than that I find it needful to press you with Arguments
of this kind.

Here then 'twould be easy to represent to you the many Evils of ill Examples;
Men that are Exemplary in Vice, they give sin some kind of Reputation, and do,
as much as in them lies, recommend it to others.

Again, they not only become mischievous to the present Age, but it extends it
self to Posterity, and the Malignity spreads it self to afterages.

From both which it is obvious to consider that Men are not hereby only
personally culpable, and to answer for themselves only, but such Men must
answer to God for the sins of those they live with, and of those that come
after them, which have been occasioned through their ill Examples.

The Jewish Law has in many places very excellently showed us the equity of
this dealing, Exodus 21.33, 34. If a Man shall open a Pit, or if a Man shall dig
a Pit, and not cover it, and an Ox or an Ass fall therein, the Owner of the Pit
shall make it good; and how much more is a Man concerned for his Brother, to
prevent his falling into Ruin? While by our sins that are open and public, we
lay open a Gulf of Scandal and Corruption, and if he falls into the Snare, we
must give an Account to God for that Soul which was Redeemed by the price of
his Blood.

Again, by the same Law of Equity in the 22 of Exodus, If a man has caused but
one small spark of fire to fly out, if it happen to burn the fruitful Fields,
and consume his Neighbors Corn, he is bound to make satisfaction; and how much
more shall the evil Actions of wicked Men, which enkindle a fire of Vice and
Calamity about their Neighbors, be imputed to them? And what Satisfaction can
be made for such a Damage?

So that Religion can never thrive in the World, till Men are convinced that
it is not the work of a few particular Men, but the Common concern of every one,
that there may be none to propagate and support an evil Action; if there be
never so few to countenance it, it quickly gathers strength, and fills the
place. It Is as Leaven, a little whereof leaventh the whole lump; and 'twas the
removing all sin from us, which was signified by that strict Command under the
Law, Exodus 12.15
of putting away the leaven out of their houses, and which St. Paul alludes to,
when he says, Purge out therefore the old leaven, 1 Cor. 3.7.
that ye may be a new lump; of the same Nature is sin. Or it is as a Contagion,
where one distempered Person is enough to infect a multitude of sound and
healthful Men; and it is the same Charity to Mankind, not to live viciously in
the Eyes of those about us, as it is not to carry an Infection into our
Neighbors Family. And I am sure that Men can never be secure of their Virtue,
while they converse in the World, nor can ever be out of danger of suffering
damage by the sins of others, till all Men shall think themselves obliged to
live virtuously in the Eyes of the World, and that, even from a Principle of
Charity to the Souls of Men; and till they shall profess the same care and
concern for each other, as every Man does for his Neighbors Beast, and be as
ready to preserve him from the Snares of Sin, as to deliver the other out of
the Pit.

I will not say more of the Evils and Mischief of a bad Example, but will
rather choose that what has hitherto been spoken in general upon this Subject,
may now in the Conclusion be rendered more useful, by showing you the particular
Virtues you must be Exemplary in.

It Is not all Virtues that are outwardly to be performed in the Eyes of the
World; some there are which have an additional value for their secrecy. Let a
Veil be drawn over our Virtues in our Retirements, and our Private Devotions
known only to God and our own Hearts; let not a Trumpet be blown when we
dispense our Charities, Matthew. 6.3.
nor let the left hand know what the other does. Nay, even those which we are
required to perform publicly, and to be exemplary in, let there in these be
nothing of Vanity and Ostentation; these are the Qualifications that must
attend our Virtues.

But how shall I be able to recount to you the Virtues themselves that we are
to be Exemplary in? Rather will I point out to you some of those Circumstances
and Conditions of Life, to which 'twill be easy for every Man's Observation to
reduce most of the Christian Virtues to. And they are these.

1. An Exemplary Virtue will be required in all our Conversation with each
other.

2. In living up to such Virtues that are opposed to the popular Vices of the
Age.

3. In such that concern our Public Devotions.

And from these three General Heads will I instance only in three Duties, which
we should cause to shine forth in an Exemplary Life.

First, Charity and Mutual Affection in our Conversation.

Secondly, Purity in our Actions, as they oppose the Vices of the Age.

Thirdly, And Unity in our Devotions.

And first of all of our Charity and Mutual Affection toward each other, and
this I think my self the rather obliged to speak to, inasmuch as there never
was a time when greater Blessings might be hoped for from it; what lasting
Foundations of Peace, and continued Prosperities would it promise us, could we
but nourish up this Grace to its perfect growth?

But alas! if we fall again into Parties and Divisions, we deliver up our
strength, nor can any success attend our Endeavors; it is this therefore which
our Enemies promote and hope for, and promise themselves more by our Divisions,
than their Armies; it is this they labor at even at this time, endeavoring to
dis-unite us, by stirring up a false and mischievous Zeal, as may keep up those
differences which have hitherto so lamentably divided us, and by suggesting
Prejudices and Animosities betwixt us. And so far have they prevailed upon the
weakness and ill Tempers of many, that it is a truth which I cannot without
trouble relate to you, and which in the few years and changes I have seen,
seems now to have past into the Character of our People, that nothing but great
Fears and common Calamities can make us Friends: When we are at ease, we seem
then to have only leisure to show Unkindnesses and Revenges upon each other,
the memory of Injuries returns with the power of requiting them, and when God
ceases to afflict us, we create Quarrels and Trouble to each other.

Whereas could Men but forget Injuries, and forgive each other; could Men but
lay aside their heats, and heartily embrace each other; could Men but lay aside
private Interests, and mutually conspire toward a Public Good, what
Foundations might be now laid for present and future Blessings? Such that
after-ages may build Peace and Happiness upon them; and we may with God's
Providence, as securely transfer Truth, and Righteousness, and Peace, even upon
Children's Children, as the outward Comforts of Riches and a good Estate. But,

A Second Virtue that we must be Exemplary in, is Purity in our Actions, as
they oppose the popular Vices of the Age. And here 'twill not be enough to be
free from all such sins our selves, but 'twill lie upon all of us to endeavor
our utmost to discourage and discountenance such sins in others; for there is
this unhappiness in these sins, that when they once appear common, and almost
universal, they beget a kind of Reputation, especially if dressed up with Honor,
and set off with the Advantages of Fortune; for it often happens that the
Actions which in a mean Fortune are justly reputed sins, become fashionable in
others and are imitated, resembling herein the guilt of false Coyners, they
impress sin with the stamp of Virtue, and it imposes upon thousands for true
worth; and therefore the surest way of bringing popular sins into neglect and
disgrace, is to take off that Disguise, and mistaken Opinion whereby they
prevail among Men, and to look upon them as mean, and dishonorable, and
reproachful, and then they will quickly become less dangerous.

Let but all good Men agree together to express a Zeal and Indignation against
them, and all the Interest that wicked Men have in the World, will never be
able to support them.

But it is with some satisfaction that I decline speaking further upon this
Particular; inasmuch as I am not destitute of hope, which persuades me, that
this work is already begun.

I conclude therefore with a

Third Virtue we are to be Exemplary in, and it is Unity in our Devotions, and
in the Worship and Communion of our Church, that so if there be any, that have
had mistaken Thoughts and Opinions of us, and have thereby been misled into a
Causeless Separation from us; let such be persuaded, that we have not been
wanting, in giving all manner of Testimonies to the World, that might convince
them of our Sincerity, and have as well by Affectionate Addresses, as
unanswerable Arguments, endeavored to win them to our Communion, and showed
them the Reasonableness of our Service; and that they ought now more especially
to consider of the necessity of an Union with us. Since it is an Argument
wherein Divine Providence seems to concur with me, it being the time designed
by Heaven for an Union with each other.

And if I may beg leave to offer any thing of Humane Reason, when Heaven speaks
in so visible a manner, let me upon this one account entreat your concurrence
in an Unity of Worship, inasmuch as it is our Divisions in this one thing, that
has raised all that storm of Reproaches from our Adversaries against the
Reformed Church; they know very well that it is not matters of Faith which we
disagree about, we are all of us much more united in Faith than they are, but
there being so many different Communions among Protestants, who are all one in
the Substance of Faith. Hence they raise Arguments that there are so many
Differences among us, that there can be no truth or certainty with any of us;
when alas! were those Romanists, who are so miserably divided in matters of
their Faith, but separated in their Worship too, what a number of Conventicles
must there be among them? As many as there are different Orders and
Monasteries; Nation would separate from Nation, Italy from France, and each
Religious Order from one another; the Molinists from the Jansenists, the
Scotists from the Thomists, the Dominicans from the Franciscans, and all of
them Universally from the Jesuists.

But the truth is, though they are beyond dispute much more divided in their
Faith than we are, yet they have the good Fortune to agree in Worship, and so
they seem to unthinking Men to be at good Unity with each other. That is, they
all agree to Worship the Host, they all agree to Pray in an unknown Tongue,
they all agree to Pray to Saints, and Angels, and the Virgin Mary, and to Pray
for the Dead, they all concenter in this Worship; I do assure you I have told
you the most specious pretenses for their Unity; and if such an Agreement with
each other as this be their praise, I am sure the Protestants on all sides join
in a much more commendable Unity against it, and do all with one Heart, and
with one Mouth pray to God, that from such a Unity in Worship he would deliver
us.

What remains therefore toward an Union among Protestants but this? That
whatever particular Opinions any of us may have touching Religion, yet that
men's Zeal for these should not be an hindrance from their concurring to
preserve and secure those many and greater things in which all of us agree.

All sides of Protestants find the substance of their Faith in the Established
Church, each of them agree in this, they all concenter here, more than in any
one Society besides; and if wherein they are singular in their Opinions, they
find a due Condescension and Liberty to profess them, and cannot otherwise be
secure of this Temper, than by the lasting settlement of the Church, which as a
Mother gives common Security to every side: Why then should not all sides find
it their Interest zealously to concur to give solid settlement to that, which
is but another word for their own Security and Self-preservation, whilst if
they break down these Banks, they are overflowed by the Common Enemy, and will
find no place for their Foot to rest in.

And now to conclude all in one word,

Let me provoke you to such a Zeal in the Concerns of Religion, as may not be
confined to those private Christian Duties, that have respect only to God and
your own hearts: such which concern the fervours of your Devotion, the
importunity of your Prayers, a great concern for your Innocence, great care and
strictness over your Lives, great forwardness in your private Charities, and
the like; but let your Zeal extend it self to the Public, let its influences
promote the good of Religion, and the Churches Peace and Welfare.

Your Stations and Circumstances in the World give you great Opportunities, and
by your sincere Endeavors you will wonderfully contribute toward it. The Work
is great, and calls for your help, and a prudent and well-governed Zeal will
not fail of its good Effects; it is such a Zeal which will give great Temper in
all Public Affairs and Counsels; it is such a Zeal which will render you very
Exemplary to those about you, the most powerful Argument to invite even your
Adversaries to be like you, and to approve of you; nay, rather to render you
without Adversary in the World; for to the good Man, to the Peaceful, the
Charitable, the Affectionate, and well-tempered Christian no man is an Enemy.

Let me beg the freedom therefore to press this upon you, which I esteem so
useful an Exhortation, for I would not willingly spend one Minute in this
place, without offering something that (through God's Assistance) may prove to
your Advantage, and where I must go down with a Reproach to my own Heart, were
I conscious to my self of not having used my utmost endeavor toward it. To
you of this Audience, to whom this part of the Application is most suited, who
are more especially concerned, and whose observing it may prove of greatest
Consequence to Public Good. Consider, I beseech you, the Opportunities and
Advantages you now have of doing this good, from your Circumstances and
Fortunes, from your Stations, and from the Reputation you have in the World;
Sacrifice, I beseech you, the increase of these Talents to your God, and for
the benefit of his Church and People. It may be in your way to promote a good
will among Men, to appease Dissensions, to prevent Disgusts among each other,
to promote a good Understanding among Men. By these you will become Public
Blessings, and by these Fountains of Love and Peace within your own Hearts, and
which flow from all your Actions, your Conversations, and Counsels, you will
give a Fruitfulness of Peace to all the Neighboring Borders, and shall become
like the River David speaks of, the Streams whereof shall make glad the City of
God, Psalm. 46.4.
the Holy place of the most High: Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, for
the sake of Christ Jesus our Savior, to whom be Honor and Glory for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

