FRANCIS BROCCARD (Secretary to Pope Clement the Eighth) HIS ALARM TO ALL
Protestant Princes. With a Discovery of Popish-Plots and Conspiracies, After
his Coversion from POPERY TO THE PROTESTANT RELIGION.

Translated out of the Latin Copy Printed in Holland.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for William Rogers, at the Maidenhead over against
St, Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1679.

The Translator to the READER.
THE Author of this Discourse was Francis Broccard; sometime Secretary to Pope
CLEMENT the Eighth. Who, by reason of that Employment, was well acquainted with
the Designs of the Pope and the Popish Party, and thereby enabled to Acquaint
the World with what Counsels they had then on Foot, for the Ruin of all
Protestants, and Establishing their own Tyranny, and Bloody Interest.

The Villainous Wickedness of these Unchristian Designs, we may well presume,
was one great Inducement to make him forsake that Bloody Religion, and turn
Protestant, For though the Designs were, as to others, palliated under Specious
Pretenses, yet to him who saw the bottom of those Cursed Contrivances; and by
what ways, and for what ends they were to be brought about; they did appear in
their true Shape. Which, (notwithstanding the prejudice of his Education and
Interest) made him detest and abhor such Principles. For according to our
Saviors own Direction, ( By their Works you shall know them) he might be well
assured that these Counsels were not the Dictates of the Prince of Peace.

The time when this Discourse was Written is manifest from the Contents of it
to be in the Year 1603. Being later than the Year 1602. (which he mentions Number.
21. As a time past) and while CLEMENT the Eighth was yet Living, as is said in
the Preamble, (who died Feb. the 21. 1604. English Style,) and was the same
Year in which had happened that Attempt on Geneva by the Duke of Savoy, as is
said at Number. 37. (which began with an intended Surprise early on Sunday Morning
Dec. 22. 1602. and ended with a Treaty July 21. New Style, 1603. as Thuanus
tells us. Lib. 29.

And though he do not particularly describe the Gunpowder-Treason here in
England, (which was then contriving though not perfectly formed; and was to be
executed on our Nov. 5. 1605.) Because his Principal Intent was to set forth
the Particular Designs on Germany: Omitting the particulars on France, England,
and other Countries, as he tells at Number. 24, yet he there tells us at Number. 23,
24. that out of the English Seminaries were then sent forth into England
Emissaries in great Numbers to do Mischief and work Disturbance here: And at
Number. 40. that a great Navy was then preparing either against Holland or England
(as there should be occasion) and that there were in England and Scotland (as
well as the Netherlands) great Multitudes addicted to the Popish and Spanish
Interest, who did but wait the opportunity of such an Invasion, being ready on
all occasions to spend their Blood for the Church of Rome.

How Universal the Design was which (under the Name of the Holy League) was
intended against the whole Protestant Party (and England, amongst the rest;)
and how Subtily, Sedulously, and Maliciously it was carried on with all the
Artifice, Falsehood and Treachery imaginable, is evident by the Discovery made
by this Convert who had been an Actor in it, and Secretary to the Pope.

And it is from such only that we can hope to have a particular Account of such
dark Designs: When God by his Providence convincing them of the wickedness of
these Hellish Plots, make those who had been Actors in them to betray their own
Counsels.

And that the Designs here Discovered were not Forgeries of his own Invention,
but really intended, is but too manifest from the History of those Times; where
we find many of them actually attempted, and more (in likelihood) would have
been, if that Pope (who died the Year following) had lived a little longer.

And that the same Designs have been ever since pursued as to the general, (but
varied in Particulars as Occasions and Opportunities have required) and are so
at this day; is very evident by the Bloody Wars and Massacres ever since, in
Germany and many other Protestant Countries in pursuant of those Designs. And
particularly in our late Civil-Warrs in England fomented by Jesuitical
Counsels, though executed by Schismatics, the Bloody Massacres in Ireland, and
the present Popish Design, for killing our King, subverting our Government,
murdering his People, destroying the Protestant Religion, and introducing
Popery amongst us. Which God has in like manner Discovered by persons engaged
in it, as he did then by the Author of this Discourse.

The Lord grant that our eyes may at length be opened to discern these Depths
of Satan, and Antichristian Policy; and our Hearts enlarged to Praise him who
has hitherto watched over us and Preserved us: and to wait on him by a
Faithful Dependence, Sincere Repentance, and diligent Endeavors to Prevent the
Mischiefs which they Design.

The Copy from whence I Translated this, was Printed at Amsterdam, by Jacob
Younger, in the Year 1677. Annexed to the Latin Translation of Mr. Potters
Interpretation of the Number 666.

FRANCIS BROCCARD (Sometime Secretary to Pope Clement the Eighth) HIS ALARM
(After his Conversion to the True Faith of Christ) To all Christian Princes
(Favorers of the Protestant Religion) against the Pope and Popish Plots and
Conspiracies, by him discovered.
THE most gracious God having marvelously brought me forth from the dismal
Darkness of Popery, to the clear Light of the Gospel, and the pure
acknowledgment of his Word; I might deservedly be accounted the most ungrateful
of all men living, if I should not devote and set apart the rest of my life to
the glory of his holy Name, and the advantage of his Gospel. For most unworthy
I were and impious, if him from whom I enjoy life and salvation, I should not
vouchsafe to serve and obey in the best manner I can.

And since for the present I am able to do no more, I see no better way and
opportunity of bringing glory to God, doing good to his Church, and testifying
my true affection to the Protestant Religion, than by detecting and making
known the counsels which the Papists, the sworn enemies of Christ and his
Gospel, are contriving and endeavoring to bring to pass against all that have
a kindness for the Protestant Cause; which in my opinion are such as ought not
to be dissembled or concealed, nor can be without great offense to his Divine
Majesty, and great mischief to the true Religion: For the whole Popish Party
have entered into a most grievous and pernicious Conspiracy against the
Protestant Religion, and have unanimously united and bound themselves by oath
in a most strict and wicked League against all the Professors of it; insomuch
that without doubt they will be able to do much mischief to the Protestant
Cause, if those against whom these counsels are first intended to be put in
practice do not take timely warning for their own defense. I know very well
that the Protestant Cause is a good Cause; and that God will be assistant to
them, to defeat the assaults which Satan and Antichrist make upon them: yet
ought not these things to be despised, nor they to sleep securely on such
persuasions, but ought to believe that it is a providence of God that stirs up
any to make discovery thereof to those whose life and safety is in hazard, that
they may the better secure themselves from those enemies who thus assault them.

To the end therefore that all Protestant Princes, and all Professors of the
true Religion, may have warning to avoid these Conspiracies of the Pope of
Rome, and all Popish Princes; I will through the help of God clearly and
undauntedly declare and make known the most wicked Confederacies, and devilish
Arts and Machinations of the Popish Confederates against the Protestant
Religion. And what I shall relate, are not slight and trivial stories picked up
from the discourse of ordinary persons, or idle Monkish dreams; but what I have
heard my self from the Pope's own mouth, and from the Cardinals themselves, and
which have come to my knowledge from the authentic Writings of Popish Princes
under their own hands and seals.

Nor am I frighted with the wrath and indignation which I am like to sustain
from Kings and Potent Princes incensed by this discovery: For I ought to be
more afraid of God, who is able to destroy both body and soul, than of those
who have power only to kill or torment a frail and mortal body. Be they enraged
and full of indignation, and (if God so permit) fall fierce upon me, I am
sensible I do acknowledge that it is from God that I am hereunto moved and
incited; and shall, notwithstanding their rage, undauntedly make known their
treacherous Conspiracies.

Hear therefore all ye that bear a good will to the Protestant Cause, and take
good heed to what you hear.

Pope CLEMENT the Eighth (who is at this time Pope of Rome) having by strange
Artifice obliged to himself well-nigh all the Princes in Europe, not willing to
neglect so fair an opportunity to establish his tyrannical Power, does
endeavor with might and main to carry on and establish the holy League (as
they call it) of all Popish Kings and Princes, against the Protestant Interest;
and which as to the greatest part is already concluded.

1. For the Emperor, the King of Spain, the Archdukes of Austria, Albert and
Ferdinand; the Dukes of Bavaria, Lorrain and Savoy; and almost all the rest of
the Popish Princes, except the French King, and the great Duke of Tuscany) have
already consented and subscribed the League; and the Pope moves every stone to
engage the rest to concur with them, and is in hope to effect it.

2. This League consists of diverse heads: The way of proceeding, the Time, the
Preparation, the Proportion which each of them is to contribute to this holy
War, they are plotting and contriving against the Protestants. And on this they
are in all points agreed, that all these Confederates shall with joint force
endeavor the extirpation of Protestant Religion by all the means they can.

3. The Emperor about a year ago was earnest with the Pope for money and Aid
against the Turk, whereby he might be able either to repress his insolence, or
at last bring him to honorable terms of Peace, or some lasting Truce;
promising that so soon as he shall have dispatched his business with the Turk,
he will employ all his strength and forces for the Pope against the
Protestants, or (as they call them) the Heretics.

4. The Pope is very much inclined to a Peace with the Turk, and for this
reason would not last year give ear to the Ambassadors of the Persian King, who
pressed him to a general Confederacy against the Turk. For the Pope reckons
that the Protestants are a greater hinderance to his affected Tyranny, than is
the Turk. And does often complain that a long War has now been managed for forty
years together against the Turk to no advantage; whereas in the same time with
far less expense the Church of Rome might have recovered her Authority in
Europe. And he does therefore endeavor to persuade the Turk to seek a Peace,
and persuades the Emperor to let him have it on reasonable terms.

5. In the year 1601. Cardinal Dietrichstein, Bishop of Clomute came in great
haste from Prague to Rome, and brought Letters to the Pope from the Emperor,
promising the Pope to put in execution by force of Arms the sentence which the
Emperor had given in behalf of the Pope against the Protestants in the Cause
concerning goods Ecclesiastic, which he commanded to be in all places restored
to the use of the Church of Rome. And from thence the Pope conceived hopes of
some occasion to be offered of beginning some broils and commotions in Germany;
and it was agreed between them that the greatest part of those goods should be
distributed amongst those who should be most active in that War.

6. The same Cardinal did at the same time promise (as he said) in the
Emperors name, that in the mean time (while things were getting in readiness
for an open War) the Emperor and the Princes of Austria would wholly turn out
all Protestants within their hereditary Dominions, as in Austria, Tyrole,
Croatia, Carinthia, Stiria, and the like places; and that they would in like
manner fall upon them in Moravia, Silesia, and Bohemia; first without noise if
it may be, and then by force of Arms, especially of those soldiers which come
back from the War of Hungary; (For in such cases they do not think fit to trust
the German soldiers) and that he had already granted to them the spoiling and
pillaging those people in case they return not to the Church of Rome.

7. The Popes Legate now resident at Prague did write some months ago, that all
these things are in great part already dispatched; that the Protestants were
cast out of those Provinces, and the Jesuits by the Emperors permission
possessed of most of the Protestant Churches and places, not only in Austria
and Carinthia, but likewise in Silesia and Moravia: And that the French
soldiers under the command of one Count Benegrave had already burnt some
Villages in the borders of Bohemia, and that they intended this year to make
more progress therein, especially by the assistance of the Italians, which the
Pope sends into Hungary, chiefly for this end, to spoil and destroy the
Protestants.

8. The Emperor has also promised that he will not henceforth confer any
chief Offices, whether in Civil or Military Affairs, on any that are Heretics,
or do in any wise favor them: And moreover, that all lesser Offices now
enjoyed by Protestants, shall be taken from them, unless within a time limited
they return to the Church of Rome. And by this means the Popes Legate informed,
that daily many of the Nobility in Germany do renounce the Lutheran, and turn
to the Romish Religion; and that on such are frequently bestowed good places
and Offices, that others may be thereby encouraged to make the like revolt. For
they are persuaded from the experience of all times, that by ambition, and
covetousness of riches and honors, many have been seduced, who it is thought
would otherwise have been very constant.

9. By this promise the Pope having conceived great hopes, has taken the
confidence to press the Emperor to depose and put out some of the Protestant
Nobility by him named, from public Offices and places, Civil and Military,
which then they enjoyed. And among these by name Count Colinick, Henry Matthew,
a Turre, a Bohemian, the Lord of Offer-Kirchen, the Barons of Pothan, of
Oglisto, of Dermenstorf, and the like; and desired that he would put in their
places some of the Popish Nobility, and such as had revolted; affirming that
things would never succed well against the Turks, if the War were managed by
Protestants: And that he would never endure, nor was it for the dignity of a
Catholic Emperor, that in a Christian Army against Infidels they should be
suffered to have Lutheran Sermons; which he therefore required to be wholly
suppressed; threatening that otherwise he would never endure that they should
henceforth have any leavies of soldiers in Italy or Spain to be sent thither;
lest these Provinces which are yet free should become infected with Heresy.

10. The Duke of Mercury gives this advice, that diverse of those who are his
adherents, may be promoted to Military employments: And himself has written to
Cardinal Aldobrandine, to persuade the Pope, that this the Emperor may do very
easily. The Pope believing this to be a good means for the removing Sermons out
of the Army, and for preparing a way to many other things for the ruin of the
Protestants, has very earnestly desired the same thing of the Emperor; from
whom yet he has received no other answer, than that he must wait a convenient
time for the doing of it, and some better opportunity; and in the mean time he
will take care to do it by little and little.

11. The same Duke of Mercury about two years since, having conference with the
Confederates to this purpose, had resolved that in winter time (when the War in
Hungary could not be carried on) he would carefully take a view of all Germany,
and (as if he were minding somewhat else) observe and take notice of the
places, Situations, Rivers, Straights, Borders, Passes, Avenues, Forts and
Strengths of the Protestant Princes and Protestant Cities, that he might the
better contrive ways to surprise and circumvent them, in the War designed. And
I my self have seen at Rome with the Duke of Suesse the delineations of some
places belonging to the Protestants drawn by Petrine a Mathematician to the
said Duke. And while he was yet living, I heard the same was to be done by the
Duke of Nevers who seeks for the place of the Duke of Mercury in the War of
Hungary.

12. When the Pope perceived that he could not presently obtain from the
Emperor to put out the aforesaid Protestant Nobility; he did by a new device
desire of the Emperor that he would at least employ a smaller number of the
Protestant forces, least by this means they might be trained up in military
skill to the prejudice of the Roman Church, and come to have the better of the
Catholics. That it were much better that the Emperor should raise none but
Popish, Soldiers, and require pay and contributions for them from the
Protestants: For by this means the Protestants in a short time would be at once
disarmed and impoverished. That many of the things designed might then be begun
and attempted for the destruction of the Protestants, which, as things now
stand, could not be thought off: And the better to persuade the Emperor
hereunto, he accused the Protestants of holding correspondence with the Turk.

13. The Pope has some Councelours in the Emperors Court who stick very close
to him, who for large pensions and great hopes, wherewith he feeds them, do
incline the Emperor to comply with the Popes directions; and by their means he
is made acquainted not only with the Emperors actions, but with his very
propensions and inclinations.

14. The Pope presses for an election of a King of the Romans; fearing least
if the Emperor should die before a Successor were appointed, some might be
chosen in his place, who either is not a Papist, or at least more moderate
toward the Protestants. And for this reason he does press the Emperor to it;
and both to him and to the Ecclesiastic Electors he does earnestly recommend
Albertus; whom in many respects he desires to have preferred before the rest;
for this consideration especially, because he thinks that by this means the
Popish Religion will come to be restored in the Netherlands and in Germany, and
moreover because the King of Spain does make offer and promise to employ all
his strength and forces against the Turk and the Heretics, in case they chose
Albertus.

15. The King of Spains Ambassador resident at Rome produced letters from that
Kings Ambassador at Prague, informing him that one of the Protestant Electors
was inclinable to Albertus; and that the Spaniards promise themselves great
things of him, both as to the business of the election, and the affairs of the
Netherlands.

16. The Emperor seems more inclined to Matthias, whom yet the Pope seems to
reject by reason of some suspicions raised of him in matter of religion; which
he endeavors to remove by the persecutions in Austria and Moravia, in which
places he is very severe against the Protestants: hoping thereby to reconcile
himself to the Pope and to the Ecclesiastic Electors, but in vain. For the
Pope and Ecclesiastics do not so much look at matter of Religion, as Politic
Interests; and would have Albertus, not because he is more religious, but
because they think he will be the more potent, and will less regard the
Protestant Princes.

17. Because of this Election it is, that many things against the Protestants
are at present deferred, which they would forthwith put in execution if they
could, without them obtain an Election for the house of Austria. For the
Emperor is afraid if he should use open hostility against the Protestants, the
Protestant Princes would be averse to him and his family; and for this cause he
does sooth and make much of many of them at present, whom (if he had obtained
his end) he would certainly despise.

18. The Archbishop of Cologne has also writ letters to Cardinal St. George
wherein he intercedes for his house of Bavaria; affirming that he has the
votes of some of the Electors inclinable to his Family. And makes offers to the
Pope both in his own and in his Fathers name, of all their forces and
assistance for the exaltations of the Roman Church.

19. At the same time came privately to Rome, in the Duke of Bavaria's name, an
Ambassador called Somburg, one of the four Knights of the Empire, who on the
behalf of the said Duke treated of diverse things with the Pope and Cardinals
concerning the manner of proceeding and taking an opportunity for beginning of
that holy War. He pressed also the business of the Election; and to obtain the
Popes favor toward him, he gave great hopes that by the Colloque at Ratisbone,
which was then under consideration, some of the Protestant Princes might be
brough over to the Romish Church. Which notwithstanding, the Pope could not be
induced to grant that it should be held with his consent, but had given command
to Claudius Aquaviva, that things being hazardous it should be broken off.

20. The Citizens of Ausburg (among whom were Mark Velsarus, and George
Fucherus) were instant with the Pope to obtain from the Emperor that the
Protestant Ministers might be expelled and cast out of the City of Ausburg;
which at that time (they said) might easily be done, for that the chief
inhabitants and the Magistrates of the place were Popish, and the Neighboring
Princes very zealous for the Roman Religion. The cause was managed in their
name by Cardinal Palavicini, and by the said Fucherus, who the last year came
to Rome on purpose. And with him was one Dr. Brandanus who suggested to them by
what means it might most easily be brought to pass. And it was thus far brought
about that the Emperor at the Popes instance, consented to the ejection of
those Pastors in case it could be done without commotion and sedition; and did
openly declare that he desired nothing more than that it might so be done in
all the Cities of the Empire.

21. In a Congregation held at Rome beginning in Jan. 1602. It was there
decreed, with the Emperors concurrence thereunto, that there should be Jesuits
placed and maintained in all Cities of the Empire, by whose means the way might
be prepared for the designed persecution. For they hoped that by the Artifices
of the Jesuits they might so far prevail as to get many to favor them in those
Cities who were otherwise Protestants: by whose assistance they hoped with more
ease to suppress the Protestants. The Question then was only concerning their
maintenance. For the Germane Bishops complained of the smalness of their
Revenue. And the Pope at length concluded to maintain them for the present at
the charge of the treasury of the Church till some other course should be found
out.

22. Archduke Ferdinand Prince of Stiria, and Carinthia, did lately make
complaint to the Pope, that whereas he had expelled of his Provinces all the
Protestants; many of them notwithstanding continued yet to live there by the
indulgence of the Ecclesiastic Princes who held some places in his Provinces;
as for instance, the Bishop of Bomberg and the Archbishop of Salisbury, who
received and entertained them: wherefore he prayed the Pope straightly to charge
and to compel them utterly to cast those out, otherwise he threatened to use his
Sovereign Authority, which he pretends to have in those places, and to cast
them out by an armed force, even whether those Bishops would or not; with which
the Pope was well pleased.

23. While things are in preparation for an open War against the Protestants,
the Popish Party are contriving how to make attempts on the Protestant
Interest; and have this year sent into the Countries of the Netherlands, and of
England, a great number of Spies and Seducers, by whose means many of all sorts
are seduced, and wrought over to their party; who are then maintained in
Protestant Cities at the Popes charge, to be serviceable unto him in what he is
designing. Some of these Emissaries about a month ago, went through Lipsia in a
disguise, in their passage into Prussia, where they hope to nestle, as shall
afterward be showed. If the actions of these Emissaries were well observed, it
would not be hard to take some of them, and by their notes and memorials these
and many other things might be discovered.

24. A few years since the Pope erected here in Rome two Congregations or
Senates; whereof one is called Congregatio ad propagationem Fidei, (The
Congregation for the propagating of the Faith) the other, Congregatio sacri
Foederis, (The Congregation of the holy League.) In each of which are nine
Cardinals, and as many Councellers, who meet together once every week; and
there they act, meditate and study nothing but how to contrive, propose, and
consider all means of propagating the Popish Tyranny, and how to prepare the
way for the persecution, and the butchering of the Protestants; and how to lay
hold of all advantages of beginning that cursed War designed against them. From
this Congregation are sent forth those Spies and Emissaries who every year in
great numbers are employed to make broils in Protestant Countries, and seduce
the Professors of the true Religion. And these two Congregations are the shops
wherein they form all their instruments, and contrive all their Machinations,
Treacheries, Plots, Villainies, and all mischiefs against the Protestants. These
Congregations hold particular correspondence with the Jesuits, and those bred
up in the Colleges or Seminaries of the German* English, and Moravians; from
whence as out of a Trojan Horse come forth those Traiters and Seducers, whom
(as we said) they send out into all Protestant Countries. For those of all
others are judged the fittest for subtle frauds and (...). For by reason of the
languages they understand, their fashions, kindred and relations which they
have in all Protestant Countries, they can easily insinuate and get into the
Courts and acquaintance of Princes and persons of quality: and if they find any
pliable and easy to be wrought upon, they make it their business by little and
little, with hopes and promises, as in the name of the Emperor or Pope of
Rome, of honors, dignities, and great things, to allure, seduce and work upon
them, and many times with great success; as we may see in those Lords and
Nobles whom they have lately perverted, as Baron Terrisle the younger,
Cicendorff, the Knight Audechan the younger, Baron Dermensdorff, Baron Thona,
and many others in Germany, I omit what they have done in France, England, and
other Countries.

25. There is a great number of them every day flocking to Rome, to renounce
the true Faith of Christ; but much greater of those who do privately at home
abjure it, and are by these Emissaries instructed in the Popish Idolatry, and
are maintained in the Country and Cities of Germany, that liveing covertly and
under disguise amongst Protestants, they may have the better opportunity of
promoting the Popish Interest; and do it effectually: For by their means it is
perfectly known to Rome, what are the Protestant designs, differences and
inclinations.

26. Part of these Apostates who flock to Rome, and are of the most part of
mean condition, are entertained in the City of Rome, and the Court it self, and
there maintained to be serviceable against the Protestants who resort to Rome;
and for many other purposes, of which we shall speak by and by. Others of them
are dispersed in several parts and Cities of Italy, to make discovery and
observation, whether any of the Protestant Princes or Nobility come into Italy;
which whenever they can discover (which is very easy to do by the Jesuits
education wherein they are exactly instructed) they presently accuse and give
notice of them either to the Pope, or to the Inquisitors according to the
quality of the persons.

27. Diverse of these Spies at Rome I have known my self, when about two years
since I was conversant there: and to the end that those Protestants who shall
thither resort, may beware of them, I will mention them by name. The first I
shall name is John Hierom Fendri, who lets lodgings at the Sign of the White
Lion; he with two of his Sons who understand the Germane tongue very well,
receive from the Pope an annual pension to betray the Germans who come
thither. The next is one John Scherver, at the Sign of the Black Eagle, near
the Bridge of St. Angelo. The third is a Dutch Tailor in the Street called Via
Julia. These three by reason of the employments they exercise, run up and down
to several Inns and Lodgings, as the Bear, the Bull, the Sword, etc. where
Germans use to lodge, and by occasion of their Language, and the Trades they
use, make use of that opportunity to insinuate themselves into acquaintance
with the Gentlemen themselves, or with their servants, and by little and
little, by one sign or other, easily discover of what Religion, and what
Country they are; and do then presently betray them without distinction,
whatever their condition be, whether Princes, or of inferior quality. For all
these and many more receive pensions from the Pope to this purpose.

28. There are besides these some other Apostates, men of learning, who do the
same but in a more grave and subtle manner; for these come not but to great
Persons, whom the meanness of those others is not fit to converse with. Of
these is one Gasper Schoppius of Bamberg; Dr. Fabor a Physician (at the
Hospital of the Holy Ghost) of Franceford, Justus Calvin of Heidleburg; John
Wouren of Amburg; Dr. Joseph of Worms; Arnold Martin of Swilzerland; Stephen
della Favergia of Geneva; a Son in Law of Anthony Calvin; Roboll a Frenchman
who heretofore Secretary to the Duke of Bullione, and many others of the same
stamp from almost all parts of Germany. These as soon as they understand that
any Germane is come, of some name or with a handsome retinue, presently resort
to him, and (as out of mere officiousness in respect to their Country or
Nation) proffer their service and assistance, and offer to show them what
things remarkable are to be seen, and then by degrees begin to discourse with
them of the affairs of the Court of Rome, and sometimes discourse of the Popish
Ceremonies and manners, as if themselves were not in all things so well
satisfied in the Romish Religion; that under this pretense they may make
discovery where they be halting. And of these wicked Apostates they must have a
great care who resort to Rome; for few there are who can escape their subtilty;
and many persons of mean condition are by their means, and by the informations
they give, cast into prison, and forced to renounce Christ. With Princes and
Persons of quality, the Pope for many reasons thinks fit to deal more mildly;
but yet for these also, he lays snares, and uses his endeavor either to
seduce them, or privately to make them away.

29. By means of these Apostates and Spies, the Pope has been made acquainted
with the entry and abode of all great persons who of late years have been in
Italy; and from the day of their entering into Italy they have had some on the
Popes behalf who have followed them from place to place, observed their actions
and motions; not presently to seize or commit them (for they have learned by
experience, that these methods do not advantage the Romish Church) but to make
discovery of their propensions and inclinations, that they may the better know
how to entice and seduce them.

30. The Pope or the Inquisitors so soon as they are informed of any Protestant
Prince or person of quality that is come, they presently dispatch some person
of good condition to attend them, and to show them all civilities, and bestow
upon them some small presents, and to entertain them with very civil language,
and encourage them not to be afraid. Mean while by his Emissaries he neglects
not to make attempt on them as to their Religion, and does endeavor by all the
civil ways, he can, either to seduce them from the Protestant Religion, or at
least to send them out of Italy with better opinions of the Popes proceedings,
and the Romish Religion. Witness hereof are the Princes of Wirtenburg, of
Anhall, of the Palatinate, of Newburg and of Saxony; who have been tempted by
such presents, flatteries and artifices. And some of their Councillors and
Preceptors vigorously assaulted and tempted with large promises of honors and
dignities, to bring over and pervert their Princes: but those of meaner
condition are betrayed to the Inquisitors, whom by long imprisonments and cruel
torments they force to renounce Christ; or if they persist constant in the
truth, then by fire and Sword and cruel torments they kill and destroy them.

31. By the coming and abode of the foresaid Princes in Italy, they came to
understand much of the Protestant Princes differenees among themselves, and of
the State of Religion in Germany, and of the peoples affections toward their
Princes. The Pope likewise by this means was made acquainted with the strength
and counsels of diverse of them, which aford him opportunity of raising and
fomenting discords and jealousies amongst the Protestant Princes, and
contriving many things for the ruin of the Protestant Cause, which before that
time he was not able to do. And he hopes, as he has often bragged, by the
Protestants own Arms to propagate and establish his Tyranny. Let therefore the
Protestant Princes take good heed to themselves: and if they be wise, not
confide too much in Popish Princes; and forbear coming into Italy, and
especially to Rome; and when at any time they come there, let them take heed
what persons they have with them, and whom they put confidence in.

32. The Pope not long since had been informed that a part of Prussia was to
descend to a Son of the Marquess of Brandenburg, and thereupon he so far
prevailed with the Emperor and the King of Poland, that they three are jointly
to endeavor, that it come not to the House of Brandenburg, but to the King of
Poland; and they have lately sent their Agents the Jesuits into those parts,
to make way for it. For their design is to begin the broils in those parts; and
for this end the Romish Legate is yet detained at Rome in order thereunto.

33. The aforesaid Confederates had endeavored by their Agents and Emissaries
to suborn the Counts of Frisland, and draw them into a certain negotiation for
delivering up the Town of Emden to the Emperor; that it might not come into
the hands of the States, and that the Papists might on that side have a fair
passage, and a gate open to fall upon the Protestants, and create disturbance
to their affairs in those parts; and did pretend to have come to somewhat of
certainty therein, and that they had drawn over those Counts to the Spanish
Interest, and the Romish Religion; and to that end did place and maintain some
Jesuits about them to instruct them and retain them in their duty and devotion
to the Sea of Rome. But those affairs, through the vigilance of the States, not
succeeding as they desired, they are now contriving some other expedients.

34. The Pope is by all means endeavoring to make a breach betwixt the Princes
of Austria, and the Duke of Wurtenburg upon occasion of the alienating and
withdrawing the Fee of the Princedom of Wurtenburg by the Emperor; which they
would not have to be thought valid, to the prejudice of the rest of the
Austrian Family; those especially who were then under age, whom he stirs up and
incites to demand a restitution; and for that end to take Arms against the Duke
of Wurtenburg, hoping that if once a War be begun in Germany against the
Protestants, he shall be able to pursue his design, and restore the Popish
Idolatry amongst them.

35. The Popish Argitatours, and the Fathers of the two forementioned
Congregations in Rome, are contriving likewise to make a breach between the
Elector Palatine, and the said Duke of Wurtenburg; upon occasion of some
possessions which have now for diverse years been held by the Duke of
Wurtenburg, whereof they are endeavoring (by means of some of his Councillors
whom they have corrupted and other ill disposed persons) to persuade the
Elector Palatine to demand Restitution. And hope by this means, together with
that of their difference in Religion, they may engage them in a War, or at
least foment discords between them, and so alienate and divide them that they
may not join in a common defense when either of them shall be assaulted, nor be
assistant one to the other. I would therefore advise those Princes to be very
circumspect, and not readily give ear to such sowers of dissensions between
Protestants. They have endeavored the like against the Marquisate of Bade and
Durlac, one of whom seemed ready to comply with the Papists, and was treating
with the Bishops of Spire and Constance about restoring the Popish Religion in
case he obtain that government; which he hopes to do because of the Marquess of
Durlac being so ill in health and (they say) cannot live long; and in such case
this Popish Successor by the assistance of the Pope and the foresaid
Confederates promises, the restoring of Popish Idolatry, to which they will in
no wise be wanting; for they leave nothing unattempted, and lose no opportunity
of raising commotions in Germany.

36. By the instigation of Archduke Albert, and by the Popes Authority, they
are endeavoring to incite the Emperor and all the States of the Empire
against the Belgic Provinces of the Low Countries, pretending that they have
done, and daily do possess diverse places and dominions belonging to the Empire.
And that they will in a short time become formidable to all Kings and Princes,
unless some stop be put to them, before their Empire grow too large. And so far
has this craft, and the subtle insinuations of the Papists prevailed, that
under these specious pretenses for the Empire, they have wrought upon some of
the Protestant Princes, who being deceived and seduced, and by this their
devilish subtilty seem inclinable to the destruction and ruin of these
Provinces, not discerning that this is a most subtle crafty device and
Stratagem of Antichrist, to set Protestant against Protestant, and if possible
to destroy the Protestant party by the Protestants own weapons. These are
(believe me) the venomous counsels and villainous contrivances of that cursed
League and Confederacy, and those wicked Congregations of the Pope above
mentioned; palliated with this pretense that they are in the behalf of the
Empire, and for the good thereof, to which they do in no wise appertain. These
counsels of suppressing the Hollanders are rather against the Empire than for
it; as any man may easily discern, if he compare the present government with
that of the Spanish tyrany. And moreover who is so stupid and void of all
sense, as not to know how little kindness the Popes of Rome ever had, or yet
have toward the Empire, of whose greatness and Majesty they were ever envious
and professed Enemies. And therefore even the Popish Princes themselves ought
always to be suspicious of their Councels when the good of the Empire is
concerned.

37. From the same fountain (or Abyss rather) of the aforesaid Confederacies
against the Protestants, proceed these Wars and Invasions which have this last
year been attempted against those of Geneva and Strasburg, which are but the
praeludes or forerunners of the intended general persecution: designing by
these attempts to make an Essay of the Protestants Councels and Forces; and
make observation whether the Protestants will conjoin their forces to defend
their common cause; or each one stand severally upon their own guard. I gave
notice fifteen months ago by letters and trusty friends both to those of Geneva
and to those of Strasburg of this design of the Popish Confederates to assault
and surprise them unawars, whether or no they believed me, I cannot tell. But
sure I am that merely out of Zeal to the Protestant Religion I gave them this
Warning of what I knew to be certainly true; and they by experience and the
event have found it so to be. And so it will be as to those things now write
and sincerely declare to all Protestant Princes. For God is my witness that the
things I now discover are what I know to be true and already agreed upon. Nor
do I this for any other design than out of Zeal to the Protestant Religion.

38. It was not without a deep and subtle design that they did at one and the
same time fall upon Geneva and Strasburg; for by assalting both these at once,
they hoped so to amuse and employ the Protestants of Switzerland by the war
against Geneva, that they should not be at leisure to give assistance to those
of Strasburg, as they did nine years ago. And again by the War begun against
Strasburg, they hoped so to keep the Protestant Princes in fear and suspense,
as not to suffer any Soldiers to be raised in their Dominions to assist the
States of Holland against Albertus. They had received intelligence that some of
the Princes of Germany intended to give assistance to those Hollanders, which
they hoped to prevent by this War of Strasburg Nor had they failed in this
conjecture had their design succeeded against Geneva. And though they were
therein disappointed, yet are they not thereby dismayed, or give it over. For
they have determined to attempt all ways of kindling a flame in Germany. And
herein the foreign Princes are also very intent; as hoping to extinguish the
flames which are yet raging in their own Countries, by kindling a fire
elsewhere; and that by this means those of their own Countries who are men of
turbulent and seditious Spirits might have where to employ their fury, and
satisfy their bloody minds. This artifice has at all times given occasion and
fuel to many wars throughout the World. It has long been made use of by the
Popes of Italy and the Kings of Spain, who have now for many years sat quiet
at home, and been spectatours of the Wars in the Netherlands, in France and
Hungary, which they for these ends did at first stir up and kindle, and do at
this day foment and cherish. The noble Germans of former ages were not wont to
wait for others to bring War home to them and assault them in their own
Country; but to go out and meet it as far as Italy, France and Spain. That
Heroic virtue is not yet extinguished in the Germans breast, and that divine
Prowess whereby they have conquered great part of the World. Let them but rouse
it up and exercise that valiant courage and undaunted Prowess against these
effeminate and faint-hearted Priestlings; who though at present encouraged by
our sloth, they grow sierce and insolent, will not dare in Italy to look the
Germans in the face, whom they could not in former days look upon but with
terror. Let the Germans look over the noble acts of their Ancestors recorded
with glory in the writers of all ages; and learn at length to be true Germans;
that is, suppressors of tyranny, assertors of liberty, and Masters of the
world, and not suffer the Popes Cowl with a few faint-hearted and lazy
Popelings insolently to insult over the valiant and masculine Germane Nation.

39. There was a constant same, and it was reported by the French themselves,
that the attempt on Geneva by the Duke of Savoy was with the privity and
consent of the King of France. For by as agreement made two years since by
Cardinal Aldobrandine between the French King and the Duke of Savoy, it was
covenanted and agreed, that the Duke of Savoy might, without offense of the
King, or violation of the Peace, assault Geneva. But with this condition that
when it is taken it shall either be demolished, or else so divided between
them, that the King shall have that part of it which is on that side of the
Rosne toward France; and the Duke that of the other side toward Savoy. At the
same time, in that treaty with Aldobrandine, the King of France made promise of
many things, concerning receiving the Council of Trent, concerning the
Confederacy or Holy League abovementioned, and restoring of the Jesuits; which
thought they have hitherto been deferred, yet Cardinal Dosutus and the Kings
Ambassador have promised the Pope that the King in due time will perform them
all, and protested that he is very well addicted to the Sea of Rome, but that
he has not been able yet to make good his promise, because of the League he
was to confirm with the Helvetians, and some Protestant Princes; who he fears
would be highly offended, if he should put those things in present execution;
but he will do it in a short time. But (to speak what I think) I am of this
opinion, as to the King of France (which also I have of ten heard from the
mouth of the present Pope) to wit, that the King plays the Politician, and is
firm to neither part.

40. The King of Spain under pretense of blocking up Algiers, has prepared a
great Fleet in the Mediterranean and Tyrrhene Sea, but means to go forth with
it out of the Streights, either against the Hollanders, or against the English;
and in expectation of this Navy it is that Albertus lies so long before Ostend.
Of this his intention there be many evidences, one of them is very apparent,
that this Navy is for the most part furnished with very great Ships, which are
very proper for the Ocean, but not so fit for the (...) of Africa and the
Mediterranean; for which Galleys are more convenient, and such only Charles the
fifth made use o^ But there are more certain arguments which I have observed
from their Councels. Let them therefore take heed whom it concerns. Nor will it
be long ere they make this expedition, if they can but secure themselves of a
safe Port on the Coa^ of the Ocean, which they are endeavoring with all their
power. For this, they say, is the only obstacle to their business, that they
have not any Ports or Harbors large enough to receive a numerous Fleet; which
if they could once obtain, they boast that they should have forces innumerable
and insuperable both by Land and Sea. And truly there are in Holland, Zeland,
Frisland, England, and Scotland, very great numbers who adhere to the Popish
and Spanish Interest, and who daily solicit the Popish Princes to take arms
against those Countries, and promise them all their assistance if once they
arive there. And within these few weeks the Jesuits who in those Countries live
in disguise, and say Masses, have written to their General Claudius, Aquaviva,
that the number of Papists fit to bear arms within the Provinces of Holland and
Zealand only, are thirty thousand and more; and they are so zealous therein,
that they are ready on any occasion to spend their blood for the Romish Church.
Their letters were read in the Congregation (as they call it) for the
Propagation of the Faith: and with so great applause, that they were all of one
opinion, that in case a Navy should there arrive, it would be easy to raise a
very great party; and they conceive hopes of very great success for the
Catholics in those parts, if once Albertus's affairs succeed well. And in
truth the States ought with greater severity to restrain the petulancy of these
rebellious Spirits, that they grow not worse by too much indulgence.

41. The Ecclesiastics in Germany (that is to say) the Bishops of Mentz and
Collogne have given information to the Pope, that there are up and down in
Germany diverse Confederaices amongst the Protestant Princes, and frequent
meetings to that purpose; partly for maintaining Calvinism against the
Lutherans, and partly for maintaining Lutheranism against the Calvinists; and
that they are at this time at greater discord amongst themselves, more incensed
and more enraged against one another than ever they were, all of them against
the Papists. And added moreover many particulars concerning their Factions in
state affairs, and other emulations and hatreds of each Religion against the
other, and of differences among themselves, and how the people stand affectd
toward their Princes, from whence they might presage and were in hopes, that in
a short time the Protestants will fall soul upon one another, and by that means
the Popish Religion be greatly promoted, The aforesaid Confederates on this
occasion spare neither for pains not cost to cherish and foment these discords,
contentions and animosities amongst the Protestants; and (which is very
pernicious and much to be lamented) have so prevailed through their subtilty
and our sloth, that for promoting and furtheing these discords they make
advantange of the simplicity (shall I say) or malignity of Protestant Princes
and Counselors. And many there are at this time through the Craft of the
Papists, and Artifices of some Courtiers, so bewitched, as to think verily that
the Popish Monarchs and Princes bear no ill will to the Protestant Interest,
and (which is more,) that the Pope himself favors this Religion, and is
desirous of Peace with us: And being deluded with this vain persuasion, and
besotted (as it were) with this deadly lethargy, they who should be most
watchful over the Lords slock are fallen a sleep,

I beseech therefore, most Illustrious Princes, all of you, who have renounced
the Popish Idolatry, and embraced the Protestant Religion, whether by the name
of Luther or Calvin, that laying aside all discords and animosities (if any be)
amongst your selves, you would all agree in one solemn League (and truly
sacred) amongst your selves against your professed and sworn enemies; and would
believe that the whole Popish party, whoever they be; are your worst enemies;
and if you give not credit to my bare narration; observe (I beseech you) their
actions and motions; for you will easily discern that it is all true which I
have here written. And herein I have not consulted my own advantage, but what
is necessary for the safety of your selves, and the whole Protestant Interest.
I have omitted many particulars that I might not be over tedious; which yet if
I shall find you to make a due use as you ought of what is now written, I will
not fail to add for the common Interest of the Protestant cause. In the mean
time be watchful, take heed to your selves, and give thanks to God.

Francis Broccard, Secetary to the Pope.

FINIS.

