THE ORIGINAL OF PLOTTS, OR, Some Seasonable Reflections upon the late Horrid
Fanatic Conspiracy, in a Sermon Preached at St. Mary's in Dover, on Sunday
September 23, 1683.

By JAMES BROM, A. M. Rector of Cheriton in Kent, and Chaplain to his most
Sacred Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Lee, at the Feathers in Lumbard-street, 1684.

To all the Loyal Gentlemen, and Men worthy, of the Town and Port of Dover.
GENTLEMEN,
THIS plain discourse having met with great encouragement by your serious
attention to it, and favorable approbation of it, does now presume to shelter
it self under your Wing, as not knowing any better Asylum to have recourse to
then your protection, whose exemplary integrity and Loyalty, as they have
endured immoveably the greatest shocks of Fanatic rage and malice, so are they
chiefly able to succor such Persons, who are likely to fall under the same
dismal fate, and to suffer persecution from the malevolent Tongues of those
Foul-mouthed Animals, who were never acquainted with any other civility but
that of railing.

How far this discourse may provoke the cholor of some Men, I shall not much
concern my self; being resolved to follow the advice of the wise Philosopher,
Not to kick against such Asses whose chief Talent has been found to lie mostly
in their Heels, and have for a long while suffered a Delirium in their upper
parts.

But if some of their own party speaks true, (and it is hard not to believe but
that sometime they may do it,) that what was here uttered was delivered with
so great modesty and little Passion, that it must needs be well resented by all
unprejudiced Men, they are obliged rather to give me thanks, then to pick a
quarrel with me for endeavoring to undelude them.

And that this was chiefly the design will plainly appear throughout the whole
series of it, which is to make Men truly sensible of all Seditious Principles
and Practices, and to show them what an Heinous crime it is to Act a Ravillac's
part under a True Protestant disguise, or to hide a Dominican Dagger under a
Presbyterian Cloak, that it was far more advisable to expiate the guilt of a
late Murdered Sovereign before they enter upon a new Tragaedy, and embrue their
hands in the Blood of his surviving Sons; and that to ruin three Kingdoms
twice in one age, is to render themselves the most insatiable sort of Cannibals.

In fine all that this discourse would put them upon is to repent of what is
past from the very bottom of their Hearts, and to promise to do better for the
future without any mental reservations, and by their Loyal Practices to evince
the true sincerity of their intentions: And surely this should be reputed no
unfriendly Office by them to reminde them of such things as are chiefly wanting
in them, when it is a most excellent and seasonable Memento Authorized by that
great Apostle St. Paul himself, put them in mind to be subject to
principalities and powers to obey Magistrates.

But Gentlemen, least whilst I am preaching Memento's to others I forget my
self to you, give me leave to declare, that how plain soever the design was in
Preaching, the Publication of this Sermon is chiefly owing to that absolute
power which your commands have with me, where it will be as impossible for me
to resist their force, as to deny those manifold obligations so frequently
devolved upon me: And if it meet with any frowns of the Fanatic Tribe it will
be a sufficient compensation that it has passed the Pikes with you, whose
candid and unbiased Judgment will be able to buoy it up against the blackest
aspersions: In a just deffiance to which I humbly lay it at your feet, with a
due acknowledgment that I am

Gentlemen, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, JAMES BROM.

THE ORIGINAL OF PLOTTS, etc.
Psalm. 37. v. 12. The wicked Plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him
with his teeth.


IT has been truly observed in the revolutions of the World, that those
Persons who have been realy the most professed Enemies to all Religion,
themselves have been for supplanting its true Professors, and for hindering its
further growth and entertainment with other men; and this is little to be
wondered at, that they who are only guided by the principles of Atheism should
push forward Irreligion; and endeavor to undermine all opposers of it: But for
men who pretend to the height and purity of Religion, at the same time to
strike the greatest blow against it by their practices, is such a rank piece of
Hypocrisy as never any but this age could pretend to Parallel.

Indeed it is too too common with the Pope and his cunning Emissariss, to
consult the Interest of the Triple Diadem above the Crowns, and make the Laws
of Religion no further useful and obliging then they are subservient to the
designs and Policies of his State-Engineers; it is no news to hear him
quarrelling with the greatest Emperors and Princes, and thundering out his
severest Bulls and Anathema's against them, if they will not tamely submit to
his Usurpations and Encroachments: To depose Kings, and absolve Subjects from
their Allegiance, to promote Sedition, and cause Insurrections, to set Kingdoms
in Flames, and draw People into Arms; this is a meritorious piece of service
amongst Jesuits.

But then for True Protestants to quarrel at the Pope for his Bloodiness and
cruelty, and yet write after his Copy in the same Charactars of Blood, to
afright People out of their senses with the hideous noise and amusement of
Popish Massacres and Conflagrations, and yet at the same time privately to
ferment the Nation into Rebellion, and to prepare Presbyterian Blunderbusses to
do the same bloody Execution with Popish Knives and Daggers; I say, to make a
mighty splutter and huge outcry against Popery, and yet at the same time to
take the very same Popish measures of Ruin and Destruction: This is a new way
of supplanting and beating down Popery, which was never known in the World,
till the Saints of the last Edition Chalked out the ready way for it, and
proved by such practices as these, That their only means to become the best
Christians was first to commence the most flagitious and bloody Villians.

And that this was not true either in Theory or Practice, it were well for them
that have of late been Styled publicly, not only the briskest and tightest
part of the Nations Friends, but even the very Anti-Papal Guardians and
Saviors of it: but (alas) these are the Demure and Sober party amongst us,
who have sowed together the Fig Leaves of Sanctimonious pretenses to cover the
most Horrid and Execrable Impietys, and under Holy Samuel's Prophetic Mantle
have fobb'd of all their Satanical delusions amongst the Multitude.

These are they, who under a design of destroying all those whom they are
pleased to call Baals Priests, have approved themselves zealous for those of
Jeroboam, and by the most poisonous Libells that were ever hatched by a brood
of Sanguinary Conspirators, have been promoting the true interest and wellfair
of the Nation: These are the men who with lift up Eyes and sanctified Lips;
call God a Thousand times to witness the Integrity of their Hearts, and the
Loyalty of their Intentions, whilst upon pain and peril of another
Meroz-Course, they were secretly calling out the People to the help of the
Lord; to the help of the Lord against the Mighty: Nay, whilst they were
solemnly protesting with the most bitter Asceverations, both in their Pamphlets
and Discourses against all Protestant-Plotts, and Associations against the
Government, they were even at that time more eager and hott upon the Sent of it.

Thus whilst they were wheadling us into a good Opinion of their Actions, they
were then at work with the most Hellish Contrivances, and the Saints in the
Conventicle proved Devils in the Caball. For King and People were there
appointed as Sheep for the Slaughter, and Church and State both designed a
Sacrifice to their Cruelty and Revenge: And what Malice so implacable, what
Rage so inexorable as Fanatic Rage? Nunc Cinna pius Cinna and Sylla, Marius
and Catiline were men of Mercy to these, Maugre all their Republican Principles
and Massacres at Rome; and even Turks and Infidels, had these men's villanys
succeeded, would have abhorred their very memories as the prodigies of Humane
Nature, and a shame to all Mankind.

But God who sets bounds to the Tempestuous Waves of the Sea, and says, Hither
shall ye go and no further, has put a Hook into the Nostrils of our Republican
Leviathan's, and has as yet stopped them in their Career by discovering their
Conspiracy; and though the Wicked plotteth against the Just, and gnasheth upon
him with his Teeth, yet God, who sits in the Heavens, shall Laugh him to
Scorn, for he sees that his day is Coming.

The Greek word in the Septuagint (...) which we translate plotteth is more
significantly rendered by the Latins, Contra jus and fas superstitiose observat,
which implies an illegal and unlawful, or any overcurious and even
superstitious observing and taking notice of, and misconstruing the Actions of
another to his detriment and prejudice, a prying so far into them as to be able
to Obviate and Countermine them, and hinder them from pursuing those ends to
which they were directed: So that the malicious design of the wicked against
the just, which David seems to decipher, is this, That he is still making it
his business privately to do the Righteous Man the greatest mischief, by
misrepresenting his Actions to the Public, by taking such malicious Courses
and Methods against him as may render his life very Dangerous and Uneasy.

And from the Words thus explained, I shall branch out my Discourse into three
Heads.

First, To show you that it has ever been the fate of all Virtuous and good
Men to be Exposed to the malicious Plots and Contrivance of wicked Miscreants.

Secondly, I shall consider from what Grounds and Causes such Plots and
Contrivances do most usually proceed.

Thirdly, I shall deduce such practical conclusions as may be sufficient to
deterr men from such vile and infamous practices.

First, For good and virtuous men to be exposed to the Malicious Plots and
Contrivances of those that are wicked has ever been an hard fate which has
attended them in the World: It Is no new thing for Religion to meet with
opposition from such Persons whose passions and interests are inconsistent with
it; Christian Religion, we know, is the most Rational and Excellent
Institution that can be imagined; it lays a great restraint upon the passions,
and bridles all irregular and disorderly affections, it limits men's unbounded
and extravigant desires, and puts them off from all base and unworthy projects
and pursuits, it teaches them to be just and honest, simple and open, candied
and upright in all their Actions, and would have them to be as innocent as
Doves, though it allows them likewise the wisdom of Serpents; and where these
are not the visible effects of its Holy Doctrine and Precepts, it meets with a
very strange Reception and Entertainment in the World.

For where men once give up themselves to the conduct of their passions, and
indulge themselves entirely in all the common prejudice of Humanity, where they
Sacrifice to their interest as the greatest of all Deitys, and measure all
Religion by complying with such a party, or adhering to such a faction, or
espousing such an interest; if Religion do in such cases exert its vigor and
zeal to beat down such palpable Irregularitys amongst such People, it shall be
sure to be censured and dealt withal as an enemy, because it is resolved so
fairly to tell them the Truth.

And hence arise evil thoughts, and false surmizes, and wrangling debates, and
perverse disputings by men of corrupt minds, who turn Faith into Faction, and
Religion into Rebellion, and all Government must be Abolished that is not of
their Mold and all Humane Appointments Abrogated that are not stamped with
their Mark; and if Governors will not be huff'd out of their Authority by
their demands, then all their Actions must be immediately misrepresented to the
Crowd, and the People must be forthwith harangu'd into mutiny and sedition, and
Plots and Arms must be the last refuge of the Saints to set up Christ's Kingdom
in opposition to Caesar's.

That these have been the proceedings for some years in this Kingdom, I think
none so great a Recluse to be ignorant of at this day; for who ever more
persecuted by seditious Boutefeus then our most Gracious King? What ever more
harast'd by Factious Spirits then our Apostolical Church? Was not our
Sovereigns Restoration very wonderful and Miraculous, and has not God
attested his care and protection over him ever since that time by such a series
of Deliverances, as might convince his Enemies (one would think) that he is
above the reach of their malice, and the very darling and favorite of Heaven
it self? And yet for all this, have they not taken all advantages to stuff the
Pillow of his Crown with Thorns, and to make the Throne totter, and become
uneasy to his Majesty? Did not an ungrateful Absalom endeavor to steal away
the Hearts of his People from him, whilst a false and trecharous Achitophel did
form and marshall them into Clubbs and partys against him? Did not the railing
Shimeis and bawling Rabshakah's of the party endeavor to blast his reputation
with his Subjects, whilst the canting Sheba's by blowing the Trumpet of
sedition did Alarm them all into another Holy War? And whilst they were
conjuring up such Hurricanes against the King, was not the Church to be
involved in the same general calamity, and both his and the Churches Friends
doomed to the same portion of sufferings, under which for so many years
together they had once so foundly smarted?

Alas, these tenderhearted and purely conscientious Persons, could by no
means away with the harmless Rites of the Church, but were preparing their
Swallows again for its goods and revenues, and though one poor small Ceremony
might by no means go down for fear of choking them, yet a Bishopric would
certainly have been a very pleasant morsel for a breakfast, for Church Lands
never yet came within their motion of Sacrilege; and though decimating and
sequesting and plundring was out of fashion, it had been a Trade which proved
formerly so beneficial to the Saints, that they began to grow bigg with hope
of renewing the Monopoly.

In fine Dagon must down, for Kingly Power grew burthensom, and the Lords were
become useless, and the Bishops dangerous, and we had nothing left amongst us
but through paced Judges, and Evil Counselors, and Flattering Divines, buisy
and designing Papists and French Councills; and since the Ministers of State
were inexcuseable, and deserved all the fury (as one of the Hellish Plate
Redivivus.
Agents speaks) which must one time or other be let lose upon them; now was the
time for the True Protestant Flails and other new Instruments of Torture to
fly about their Bones, and take Vengeance of Gods, because their reputed
Enemies.

Psalm. 24. v. 5, 6, 7.
But Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us over as a Prey unto their
Teeth, Our soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler, the Snare
is broken, and we are delivered, and our help stands yet in the Name of the
Lord, who has made Heaven and Earth.

Plott it self, I shall proceed to the second thing, and consider the grounds
and Original of this and all other Plotts and Conspiracies in the World; which
I shall resolve into three general Causes.

Supreme Power, and all civil Authority is derived originally from them, that
there is a mutual compact between a Prince and his Subjects, and that if he
perform not his Duty they are dischar ged from theirs; why, it is only giving
out that the Prince has forfeited his Trust, and is accountable for the breach
of that power with which he was Entrusted; and then the next thing by course
follows to depose or Murder him, and he falls justly too by the Sword for
those, which they call, his Crimes and Misdemeanors.

Again, what greater Encouragement can possibly be given to conspire against a
Government, and contrive its utter Subversion, then when men are told publicly
that self preservation is such a fundamental Law of Nature as superseeds the
Obligation of all others which stand in competition with it, and that it is
Lawful for their own defense, and the defense of their Religion to enter into
what Leagues, Covenants, or Associations they please, even against the will and
consent of the Supreme Magistrate? And can there be any higher incentive to
Rebellion in the world, then to Preach amongst the Rabble, that the Doctrine of
the Gospel concerning patient suffering of injuries is not incompatible with
taking up Arms against our Government, and that Resistance of Superiors is a
thing very lawful, where our Rights and Liberties are invaded by them?

Nay once more, when Rebellion grows prosperous, and Conspiracies are Crowned
with success, when Victory flies to the sides of Oppressors, and Kings are led
in triumph for a spectacle to the Multitude, tell the People but then, as it
was taught them in the late Wars, that Possession and Strength give a right to
Govern, and success in a cause or enterprise proclaim it to be lawful and
just, and to pursue it is to comply with the will of God, because it is to
follow the conduct of his Providence; and I defye any better method to
instigate them afresh then this will prove, for it pusheth them forward upon
new attempts, and it makes them so daring and desperate in that Cause, which
they believe God himself has owned so providentially, that they will Caball
and Plott, and Mutiny and Fight against all who shall oppose them in their
Resolves and Designs, being still flushed with hopes of a glorious success; and
tha t God will never desert that People or that cause, for which once he did so
signally interpose his mighty Providence.

Thus where men have once sucked in such dangerous principles as these, they
scruple not to act according to those Principles, and they must needs prove
very pernicious in order to the undermining the Peace and prosperity of that
State where they are entertained, because they are the very bane of all
Obedience and Loyalty, and transform men into such horrid monsters of Anarchy
and Rebellion, as are unfit to live in any Christian Community, being like the
Plague that poisons all places with their infectious Contagion; as we have
felt by too woeful experience in these three flourishing Kingdoms.

Leviathan of arbitrary power shall raise such panick fears, that those very
shadows and Chimaera's like so many Igens fatui shall mislead deluded ignorance
into distraction and rebellion, whilst the great Knaves trail the Carrion, and
the little Fools hunt after, as one Phraseth it wittily to this purpose.

Again let it be but given out though with all the incoherencys and absurditys
imaginable that the Pope is advancing with his Holy Banners into this Kingdom,
and is resolved to make a reprizal of all his lost ground amongst us; tell them
that the Bishops are Pensioners to his Holiness, and are resolved to open both
their Churches and Treasuries to readmit his Sacred Train; it is not all these
men's Protestations, or Tests, discourses, writings and Sermons can be able to
undisguise the deluded rabble, or gain them any reverence from these their
professed Enemies; but they must be hollowed out of the World with the common
cry of the multitude, Away with these fellows it is not fit that they should
live: thus Christ must suffer by the decree of the Pharisees, least Heathen
Rome prevail, and the Romans come and take away both their place and Nation,
though the very death of Christ brought in the Romans to destroy them; and the
Church of England must be voted down by our Pharisaical Dissenters, least that
proving an inlet to Popery the modern Romanists by that means take an occasion
to root them out; when indeed the case is plain, that if ever they should again
prevail to the subversion of our Established Church, Rome would pay them
quickly in the very same coin, and they but hasten their own Ruin, by the
contrivance of ours.

Let not then any foolish fears or jealousys, that are conjured up, affright us
out of our Loyalty and Obedience to our Governors, for those are only the
State-Tools of Hot-spurd Bigots and Incendiars, and are always used as Boys do
Vizors to fright every body but themselves that wear them: And though there is
not the least shadow or appearance for such surmizes, and all is rank Forgery
which they scatter amongst the Multitude; yet because they know the Temper of
most English men, that they fear nothing which they see, but all things that
they hear, which if unpleasing, and ungrateful do presently set them a kicking
and madding against the Government; they gratify their foolish humors in this
affair, and after they have mustered up a whole legion of public Grievances in
the Nation, they magnify these very Annusances with such artifices of Faction,
that the People are induced to believe these imaginary Castles and Scare-Crows
to be real and substantial Truths, and so run into confusion and an opposition
of that Government, which were it not for these men they would quietly
acquiesce in, and think it the greatest happiness to live quietly under,
withal Obedience and Submission.

Leagnes, and Plotts, and Conspiracys, is an uneasiness under Government, and
an itching desire after new changes and Alterations: Though after all the
mighty heats and debates amongst Politicians Monarchies have at last been Voted
for the best of Governments, and one Tyrant (if so it happen) more tolerable
then thirty at Athens, or a greater number in England; Yet so besotted are some
Bigors to Commonwealth principles and practices that a Solomon upon the Throne
shall be made impeaceable at their tribunal, and they who perhaps Alphonsus
like could have contrived the World better, had they been admitted
Privy-Counsellors with God Almighty at the Creation, no doubt are so
opinionative as thoroughly to be persuaded that they can Govern the World better
too then Gods Vicegerents who are at the Helm, might their measures be taken
in the administration of Government.

But what are the measures which these men of Policy propose? Why, if the
Prerogative was but little more paired, and Church Government new modeled, and
squared more exactly to the Presbyterian cut, you should perhaps have these
Men's wits leave off working for a while, till the next Moon caused a new
Fermentation in the Brain; and when their Lunacy did return, new projects must
be set on Foot, and down goes Presbytery as too severe and Tyrannical, and a
Jus divinum must be enstamp'd with a Nemine Contradicent upon Independency;
till at length the Moon changes again, and then it being thought too much to
Monopolize true Christianity to any one particular sect of Men, at last comes
out a Toleration, and like Noah's Ark takes in all clean and unclean Creatures
within the Pale of the Church, till our Heresies grow as numerous as the very
Letters of our Creeds, and the Church it self become realy, what Julian once
falsely traduced it to be, a Sanctuary for all the greatest Villainies, and most
horrid Diabolical illusions in the World.

And these are the true Fruits and mischiefs of unnecessary changes in
Government, which should make us utterly detest all Abettours of them, and to
dread the very thoughts of any further Reformation, until they could all agree
upon a better then is established: For it is the duty of Reformers to provide
themselves of a sure remedy before they take notice of the wound, and that
Chyrurgeon deserves to be punished who first opens the sick Man's Vein and then
runs for things to close it: And they that would bleed the Kingdom in the
Basilick Vein, (as in their own Phrase to their eternal infamy has been once
done already,) and would heal the distempers of the Nation without having
better remedies at hand, which are more necessary and expedient then at present
are applied, is such an impracticable way to cure it, as none but State-Quacks,
and Bloody Empiricks would pretend to, and are therefore to be punished as such
unskillful miscreants whose proper work is not to cure but to ruin that
Kingdom.

And now having Briefly acquainted you how far the malice of wicked Men
prompts them forward to commit the greatest outrages by their cursed Plotts and
Conspiracies; and what is the source of all such Devilish Machinations; it will
be requisite in the third place to deduce from thence such practical
conclusions as may be sufficient to deterr men from such vile and infamous
practices against either Church or State.

In order to which I desire it may be considered,

Prove. 8. v. 15.
If by God Kings Reign, and Princes do decree Justice, to wound their Persons
is to stabb God in Effigy, nor can their Honor be Eclipsed without lessening
Gods too: He that quarrels with his Prince quarrels with God who has bestowed
upon him all his Regalia of Kingly power, and he that endeavors to undermine
or betray his Sovereign out of any selfish principle, or secular interest and
design, was our Blessed Savior now upon Earth, would Judas like venture his
Soul to betray him too, was he but sure to come to a good Market for him.

Hence the Giants of old who warred against Jupieter are a very true Emblem of
all Seditions Rebels; for to raise commotions against Kings is to wage War
with Heaven, whose Vicegerents they are, and what greater affront can be
given? what more open violance offered to the King of Kings? To be still
carping and repining at all Public administration of affairs is to question
Gods wisdom in the choice of his own Ministers, and in plain Terms to tell him,
that he is much to blame in bestowing Crowns upon Fools or wicked men: But
methinks what Luther said concerning Philip Melancthon who was more disquieted
in his thoughts then he needed to have been concerning the confused state of
things in his days, Monendus est Philippus desinut esse Rector Mundi, is very
applicable to our purpose at this present time: Every hot-brained Fanatic is
duly to be admonished that he would cease to take upon him the Government of
the World, as if he knew how to dispose of it to a better Lieutenancy then the
Almighty; and consequently that the Brethren would once be persuaded to leave
all their Mutinuss and Seditious Practices, their raillery, and detraction,
their Plotts and Associations against Kings and all that are in Authority,
because God looks upon it as a contempt and a defiance given to himself, and
therefore does assure them, 1 Samuel 15. v. 23. Romans 13. v. 2.
that as Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft. So they that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation.

Again God is pleased to declare his utter distaste and abhorrence of all such
practices by the Providential discoveries he so frequently makes of the
greatest conspiracies in the World: And indeed there is no greater argument for
the Providence of God against the rankest Atheists living, that he does
continually take cognizance of all affairs of Sublunary beings; nor is there
any surer Testimony of Gods mercy and loving kindness to the Sons of Men, then
the great care he has taken for the preservation of his People, and the
wonderful deliverances which in all ages of the World he has wrought for the
Church, maugre all the powerful and Politic attempts of Men or Devils to
undermine and destroy it.

And if upon this account God owns any cause by making it successful, which I
showed you before it was the Doctrine of Fanatics, what may they judge of our
cause now, by the success and happiness of the late discovery? For if this
argument be true, the Gates and Turrets of the City, who now groan under the
Heads and Quarters of the late Executed Rebels, will Proclaim to all the World
the gracious Success on our side, and that God has visibly espoused our Cause
against those Antimonarchicall and Anti-Episcopall Zealots who did oppose it?

Fanatic Fraternity is as demonstrable as to show you where they have been
looked upon as Antichristian, and I defye any one to point me out the time
where ever they were yet publicly disowned by a joint concurrence of all their
Sanctified Tribes.

Read over, if you can think it worth your while to puddle in so much filth and
impiety, some of the Books or Sermons of Calamy or Baxter, Owen or Goodwyn,
Jenkyns or Marshal, and of diverse others who were the Heads and the very
Oracles of both the Sectarian parties, and you will find the greatest Villainies
countenanced, the horrid'st Blasphemies vented, the deepest Treasons
encouraged, and the most execrable murder of the late King himself justified in
their Pulpitts and Presses, which have been the accursed Fountains of all our
deplorable calamities: Or if you please to take an infallible Antidote against
them all, read over the Dissenters sayings, published on this very account by
the true Heroic Atlas of our established Church, and you will meet there with
such a Farrago of wicked principles and opinions flowing all immediately from
the same sink of Fanaticism, as indeed is no where else to be met withal but
in Hell it self: For what false and horrid Stories do they there tell God
Almighty of the King and the Church, as the same Incomparable Author observes,
and then what Blasphemous Commissions, in the Name of the High God, do they
sham upon their Congregations? They tell the people on the one hand that it is
the will of God to have Kings put to death, Altars profaned, Temples
demolished; whilst they treat the dreadful Majesty of Heaven on the other hand
as if he himself was to come in for a share in the next Crown or Church Lands
that fell: They bless God for successes, and pray for blessings that carry
damnation along with them, imputing the motions of Hell to the very breathings
of the Holy Ghost.

Now all these things were not done privately in a Corner, or shrouded up
closely in the shades of darkness, but were published boldly and openly in the
face of the Sun, as doctrines fit to be propagated and espoused by all true
Christians; nor were these the particular sentiments only of some private men,
but the approved opinions of all their principal Teachers, some of which were
Assembly-men, urged with all the Zeal, and inculcated to their People with all
the vigor imaginable, and some of these Persons are alive at this very day,
and we find them Men of the same Kidneys still, for they have not yet retracted
any of these Seditious principles, nor recanted for their dangerous opinions
and tenants, nor given the State any reasonable satisfaction to believe that
they are sorry for what they have done, nor declared any visible reluctance or
regret for all their former misdemeanors, repentance in a Fanatic being as
great a Miracle as conversion in a Jew.

Now it is impossible that Men who are poisoned with such Unchristian sentiments
as these can ever be Members of a Church truly Christian: And I never read of
any Rebels that were Canonized for Saints by those who did believe themselves
to be the best and Truest Protestants, till Mr. Baxter first placed them in his
Saints Everlasting Rest; for Christiaanity truly primitive, never owned any
such principles or Persons in the World, but lays down other Maxims of another
stamp and nature; it commands us Love and Peace, Unity and Obedience, and
abhorrs all Schisms and Factions and Dissensions as Plagues and Firebrarnds; it
obliges us to be subject to the higher powers and to obey for conscience sake,
and to submit our selves to froward and cruel as well as to mild and Gentle
Governors; it allows us not, though surrounded with Storms of persecution, to
take our measures of obedience from our strength or our numbers, for the
primitive Christians were more in number and greater in power then their
Persecutors, and yet nunquam conjuratio erupit, faith the Father, there never
was any uprour or hurly-burly amongst them, but in reverence to their Master
and his example, Interimi se a paucioribus quam interimere patiebantur, they
rather suffered themselves to be killed by a smaller number then themselves
are: And St. Cyprian cries out, Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur reluctatur,
quamvis nimius and copiosus noster populus; none of us when we are apprehended
strive or endeavor to revenge your unjust violence, allthough our People are
very many and more numerous then you are; and Tertullian gives the reason,
Occidi licet occidere non licet; God has made it Lawful for us to suffer our
selves to be killed, but not Lawful for us to kill.

And indeed the doctrine of Resistance was never taught in the Christian
School, till the Pope and his Jesuits laid down plainly the Text, and our True
Protestant Scotch and English new upstart Theologico-politici began to lick up
the Venom, and were pleased to raise their Holy comments upon it; and it was
quite beaten out of countenance, till of late an Apostate Julian, almost as
bad as Julian whose life he writes, did endeavor again to bring it into
reputation with the Mobile: Sure I am that the whole life of our Savior was a
confutation of such vile Practices, his rebuking St. Peter for rashly St. Mat.
25. 52.
using the Sword, was a plain discountenancing such unevangelical principles,
the sufferings of all the Apostles and primitive Martyrs are a sufficient
comment upon the doctrine of our Savior in this particular, and in short
Erasmus was much in the right when he lays down this for one of the greatest of
Truths, Nulla haeresis perniciosior, etc. No heresy is more pernicious then
this doctrine of Resistance, the whole Stream of Apostolical Men running quite
counter to it, both in their principles and practices.

So that till men learn to be more peaceable and quiet, more submissive and
obedient, less mutinous and refractory, less censorious and seditious, till
they leave off pleading conscience, for not doing that which a
Gospel-conscience tells them they are obliged to do, and never take up Arms,
raise any insurrections, or confederate in any private leagues or associations
against their Governors; let them list themselves in what Congregations, and
Church themselves in what Assemblies, and pretend to what measures of
Saintshipp they please, I darr assure them (if the Gospel be true) that they
are not yet enrolled in the Catalogue of Gods true Saints, who never as yet
held up one hand in adoration to God Almighty, and with the other rebelled
against and endeavored to murder his Anointed.

Relations have falln Sacrifices to revenge and cruelty; the Rivers shall be
Dyed with Purple Gore, and the Air become infected with the contagion of the
slain; the most stately Cities shall be disrobed of all their glory, and the
very Woods and Mountains of the Country shall want caves and receptacles for
wandering Exiles and Pilgrims: Nobility is then no bar against oppression, and
Birth and Family do but at that time make the condition more deplorable; nor
will Sacred places meet with better usage then any other, and will prove but
very weak Asylum's and insignificant Sanctuaries to those that have been
employed therein; it is no news then to behold the abomination of desolation
standing in the most holy place, and the House of Prayer made in the most
literal sense a Den of Thieves; and it will be less matter of wonder for a fat
Benefice to become a crime and witness too against its Incumbent, and he to be
voted unorthodox, that is worth the plundring.

That this is all Romance or but barely speculation I wish our late unhappy
times did not fully contradict, but (alas) we then so dearly experienced the
mischiefs of Sedition, and what direful consequences ensued when the Rebels
were in the Saddle, that the least apprehension of such dismal revolutions may
reasonably affect as at the greatest dread and horror, and the burnt Child may
justly fear the Fire a second time.

but in the Takers; they can Rebel without Treason, because Kings being only
the Peoples Creatures, it is lawful to unmake what themselves Created; and they
can Kill without Murder, because what the Word cannot, the Sword may lawfully
do: For there is such a strange kind of bewitching infatuation in Rebellion,
that it many times so far imposes upon their Reason as to make them believe
themselves innocent, when they are Devils Incarnate, or hellish Agents walking
in humane shapes: This was very evident in the Regicides that suffered for the
Barberous Murder of that Glorious Martyr Charles the first, their eyes were so
blinded even to the very last, that they could not see their Error, but
justified what they had done with so much boldness and pertinacity, as if they
had seen a Vision of Christ holding forth to them a Crown of Glory for their
perseverance in their Villainy: and the Scotch Rebels were so far from being
sorry for their Crimes, that they cry up that Rising for a very meritorious
Act, and Canonize the chief Ringleaders at Pentland-Hills for Martyrs: And it
is to be heartily wished that they who lately suffered for their too apparent
Treasons had died with a deeper sense of them then they are apprehended to have
done.

Again, Rebellion and Disobedience are much the worse sins, because (as it has
been truly observed by a Reverend and Learned Dr. Pierce.
Divine) they are Luciferian Crimes, sins which can never attend men to Heaven,
having brought down the Angels of Heaven to Hell: There are some sort of sins,
such as Drunkenness and Whoredom (however Damning) that the Devil cannot
possible commit; but Envy, and Malice, Shism and Sacrilege, Hypocricy and
Rebellion and Intoxicating Pride are peculiar to him, and they are the Devils
sins so properly, that they are properly called Devilish in men or Christians
where ever found: And as these of all sins are the most diabolical, so they
are the most damning, which is very evident from the terrible emphasis and
force St. Peter puts upon the Word (...) 2 Pet. 2. 9. saying of them, who
despise Government, that they are chiefly or more especially reserved by the
Lord unto the day of Judgment to be punished: And certainly then it will be to
great a hazard for a Christian to be so foolhardy as to venture his immortal
Soul in the point of Resistance upon the bare assurance of Mr. Bridges or any
of his Frye, that St. Paul's (...) Romans 13. 2. signifies only a Temporal Mulet,
and not Eternal damnation without Repentance.

Let none then who know themselves guilty of these damning sins value
themselves a rush the more because they can boast with the proud Luke 18. v. 11*
Pharisee, I am no Extortioner, Adulterer, Drunkard, or the like*; for as
Rebellion is a sin of the highest magnitude, which erases all the common notice
of Duty and Loyalty, and even humanity too out of the mind, so it hurries a Man
down to Hell seared and hardened in his Villainy, where no doubt the preeminence
of the hottest place is reserved for those who die in that condition without
repentance.



And here we shall find Gebal and Ammon, and Amalek with the uncircumsised
Philistines, all in a confederacy against the established Government;
Presbyterians and Independents, Ana-Baptists, and Fifth Monarchy Men, all
joining issues to make the King Glorious, that is in their sense a Martyr as
his Father was; as if the Royal Ghost was still Haunting their Conventicles,
and no Blood could still propitiate him but that of his own Son: Those who are
off as different Interests as opinions all engage in this, and those whose
affections are as much alienated from one another (singly considered) as from
us, all agree upon this account in an unjarring Harmony: Herod and Pontius
Pilate are made Friends that Christ may suffer, and those who are the most
bitter and implaceable Enemies to one another (when time serves) in their
Principles, Doctrine and Government; all unite in a league against their common
Enemies King and Church.

And ought not such Men to be avoided with the greatest horror and
detestation? Or shall these any longer find favor from us, who desire only to
be so kind as to cut our Throats out of courtesy? Oh, let us not only shun them
as we would do Fire or Plague, or Wild or Ravenous Beasts, but let us pray too
against theirwickedness, as Holy David did in the like case. Psalm. 83. y. 9, --
18.
Do unto them as unto the Midianites: as to Sisera, as to Jabin at the brook of
Kison: Which perished at En-dor: They became as Dung for the Earth. Make their
Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: Yea all their Princes as Zebah and Zalmunna:
Who said, let us take to our selves the House of God in possession. O my God,
make them like a Wheel: As the Stubble before the Wind. As the Fire burns a
Wood: And as the Flame sets the Mountains on Fire: So persecute them with
thy Tempest; and make them afraid with thy Storm. Fill their faces with shame,
that they may seek thy Name, O LORD. Let them be confounded and troubled for
ever: Yea let them be put to shame and perish; That men may know that thou,
whose Name alone is JEHOVAH: art the most high over all the Earth.

But if some will not do this, because they do not imagine things so bad as
they are represented, and will still brazen it out against a True Protestant
Plott, though the Treason is as apparent as if it had been wrote with a
Sunbeam; should an Angle come now from Heaven, and attest the truth of these
things, they would believe him too, to be only some misguided Tory Apparition;
and it is to be feared, that those who give themselves over to such invincible
scruples and obstinacy, have either a hand in these proceedings or hearts that
wish well to them; and so nothing will be able to work in them better things,
till public Justice brings them to open and Condign Punishment.

Rebellious Principles and Practices: Now what Church that is, is Conspicious
to all the World by that indelible mark of Loyalty which is her proper badge
and honor; I mean that truly Primitive and Apostolical Church, the Church of
England as now Established; which never yet bestowed the Kings supremacy on the
Pope, nor huff'd him out of his power to bestow it upon the People: It by no
means can allow an entrenchment upon prerogative, and it as much desires that
property should be secured by all honest and lawful means: It sues for mercy
of the Prince, but it would not have the Subject abuse it to ill purposes; and
though it does allow them a liberty in a regular way to do that which they
judge to be best for themselves, yet it by no means gives them leave to tell
their Prince what he must do, or to thrust themselves in as spies upon, or
judges over his Actions: In fine it enjoins us to obey him in all things that
are lawful and honest, and if he commands us otherwise, it permits us not to
Rebel, but bids us patiently suffer for what we cannot freely comply with.

This is the avowed doctrine of over Church (for which her fame may be justly
celebrated our all the Christian World) in which let us all with one consent
resolve to live and dye; for where can we be taught better, or in what
Communion can we hope sooner to gain Heaven then in this, whose principles are
so sound, whose doctrine so pure, whose Rites and Ceremonies are so few and
decent, and whose practices are all so agreeable to the first and purest ages
of Christianity. Which if once seriously considered would not only confirm us
in this Faith, and make us firm to our Church, but persuade others too to enter
again into the bosom of it, who have so perfidiously without any just grounds
revolted from it.

For why should they any longer suffer themselves to be deluded, and why should
they not suspect that there may possibly be some corruptions in their Churches
as well as any in ours? Now that there are both in principle and practice
amongst them I have undeniably demonstrated, and would they but themselves
weigh both sides impartially, and without prejudice lay things to Heart, they
would be judges against themselves and embrace our Communion: For what
corruptions can be greater then those that proceed from rebellious principles
and Treasonable practices, which their Churches still do most certainly
maintain, and never did yet by any public Assembly or Remonstrance disclaim or
openly renounce: and why then should any be so scrupulous to hold Communion
with our Church for fear of some imaginary corruptions, and yet cleave to such
Churches as are visibly more corrupt?

Return then, O Shulamite, return, and if there be any straglers now amongst
us, let me earnestly beg of them to return to this our fold, that we may be
all but one Flock under one Sheepherd Christ Jesus: For it is now high time for
men to see their errors, and if such Treasons and Conspiracies as these, will
not satisfy their consciences that those who are the Leaders and Abettours of
them are false Teachers, and Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing; Heaven it self cannot
work such men's conversion.

But we heartily entreat you for the Kings safety, whose life you all pretend
so highly to value, and yet can never be secure, whilst you so nicely
distinguish betwixt his Person and his Authority; for the Interest of these
Kingdoms, in whose welfare must needs consist your happiness, and yet your
mutual Feers and Animosities do daily lessen and undermine; and for the peace
and comfort of your own souls, and that Faith and conscience, which you lay so
great a claim to, and yet so constantly Shipwreck by your obstinate Schifm and
Separation, to believe these things to be really true* and to become at last
sensible that by embracing these Loyal principles which our Church teaches
you, you will be certainly in the fairest way to promote your best and chiefest
Interest, that is, to do well and prosper here, and to attain far greater
degrees of felicity hereafter; whereas all other Seditious Tenants expose men
to certain unavoidable dangers, penalties, and misfortunes in this life; and
hazard their eternal Salvation in that which is to come.

I shall conclude all with that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I call Heaven and Earth
to record this day against you, that I have set before you Life and Death,
Blessing and Cursing, therefore choose Life that both thou and thy Seed may Live.

FINIS.

