AN Invitation of LOVE UNTO THE SEED of GOD, Throughout the WORLD.

With A WORD To the WISE in HEART. And A LAMENTATION For NEW ENGLAND.

Given forth from the movings of the Spirit of the LORD, by one who is known to
the World by the Name of JONE BROOKSOP.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson.

AN INVITATION of LOVE unto the Seed of GOD throughout the World, etc.
OH hearken all ye People of the Earth, and listen all ye Inhabitants of the
same: Oh hearken what the Lord speaks to his People, He speaks Peace unto his
Israel, and to all them that put their trust in him; for says Christ Jesus, I
am the Light of the World, which does enlighten every one that comes into the
World. Oh hearken to that of God in all your Consciences, which checks for sin
and for iniquity, and for every thing that is contrary to that of God in all
men's Consciences, which is the Light which Christ Jesus has enlightened every
one withal that comes into the World. Oh my dear Friends, consider the Loving
kindness of the Lord God unto your Souls, that he should So love the World, as
to send his only begotten Son into the World, that they through him might
believe; in whom is Life, and the Life is the Light of men. Oh let not the
Loving Kindness of the Lord slip out of your Minds, but fear and dread before
him, who made Heaven, and Earth, and all things that are therein; and has all
Powers in his hand, and can turn them whenever it pleases him, and howsoever
it pleases him. Oh fear and dread before his holy blessed Name for ever more,
Amen.

For at his Name must every knee bow, and every tongue confess, even at the
Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior, and Redeemer, whom we witness
come, to take away sin in the flesh; which all the Teachers in the World are
ignorant of, that tell people, that they cannot be free from sin while they
live in this Life; which is contrary to Christ's Commands, which says, Be ye
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: and, Be ye holy, as I am holy: And
so they keep poor people always learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus. For Christ, he came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, that they through him might believe, in
whom is Life and Salvation, for all them that believe in the Light which Christ
Jesus has enlightened them withal.

And so all People, great and small, high and low, rich and poor, of what sort
soever ye be, Mind the fear of the Lord God of Life, every one of you in your
own perticulars; while you have time, prize it; lest the Lord come and smite
the Earth with a Curse: For assuredly, a Day of account must come upon all
flesh, to try all them that dwell upon the Earth, whether their deeds be
wrought in God, yea or nay: For the Lord God of Life is risen, and arising to
plead with all the Inhabitants of the Earth, and they shall be as stubble
before him; for our God is a terrible God unto the wicked, for all the proud,
and all that do wickedly, shall be as stubble before Him with whom we have to
do. For assuredly, a Day of Account must come upon all flesh, to try them
withal; and every man's work that will no abide the fire, must be burnt up, of
what sort soever it shall be: For there is not a deed done in the Body, but an
account must be given for it, whether it be good, or whether it be evil: the
mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it; Who will perform all his Promises
made unto his own Seed. All praises be given unto him who made all things by
the word of his Power, and Man to serve him. And now is his everlasting Trumpet
sounding unto all Nations, that whosoever will come and drink of the Rivers of
Life freely, may come and buy Wine and Milk without Money and without price.
And let every one that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let him come, and
take of the Water of Life freely: And so all People, who desire to know
Salvation for your own Souls, come to the Light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened you withal. And now has the Lord alone set up his Standard, and is
displaying his Ensign, that all Nations may come unto it and be saved, who is
Israel's King and Redeemer, from all Storms, and Tempests, whatsoever may be
suffered to come upon them to try them withal. Oh! my dearly beloved Friends,
in whom there is any tenderness toward God and his Truth, consider what you
have been doing, and how you have spent your time, whether in the Service of
the Lord, or in serving of your own Wills? To that in your Consciences I speak,
which is God's Witness, and will bear witness, against all that which is
contrary to it in your own particulars.

And if you love the Light, you will bring your deeds to the Light, that the
Light may prove them, whether they be wrought in God yea or nay; but if you
hate it, it will be your condemnation, (the Light) but I exhort thee whoever
thou art, as thou tenderest the good of thy own Soul, that thou love the Light
which is the Life of Men, and embrace it, and love it with all thy heart, and
with all thy mind, with all thy Soul, and with all thy strength; Oh! love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy Neighbor as thy self; so shall thou
come to feel the Plant which the Lords right hand has planted in thee, to grow
up, if thou love it; for this know asuredly oh Man, that the Lord is come to
look for Fruit, For he that sows to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption; But he that sowes to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap Life
Everlasting; and Joy and Peace, which shall never be taken from them; And so in
tender love unto the Seed of God in all People, do I write, to warn all that
love their own Souls, to fear and dread before the Lord God of Life and Power,
for the Lord is at hand, as thousands can witness at this day; all praises be
given unto his holy Blessed Name for ever; for his Love is unspeakable unto the
Children of men, and his Ways past finding out; Oh! that men would praise the
Lord for his goodness, and for his loving kindness toward the Children of men,
for his Mercy endures for ever, throughout all Generations, unto such as love
his holy blessed Name for ever: Oh, let the house of Israel, say, that his
mercy endures for ever; and let the house of Jacob say, that his mercy endures
for ever; and let the house of Aron say, that his Mercy endures for ever: Oh!
let all them that know him say, that his Mercy endures for ever; and let all
the Ransomed ones of the Lord, say, that his Mercy endures for ever; who have
tasted of his Everlasting Love, which is shed abroad in our Hearts toward his
own Seed: And in that Love which the Lord God of my Life has loved me with
all, do I exhort thee, and beseech thee unto whom this may come, that thou
slight not the day of thy Visitation, for if thou do, the Lord will slight
thee, when the day of thy Calamity comes upon thee to try thee; therefore I
say unto thee, slight it not, least the Lord come and spue thee out of his
Mouth; and thou seek the Lord with tears as Esau did, and could not find the
Blessing; For the Spirit of the Lord shall not always strive with Man;
therefore sink down low to the witness of God in thee, that so thou may come
to have Peace with God in thy own particular; and so being obedient unto the
Light of Christ in thee, thereby thou may come to witness victory over all
that which has veiled from thee the Pure Seed of God in thee; and so my dearly
beloved Friend, unto whom my Life reaches, that all might come to the Knowledge
of Life in themselves, and live; which is the desire of my Soul, and the desire
of all them that love and fear the Lord Jesus Christ, who is my Life, and the
length of my Days, in whom I live, not I, but Christ in me, the Hope of Glory,
as the Scriptures of truth do bear witness: Unto that of God in all men's
Consciences do, I speak, which is my witness and the Apostle bears witness of
the same when he says, Know ye not, that Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates; so then I say, as thou tenderest the good of thy immortal Soul,
Dwell in the Light which is the way that leads to Life, which all the Prophets,
and all the Apostles, and all the Holy men of God did witness, Christ the Way,
the Truth, and the Light, as thousands can witness at this day; all Glory, and
Honor, Praise, Power, and Thanks be given unto his Blessed Holy Glorious Name
for ever, and for ever; who first loved us, when we were in our Blood, he said
unto us, live, and is become unto us a place of broad Rivers, and Streams of
Everlasting Life, flowing into our Hearts, to nourish his own Plant in us, whom
he has called and chosen, to bear Testimony for his name Sake; everlasting
Pure Praises be given unto him, who lives for ever, who is our King, Priest,
and Lawgiver; unto whom the gathering is, and shall be for ever, all praises
be given to his holy Name; for he is become unto us the chiefest among ten
thousands, and more to be desired than the Honey, or the Honey-Combe, of all
them that fear him and keep his Commandments; and more to be Embraced then fine
Gold: And as we abide faithful unto the Lord, we know that we shall all sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, where none shall make us afraid, though
ten thousands rise up against us, yet shall we not fear what man can do unto
us; for our God is on our side, Who then can be against us? who works all our
Works in us and for us continually; who never ceases to administer daily
refreshment unto his own Seed in us; Everlasting holy Praises be given unto my
Heavenly Father, who is my Eternal Portion, and my exceeding great reward; who
has redeemed me from Death to Life, and from under the Power of Satan unto
God, and has set my feet upon a Rock, which Rock is Christ in me, the hope of
Glory; In whom I live, and move, and have my Being; and unto him alone
belongs all the Glory; for of my self I can do nothing: But it is he that
works all his Works in me by the Word of his own Power; by which I stand even
at this present time, and am preserved through all Straits by Sea and by Land,
and through good report and evil report, and whatsoever may come for his Name
Sake; Who so loved the World, that he sent his only begotten Son into the
World, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but should have
Everlasting Life abiding in them; for he came to save Sinners, of whom I was
the chief; but now I am washed and cleansed through the Blood of Christ Jesus,
which God has revealed in me by the Revelation of his only begotten Son,
without which none can see God, and live.

This is to go all over the Earth, that so People may come to see their Sins,
and repent, and live; given forth from the moving of the Spirit of the Lord
God, in tender Love unto the Seed of God in all men's Consciences to whom I
write, who am a true lover of Isreal's Good, and would have none to perish in
their Sins, but that all might come to the Knowledge of him, and live, in whom
is Life and Salvation, and with him there is Plenteous Redemption for evermore,
that he may be feared and worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, for such is the
Father seeking to worship him, as do worship him in Spirit and in Truth; as
thousands do witness in these our days, in whom he has revealed the Image of
his only begotten Son in our hearts, Jesus Christ our Lord, and only Savior,
in whom we live, and move, and have our Being, who is the Rock of Ages, and
Generations; so that Generations which are to come, shall bless and praise his
holy Name for these our days, wherein he has made known of the Riches of his
Grace, and of his Majesty in our Hearts, and has shed it abroad unto all
Nations, Kindreds, and People, that so they might come to the knowledge of
Salvation for their Immortal Souls, and live in whom is Life.

O all People be obedient unto that of God in your own Consciences, which makes
manifest the deeds of darkness in your own particulars, that you may come to
feel the springs of Life to nourish the Plant, which his own right hand has
planted in you. O love the Light that leads to Life and Salvation; O let it
take impression in your hearts, so shall it be worn in the inward part of the
mind, which is the searcher of all secrets, and knows the intents of the same;
for they are all naked and bare before him. O my dearly beloved Friend, in
whose hearts there is any tender desires begotten, Keep to the Light, and dwell
low in it; for if ever thou come'st to know Salvation for thy Soul, thou must
know it in thee; for Christ says, that none comes unto the Father, but by me,
and none knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him;
and he says, I and my Father are one; and he says, Ye are my Friends if ye do
whatsoever I command you to do; and his Commandments are not grievous but
joyous unto all them that keep them in truth and uprightness of heart and mind;
unto whom the Son of Righteousness is risen, with healing in his wings; and he
will thoroughly purge his floor, and will gather his wheat into his garner, but
the chafe will he burn with unquenchable fire. O fear and dread before him,
for he is a God of Love to his own Seed, but a terrible God unto the wicked,
and all the ungodly shall be as stubble before him; and there shall be weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; and there shall be none to help them.
Therefore return with speed, while ye have time prize it, lest it be hid from
your eyes, and ye perish in your sins, and there be none to help you; for there
is no redemption in the Grave, as the Tree falls so it lies, and as death
leaves it, so Judgment shall find it; and the ungodly shall perish in their
ungodliness, but the righteous shall flourish like a green Bay Tree; and they
shall reign over their enemies within and without, for the Lamb shall have the
Victory over all his enemies that may arise to oppose him; for his Dominion is
an everlasting Dominion, and of his Government there shall be no end; who rules
all Nations with a rod of iron, before whom all the Nations of the Earth are
but as the drop of a bucket; for he will dash them in pieces as a potters
vessel, yea they shall call to the Mountains to cover them, and the Hills to
fall upon them in that day when the Lord shall call them to an account for all
their life time; O that thou would lay this to heart, whosoever thou art
that art in this Condition, and fear and dread before the living God of Life
and Salvation, whose presence is dreadful unto the wicked.

O my dearly beloved Friends and fellow Citizens of the household of God, who
are come to the Heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the Saints solemnity, where all
the faithful ones shall lie down together, and drink of the Rivers of Life,
which run freely: Oh drink, drink my beloved friends of the virtue of the
streams of my heavenly Father's Love, which run freely and plenteously, for all
them that do wait upon him in his holy blessed fear for ever, and has him
alone to be their hiding place, of whose fullness there is no end; for he gives
freely and upbraids none. Oh my dearly beloved Friends, unto whom my Life
reaches, Read me in the Covenant of Light, and Life, and Peace, where our
Unity stands, in that which was before words were, and shall be when words shall
be no more, even in that by which the World was made, and all things were
created, and are upheld to this day, even by the word of his Power: And so all
dear Friends, hold fast your Confidence without wrath or doubting unto the end,
and in the end, that so ye may receive a Crown of Life, which is laid up for
all them that endure faithful unto the end; for assuredly, ye shall all reap if
ye faint not; but stand fast, and keep your integrity, oh dwell low in the
feeling of the pure power of the Lord God of Life continually, that with it you
may come to fathom over all the World, both within and without, and live unto
God who is the Father of Spirits, that so ye may come unto the New Jerusalem,
the City of the living God, and unto the spirits of just men made perfect by
the blood of the Lamb, which was slain from the foundation of the World; but
now has the Lord made him known in these our days; everlasting holy praises
be given unto his glorious Name for evermore, Amen.

Oh the riches of his Grace and Love, which he has shed abroad in our hearts,
toward his own Seed, who has taken upon him the Government, and of whose
Dominion there shall be no end, for he is come to Rule whose Right it is;
everlasting, glorious, powerful, holy praises be given unto him for ever, my
Father of Life in whom I live for ever; who is my strength, and the length of
my days, and my portion for ever, and my exceeding great reward, who have
forsaken all my Relations, Husband, and Children, and whatsoever was near and
dear unto me, yea and my own Life too, for his own Names sake: Everlasting
praises be given unto his glorious Name for ever, who has counted me worthy to
bear a Testimony for his Names sake, and has fulfilled that Scripture, which
he spoke to his Disciples, when he said, He that will not forsake Father and
Mother, Wife and Children, for my Names sake and the Gospels, is not worthy of
me; yea, and his own Life too: Which I do witness in my measure, Hallelujahs be
given to the Highest for ever, who am a true lover of the Seed of God, and it
is the desire of my heart, that all may come to the knowledge of him in their
own particulars, and live to God, in whom is Life and plenteous Redemption for
evermore, Amen.

J. B.

A LAMENTATION for New England.
OH New England repent, I say unto thee repent, for in thee is found the Blood
of the Saints, and the Cry of it is entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbaths, and it is come before him, for he is risen to plead with all flesh by
the sword of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming, and he will terribly
shake the Earth, and it shall be as stubble before him; for he is risen to make
inquisition for blood: Oh how will you stand before him? or, what will you
answer him when he shall call you to an account, for all your ungodly deeds,
that ye have ungodlily committed against the Lord and his Truth? or, what will
you answer when he shall make inquisition for blood? Oh howl and weep ye Rulers
of Boston, for the men of Nineveh shall rise up in Judgment against you, for
they repented at the Preaching of Jonas, but a greater than Jonas is here; but
you have hardened your hearts against his servants, and against the witness of
God in your Consciences. Oh how is your beauty stained since the day the Lord
first visited you? and, how is your Light become Dark, yea even gross Darkness
that may be felt, and blind as ever the Sodomites were? Oh how does my Soul
pity you, that ever ye should be so ignorant of your own Salvation, to turn the
truth of our God into a ly, and put his Servants to death, when he sent them
among you to warn you of the Wrath to come, which is coming upon all the
inhabitants of the Earth, except they repent; and therefore has he sent his
Servants and Handmaids amongst you to warn you in tender love to your immortal
Souls, but how have ye rewarded the Lord evil for good? and he looked that ye
should have brought forth good fruit, but behold briars and thorns, and ye have
made your selves a stink to all Nations round about you. Oh come down to the
witness of God in your Consciences which will let you see what you have done,
and if you love it, it will bring you to repentance, even the Light which
Christ Jesus has enlightened every one withal, that comes into the World; and
if ye hate it, it will be your condemnation, even the Light; unto that in your
Consciences I speak, which is God's Witness, and my Witness, which never
consented to sin, but ever stands a Witness against it, in all your
Consciences, and is even pressed as a Cart is pressed with sheaves. Oh that
every one of you were made sensible of it, then would you not so kick against
it as you do at this day, even as the Gadarens did at Christ, who besought him
to depart out of their coasts; even so have ye made Laws, and Gallows, and
Prisons, and Whips, what not, that can be invented against the people of God.
Oh how are you found fighting against the Lord and his Witness in every one of
your Consciences: for assuredly a Day of Account ye must give unto the Lord God
of Life, who has all Powers in his hands, and can turn them whenever it
pleases him, and howsoever it pleases him. Oh what will you answer him when
he shall call you to an account? Oh ye Rulers of Boston, my heart is made sad
when I remember your condition and your state, how you are found out of the
ways of God, against your own Souls. Oh New England, how is your beauty become
ashes, and your glory turned into shame? and how have ye forgotten the Lord
your Maker, and the Rock from whence ye were hewn, and are found fighting
against him? But this know all ye that forget God, and kick at his reproof, and
will have none of his Counsel, but slight his Messengers, and the Witness of
God in your own Consciences; yea know this assuredly, that ye cannot hide your
selves from the Wrath of the Lamb, and his presence; For, Who art thou, oh man,
that art found striving against thy Maker? Have not I all Power in Heaven and
in Earth, to do with them as seems good in my sight? says the Lord God
Almighty. Oh that man could praise the Lord for his Mercies and his Goodness
toward the Sons of Men! And say not but that you were warned in your Life
time, by one who is a true lover of the Seed of God, known unto the World by
the Name of

Jone Brooksop.
The 4th Month, 1662.
THE END.

