The Late CONVERTS Exposed: OR THE REASONS OF Mr. BAYS's Changing his Religion
Considered in a DIALOGUE.

PART the Second.

WITH Reflections on the Life of St. Xavier. Don Sebastian King of Portugal. AS
ALSO The Fable of the BAT and the BIRDS.


Parcite Oves nimiu^ procedere, non been ripae
Creditur, ipse Aries etiam nunc vellera siccat.
Virg. Ecl. 3. Rode Caper vitem, tamen hinc cum stabis ad aram,
In tua quod fundi Cornua possit, erit.
Ovid. Fast. Licensed, January 8. 1689.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bennet, at the Sign of the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1690.

THE Reader may be pleased to observe, that most of the following Sheets were
written in the Late Reign, and then designed to be published: But the Author,
who had promised to make a Sacrifice of Mr. Bays yearly, did not think there
lay any great obligation upon him, to sacrifice himself, and an Honest
Bookseller, to the indignation of Mr. Hills of Pious Memory. He has been since
prevailed upon, at the entreaty of some Friends, to alter the Dialogue where he
saw convenient, and so to Print it: For doing which, he has not the vanity to
imagine the Reader will thank him, because it comes out so very unseasonably;
only he presumes Mr. Bays and Mr. T-ns-n will be sensible of the kindness,
since it may help to revive a certain remarkable Poem, which might otherwise
have been forgotten.

Preface to Mr. Bays.
I Make bold to dedicate the following Dialogue to your self; for who can
pretend a better right to the entertainment, than he that has furnished out the
better part of it at his own expense? They are your own Arguments, only for the
present occasion untagg'd, and divested of their dearly beloved Rhyme, and you
are too much a Gentleman I know, Mr. Bays, to quarrel with me for so doing: You
that have so often disguised the thoughts of other Authors, by altering the
property, and putting them into Meter, cannot in Honor or Justice quarrel with
your humble Servant, for taking the liberty to turn some of your own Poetry
into Prose. The truth on it is, such pretty reasonings, for their own safety,
ought no more to visit the World out of the Livery of Verse, than a Bully of
Alsatia to walk the Streets on any other day but a Sunday; it is a Garb that
becomes them so extremely well, that methinks it is as much pity they should
ever be forced to part with it, as for an Actress that becomes her Playhouse
Habit, and Charms half the Town by Candlelight, to be surprised in her
ordinary Dress, dans une brillante assemblee. And so far, Mr. Bays, all the
World is obliged to justify you; I don't mean for changing your Religion, but
for defending it with the most plausible arms, that can be employed in its
Service. You know the Critics of all Ages have fallen very severely upon
Lucan, for treating a true History in Verse, and if that reason hold, I think
your Divines ought, every Mother's Son of them, to be condemned, for treating a
Poetical Subject (as I look upon the whole body of your Italian Theology to be)
in Prose. And now, Worthy Sir, to perform my promise to the World, which every
honest man is bound to do, I here Sacrifice your Hind and Panther once more, to
the memory of Mr. Quarles, and John Bunyan; which Oblation, I hope, will become
the more pleasing and acceptable, through the merits and intercession of Mr.
Sh-dw-ll, Mr. S-ttle, Mr. N-rris, Mr. Cr-ch, Mr. D-rfy, Dr. Beest-n, and all
the rest of your fellow Poets in Christendom.

I must confess, Mr. Bays, that some years ago, I little imagined that I should
ever have the opportunity of contesting with you upon this score; if your
Christian Mercury could have settled long in any communion, I durst have sworn
the Established Church could have made the justest pretensions to you; and as
long as so good a pledge as the Religio Laici continued in our hands, I
flattered my self, that you durst no more revolt to the other Party, than a
King of England durst make a descent into France, that had pawned his Prince of
Wales to the Society at Paris.

But this it seems is an Age of Miracles. Who could expect to see the
difference made up between the Observator, and the late Occurrencer? Or that
those two everlasting Adversaries, who one would have thought, like two
Parallel lines, if they had been drawn out till Doomsday, could never have met,
should lay aside old grudges, and write for a Toleration? Who could imagine
that the Fanatics, who had hitherto opposed the Just Rights of Princes, would
on the sudden offer Incense to the Dispensing Power, and pimp to the
Prerogative? Or while so many Refugees came daily over to us from France, that
your Party could have the assurance here to disown the Spirit of Persecution.
Who could ever hope, till the re-converted Mr. Sclater showed them the way,
that the Jews would take up the Cudgels for Transubstantiation, or that those
nice humoursome Gentlemen, that all along expected to find their Messiah under
a Royal Character, would now be content to acknowledge him disguised in a
Wafer? Who could believe, till the Bishop of Meaux had satisfied the World as
to that particular, that a Corporal Presence was a received principle of all
the Reformed Churches? This policy, I must needs say it, was refined enough,
and I suppose, Mr. Bays, your Churchmen borrowed it of the Venetians, who love
dearly to sit idle at home, and fight out their battles by Foreigners. When you
had once proved that the Jews and Protestants belonged to your Communion, there
was no question to be made, but that the Turks and Pagans must fall in of
course to uphold your Universality, just as whole Provinces and Towns in
Flanders, used to drop into Lovis le Grand's Chamber of Dependancies. Lastly,
to complete our astonishment (for the greatest Prodigy is still behind) what
mortal Man in the three Kingdoms, could Dream that Mr. Bays, the Poet, would
renounce the Devil and all his Works, would condescend to think of saving his
precious Soul, and espouse the Catholic Cause, that he had so often ridiculed
and banter'd upon the Theater? Far be it from me, my most noble Play-wright, to
speak this with a design to blame you, for justifying your Church in Verse;
for, as you may well remember, I have commended you for using that conduct. No,
no, honest Mr. Bays, like Tullie's Fiddler, that defined the Soul to be
Harmony, so you in like manner, when you wrote the Hind and Panther, ab art
tua non recessisti, you never flinch'd from your old Profession; and let the
ill-natured World say what it will, I am still ready to maintain, that your
abovementioned immortal piece of Controversy, is but the second part to your
Essay upon Dramatick Poetry.

Indeed, as Sir Roger L'Estrange in his History of the late times, has
judiciously observed, Part 3.
that Murder is of no Religion: so I was in good hopes that false dealing and
dissimulation were of no Religion; but a little experience in the World, and
the first year of the late Reign sufficiently convinced me of the contrary. We
were from all quarters arraigned for mis-representing your Church, when no
body, as I know of, was guilty of that Crime, but only your selves. To say the
truth, Popery is like some sort of Painting, which is to be viewed at a
convenient distance, and by an ill light, for otherwise the courseness of the
colors will appear too visible; and upon that score, it must be acknowledged
your Missionaires lay under a temptation to palliate some of the grosser
Doctrines; but I question whether that way of proceeding did not do you a more
sensible disadvantage than you were aware of. Your Predecessors, I am sure,
though they lay under the same inconveniences, managed the cause with more
sincerity, they argued like Gentlemen of Honor, and maintained all the
controverted points as long as they were tenable: at last when they were beaten
out of the field, they entrenched themselves behind an Ecclesiastical Mud-wall
of Fathers and Councils, and contented themselves, as well as they could, with
the Churches Infallibility. They had the charity to believe, that most of their
Adversaries could write, and read, that some of them had traveled abroad, and
now and then for curiosity peeped into a Popish Chapel, and therefore thought
it an ill advised policy to deny those practices that were too notorious to be
disowned, but generously endeavored to defend them. Whereas the modern
Polemics, as if they had fallen amongst a Herd of mere Indians, that had never
conversed with the rest of mankind, were for putting the most intolerable
shams in the World. Your Religion was unpalatable enough of all Conscience,
before these Spiritual Pioneers undertook the handling of it, but their awkward
management made it a thousand times worse than ever. Transubstantiation of it
self, the Lord knows, is a very mortifying, Self denying Doctrine; but two
Czars, and two Transubstantiations are one too many for a Town, or a Church;
and to oblige us to renounce our reason and senses, almost in every other
Doctrine, as well as that, was an insupportable presumption. We were told, Mr.
Bays, you never made any formal addresses to the Saints, to the utter confusion
of the Breviaries, and the Missal; and if they had told us at the same time,
that the Fanatics never made any formal addresses to K. James for his
charitable Indulgence, we could not tell how to help our selves; we were
informed that the Deposing Doctrine was no principle of your Church, to the
everlasting shame of the La^eran Council; that only a civil respect was paid to
Images and Relics, that cutting of Throats for the score of Religion was a
great sin, that the Scripture was no Dumb letter, no Weathercock, nor Nose of
Wax as was formerly given out, with abundance more of such pretty Tenets, for
which many an honest Heretic has had his Tabernacle carbonadoed beyond Sea. A
certain worthy Author, supposed to be Georgius Barzon, Hist. Pap. l. 4.
the titular Bishop of Waradin, in a Treatise which he dedicated to the
Emperor some twelve years ago, tells him, that he was no longer obliged to
tolerate the Lutherans in Hungary, because tho he had sworn to make no
invasions upon the Augustan Confession; yet he was at large now whether he
would observe his Oath or no; since the Protestants had departed in several
particulars (which he there mentions) from that Confession. After this
followed, as all the world knows, one of the bloodiest Scenes that ever that
Country saw; which whether it were owing to this Incendiaries Sophistry I
cannot tell, but any one may see he was a well-wisher to the design. Now if we,
Mr. Bays, had been so malicious as to have trumped the same Card upon your
Priests, writ a Letter to the Pope, and told him, Worthy Sir, Whereas certain
persons, here in the Kingdom of England, who pretend themselves to be true
Catholics, have shamefully denied and misrepresented most of the established
Doctrines of your Church; have discarded your deposing power; and made you
dwindle from the Universal Bishop into the Western Patriarch: nay and to do
greater affronts to your unerring Person, have acquainted all His Majesty's
Subjects, that you eat and drink just for all the world like other men, and
keep a Close Stool too for your private occasions, nothing of which we could
have believed before: This is to acquaint your Infallibility with their Names
and Offenses, that you may reduce them to their duty in time, for we are
afraid, if they continue still to make the same advances into Heresy, as they
began, that they will every man of them turn Protestants, before the year's ended,
and so become chargeable to the Parishes, where they live. Had we done this,
Mr. Bays, as you know we had reason enough to do it, I dare not take upon me to
conjecture, what had been the event; whether immuring between four Walls, or a
Pilgrimage to Lapland, or their Ecclesiastical Livery pulled over their Ears,
but certain I am, that he had disowned them for his Sons, as heartily, as a
former Pope disowned a certain French Bishop, that was sent to him in his
Military Habit.

As I was a saying before, Mr. Bays, your Predecessors managed the controversy
much more like Gentlemen, than those that pretended to manage it after them in
the late Reign. If they palmed any spurious Fathers upon us, it is to be
considered, that such artifices were the ancient laudable practice of their
Church, witness Constantine's Charter, and the forgery of the Nicene Canons;
that they found them ready cut and dried to their hands, and so drew them out
of the Papal Armory, to support a declining cause, that could not otherwise
subsist; and how far this policy is allowable in a state of war, I leave it for
the Casuists to judge. After all. Forgery it self, as odious and despicable as
it looks, is not in my opinion half so black a crime, as downright lying, as
you know, Mr. Bays, counterfeiting another man's hand is nothing near so bad, as
denying his own: There is some art and dexterity required in the one, but there
is nothing but barefaced impudence, or cowardice in the other. He that puts
false Dice upon me at play, will be reckned (as the world goes now adays) an
expert Gamester, and I only to be blamed, that would suffer my self to be so
imposed upon; but he that shall tell me Seven and Four is not Eleven, or that a
Deuce is a Cinque, is to be used after another manner. Therefore I could
methinks willingly excuse your Ancestors, who conjured up some supposititious
Authors to defend the principles of their Church, (because it had been our
fault, if we had not discoverd the trick) but I shall never forgive those
everlasting Blockheads, that disowned most of the Doctrines of their Religion,
all the while they were a practicing them within doors. If it had been my
fortune, Mr. Bays, to have been in company with the Author of the Nubes
Testium, or the Speculum Ecclesiasticum, I promise you, upon the word of a
Young Author, that hopes to flourish in this wicked World, I had not fallen
into the least passion or fury, but only offered them a little sober advice:
Pray good Gentlemen, don't squander away the poor Patrimony of the Church after
so profuse a manner; take some mercy of your Fathers, and don't set them all
upon one single throw; consider how many hundred years they have been a
gathering for you, use your Fathers frugally and discreetly, do you think their
keeping has cost the Pope nothing all this while? Let St. Jerome and St. Austin
come on to day, and bring St. Ambrose, and honest St. Bernard, into the Field
to morrow. Take a Friends Counsel, Gentlemen, and never hazard all upon one
chance: Alas! He that throws away his Fathers extravagantly, was never at the
pains of collecting them himself; as we say, that Aldermans Son that makes
Ducks and Drakes with his money, never knew the trouble of getting it; and
therefore, good Gentlemen, pray don't make Ducks and Drakes with your Fathers.
This is all, Mr. Bays, I assure you, that I should have said to them, but if I
had met with the Bishop of Meaux, or any of the Misrepresenters that Copied
from him, I don't know how far my resentments might have carried me.

We have all the reason in the World, Mr. Bays, to thank our Stars, that your
Divines in the late Reign proved as feeble Statesmen, as they were Disputers.
Had a wise able Cabal, men of foresight and conduct, been to manage so golden
an opportunity, perhaps we might have had as much reason then to curse the
dexterity of their Policies, as we have now to congratulate their Blunders.
Infallibility was the word in the Church, as Arbitrary Power was in the State,
and by the sound of these two Almighty Words, you thought to Proselyte the
whole Nation, but experience has since convinced you, how little they
signified. Of a Jesuit, before we came to make trial of him, we had as terrible
an Idea, as the Romans had of Elephants in their War with Pyrrhus; we forgave
them for being so tamely vanquished in the age before, and charitably ascribed
it to the restraint they lay under in former Reigns, but when they had the
Government to support them, besides the goodness of their Cause, we expected
nothing less than miraculous performances. They were pleased, however, to
disappoint our expectations in that case, as well as several others, till at
last they grew so very contemptible, that even one of our Protestant Footmen
took a Father of the Society, and held his Nose to Dr. Sherlock's Preservative,
just as the Americans, to try the immortality of their new Invaders, took a
straggling Spaniard, and dipped his Head under water. We expected you would have
performed your promises, in relation to the Established Religion, not so much
for the principles of your Church (for those we knew very well) as for your
hon^ur and interest, and yet even there you thought fit to disappoint us. What
need I say more? There was nothing in the whole riddle of the late Reign, that
did not fail our expectations, except the Irish that came over, and the
Dissenters; the last promised to Sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes, as the
former, without question, promised to fight: But as we all imagined, neither of
them kept their word, and therein they answered our expectation. Certainly, Mr.
Bays, no men in the World ever miscarried so shamefully in all their projects
as your Priests did, they acted the Counter-part to Dionysius's Story, came
from a School to a Kingdom; and like him too, at last, were thrown from a
Kingdom to a School. They took care, we thank them, to break the Neck of their
Religion before they withdrew, and left us of the Reformation to interr her,
and we shall take care, like the young Gentleman that buried his penurious
Father, to lay so heavy a Tombstone upon her, that she shall never rise in
judgment against us.

There Is a remarkable passage, Mr. Bays, in your Tragedy of Don Sebastian,
about Clergymen, which I shall make bold to transcribe. p. 24.
For Churchmen, tho they itch to govern all,
Are silly, woeful, awkard Politicians;
They make lame mischief, tho they mean it well.
Their Interest is not finely drawn and hid,
But seams are coursly bungled up, and seen.
Whether you had an eye upon your own Churchmen, when you wrote these lines,
does not signify a farthing, but for your comfort, Mr. Bays, the Character
suits them as exactly, as if they had sat for their Pictures. To give your old
Enemies, the Dissenters Liberty of Conscience, after you had so unmercifully
harrast them before, was so palpable a Sham, that without dispute they
understood it well enough, and tho for their present case they accepted of it,
they were not such errant fools to imagine, that because Fanaticism brought in
Popery, therefore Popery would out of complaisance bring in Fanaticism. To
publish King Charles's Papers that were pretended to be found in his Closet,
was another lamentable miscarriage, for what could create a greater aversion to
your Church, than to let people know, that it tolerated a man to live in a
contrary Persuasion, notwithstanding he was otherwise obliged by every thing
that was sacred here upon Earth, and that it countenanced the blackest
Hypocrisy. I dare not take upon me to conjecture, whether those Papers were
spurious or no, but by making them public, I am sure King Charles secured as
many to the Established Church, as he did by passing the Test; and if I had
been one of the Cabinet-Council, I am sure I had sooner consented to let the
Bible walk abroad in English than to Print them. To ride the late Unhappy
Monarch after that unsufferable rate as your Priesthood did, to make the best
of Friends, and the justest Master, a Prince that had every thing that was
Generous and Heroic in his Nature, condescend to feel the Pulse of his meanest
Officers about the Penal Laws, to make him Sacrifice his Promise so solemnly
plighted to his people; what was it but to let the Subject see beforehand, how
triumphantly you would domineer over him, if you had once got the ascendant?
Tho you had Adulterated all the Ecclesiastical Writers between this and the
Creation, we could have pardoned you, but for debauching a Prince that was so
dear and tender to us, and who is only fault was to take you for Oracles, we
shall never forgive you. To ridicule us for holding Passive Obedience a
Doctrine, which you ought for your own sakes, to have been encouraged, and
cultivated, was so gross a piece of Stupidity, that a Laplander one would have
thought, could never have been capable of; and if we have not lived up to the
height of that principle, you are, to my knowledge, the unfittest men in the
World to make the objection. To make Transubstantiation stand upon as good a
bottom as the Trinity, and pretend that we had as great reason to believe one
as the other, what other consequences could it naturally produce, but that both
Doctrines were to be equally rejected. And indeed, Mr. Bays, I am apt to
believe, from the conduct and management of your Priests, that since they could
not introduce their Religion amongst us, they thought it the best expedient to
set up Atheism. For as St. Jerome, in his Treatise Contra Vigilantium, has
somewhere observed (and why may not I, Mr. Bays, palm a Father upon you, as
well as your party has palmed a thousand upon us?) A Papist and an Atheist
differ like a jealous man, and a Cuckold, like Alderman and Mayor; a little
time makes one the other. Sow Atheism in one Age, and it will infallibly
produce Popery in the next; for Popery begets Atheism, and Atheism begets
Popery, just as Peace and Poverty beget one another in the Almanac. The World
is a very melancholy place, without the diversion of one Religion or another;
Statesmen or Poets, would in a short time trump up some new way of Worship, to
amuse the people, and after their recovery out of Atheism, Popery, as the
grossest Religion, would soonest take with Mankind, just as when one comes out
of a dark Cave, or a Dungeon, the grossest objects first employ the eyesight
So that in my opinion, Mr. Bays, your Canon Law ought as well to have taken
care, that a Sceptick and a true Catholic should never Marry, for fear of
committing Incest, as it has already provided, that those that have stood
Godfather, and God-mother at a Baptism should not join, to the tune of for
better for worse, for fear of violating the rules of a spiritual Consanguinity.
If you say, this is uncharitably urged upon you, I cannot tell how to help it,
for if we do not run out into the rankest infidelity, we are not to thank your
Church for hindering us.

But now to come more closely to you, Mr. Bays, I should never have taken this
second occasion of reviving your old Transgressions, but that you have lately
given us the justest provocations in the world to attaque you. You tell us in
your Preface to Don Sebastian, That if ever a man has reason to set a value
upon himself, it is when his ungenerous Enemies are taking the advantage of the
Times upon him, to ruin him in his reputation. Now what reputation you have to
lose is a mystery to me, or any one else that knows you; that little you had,
has been lost and forfeited many years ago. The City and Country Mouse ruined
the reputation of the Divine, as the Rehearsal ruined the reputation of the
Poet; so that upon this score, Mr. Bays, whatever Adversaries shall fall upon
you for the future, you may as well comfort your self, that you have no
reputation to lose to them, as many a poor Prisoner in Ludgate blesses his
condition that he has no money to part with to the present Government. You have
indeed forefaulted your Laurel, and Historians place; that is all the advantage
the times have taken on you, and you may well admire the mercifulness of the
Government, that it has not punished your Panther ribbaldry, and desertion,
(for I will not call it Apostasy in a Poet) with a severer mortification. If
you are weary of living without an employment (as I see very little probability
you have of regaining that you have lost) I de even counsel you to go over to
Spain, to get an office in the Inquisition; for, Mr. Bays, if you make no more
conscience of killing men elsewhere, than you do on the Theater, you are the
fittest person in Europe for it. But prithee why so severe always upon the
Priesthood, Mr. Bays? What have they merited to pull down your indignation? I
thought that ridiculing the men of that Character upon the Stage, was by this
time a T^picas much worn out with you, Preface to Don Sebastian.
as Love and Honor in the Play, or good fulsome flattery in the Dedication.
But you I find, still continue your old humor, which we are to date from the
year of Hegira the loss of Eaton, or since Orders were refused you: whatever
hangs out either Black or Green Colors, is presently your prize, and you would
by your good will be as mortifying a vexation to the whole Tribe, as an
unbegetting year, a concatenation of Breifs, or a voracious Visiter: So that I
am of opinion you had much better to have written in your Title page, -- Manet
alta mente repostum
Judicium Cleri, spre^aeque injuria Musae.
Than the Nec Tarda Senectus, and all that. For tho you are so complaisant to
your Reader, as to tell him, of the Luster, and Masculine Vigor, in which it
was written, of the newnesses of the English, of the noble daring in the
Figures; and that in the roughness of the numbers, and cadences, he will see
somewhat more masterly than in most, if not any of your former Tragedies; yet
me give me leave to tell you, Mr. Bays* the world thinks otherwise of it,
because you come duller off with your Clergy in that, than the Spanish Friar.
They judge of your wit by the smart repartees you pass upon the Priesthood; if
it fails you there, they conclude it goes very hard with you: From your usage
of the Churchmen they know how your fancy falls and rises, as exactly, as we
know how the air is disposed, from the mounting and sinking of the Quicksilver
in a Weatherglass. If you were to write a thousand new Plays, and to change
your Religion as often, no question, Mr. Bays, but the last would still be the
best; and therefore the Town will no more believe you for the future, when you
commend your Plays, than a jealous Citizen when he commends his Wife. You say,
you are growing old, and therefore assume to your self the right of talking; if
we are to guess at your age only by that, why then, for any thing I know to the
contrary, you may live as long as Me huselah, Mr. Bays; for ever since I have
heard of your name, you have assumed the same liberty. To be plain with you,
honest Mr. Bays, you acquired your self a reputation by your Poetry, and you
have lost it by your Poetry; as a certain nameless Author about Town, who has
exactly calculated the fall of Antichrist, got a name by a Somnium Navale, and
parted with it, in a Somnium Theologicum.

And now, Mr. Bays, if you please to give me leave, I Will make bold to examine
two or three points, relating to your Religion, in this place, because the
rules of Dialogue, you know, tie up a man's hands from making any continued
Discourse.

I shall begin then with your Infallibility, because if that were evidently
proved, it would soon put an end to the Dispute; and here I cannot but observe
what perplexities your Doctors are in, to adjust this affair. They prove the
infallibility of the Scripture, by the infallibility of the Church; and the
infallibility of the Church, by the infallibility of the Scripture. After the
same manner, as Sir Roger tells us in his abovementioned History, the evidence
of the late Popish Plot, were at a loss, whether to bring Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey's murder to the Plot, or the Plot to the murder; but at last so managed
the matter, as to make the murder prove the Plot, and the Plot the murder. But
to be serious with you, Mr. Bays, where is this infallibility of your Church to
be found at last? Why say you, and most of your Divines that live on this side
the Alps, in Pope and Council; as for a Council, there is none sitting at
present, or if there were, I hate as mortally to look after Infallibility in a
Crowd, as to carry a Letter to Mr. such-a-one living in London, without naming
the Street and Sign: Neither this, or that Bishop, and so on of the rest, make
any pretensions to it; and tho no individual man in the Assembly claims any
right to the Title, yet we must in complement to you, believe that the Body
shares it among them; but for my part I can as little endure to hear of
Accumulative Infallibility, as of Accumulative Treason. It Is very true there is
a promise made somewhere in Scripture, to preside over Two or Three that meet
upon a Religious Score, but the condition of the Obligation is, Si in nomine
meo convenerint, which I presume those people can never pretend to have
fulfilled, that can decree Articles of Faith with a Non Obstante, to a
Primitive Institution. The Italians, that we have reason to suppose, understand
the question in hand better than any of their Neighbors, by having the
Infallibility reside amonst them for so long a time, utterly dislike this
opinion of the Tramontani, and make a Council as unnecessary a thing to the
Pope, as the Parliaments in France are to their All-Mighty Monarch. I am so far
of their Opinion as to believe, that if such a thing as Infallibility is any
where to be found, it must be lodged in one single person, and therefore I am
resolved for trying the experiment, to go and give him a visit at Rome; and
here I see as little signs of Infallibillity, as in any Princes Court in
Christendom, unless the errors and irreligion of the place, be an argument
that he dwells amongst them, as we observe in England, that people generally
talk most Treason near the King's Palace. Sometimes, indeed, I see a Grave Old
Gentleman, who as they tell me, assumes this venerable title, carried in
procession up and down the City, when he saves the poor ignorant people (as the
old Romans did their Gladiators) by holding down a finger and a thumb; and this
is, unless I am mistaken, Soloecismum manu facere, even according to the
letter. Sometimes I see him, as on a Maunday Thursday, with abundance of
solemnity, and Christian compassion, deliver three parts of the Globe into the
hands of old Satan, by which tenure I suppose, he holds his Spiritual
Jurisdiction, and his Manor of the Vatican; as a certain family in
Buckingham-shire, Mr. Cambden tells us, held their Lands of the King, by being
obliged to furnish his Royal Bed with fresh straw, whenever he came in progress
to that side of the Country. If I inquire into the History of Infallibility,
they inform me here, that it was very ignorant, and very obstinate under the
late Pontificate, and that the Man of Sin did not understand the Language of
the Beast. If I trace it farther, I find that in the Reign of Pope Innocent the
Tenth, or rather Donna Olympia, it was seated (as the French call it) en
quenouille, that in former times it has suffered an Interregnum for forty
years, that it has fornicated, blasphemed, offered Sacrifices to Idols, denied
the Immortality of the Soul, committed Incest, studied Magic, tolerated
Sodomy, dispensed with Murder, and occasioned most of the Wars and Desolation,
that have plagued this part of the World for the ten last Centuries. To recount
all the Impieties that his story stands charged with, were as endless a piece
of trouble, as to reckon up all the Treasons and Rebellions since the Conquest;
and I believe, Mr. Bays, you will find it as difficult a matter, in the end, to
reconcile what has been mentioned to the Infallible Character he sustains, as
to reconcile his two incompatible Titles, Rex Regum, and Servus Servorum, to
one another. One that has either read or heard of these passages, would be apt
to conclude, that as the Romish Religion is only a continuation of Paganism, so
that Platina's History is but the second part to Suetonius's Lives of the
Caesar's; so I find, I must even quit my Lodgings, and leave Roma la Santa, if I
have a design to see Infallibility. Migrandum est mihi longius, vel illi.
When I have removed out of the City, I may, perhaps, be so happy as to meet
the long expected Object; for as the same Poet observes, Vicinus Novio, vel
inquilinus
Sit, quisquis Novium videre non vult.
The English of which, Mr. Bays, is this: He that has a mind never to trouble
his Eyesight with Infallibillity, must take himself a House in Rome, and the
nearer the Vatican, or St. Peter's, so much the better. Two Texts in the Bible
(a Book which he very scurvily requited afterward) Tu es Petrus, and Pasce
Oves meas, first acquired him this Reputation, in a dull, barbarous unthinking
Age, and that soon brought along with it the Temporal Power which he now
possesses; but it is no easy matter to determine, whether he most scandalously
behaves himself on his Secular or Spiritual Administration, for he lets his
Subjects, amidst all their plenty, starve in the most fruitful Country in the
World, and suffers them too, for all his pretenses to an Unerring Spirit, to be
overrun with the grossest Ignorance and Superstition. If a Socrates, or a
Plato, or a Race of honest Heathens of the same stamp had presided in the
Chair, I question whether the Christian Religion had received so much injury as
it did, from the conduct of the Popes, unless they had expressed as great a
passi^n for the Welfare of the Church, as they have done all along for the
raising of their Nephews; and then, perhaps, most of th^se shameful
miscarriages had been prevented. I cannot tell, Mr. Bays, whether he is sensible
of the kindness, but I am sure your Infallibility is obliged for that little
Christianity and Learning which is remaining in his Territories, to the
Reformation, or Luther's defection (as you call it) as a Learned Traveller has
observed that the preservation of Spain, in this Age, is entirely owing to the
happy revolt, the Hollanders made from it, in the last. Your Divines, I know,
tell another story, but where Interest and Prejudice blind people, there is no
sincerity to be expected, they magnify and preach up the Papal Infallibility,
in hopes to inp^y the same when they are raised to the Supreme Elevation, as I
don't question but from the same principle they have practiced, and justified
the Invocation of Saints, to have the same Adoration paid to themselves or
their friends* another day. To conclude then this troublesome tedious discourse
about your pious Pastor's Infallibility, if ever, Mr. Bays, you alarm me with
it any more, I must return you the very same answer, that a certain Gentleman
gave Dr. Oats about his Narrative, and tell you plainly, I believe just as
much, and not a syllable more, than he believes of it himself.

I come now, Mr. Bays, to consider in the next place, the Antiquity of your
Church, which, all of your Pamphleteers take for granted, belongs to you, and
in commendation of which* they employ all their little stock of Eloquence, when
the Novelty of the Reformation has somewhat discomposed them. When I first read
Caranza, Summa Conciliorum.
and some others of your Authors of the same strain, I was afraid they would have
carried their Religion an Age or two above the Incarnation, as well as their
predecessors in Chronology, the old Egyptian Priests, made themselves some
thousands years older than the Creation. They tell us, that Anacletus, the
third Pope after St. Peter, Decreed, That all difficult questions should
receive their final determination from the Apostolic Chair. That Alexander, his
immediate successor, recommended Holy Water to the Church. That Anicetus
commanded the Priests to shave their Heads in fashion of a circle, for a
certain grave reason, which will serve them for changing their Shirts once a
Week, as well. That Pope Fabian passed an Order, that Bishops should carefully
observe to renew the Chrism once a year in their Churches. I need not give my
self the trouble to pursue these puny Historians any farther, because these
instances, Mr. Bays, may serve to give you a taste of the rest; only from this
blind account of the Primitive times, a man would be tempted to think, that for
the three first Centuries, after their receiving Christianity in Rome, they had
no such thing as a Distinction of time; as Pliny tells us, that for a hundred
and twenty years, ab Urbe Condita, they had no distinction of hours. Now,
supposing all that I have mentioned out of the Decretal were true (as I am sure
it is every syllable an Imposture) I can only say this, Mr. Bays, that the
Mystery of Iniquity began to operate very early amongst you, and that your
Church might with a great deal of justice, use the famous Quartilla's saying in
Petronius, Junonem iratam habeam, si me unquam meminero fuisse Virginem. But
for your comfort and satisfaction, Mr. Bays, we are able to prove that she was
not debauched so soon as you pretend, but continued in her state of Maiden-hood
a good considerable time after, tho we expect you will no more thank us for such
a performance, than a she-Cut-purse at the Old Bailey, that hopes to save a
hanging by pretending a big belly, would thank a Jury of Midwives for bringing
her in not with Child. Alas! St. Peter's Successors in those days, had other
business on their hands than to amuse their Flock with such idle
impertinencies, and you might as soon persuade me, that a man of tolerable
sense, would send to consult with his Peruke-maker about the newest fashion,
just an hour before his Execution, as that your Bishops would entertain their
people in these trifles, these No-parts of Christianity, when they were to
prepare them for Persecution and Martyrdom. No, no, Mr. Bays, your Roman
Religion was no more perfected in one day, than the City was built in one day,
'twas the labor of several Ages to bring it to its present splendour and
condition; and part of it, like our St. Paul's here in the City, was finished
and adorned, before so much as the foundation of the other end was laid. And
thus you know, Mr. Bays, in the business of Tragedy and Comedy, Thespis began
it in a Cart, AEschylus not long after introduced it upon the Stage, and in
succeeding Ages, when the Government was wholly employed in cultivating the
Theater, it received the additional beauty of Chorus's, Scenes, Machines, and
other decorations. After all, if your Party cannot be persuaded to drop their
pretensions to Antiquity, but they must needs continue their claim still, I Would
even advise them to make the most of the plea as they can; they may give out
that those two noble Philosophers, I mean Zeno, that denied local motion, and
Anaxagoras, that held Snow to be black, were Members of your Church, and stiff
asserters of Transubstantiation: Their principles, all the world knows, have
nothing in them that contradicts a Sense-renouncing Doctrine, and, I am sure,
they may be urged upon us, with greater show of probability than either a St.
Cyprian or a St. Austin.

I have I cannot tell how, run my self into a longer Preface, by far, than I at
first designed; whether it is your example, Mr Bays, that has betrayed me into
this extravagance, or whether my matter flowed upon me so abundantly, that it
was impossible to check the tide, I know not; but I shall make bold to tell you
in your own words, that when I address my self to you in a discourse of this
nature again, whatever fault I commit, Preface to Don Sebastian.
you may rest assured, it shall not be that of too much length. I have only a
word or two to say to the Devotion, and Canonization of your Church, and then I
have done. A man has all the reason in the world to entertain but ordinary
thoughts of your way of worship when he finds a la veue, that your Devotion was
altogether fitted to the Ceremonies, and not the Ceremonies to the Devotion.
Thus for instance, a show of Candles made a pretty figure in the Church, they
helped to set off the Pictures, and the rich habit of the Priests, and for that
reason principally they were introduced: But after they had continued some
years in the Church, it was thought expedient to assign a better reason for
them, so some body stumbled upon Ego sum Lux Mundi, and from that time Candles
dated themselves Jure Divino. Thus likewise the Elevation of the Host was set
up, not for any Devotion or necessity, for every body knows that
Transubstantiation was a hundred years old before it was decreed; but Holy
Church was resolved to bring in that Ceremony, whether a pretense could be
offered for it or no: At last, a Monk proved it out of Psalm. 72. v. 16. Eckius
de Sacrificio, Missel p. 42.
There shall be a handful of Corn in the Earth upon the top of the Mountain. A
man sees nothing like Elevation in our English Version, but for your comfort,
Mr. Bays, the word Elevabitur is to be found in the Latin Translation, and then
the handful of Corn was immediately turned into a Wafer, and the top of the
Mountain was to pass current for the Priests Head. Whether or no these reasons
were thought of, at the same moment as these Ceremonies commenced in the
Church, or afterward, as I imagine they were, is no great matter; for any one
may see from the absurdity of them, that the reason was rather made for the
Ceremony, than the Ceremony for the reason; so that I cannot but apply an
ingenious passage in Monsieur Vaugelas, with a little alteration of the words,
upon this occasion. Ce'st fair comme a la feste des Saturnales, ou les
Serviteurs estoient servis par leur maistres, la devotion estant comme la
maistresse, and les Ceremonies comme les Serviteurs. And the truth on it is,
nothing else could be expected, when the Monks were the only Masters of the
Ecclesiastic Ceremonies, and brought in their adulterated Ore to the Papal
Mint, to receive there a Canonical Stamp. They lived in ease, and fed high, and
mistook every Hypocondriac fit for a Revelation; they had too much ignorance
and stupidity to assimilate (as the Physicians term it) their Devotion, and
therefore it broke out into Watchings, Dreams, Silences, Hours, Altars, Images,
Murmurings, Rosaries, Unctions, Ashes, Palms, Beads, Crosses, Tapers, Holy
Water, and such Scorbutic humors. In the Addresses which you pay to the
Saints (which is indeed the principal Devotion of your Church) a man would find
himself extremely mistaken, if he expects to meet with any thing that is
rational and solid: For admitting that that kind of Worship were allowable, yet
the choice that you make of your Saints for some little resemblance or jingling
of his name, is so very ridiculous, that it can admit of no defense. And this
has been curiously observed by Monsieur Menage, the Hesychius of France, who
upon the word Acariastre, Les Origines de la Langue Francoise, p. 8.
has remarked that for the Conformity it bears to the name of Acarius,
therefore they made their recourse to that Saint for the cure of this Malady.
Ainsi on est (says he) s'est address a Saint Mathurin pour les fous, qu 'on
appelle en Italien Matti; a Saint Eutrope pour les hydropiques; a Saint Auertin
pour les Vertigineux, qu'on appelloit autrefois Auertineux; a Saint Mammard
pour les maux de Mammelles; a Saint Main pour les rongnes des mains; a Saint
Genou pour la goutte; a Saint Aignan pour la taigne; a St. Clair pour le mal
des yeux; a St. Oven pour la surdite; a Saint Fenin, qui est comme les paysans
de Normandy appellent Saint Felix, pour ceuz qui sont tombez en chartre, ils
appellent fenez; a Saint Atourny, c'est Saint Saturnin, pour ceux a qui la
test turn. Par cette mesme raison on a eu recours pour les chooses egarees,
qu'on appelle epaves, a Saint Antoine de Padoue. I need not Translate this
passage into English, because most of the jests will be lost in the
Translation, but for the satisfaction of the English Reader, he is to imagine
that the Saint is only chosen for the conformity of the name, as if our
Sales-men here in the City should choose St. Francis de Sales for their
protector, and the Merchant-Adventurers should pitch upon St. Bonaventure.

And now I am discoursing of the Saints, I have oftentimes admired that since
you leave most of your Cities under their protection, you never paid that
complement to them, which the Old Romans used to pay to their Tutelar Gods; I
mean, that when you sit down before the siege of any place, you have not the
good breeding to invite the Saint, to whose care the Town is committed, to a
better station, and beg his pardon for disturbing him in his quarters. I wonder
(I say) Mr. Bays, that such a thing was never practiced, both because there is a
great appearance of civility in it, and because, as it has happened, the whole
Form transcribed out of the old Roman Pontifical, is still to be found in
Macrobius; Saturn. l. 3. c: 9.
and you know a Pagan Ceremony, if your Infallibility pleases, is as easily
changed into a Christian Rite, as Agrippa's Pantheon was turned from a Temple
of all the Gods, into a Church of all the Saints.

And this has led me to consider the merits of your Canonization, which needs
no formal conviction, being one of the absurdest impostures, that the world
ever knew. It Is an unaccountable thing how most of your Saints got into Heaven,
and, to make them amends, when they are there, they are as unaccountably
worshipped. Indeed if preferring a person to the Almanac, signified only this,
That on St. Dominic's day it would be convenient to let Blood, and cut Corns;
on St. Ignatius's day to geld Hogs, or drench Horses; on St. Francis's day to
raise Melons, and sow Cucumbers; that St. Xavier should preside over such a
Fair, or such a Market, it were no very great matter; we should never grudge
them so small a courtesy; but when we see a Divine Adoration entailed upon
them, immediately after their preferment to the Calendar, we are naturally led
to enquire, whether they deserved so great an honor, and whether the person
that advanced them to it, had the authority to make the promotion. Some of them
I am sure, as St. Dominic for instance, were sad gloomy* Wretches here upon
earth; and unless the place has mightily altered them for the better, a man of
sense would have very little temptation upon him to wish himself in the
company. After all, I am afraid they have no more right to the place they
possess, than the Pope had to give it, for I never read that St. Peter left the
power of making Gods en appanage, or by way of Portion to his Successor. As he
is Pope, he has no more title to Canonize, than my Lord Mayor has to confer the
honor of Knighthood; and therefore, Mr. Bays, I would advise you for the sake
of your Brother Poets, to take the matter into your own hands, for originally,
I am sure, the Poets only pretended to bestow such favors, and what may serve
to bring them into play again, they can Canonize a great deal cheaper than the
Pope. Horace, you know, is very positive to the point, Musa vetat mori, Coelo
Musa beat, part of which Ode I will translate, and so take my leave of you. I.
From dark Oblivion, and the silent Grave,
The indulgent Muse does the Great Hero save;
It Is she, forbids his Name to dye,
And brings it to the Stars, and sticks it in the Sky.
II.
Thus Mighty Hercules did move
To the Eternal Palaces above;
Not all his Twelve Exploits advanced him to the Sphere,
But 'twas the Poets Pain, and Labor brought him there.
III.
Thus the famed Spartan Twins did rise
From Ornaments of Earth the Glory of the Skies:
Tho Heaven by turns they do obtain,
Yet in Immortal Verse the Brothers jointly reign.
IV.
And Bacchus too, for all his vain pretense,
Borrowed his Crown, and Godhead hence:
He by his Powerful Juice first taught the Muse to fly,
And She in kind requital gave him Immortality.


Will's Coffee-House in Covent Garden. Crites, Eugenius and Mr. Bays. Bays.
WELL Gentlemen, I find you are punctual to the Assignation, and now if you
please, we'll fall to the business in hand without any more Preface, or
Ceremony. You know I promised to make you acquainted in the first place with
the motives which obliged me to leave the Church of England, and afterward to
give you the reasons why I settled in the Romish Communion. This method I design
to follow, because it will give us a full view of all the Controverted Points
between both Parties; but I must make bold to ask you one Civil Question or
two, beforehand, since it is so material to our present affair; and that is,
whether you have seen a famous Poem of mine, called The Hind and Panther?


Crites. Seen it, Mr. Bays! Why, I can stir no where but it pursues me; it
haunts me worse than a Pewter-Button'd-Serjeant does a decayed Cit: Sometimes I
meet it in a Band-Box when my Landress brings home my Linen, sometimes whether
I will or no, it lights my Pipe in a Coffee-House; sometimes it surprises me in
a Trunk-makers Shop, and sometimes it refreshes my memory for me on the
backside of a Chancery Lane Parcel -- For your Comfort Mr. Bays, I have not
only seen it as you may perceive, but have read it too, and can quote it as
freely upon occasion, as a frugal Tradesman can quote that Noble Treatise,
called The Worth of a Penny, to his Extravagant Prentice that revels in
Cock^ale, Stewed Apples, and Penny Custards.


Bays. Then take it from me, Mr. Crites, you have read the most Exalted, the
most Sublime Piece of Poetry, that was ever extant in the Universe. It
contains, without vanity I may say it, all the Arguments that can be proposed
in behalf of the Unerring Guide the Churches Infallibility, Transubstantiation,
Tradition, and the like: So that if this were not an age wherein people were
resolved never to trust their Faith out of the company of their Reason, I
should not question to reduce half the Kingdom in due time, only by the
Sweetness and Majesty of my Verse. But pray, Mr. Crites, do me the favor to
tell me what the sinful world has said to this Noble Offspring of mine.


Crites. Troth Mr Bays the sinful world, as you call it, is very much divided
about the point, and who can help it? Some persons allow it as little quarter
as the Inquisition does a Tract of Lutheran Divinity; and others again speak as
favorably of the Author, as the Dissenters do of the late Immortal Pacqueteer.
Some say you chose a Religion, tho it were none of the best, only to confront
the World that you had one, like the Young Prince in the Rehearsal, who was
glad to own the Fisherman for his Father, rather than lie under the scandal of
having none at all. Some commend your policy for treating your subject in Rhyme,
because, as they pretend, the Polemic is no more obliged to answer for the
Paralogisms of the Poet, than the New-made Lord is concerned to pay the debts
of the private Gentleman. Lastly, the more Censorious sort question the
sincerity of your Conversion, and are apt to believe, that although you have
drawn your Pen in the Churches quarrel, you would scarce be allowed the humble
favor to stand Godfather for a Bell, and promise in the Bells name, that it
shall scatter Tempests, disperse Evil Spirits, and disarm Thunder and
Lightning; for like malicious persons as they are, they observe that you have
made the Panther in that noble Episode of the Swallow, tell a better and more
pertinent story, than even your Catholic Hind. In fine, since you will have all
out together, they say if your own Party ever comes to tell Noses, that they
must be forced to serve you, and the rest of the New Converts, as the Turkish
Janissaries do their other Foot-Battalia's, place you in the Front, and
encompass you round, because you have got such a damnable trick of running away
from your Colors, that you are not to be trusted in the Rear.


Bays. And is the World then so wickedly disposed as to question the sincerity
of my Conversion? Oh tempora and mores! I could almost resolve with my own
Almanzor, that henceforward all mankind should walk upon Crutches. I cannot
tell, I gad, what to offer farther in my own defense, than what I have done
already, except only this which comes in my Head on the sudden. -- Pray
Gentlemen did you ever hear of a certain Noble Grecian called Ajax?


Eugenius. What he, that wore as many Cow-hides upon his Shield, as would have
furnished half the King's army with Shoe-leather!


Bays. The very same Sir. -- Now this Ajax, you must know, was Hector's
Cousin-german, and I Will acquaint you how the Kindred came in. Hesione, Priam's
Aunt, no I mistake I gad, Hesione, Priam's Sister --


Eugenius. Was a very honest Gentlewoman, for any thing I know to the contrary.
But prithee Mr. Bays setting that business aside, let us know what you have to
say to Ajax?


Bays. Nay, if you will have story in its puris naturalibus, without the Pedigree
and all that, even thank your selves for it -- Why then, once upon a time an
Assignation being made between Hector and his Cousin Ajax to determine the war
in a single Combat, just before the Trumpets sounded, Hector tells his Noble
Kinsman, that if he certainly knew which part of his Body was Trojan, and which
was Grecian, he would spare the one out of a respect to his pious Aunt, but slash,
cut and mortify the other like Lightning. The whole passage you may find in
the Tragedy of Troilus and Cressid, which with some little variation from the
Original, I will thus apply to my self. But pray listen -- Were my Commixion
Hind and Panther so,
That I could say this Hand the Panther's is,
And this the Hind's --
Mr. Eugenius for God's sake attend, -- The Sinews of this Leg All Panther,
this all Hind; The Panther's Blood
Runs in the Dexter Cheek, and this Sinister
Bounds in the Hinds --
Incomparably good I vow to Gad; and now follows one of the finest Oaths in
Christendom -- By Jove Multipotent I would not bear from hence that Pagan
Member,
Wherein my Sword should not impression make.
In plain English, Mr. Crites, if I thought I carried any Protestant Blood
about me, I Would tap it this very moment with my trusty Tilter, and write a
Letter of Defiance with it to all the Calvinists and Socinians l'gad in the
Universe. I could wish with all my Soul, that the troublesome Quietist yonder
on the other side the Hills, had made as true and sincere a Recantation as I
have done; for, between Friends, if this fails to give satisfaction, I cannot
tell what will -- And now, Gentlemen, pray let me have your Opinion of the
Poem, for methinks as long as I stand in your good graces, I should not be much
concerned if all the Town besides should censure it.


Eugenius. Faith little Bays, to deal freely with you, I have the same
indifferent thoughts of the Poetry as I have of the Subject, and could never
have imagined, but for the clear conviction you have given me in the matter,
that the Hind had obliged her Converts to part with their Wit, as well as their
Reason. I am afraid she has served your Muse, as they serve Jesuits in
Swedeland, and so disabled her, that you will scarce be able to dribble so much as
one single Madrigal for any of your New Friends in the Almanac. Besides, to
pursue my quarrel a little farther, I am angry that a Dramatist should either
trouble himself or others with matters of Controversy. For tho I confess it
seems somewhat generous in a Poet, to defend that Religion which was first
introduced by Poets, or Men poetically given, yet still the Character is
unnatural: Something must of necessity drop from him, that is not suitable to
the gravity of his Undertaking, and for all his Conduct, his Muse and his
Devotion will no more keep together, than the Young Lady, and the Pious
Grandmother at a Smithfield Show. You may remember, Mr. Bays, how the famed
Mrs. Behns Miscell. Printed by Ios. Hindmarsh.
Astrea, once in her Lifetime, unluckily lighted upon such a Sacred Subject,
and in a strange fit of Piety, must needs attempt a Paraphrase of the Lord's
Prayer. But alas poor Gentlewoman! She had scarce traveled half way, when
Cupid served her as the Cutpurse did the Old Justice in Bartholomew-Fair,
tickled her with a Straw in her Ear, and then she could not budge one foot
further, till she had humbly requested her Maker to grant her a private Act of
Toleration for a little Harmless Love, otherwise called Fornication -- Thus you
see, Mr. Bays, that in my Opinion, a Poet is none of the fittest persons in the
World to write a System of Divinity, or to deal in Controversy.


Bays. Well Sir, this is but one Doctors judgment however; but what say you Mr.
Crites?


Crites: For your comfort, Mr. Bays, I am not of my friends opinion here, but
think you have very honestly discharged the duty of a Poet, which obliges him
to preserve and maintain his Character still to the last. You know what our
great Master Horace says to this point, Servetur ad imum qualis ab incepto
processerit; and I am sure you have kept close to the Text. As you began with a
very indifferent Religion, so (Heaven be praised) you have not much m^^ded the
matter since in your last choice; and in my opinion it was but reason that your
Muse, which appeared first in a Tyrants quarrel, should employ her last efforts
to justify the usurpations of the Hind. But this is not all, Mr. Bays, you had
it seems a design in your old age to sacrifice your reputation, and how could
you do it more honestly than the same way you got it, that is, in Rhyme; or
sacrifice it in better company, than when you parted with your Senses, Reason,
and Conscience all together?


Bays. So Sir, I find I am very much beholding to you; and have you any more of
these Complements still behind?


Crites. Yes several of 'em, Mr. Bays; as first and foremost, we own our selves
extremely obliged to you for that honest well-meaning Motto in your Title Page,
The two Motto's to the Hind and Panther.
Antiquam exquirite matrem. For as long as we have the Grace to follow that
direction, few of our Gentlemen I believe will be for making the tour of Italy;
and your Hind in all probability will send as few Proselytes upon a Pilgrimage
to Rome, as old Mr. Sclaters Galatinus will send to Jerusalem.


Bays. Oh this wicked profane Generation! But pray Sir proceed --


Crites. Indeed as for the * Vera incessu patuit Dea, which accompanies it,
most of the Critics about Town are of opinion that it fits the Old Gentlewoman
of Endor much better than the Italian Madona you designed for, who they say has
been observed to have a strange hobbling in her gate, ever since her Female
friend miscarried in the Lateran: And therefore they advise you by all means to
lend it honest Elkanah against his next Edition of Pope Joan, for there, they
pretend, it would be a very seasonable pertinent jest, which it is not in the
place where now it stands. Just as you know Mr. Bays the Venio sicut Fur is a
very pat and agreeable thought on the Dial at Newgate, but would lose very much
of its poignancy, if it were removed to the Pillar in Covent Garden.


Bays. I perceive Mr. Crites where the Shoe pinches, but it is no more than
what I expected: This backbiting and slandering does not come upon me a l'
improvisse. My Savior and my Sovereign had enough of it in their times. Nay I
gad, I knew well enough my Book would make every Mothers Son of you angry --


Crites. Faith little Bays I am so far from being angry, that I could hugg thee
a hundred times over, for the performance; it was the most acceptable piece of
Service you could have done us, because we are all in very good hopes now, that
the Savoy-Pamphleteers will no more invade us with those outworn arguments in
Prose, which you have so profaned in your Poetry. 'Twill put your Church to
the charges at least of new Consecrating those Spiritual arms, which have been
so unhallowed in the usage by a secular hand. For to return some of your own
words upon you at parting. You Have made the benefits of others studying,
Much like the the Meals of Politic Jack Pudding
Whose dish to challenge, no man has the courage,
It Is all his own when once h' has spit in's Porridge.



Bays. Well Gentlemen I thank you both very heartily for the good opinion you
have of your humble Servant, and now I hope you will allow him the liberty of a
little Christian raillery in his turn.


Eugen. By all means Mr. Bays, begin as soon as you will.


Bays. Allons Messieurs. Have at your Established Church, for I design now to
proceed to my Reasons why I quitted her Communion; they are some half a score
in number, and (tho I say it) such swinging two-handed Reasons, that any single
Reason among 'em, well mounted and planted, is enough to demolish the
Foundation of any Church in the Universe. But can you guess either of you which
of all this jolly company of objections I intend to begin the assault with?


Crites. Not I by my troth Mr. Bays, for I believe it is less difficult by far
to assign the true motive of your going over to the Church of Rome, than to
assign any good Reason for your leaving the Church of England.


Eugen. Since you will needs put your friends to the trouble of guessing for you,
considering you are a Poet and all that, I am apt to believe you will make your
first attacque upon our Translation of the Psalms, because the Panther never
set you on work to rectify 'em. As I knew a trusty Glasier the last Summer,
who because he was not employed to mend the Church-windows, took pet, and went
to a meeting.


Bays. Upon Honor Mr. Eugenius that was not the case, tho since you have
refreshed my memory as to this point, I must freely own before you both, that I
was always extremely scandalized at your allowing of Hopkins and Sternholds
Poetry to be Sung in your Churches.


Crites. God so Mr. Bays! Was your Brother Hopkins so great an Eyesore to you?


Bays. Not so great an Eyesore by the half, as he has been an Ear-sore to me,
for I thank my Stars Mr. Crites I never mortified my self with reading a
Syllable of him in my Life time. As the peevish old huncks in the silent Woman
hired him a House as far from the rattling of Coaches as he could meet with, so
I have done the same in relation to a Church, and you might as soon wheedle Ben
Iohnson's Morose if he were alive again into the Wits Coffee-House, as persuade
me now into any of your Churches. You cannot imagine how strangely I have found
my self discomposed, when I have passed by any of those places where the
Congregation has been bellowing out the Psalms, so that of late years I run
away as naturally from that unsanctified thing called a Clark of Parish, as an
Irishman from a her'd of Prentices, or the rest of my own Profession from a
Lampooned Courtier, or a bilked Bookseller. En verite Mr. Crites if I have the
wind of him I can smell his ekes and ayes and his other expletives about him
half the length of Cheapside.


Crites. And that is much the same distance (as I take it) that they say Father
Ignatius could smell out a Heretic. But methinks this subject has inspired you
with a great deal of gayety Mr. Bays: I perceive you can play the Droll as well
as the best of 'em, when you have a mind to it.


Bays. The truth on it is Gentlemen my talent lies a little that way; but as I
was saying before, there is a certain business in the Churches about Town, which
I extremely fancy, and that is, the setting up Organs to drown the
insupportable harshness of the noise; which piece of policy I suppose they have
borrowed from the old Israelites, who were use to beat Kettle Drums all the
while they Sacrificed their Children to Molok, in order to stifle their cries.


Eugen. Faith little Bays I could scarce have believed you had the Heart to
treat any of your own Tribe with so much severity. If you allow no other
quarter to your Brother-trespassers in Rhyme, what mercy can a trader in prose
expect from your hands. But prithee Mr. Bays why did you never own this
grievance in public, that the state might have found some way or other to
redress it.


Bays. Tho I have frequently done it in a Coffee-House as here before you
Gentlemen, yet I was always unwilling to charge the Panther with these
Translators in Print: Because, do you mind me Mr. Crites, it would look a
little ill and all that, for a Poet to do such a thing: People would be apt to
think he did it for his own interest, and to get himself employed by the next
Convocation. Just so, as Cardinal Bellarmine tells us, the Apostles never
recommended the worshipping of Saints in their Writings; but left it in trusty
hands to be communicated four or five Ages after, for fear the Heathens might
take occasion to reproach these self-denying Gentlemen for establishing their
own adoration. I know, Mr. Crites, a person of your Judgment can never relish
such insipid stuff as we have been discoursing of; pray tell me then what
possible defense can be made for your Church, or how it can be styled pure and
primitive, which is so corrupt in her Poetry, and allows such a vile
translation of the Psalms in her public Devotions. She has longed every
Ash Wednesday any time this hundred years to have the primitive discipline of
Penance restored, and may long as many years, for all I know to the contrary,
to have her Poetry reformed.


Crites. You have chose a very ill person, Mr. Bays, to satisfy your
Conscience in this point, for I believe any of your new Friends the Dissenters
can better inform you how these aforesaid Psalms stole into the Church than my
self. Perhaps they were allowed for the good of the Lungs of the body politic,
or else to reduce some of our people who had been used a ouvrir la bouche at
Geneva, and could not subsist without it here in England; the Magistrates at
that time were willing to connive at 'em, as some of your former Popes complied
with Images, Incense, Holy Water, Tonsure, and other Ceremonies of Pagan
extraction, to bring over the Heathens with greater ease into the Christian
communion. But after all, Mr. Bays, rather than this matter shall hinder any
Proselytes from coming to the Panthers Church we'll freely part with 'em.


Bays. Part with 'em, Mr. Crites? That Is a good jest I'gad. Your people I am
sure will sooner part with their Magna Charta, than lose an inch of their
birthright in Hopkins and Sternhold. Part with 'em, Mr. Crites? Why you shall
as soon persuade me that the Spanish King will part with his Whiskers, dry 'em
to powder, and then send 'em in his Royal Snuff Box for a present to the
West India Company at Amsterdam, as that the good people of England will ever
consent to part with the Psalms.


Eugenius. Nay have a care what you do, Mr. Bays, for if you pursue this Matter
too far, you will even oblige me against my inclination to consider the Poetry of
your own Church, and unless I am mightily mistaken, a man that has any leisure
or appetite to mortify himself that way, may find as Incorrect Language, as
Unwarrantable Expressions, and as barbarous a Spirit in your Hymns and
Services, as ever the never-to-be-forgotten Wisdom was guilty of; with this
only difference, Mr. Bays, that whereas our old fashioned, Translators were
honestly content to palm a few ancient words upon us, and no more, the Authors
of your Offices have made bold to advance a step or two beyond 'em, even into
the Territories of Blasphemy. What think you Sir of the Iure Matris Impera
Filio? and all those admirable Complements to St. Joseph, St. Ioachim, St.
Wilgefortis, the three Kings of Colen, the eleven thousand Ursulins, etc. which
I would now offer to your pious consideration, but that a Friend of yours
designs to publish 'em in a Set Treatise, which intends to visit the Press very
speedily. Or Lastly, tell me whether Tom. Sternhold, or any of his Fellows ever
Burlesqued the Psalter and the Te Deum with that freedom as a Cardinal of your
own Church, and one of the Burgesses of the Roman Almanac, I mean St.
Bonaventure has done? When you have reflected upon all this, and are able to
justify it, we'll give you free leave to make what sport you please with any
of the Abovementioned Gentlemen, but till that time we desire you to be civil
to 'em. And now I fancy you had better proceed to a new point, than meddle any
more with this. Therefore pray let us know what you have in the next place to
object to the Panther.


Bays. If it must be so as you will have it, why then the second thing I quarrel
with your Church for, is the Marriage of her Clergy-Sons, and I think I I have
so effectually lashed this Ecclesiastical Devil of Incontinence, that he will
scarce be able to show his Head above Ground in my time at least.

Speaking of the blessed effects which the Reformation produced among us, I
subjoyn these following Lines, Here Marriage pleasures midnight Prayers supply,
And Mattin-Bells (a Melancholy Cry)
Are tuned to merrier notes, Increase and Multiply. H. and P. p. 21.

An excellent thought I gad, and I dare swear half the Clergymen in the Kingdom
will hereafter think the worse of the First Chapter of Genesis for my sake. A
little below, meeting with the German Reformer, I take care to inform the
World, that Little Martin, in order to make his way to Paradise the pleasanter
p. 22.
Be thought him of a Wife e're half way gone,
For 'twas uneasy traveling alone.
You may observe here, Mr. Crites, that the German Divines can no more go to
Heaven without Company, than they can drink without Company: And as for Luther,
I think I am pretty even with him now for calling the Pope Antichrist, since I
have made him one of Mahomets Disciples, and a well-wisher to the Alcoran. But
the severest touch of all is toward the end of my Book, where I occasionally
take notice, that a plain Good Man whose name is understood, refused to take
the Communion from the Panther's Chaplains, chiefly I gad, because they were
Married. Nor Consecrated Grain their Wheat he thought,
p. 128.
Which new from treading in their Bills they brought.
The finest Metaphor certainly this, as ever entered into any Poets Pia Matter.
I have abundance more of such witty hints up and down in my Poem, which I could
recount to you, but these may suffice at present, only for your diversion I Will
acquaint you with a little conversation, which I lately had on this subject at
a place of public meeting -- I could with some patience (said I) hear an
Italian or a Spaniard condemn the Church, for enjoining a Chastity which is
hardly practicable under the influences of a warmer Clymate; but here in
England where a Feeble Sun, a Phlegmatic Air, and a peculiar stiffness that
accompanies our tempers, do all contribute to make the performance more easy:
Here (I say) where little or nothing of the Christian Hero is required to
disarm a few sickly inclinations, no excuse is to be admitted; -- But before I
proceed any farther in this Argument, pray Gentlemen give me your Opinion of
it, for methinks now it was a pretty sort of a thought to make the Sun, Moon
and Stars throw the blame from themselves, and lay it all upon the poor
Clergymen.


Crites. It Is very diverting indeed, Mr. Bays.


Bays. Sir (continued I) if as you allege --


Eugenius. How now, Mr. Bays, what Gentleman have you brought into the Room?
How got he in? What is his Name, and Business? For I durst have sworn, you had
been all this while talking to your dear self, and enditing a Soliloquy.


Bays. Lord Sir, you are enough to distract any person breathing with your
damned impertinent questions; did not I tell you before, that all this was
spoke in a public place, and before company.


Eugen. Why then little Bays, I beg your pardon; however to the best of my
knowledge I never heard this Gentleman comment to il appellez vous? allege one
syllable for himself before.


Bays. That Is very true, Dear Friend of mine, he never did. But you are to be
informed, that it is a pretty new way of disputing we have got at this end of
the Town, for a person to suppose that the person he disputes with, will raise
such and such objections to the matter in hand, and then for this person to
answer 'em himself.


Crites. Faith, Mr. Bays, this is as refined a piece of Policy, as I ever heard
of in my life.


Bays. You say true, Mr. Crites, it is Machiavel all over, for you may swear, a
man in such a case will use the same discretion in choosing his Objections, as
they say Robin Hood used in choosing his men, such as he can easily Cuff and
Master when he pleases: And now, because you are both my singular good Friends,
I Will whisper to you who it is, that first introduced this Policy into a
Conference -- It Is a certain Old Gentleman of the Savoy* that has a very ill
hand at Spelling English, and his Christened Name is the same with a certain
Saints, who has had for several years a great influence upon Advent-Sunday.


Crites. Thank you for this secret, Mr: Bays, I know the Gentleman as well as
if you had named him outright, it is the very same man that said Pope Innocent
the Third was so hard a name to remember; but now I think on it, you had always
a very good hand at penning a Whisper.


Eugenius. Prithee, Dear Mr. Bays, without any more ado, go on with your
Argument.


Bays. Sir (continued I) if, as you allege, it is downright madness, and all
that, to restrain our Appetites by a Vow, which we are not capable of
performing without a supernatural assistance; I desire to know whether the
Indictment be general, and if not, why it should be made criminal in one case,
and not in another. Suppose a man of a long continuance in debauchery should at
last reform, and to prevent the return of his irregularities, should oblige
himself by a solemn vow to a stricter conduct for the time to come, no one, I
believe, would blame his resolutions, or charge him, with the guilt of a
virtual perjury; and yet let me tell you, Gentlemen, Temperance is no more a
Virtue of our own manufacture than Chastity, nay, perhaps, as times go, much
the severer confinement of the two, as having more avenues to guard, and more
manly temptations to resist. To secure one's chastity little more is necessary
than to leave off a correspondence with the other Sex, which to a wise man is
no greater a punishment, than it would be to a Fanatic Parson to be forbid
seeing the Cheats and the Committee, or for my Lord Mayor and Aldermen to be
interdicted the sight of the London Cuckolds. If you never see the Enemy, you
lie under no danger of being beaten from your post, and a farther conversation
will discover so many little vanities and impertinencies, as will serve to
improve the disgust, and confirm the former resolution But then the other
virtue is not to be maintained at so cheap a rate, to preserve it, you must
suspect your nearest acquaintance, nay your very self, you must guard it from
the attacques of friends as well as of the visits of strangers; you must lose a
thousand happy moments that men of wit enjoy when they sacrifice it to their
mirth and pleasure. In fine, like a Frontier Kingdom, it ought to be very well
manned and garrisoned, or else it is every minute in danger of being invaded,
and taken.


Crites. Very Rhetorically Harangu'd upon my word, Mr. Bays.


Bays. Besides I would willingly be informed, how it comes possible for people
to pass the most sanguine, and rebellious part of their lives (as they
generally do at the Universities) without a comfortable importance to relieve
their necessities, and yet not be able to master a few weak decaying
inclinations; can we bear the toil of the day when the Sun scorches, and the
heats are unruly, and shall we complain of the coolness of the Evening, and
call for Umbrella's at Midnight? Can we withstand the Enemy when his assaults
are vigorous, and when he has all the advantages imaginable over us; and shall
we make a tame dishonorable submission to him, when his ammunition is spent,
and he is just upon the point of crying quarter? But the mystery is easy
enough to be unfolded, for Celibacy is not so miserable a state as people are
apt to imagine; a man may subsist many a fair day without a Spouse to support
him, till the Living is provided, and then it is as impossible for the
contemplative thing to be without one, as without his German system, and
Cambridge Concordance; then, and only then, his former stock of Grace leaves
him in the lurch, and abandons him to a dismal multitude of temptations, from
which it seems a warm Bedfellow can only secure him. However to do him justice,
it is not so much the man's own inclination to marry, as his Country Patron's
Royal will and pleasure it should be so, who awakens his concupiscence to the
tune of either take this bad Halfcrown Sir, for all it is clipped within the brim,
and so forth, or else not a word of the fifty pieces. In fine, after the
Reformation-manner of distributing Preferments, the Spouse and the Parsonage go
together just like Virtue and Reward, or in Dr. Heylin's language, Knighthood
and the Service of Ladies. After this I proceeded to show the many
inconveniences of Matrimony in a Spiritual Life; that if the Levite chanced to
have his Table overstocked with Olive-branches (which was the case of most of
'em) it would oblige him to too servile a dependence upon the Srate, that he
must sacrifice the dignity of his character to get bread for his Family, put on
the Grazier to bolster up the Vicar, as in country Villages you know, it is an
usual thing to tack the sorry Tradesman to the Ale-draper; that if his Abigail
chanced to be deformed, it would incline him to preach of nothing else but Hell
and Reprobation; but if she was handsome, it would certainly tincture all his
Sermons, more or less with a touch of Mahumetanism, and so make him a fitter
Paraphrast for the Alcoran, than the New Testament. And then I concluded all
with a very merry piece of drollery, I vow to gad, upon a West-country Parson,
who having the good fortune to light upon a goodly Heritage, and a more goodly
Spouse, could not be prevailed upon for Love nor Money, (nay tho 'twas a Funeral
Sermon 'twas all a case) to take a Text any where in the Bible but out of the
Canticles, till two years at least were passed over his head, by which time his
Conjugal Love and Affection were somewhat abated.

Thus Gentlemen I have acquainted you with that discourse, which I made in the
place abovementioned upon the occasion of Celibacy, it is the quintessence of
what Father Cressy, and a more modern Author have advanced for the Cause, and
unless I am extremely mistaken, it has suffered nothing under my management.


Crites. Faith, Little Bays, you have been very severe upon the Tribe of Levi
for their Marrying, but I don't wonder at it, for to my certain knowledge you
never gave Matrimony a good word in your Life, but thought it too barbarous and
heathenish a confinement, even for the Laity. Priestcraft was one of the
civilest Nicknames you ever gave it, tho between Friends Celibacy deserves that
title much better: But so familiar a thing is it for Poets to rail at Marriage,
that methinks they ought as much to be forgiven for it, as a Country Curate for
railing at a healthful season, or a City Merchant at the French Privateers.


Eugen. As my Friend very well observes, Mr. Bays, you Poets ought in
conscience to be excused for being witty now and then upon those that are got
into the Oval of Matrimony: for either you are plagued with an odd sort of
Latitudinarian creatures at home (which they say is your own misfortune, Mr.
Bays, as well as Mr. Sh-dw-lls) and then you have all the reason in the World
to vent your indignation upon that settlement called a Wife: Or else, you are
humbly content to pick a little natural Philosophy out of some Fleet Street
Strowler, that will not consent under the last Half-Crown to qualify you for
writing a luscious Love-Scene, and taking a dose of Turpentine Pills. Let the
case be what it will, the unconscionable Wife, or the more unconscionable Whore
will infallibly excuse you, and the rest of your Brethren the Poets for passing
a little unmannerly language upon Matrimony. However Mr. Bays I dare lay one
single wager with you, that although you are of a Church, where Marriage passes
muster for a Sacrament conferring Grace, that you are not of that opinion: But
that as Aristotle is deservedly blamed for setting up ten predicaments when two
might have served the turn; so likewise that Holy Church was very much in the
wrong for quartering seven Sacraments upon the Gospel, when the number might
have been reduced to a less, and Matrimony might very well be reckoned as a
melancholy appendix to the Sacrament of Penance.


Bays. Pray Mr. Eugenius, don't fancy that I entertain any such loose
extravagant opinions as those are, I Am no such prosane person, not I, l'gad.


Crites. Before we examine this matter any farther, I must humbly request one
favor of you Mr. Bays.


Bays. With all my heart Sir, command me in what you please.


Crites. Why you know, Mr. Bays, it has been very usual of late, for persons,
when they have a mind to batter and demolish any pretended grievance, to lay
aside the merits of the cause, and judge the equity of it by its original.


Bays. Very right Sir, for thus you know we banter your Reformation with a
story or two of Ann Bolein, and King Harry's Cod-piece; and thus my Brother
Bays of everlasting memory, when he took the Test into his pious consideration,
thought he effectually ridiculed it, by tracing it to its Cradle in
Aldersgate Street, and laying it at the door of that Man-Midwife of the Popish
Plot, the late Earl of Shaftsbury -- But pray Mr. Crites, why did you give your
self the trouble to beg so small a favor as this, when you might have
commanded it.


Crites. Because I am not so very well persuaded of the honesty of such a
proceeding; but if it be so very fair and lawful, as you pretend, I would
advise you then, Mr. Bays, when you next summon a National Synod of our Rivers,
to set the Severn in the Speakers Chair, and not the Thames; for he by virtue
of his original, as springing our of the British Mountains, ought certainly to
have the privilege of sitting above the Thames, that has the misfortune to be
born in a Valley -- But now to the first institutor of Celibacy.

I am as loath, Mr. Bays, to show my little reading out of Fathers and Councils,
as a City Alderman is of showing his Young Wife at the Playhouse or at the
Mall; not that I am afraid of being plundered of what I have, but methinks
convincing a Poet out of Fathers and Councils looks as awkwardly as if a man
should think to quicken a lazy Water-man with a Greek Verse or two out of
Apollonius's Argonautics; but because we cannot possibly avoid it* we'll be
unmannerly that way as seldom as we can.

The first Pope then that ever recommended it with any effectual vigor to the
World, was that Euroelydon of Italy, Pope Gregory the Seventh, alias called
Hildebrand; and indeed he deserves to go under more Names than one, that had a
greater share of wickedness in his temper, than one would have thought any one
single man's nature had been capable of. But because it is a good secure way to
rail with Insallibility on ones side, as a late worthy Gentleman has expressed
himself, let us hear his character from the sacred Council of Brixia; He was
then in the judgment of that numerous assembly, a superstitious observer of
Dreams and Prodigies, a Magician, a Negromancer, a Monster given up to all the
excesses of Pride and Cruelty, and finally one (for the best jest he was ever
guilty of is still behind) one that by the assistance of the Devil, had aspired
to the Apostolical Chair.

I had often heard, Mr. Bays, that the Spanish and French Factions had a great
influence in the Conclave, and pretended now and then as an opportunity served
to a disposal della Spirito Santo, but never imagined that the old Gentleman in
black had any vote amongst the Gentlemen of the Purple, till this lucky passage
convinced me.


Bays. Upon my word, Mr. Crites, I will not stay a minute longer with you, if you
make any more such reflections upon the Sacred election --


Crites. This was likewise the same person, Mr. Bays, that so solemnly
delivered that unfortunate Emperor Henry the Fourth, and all the Bishops that
received investiture from him, into the hands of the Devil, for no other reason
in the World but only justifying the Imperial Prerogative against the Papal
usurpations; and lastly, to complete his character, he that branded the Married
Clergy by the scandalous name of Nicolaitans. What were the blessed effects of
that forced Chastity, which was so vigorously enjoined under this Pontificate,
a man may easily learn out of Aventinus, Sigebertus, and the other Historians
of that barbarous age, and they they were as follows: The Bishops were
continually quarrelling with the Priests, the Priests (not to be behind hand
with 'em) were continually reproaching the Bishops, and the Laics very devoutly
fell foul upon both. They trod the Sacrament under foot that had been
consecrated by the married Priests, they burnt their Tithes, they sanctified
the Altars which had been profaned by 'em, with Holy Water. Above all, there
sprung up a goodly harvest of Fornication, Incest, Murder, and Adultery; and
yet all this while, unless his Infallibility was notoriously belyed, Pope
Gregory kept a more than ordinary correspondence with his dearly beloved
Mathildis.

There are some other remarkable frolics to be found in the life of this
Ecclesiastical Leviathan, as his drinking a health to the Devil, his throwing a
Consecrated Hostie into the fire for not resolving him a certain question which
he put to it, that I purposely omit, as things that are rather fit for the
penance of a Scavenger, than the consideration of an Historian.

Let us now come over into England, to see how matters succeeded here: Much
about the time that Hildebrand was so busy to promote this affair beyond the
Alps, Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury advanced it at home, and by virtue of
his Archiepiscapal authority, deprived all the Married Priests throughout the
Kingdom of their Ecclesiastical promotions. There had indeed in the time of the
Saxons, (when the Benedictine Order, what by their pretended Miracles, and what
by the outward austerity of their Lives, spread apace) several efforts been
used by Odo, and Dunstan, by Ethelwold Bishop of Winchester, and Oswald Bishop
of Worcester, in the year 963 to eject the Married Priests out of Colleges and
Churches, and substitute Regulars in their room; But however as this was not
put in Execution in all places, so likewise the seculars were not constrained
to leave their Wives and preferments but only at their own discretion. But
Anselm copying from the furious Hildebrand proceeded farther in the matter, for
he not only compelled 'em to part with their Wives, (which unchristian rigor
the Saxon Bigotts in all their zeal never practiced) but also, what was the
more mortifying case of the two, forced 'em to part with their preferments. We
are now at leisure to observe the consequences of this worthy Institution. As
it happened Mr. Bays upon our prohibiting the Exportation of unwrought Wools,
that the Hollanders immediately set up several new Manufactures of their own:
So here when the Religious were forbidden to have any more commerce with the
Women, as necessity you know forces people upon desperate attempts, they began
to Trade amongst themselves. In short this Italian Decree of Celibacy
introduced the Italian sin of Sodomy, which occasioned so many horrid
complaints, that Anselm found himself obliged to Convene another Council at
London* where very severe Laws were enacted against it. The punishment (as
Roger Hoveden tells us) was Excommunication ipso facto, not be got off but by
Absolution from a Bishop only, and that not to be procured at an easier rate
than a swinging Penance: But the Monks shortly after taking occasion to
acquaint the Archbishop with the fatal inconveniences that in all probability
would ensue upon the Publishing of this Decree, in as much as it would lay open
and discover to all the World a Sin, that was scarce known or heard off before
out of a Cloister, he was Piously prevailed upon to call it in. Thus you see
Mr. Bays that in those Conscientious times it was thought better so permit
People the liberty of Incest, Sodomy, Adultery, and Fornication, or at least,
to leave 'em under an unavoidable necessity of committing such Brutalities,
than repeal the unsanctify'd Canon which occasioned them.

What were the first Motives which influenced the Western Patriarchs to abridge
their Clergy of that liberty which the Apostles left 'em in, is not difficult
to Conjecture. It Is certain they can make no pretenses of Antiquity, or
Tradition for it: For if St. Ierom's word may be taken, all the Apostles except
St. John, and St. Paul were Married; and when the famous Controversy of the
Celebration of Easter was so warmly disputed between the Eastern and Western
Churches, Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus alleges the example of seven of his
Progenitors, who had successively governed that See, to justify his own
practice. Were the Primitive Christians then of the first and purest Ages,
incapable of living up to that height of self-denial and Austerity, which the
worst men recommended, and the worst times could practice? Or did the Christian
Church require as long a time to arrive to the height of Spiritual perfection,
as it had to ascend to its temporal greatness? Were their Appetites more
ungovernable in the ten first Centuries, or did the succeeding Ages light upon
more effectual restringents to subdue 'em? Yes certainly Mr. Bays they did. For
as I take it, the sanctifying Miracles of Whip cord were not so Universally
acknowledged then as afterward, nor St. Francis's receipt for an erection by
running into a heap of Snow so generally made use of; and then the virtue of a
long Pilgrimage, the carrying about one this Saints Thumb, and that Saints set
of Teeth, the Praying before such an Image or such an Altar, but above all, the
recommending ones self to the Virgin Marys protection, were not things of so
universal practice and approbation in the earlier times. And perhaps after all,
the gift of continence was not to be bestowed upon the Church Militant, till
the sacrifice of the Mass was born, that only an immaculate Priesthood might be
concerned with that immaculate Sacrifice, or till the Popes had planted Heaven
with store enough of Submediators, to implore a sufficient stock of Grace for
their Friends here upon Earth.

Indeed Pope Siricius toward the end of the Fourth Century in his Epistle to
the Spanish Clergy, quotes this sorry place out of Scripture to fright 'em from
their Wives, Si secundum Carnem vixeritis moriemini, to which citation we will
only oppose another Text of the same Apostle, melius est nubere quam uri, and
so we will leave him. However by this single passage, Mr. Bays, you may perceive
with what eagerness and fury your infallible Guide snaps at any solitary Text
in the Bible which he thinks will countenance any of his innovations, or make
for his purpose. A Puny Courtier never waited with half that impatience for a
gracious nod, or a merciful wink from a rising Favorite, as infallibility it
self waited here for one lonely unguarded place in the New Testament to back
his Cause; I don't question but the Old Gentleman turned over the whole Book
from Genesis to the Revelations with as much concern, as ever you did, Mr.
Bays, to find out Nicknames for your Absolon and Achitophel. But what
advantage has he done his cause by producing this Text? Why none at all, but
the greatest disservice imaginable. Si secundum Carnem Vixeritis moriemini? Why
it destroys Celibacy, and Fornication, the heir apparent of Celibacy, to all
intents and purposes; and I don't at all question, but that the unerring
Intelligencer if he had slept a little, and consulted his ^illow, would have
been of another opinion next Morning, but it seems he was fully resolved to
show his infallibility one way or another, and he has done it with a witness,
for he is most infallibly in the wrong.

Upon the whole, Mr. Bays, (and I hope you have good nature enough to forgive
me this small digression) I make this observation, that Saint Peter's successor
can steer his Ecclesiastical Mackarel-boat with a side wind, if occasion serve,
from any part of the Bible, whether Canonical or Uncanonical it is all a case. A
little Scripture at Rome, I dare engage, will go farther than Copper money in
Ireland; it is not at present the commodity of the place, and I am very well
satisfied that a man with a foot or two of Scripture, nay rather than fail,
with an ell of Tobit, and the Maccabees* (for we ought in Conscience to make
allowances for Apocryphal ground) to purchase a dozen of the best Acres in the
Vatican planted with the most Apostolical Traditions. And this is a mystery
which I cannot comprehend. For if the notion of Infallibility will solve all
the Phaenomena's of your Religion, why for God's sake do you take sanctuary in
the Bible, and if the Bible is necessary to support your pretentions, why do
you so shamefully discard and abandon it, when it has done your business. This
way of proceeding is so very brutal and ungenerous, that it puts me in mind of
a late Monarch, that was brought to his Throne, and settled in it by a certain
well-meaning Church, and when he thought he had no farther occasion for her,
very decently laid her aside for all her former services. As the case stands at
present, your Savoy-Divines are as glad to be owned by a Friend in the
New Testament, as a needy Courtier is of being owned by a City security; but I
profess I don't see the necessity of such a Conduct. What other people may
think I don't know, but I had much rather take the invocation of Saints upon
honest Infallibilities word for it, than with Bellarmine deduce it from that
passage of Job, And he shall pray for thee. And a thousand times sooner take
the Half-communion upon the same credit, than pretend to justify it as Bishop
Fisher has done, out of Give us this day our daily bread. It Is the most
unaccountable nonsense in my opinion that a man can be capable of, to subpoena
half a score witnesses to appear for him at Westminster Hall, that when they
are examined tell a clean contrary story, and so ruin his Cause; and this, Mr.
Bays, I take to be the case of your own Polemics, they freely upon all
occasions (as is manifest from their late Pamphlets) endeavor to prove all
their Tenets out of the Bible, yet they manage the matter so indiscreetly that
every Tradesman can charge 'em with false inferences, and indeed after all
their attempts, the holy Penmen will scarce be persuaded to serve an
apprenticeship to the modern trade of misrepresenting* Now I could acquaint
'em, Mr. Bays, with a certain method that shall preserve their reputation in
all companies, let 'em pretend to Miracles among the Indians, to Antiquity
among the Quakers, to Holiness of Life among the Ranters, to Unity among the
Independants, to Loyalty and Good Works among the Presbyterians, to Decency of
Worship among the Adamites, to Learning among the Anabaptists, and to the
Merits of their Faith among the Socinians: Let them quote Scripture before
Physicians, quote the Fathers before Ladies, talk of Councils before Soldiers,
and conjure up the Trinity before those that don't believe Transubstantion: Let
'em pretend to Austerity of Living among the Beaux of the Town, to Universality
among the Muggletonians, and (what must be carefully observed) to Tradition
only among the Courtiers, for they are a sort of people, that because they have
no leisure to examine any Religion, take it all upon trust. But among the
established Churchmen, I would have 'em pretend to nothing at all, but their
two undeniable Talents Ignorance and Impudence.

And now to our business again, Mr. Bays, -- the true reason of imposing
Celibacy upon the Clergy, was at first an ungovernable zeal, void of Conduct
and Charity, a peremptory Spirit of Pride, and above all, a wild notion of
attaining to an imaginary kind of perfection, which is only to be found among
the people of Sir Thomas More's creation. This, Mr. Bays, is the true state of
the business. For tho Pope Siricius, as I told you before, was so unadvised as
to endeavor to prove Celibacy out of the Bible, yet others that managed the
Cause with more discretion, found it was not capable of that kind of
protection, and therefore instead of so many Texts to defend it, gave it a
guard du corpse of certain well-bred handsome Gentlemen, which in the language
of that age they called Conveniences: However Paphnutius stifled the motion at
the Council of Nice, and the Synod of Gangra passed an Anathema upon all those,
that refused to receive the Communion from a married Priest. What gives me a
farther prejudice to the matter in dispute, is the persons who first of all
recommended it to the World. They were such that in heat of persecution had
retired into the Woods to preserve themselves from the fury of their Enemies,
where they had lived under a great deal of austerity and mortification, and
indeed the places whither they fled for shelter, afforded no very agreeable
accommodations. Now these Gentlemen, when the storm was over, and the Church
enjoyed a little Sunshine, were for continuing that Ascetic sort of life, which
they first practiced amongst the Caves and Deserts; and tho they had lived so
long out of the world, would very discreetly impose Laws upon those, who had
always lived in it.

From what has been said Mr. Bays upon this score, I would not have you
conclude that I am an Enemy to Celibacy, no one I am sure has more honorable
thoughts of that easy unincumbred state than my self; yet for all that, I am
of opinion, it ought not to be forced upon a whole body of men without any
distinction, but that every man should be left to his own discretion, to choose
that way of life, which seems most agreeable to his own inclination, and the
sacredness of his character. Four or five hundred old men they are convened in
a Council with those formal solemnities which such great assemblies generally
make use of, have in my judgment no more authority to prescribe a Continence
(which they themselves are past a capacity of losing) to those of more youthful
appetites, than the good people that live under the Line have to command us in
the North to go naked: The only revenge which the younger Clergy could return,
would be to condemn the use of Spectacles in a full Convention for unchristian
and Heretical, to order that whosoever could not read a Geneva-Bible at two
yards distance and vault over a five-barr'd Gate, should forfeit his Mitre, and
that no one should presume to take Holy Orders, who would not oblige himself by
a vow never to be guilty of wearing a Beard, and who would not renounce both
Gout and Palsy, as heartily as he did the Devil and all his Works at his
Baptism. Should such Decrees as these pass for the mortification of the Right
Reverend Fathers, I suppose they would be only taken for things of raillery and
diversion; and yet, Mr. Bays, Celibacy is as much a jest upon humane nature,
(taking it in the gross) as what I have just now mentioned. I wonder in my
heart, that when they proceeded so far to refine the Priesthood, as to think it
possible for all of 'em to live without the other Sex, that they had not
likewise obliged 'em to go to Stool but once a quarter, and that precisely at
twelve a Clock, and to subsist after the Spiritual manner of the ancient
Knights Errant, that never, as we read of, debased themselves with brutal
eating and drinking. As our Pulses, Mr. Bays, would not cease beating, although
the whole College of Physicians in a Warwick Lane Meeting should think it fit
to lay an interdict upon 'em, so I don't question but Nature will continue
still to work after her usual manner, tho all the Councils in Christendom
should lay all their heads together to muzzle her: And I fancy it is but small
comfort to one of your fat overgrown Friars when he finds he has a huge stock
of Love upon his hands, to imagine to dispossess himself of it all, by reading
over Pope Hildebrand's Canon against Sacerdotal erections. Indeed if I might
have had my will, Celibacy should have waited at least another age before it
had been publicly enjoined. After Transubstantiation had been made a matter of
my Faith, I would then have freely consented to have Celibacy established; for
certainly, Mr. Bays, I could never think any thing too difficult for that
Priest to perform, that could make his God at a minutes warning.


Bays. Now I hope, Mr. Crites, tho you deny me a share in the other virtues,
you will allow me to have a stock of patience sufficient to furnish all the
married men and Chemists in the Nation at my own cost and Charges, otherwise I
am sure I could never have heard out this tedious harangue of yours, which is
full as troublesome as an Irish Genealogy, or to hear one of the City Aldermen
tell all the traverses of his Fortune from his Leathern Breeches down to his
Scarlet Gown. -- Nay I knew very well before hand what entertainment a
Discourse of Chastity must expect to find among you pampered Protestants; but
if you have any more to say upon this occasion, Mr. Crites, pray let me have
it, for I promise you my attention.


Crites. Thus, Mr. Bays, your Celibacy, which Presumption, and Pride, and some
few Specious Pretenses first introduced into the World, was afterward upon
certain Secular Considerations espoused by the Popes, till it was at last
brought to that perfection in which we now see it. Your Western Patriarchs, in
order to erect that Temporal Monarchy, after which they so zealously aspired,
found it requisite to make the Clergy as much depending upon their See as was
possible, and likewise to disengage 'em from leaving any natural pledges to the
respective Governments where they lived. Therefore by virtue of a blind
obedience which had for some time been paid to St. Peter's Chair, and if that
failed to produce the effect, by virtue of a little thundering language, which
at that age was as terrible to Kings, as the Twelve-penny-Act is now to the
Vintners, they made a shift to wrest the right of Investitures out of the hands
of Princes, to put themselves in capacity of gratifying their trusty Agents
abroad, and for the same reasons of State, they forbid the Ecclesiastics all
the World over to Marry, lest when they should have occasion to use their
assistance against their own natural Princes, the squauling and cries of their
Children should stifle the voice of his Roman Molocship. Had your Priesthood,
Mr. Bays, really believed Marriage to have been a Sacrament that brought Grace
along with it, you may conclude from their taking away the Cup, and several
other retrenchments, that it had been a favor to be allowed only to the
choicer sort of the Laity, and that they themselves had been so far from
denying Matrimony to their own Tribe, that I don't question but they would have
pleaded some Reverend Tradition or other, nay interpreted the Scripture so far
to their own advantage, as to make it allow 'em the privilege of Poligamy, in
order to secure themselves of as great a stock of Grace as was possible to be
had.


Bays. So, Mr. Crites, you have made a very pretty edifying discourse
concerning this business, but as I informed you before, I was not insensible
what usage such a mortifying doctrine as Celibacy must of necessity meet
amongst the Sons of the Reformation. You that have destroyed Religious houses,
and to justify the Sacrilege, have always laughed at the austerites which are
practiced in a recluse life, are too far engaged to your dearly-beloved
pleasures, to entertain a principle that so severely contradicts the dictates
of flesh and blood.


Eugenius. Nay, Mr. Bays, now you have gone a little too far in this matter,
for we Gentlemen of the Schism (as your party is pleased by way of raillery to
call us) are not so averse to a Monastic life as you imagine: For my own
particular, I wish with all my heart, that all the Brainsick Statesmen, all
the besotted Lovers, and all the melancholy Zealots, all the fine-dressing
Fops, all the doting kind Keepers, all the enthusiastic Poets, and all the
superannuated Whores, with the mighty multitudes of raving Philosophers, and
litigious Attorneys, that are to be found in the Kingdom of England, Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, were shut up within the four Walls of
some capacious Monastery. -- Now for your diversion, Mr. Bays, if you please to
afford me a hearing, I Will repeat you a certain Ode in Horace, done by a certain
friend of mine, which may serve to convince you, that we are not such enemies
to Nunneries and all that, as you have hitherto believed.


Bays. An Ode in Horace, Mr. Eugenius, that has any thing to do with Nunneries?
Why it is impossible, and you are certainly mistaken.


Eugen. You Will correct your opinion, Mr. Bays, as soon as you have heard it:
It Is a Translation of Uxor pauperis Ibyci tandem Nequitiae pone modum tuae;
only somewhat new-modelled, and adapted to the present times. You must know it
was calculated for the meridian of the Duchess of Cl -- land, but may
indifferently serve any super-annuated Court-Whore in Christendom -- But pray
listen. I.
At length, thou Antiquated Whore,
Leave trading off, and sin no more,
For shame in your old age turn Nun,
As Whores of everlasting memory have done.
II.
Why do you still frequent the Sport,
The Balls and Revels of the Court,
Or why at glittering Masks appear,
Only to augment, and fill the triumphs of the fair.
III.
To Ghent or Brussels strait adjourn,
The lewdness of your former life to mourn,
There brawny Priests in plenty you may hire,
If Whip, and wholesome Sackcloth cannot quench the fire.
IV.
Your Daughter's for the Amorous business made,
To her in Conscience quit your trade;
As when his Conquering days were done.
Victorious Charles resigned his Kingdom to his Son.
V.
Alas! never thrum your long disused Guitar,
Nor with Pulvilio's scent your hair,
But in some lonely Cell abide,
With Rosary and Psalter dangling at your side.
Well, now Mr. Bays, pray give me your opinion of this same trifle, for unless
I am mightily mistaken, there is a great deal of pious advice in it.


Bays. Pious advice do you call it? I Would give my Snuff Box here, which I value
above all things in the Universe I'gad, that I had that saucy friend of yours,
the Author in the room.


Eugen. Why what would you do with him, Mr. Bays? would you draw upon him, and
whip him decently through the Lungs? To my certain knowledge all sober counsel
is thrown away upon him, for it is a very graceless unrepenting Block-head.


Bays. No, I should scarce give my self that trouble: But I Would make him undergo
such a course of Penance, that I believe he would scarce have a mind to meddle
with Horace, or any thing that looks like a Nun in haste again.


Eugen. Then I suppose, Mr. Bays, to make him do Penance for his Translation,
you would oblige him to read over your Translation of St. Xavier's Life, and, if
possible, to believe it; or if a trespass in Rhyme must be attoned in Rhyme, to
read over your noble Poem on the Birth of the Prince of Wales twice a day.


Bays. Sir I don't understand why you should use all all this freedom with me,
it is an insupportable rudeness I gad, and I Will have no more to with you -- But
Mr. -a. you are a Gentleman of a better temper, and pray resolve me this single
question, before we suffer the business of Celibacy to drop, has not the Church
authority to prescribe what Laws she pleases to all her Sons? Now I think I
have nicked you I gad --


Crites. Faith Little Bays I am not willing at present to determine the bounds
of the Churches power, it is as invidious a Case as to make me assign the
privileges of the House of Commons, which you know increase every Session; a
Man will be apt to speak either too little, or too much in relation to such an
affair. However I think the Church had done very discreetly, if when she bound
over her Sons to the observation of Celibacy, she had ordered 'em a dose or two
of Camphire every morning instead of so many Prayers and Ave-Maries, and
commanded 'em to be let Blood every other day, that so he might have prevented
all the scandalous consequences of a forced Chastity.

But I find that as Mahomet, when he abridged his People the pleasure of
Drinking, to make 'em amends, gratifyed the other appetite by allowing Women in
abundance; so likewise a certain Church in the World Mr. Bays by placing no
very great penalties on Fornication, when she repealed the remedy for it, and
by allowing the Concubine to supply the place of the disbanded Spouse, has made
Celibacy not so very uneasy a state, as People are apt at first sight to
imagine. And this consideration is sufficient to persuade me, that Conscience
and Devotion had no hand at all in the promoting of Celibacy, let the Divine
Law sink or swim it is not a Farthing matter with you, so long as the Papal
Decrees are observed, where smaller trespasses are severely punished, and
notorious Sins meet with Toleration; as they say in the Lake of Sodom, Feathers
sink, and Iron swims. All the World knows how remarkably Costerus and several
other of your Divines have refined upon this point, and it is observable in your
Canon Law, that so many Acts of Fornication, are required to make the
Indictment large enough to comprehend a poor Sinner, that they will excuse not
only the immortal Theodora's and Marozia's of former Ages, and the Donna
Olympia's of this, but perhaps all the She-traders since the times of Rahab,
and Lots Daughters. A Woman had need now a days (if the Doctrine of your Church
be true) to live as long as one of the Patriarchs Wives before the Flood, to
have time enough to work out the painful and laborious Character of a Whore.
But we, Mr. Bays, dare not play such tricks with Religion, dubb Vices by the
Name of Virtues, or (what is full as bad) keep a disputable Virtue at the
expense of keeping at the same time an unquestionable Sin; whatever interest or
advantage may suggest, we dare not make such large purliews for outlying
Consciences, not we, Mr. Bays. Nobis non licet esse tam disertis,
Qui legem colimus severiorem.



Eugen. As my friend very well observes, Mr. Bays, we don't think it worth the
while to maintain a controverted virtue at the expense of maintaining an
uncontroverted Sin, while you of the Church of Rome have never a Virtue to
boast of, that is not attended with some Crimnal Inconveniences. Thus you
maintain your pretended Chastity at the expense of allowing public
Fornication, your obedience to your Patriarch at the expense of Sacrificing
your obedience to your natural Prince, your Monastic Poverty at the expense of
Perjury and Hypocrisy; your Unity at the expense of an Unchristian
Inquisition, the Grandeur of your Worship at the expense of Idolatry, your
pretension to Miracles and Antiquity, at the expense of Lying and Forgery, your
Charity at the expense of Superstition; and lastly, the Devotion of your People
at the expense of Ignorance, and the Unpardonable Sacrilege of taking away
their Bibles.


Crites. Nay, sometimes, Mr. Bays, matters go worse with you; as for example,
when you persuade People to the utter undoing of their Families, to leave all
they have, to a lazy Herd of Spiritual Gluttons, for the saying of their Souls;
when you persuade young Virgins in defiance of their Parents, to run into a
Nunnery for the obtaining of Heaven; when you persuade Wives to leave their
Husbands, Husbands to leave their Wives, Kings to oppress their Subjects,
Subjects to depose their Kings for the remission of their sins; this is, unless
I am mistaken, making one sin compound and atone for another* like a decayed
Tradesman that borrows Money in one place, and contracts a fresh Debt, to pay
off one of a longer standing.


Eugen. So now, Mr. Bays, if you think fit, we'll shut our hands of Celibacy,
for I Am as weary of it as a Poet is of a discourse of Religion, a young Lawyer
of Navigation, a Citizen of Heraldry, or a Courtier of Trade; we have dwelt too
long upon this point, and it is high time now to proceed to a new one.


Bays. Well, Sir, if you find it burns your fingers, I am content to drop it,
not but that it is still tenable enough, and may be defended on to the end of
the Chapter -- I shall then in the next place, consider the divisions of your
Church, which to confess the truth, chiefly prevailed with me to quit your
Communion.


Crites. This is very strange, Mr. Bays, for I think that man that leaves the
Church of England upon the score of her divisions, and then goes over to the
Romish Party, is guilty of the same piece of wisdom, as he that to avoid an
Ague leaves the Hundreds in Essex, to go into the most unwholesome part of Kent.


Eugen. Or one that to avoid being Cuckolded, removes his Wife from Cheapside
into the Pall Mall, or Covent Garden. But prithee proceed, little Bays.


Bays. It were an infinite trouble to reckon up all the Sects and Subdivisions
into which the Protestant Religion is split, a man had better run the Gantlet
through a Genealogy Chapter in the Chronicles, or (what is worse) read over one
of Ch-sw-lls Weekly Papers, that is stuffed with the Names of the Scotch Lords,
than be bound to number them. And yet they all pretend to be in the right,
Quote Scripture to support their Cause, and damn one another as heartily as
ever Interloper did the East India Company. Out of this passage Let every thing
be done decently and in order, the Established Church has raised the whole
frame of her Hierarchy, her Ceremonies, and her Liturgy, as you know in the
late blessed times the Fanatics out of Curse ye Meroz, raised several Regiments
of Horse and Foot for the Service of the good Old Cause. On the other hand,
because it is elsewhere written, that the Christian Devotion is to be performed
in Spirit and Truth, those Adamites in Religion, your Dissenting Brethren, have
stripped her stark naked, and divested her of all those deceent ceremonies that
she used in the Purest and most Primitive times.


Crites. Very smartly argued, by my troth, Mr. Bays.


Bays. I wont mention ten thousand other particulars wherein you differ, for
what I have already taken notice of, is sufficient for my purpose. Now what
relief is there to be had in this critical affair, how shall the differences be
made up between you? Or how shall a man be satisfied which Party is in the
right, and which in the wrong? All of them have Texts of Scripture to allege
for themselves, as well as you of the Established Church, and if you lead 'em a
dance amongst the Fathers, and appeal to their decision of the matter, why
they will tell you, they mind what the Fathers say no more than the Bullies of
the other end of the Town mind one of my Lord Mayors Proclamations for living
soberly, and keeping the Sabbath: Alas those Antiquated Gentlemen of the three
first Centuries knew little or nothing of the power of the Gospel; one honest
Presbyterian Weaver would make no more difficulty of bantering a full dozen of
'em if he met 'em in his way, than one of your Iniskilling men does of routing
a whole Regiment of Irish: Poor blind Prelates, they had no more interest in
Christ, than the Laplanders have in the Guinea Company; and as for the hidden
mysteries of Grace, they are as unfit to be consulted, as a Physician in a case
of Conscience, or one of the Judges of the King's Bench about the Longitude of
the Sea.

Thus you see, Mr. Crites, to what a pretty condition you have brought your
selves; you first of all began the trade of garbling Fathers and Counils, and
reserving what made for your own interest and advantage; and your Brethren
since have totally rejected 'em, or if they vouchsafe now and then to cite 'em
in the Margin, (which let me tell you, is as extraordinary a condescension, as
it is for a new-raised Courtier to look upon a poor Country relation) it is to
make out some such knotty businesses as these, that Temperance is the mother of
all Virtues, and Drunkenness one of the greatest sins in the World. In such an
intricate point as this, perhaps St. Austin may have the favor done him to be
sent for, as I knew one of the Herd that quoted this quibble out of him, Mane
is Gods Adverb, and the Devils Verb; and another that proved the Suns dancing
upon Easter morning out of that remarkable passage in St. Chrysostom, Semel-in
anno ridet Apollo.

Not to be tedious upon this occasion, your divisions are chiefly owing to the
want of an Infallible guide, that should determine all controverted cases, and
to your leaving every man to the liberty of interpreting Scripture by his own
fantastic imagination, or by the light of that farthing candle within him, the
private Spirit.


Crites. I must confess, Mr. Bays, you have now touched me in a very tender
place, for there is no man breathing that more passionately bewails the
Divisions of our Church than my self: However, it has a very ill grace methinks
in the mouth of a Romanist to charge us with such an unhappiness, since in the
first place you have as many Divisions among your selves as we have,
notwithstanding the pretenses you make to an infallible judge; and secondly,
because we are only to thank your cursed missionaires for introducing and
fomenting 'em, as is notorious to all the World.

You want to have your memory refreshed I suppose, with the noble contention
that engaged one of your orders for half an Age at least about the length of
their Cowls, which was managed with as much heat and vigor, as if the fate of
the Christian Religion had wholly depended upon it: With the everlasting
quarrels between the Franciscans and Dominicans, about the Virgin Mary's
immaculate Conception, which none of your Unerring guides have thought fit yet
to determine, for fear of disgruntling one of those powerful Fraternites: with
the late disagreements between the Molinists, and Iansenists, when the Roman
Oracle Pope Alexander the 7th was pleased to tell 'em, Pray Gentlemen go home
in peace, and let me persuade you to let this matter fall, for I never studied
the point, and am no Divine; and lastly with the modern rise and growth of
Quietism, that was Educated and refined even in the Vatican Palace, under the
favor and protection of Infallibility it self; and tho it was lately
fulminated, still makes a considerable Party all over Italy. I will not trouble my
self with the endless Wars of the Schoolmen, but especially with the Skirmishes
that happened between the Disciples of Scaramouchi Aquinas, and Harsequin
Scotus, two learned Theologues that made use of a Heathen's help to cultivate
Christianity, and Ploughed the barren Fields of their Controversies with an Ox
and Ass, that is with an Apostle and Aristotle.

These instances may serve to convince you, Mr. Bays, and particularly that
last of the Quietists, that for all the noise your Infallible Judge makes here
among us, the Tramontani with his Spiritual Thunder, and pretended Vicarship,
of what little use he is with his own Domestics, who converse with him, and
see him daily, since under his own Nose so Pestilent a Heresy could arise as
to Alarm the whole Papacy. I am sure as many divisions disturbed the first
Planted Churches, as do ours of the Reformation at present, when the World was
furnished with at least a dozen Infallibilities, and I don't question but that
the same Spirit of Discord would still continue to plague us, tho twelve
hundred Infallibillities were Quartered all over the Globe, to keep their
Masters Peace.

As for what you object to us in the next place, the libetty which some
fantastical People among us use, interpreting the Scripture, we are not at all
accountable for it, since if they pleased to take better advice, and manage
themselves with more modesty, they would seldom make use of the private Talent,
but suffer themselves to be determined by the Councils and Fathers of the three
first unquestionable Ages, as the Established Church has done.

We have indeed rejected (what you call garbling) many spurious Works, that
passed a great while under the protection of some great Names, and this I am
sure without any injury, or disrespect to the Authors themselves; as you know,
Mr. Bays, a man may have a great esteem for your friend Virgil, without
believing him to be the Writer of the AEtna, and the Priapeia, and will
preserve a respect for the old Testament, tho he cannot persuade himself that
Bell and the Dragon has any relation to the Canon. Now tho I must freely grant
you, that some seeming inconveniences may ensue upon the promiscuous use of
the Bible, especially when it falls into dishonest hands, yet we don't think
the abuse capable of justifying that Sacrilegious Rapine of taking it away, any
more than the Civil Government is obliged to lock up all Provisions, and
Prohibit Wine, to secure People from falling into Fevers, and other Distempers.


Bays. Pray, Mr. Crites, before you proceed any farther in this matter, will
you do me the favor to let me entertain you with part of a discourse, which I
lately heard at one of our Chapels, 'twill satisfy you, I believe, that all
people ought not to be made free of the Scripture, and that the common reading
of it has occasioned all those disturbances, which have ever since invaded the
peace of Christendom.


Crites. With all my heart, Mr. Bays, begin when you will.


Bays. Pray then be attentive -- As long as the Bible continued in honest St.
Ierom's Latin, it was capable of doing little or no mischief (said this Learned
Father) but afterward when it was translated into the vulgar Languages, it set
all Europe together by the ears, which I Will Illustrate to you (said he) by this
following Simile.


Eugen. Prithee, dear Bays, then let us have this Simile, for I am the greatest
lover of Similes, and a Bottle in the Universe.


Bays. A Flint, while it lies in the Fields obscure and unobserved, does no
manner of injury, but when it is once preferred to a Tinder-box, why then
(beloved) it begins to show the depravity of its nature; for alas! How great is
the frailty of all Mortal Creatures, and what thing is there upon the face of
the earth, that does not sensibly find the ill effects of keeping bad Company?
This Flint (my Brethren) after some little time, contracts an acquaintance with
a piece of Steel, and they two resolve (oh wicked resolution) not to live in
darkness, but by the assistance of their Landlord, to inflame a certain
neighbor of theirs, Tinder by Name. Even so, Mr. Crites --


Crites. Even so, Mr. Bays, the French when they could keep Spire and Worms no
longer, burnt them down to the ground; and even so your Church of Rome, when it
found the Bible would serve its interest no longer, either burnt it, or (what
is equally as bad) passed an Act to condemn it to everlasting Oblivion. And for
this blessed piece of Policy, we are beholding to your Infallibility, who found
he could never maintain his unrighteous acquisitions, till he had removed this
unnecessary piece of Lumber out of the way, as in the days of Yore, the Ladies
of Scythia put out the eyes of their Gallants to keep them at home, and secure
them from straggling abroad.


Eugen. Now I chance to meet with him once more in my Dish, I am resolved, Mr.
Bays, to tell you two or three Stories of him, which may serve to show you how
well he deserves the Glorious Title he assumes.

You are to understand, Mr. Bays, that the Council of Trent in their fourth
Session, left the reforming of the vulgar Translation (about which several
complaints were made) to the Pope's care, and Decreed that the Latin Version
being thus amended, should be received for Authentic in all Disputes,
Expositions and Sermons, so that it should not be lawful for any Person
afterward, upon any pretense whatever, to reject it: Thus it pleased those
Learned Divines at Trent, to Christen this Hans en Kelder. Now Sixtus Quintus
was the man that first took this work into his Pious consideration, (for as it
happened, his Predecessors either neglected, or forgot to put the
abovementioned Decree of the Council in execution) and prefixed a specious
Bull before it, to acquaint the World, that having Revised it with all the
exactness imaginable, and Printed it at the Vatican, it was now to be received
without contradiction all the World over. But oh the Fates! Not long after,
Clement VIII. found fault even with this Translation, though it was Ratified by
his Predecessors Apostolical Authority, and a good swingeing Anathema into the
bargain, expunged whole Words and Sentences, restored several Lections very
different from Sixtus's Edition; nay, contradicting it in many places: And in
fine, made more corrections, alterations, amendments, and all that, than you
did, Mr. Bays, either in Shakespeare's Tempest, or Milton's Paradise lost.

Now it is a plain case, honest Mr. Bays, that one of these two Infallibilities,
either Size-Cinque (as Queen Elizabeth called him) or Clement VIII. choose you
whether you will, was most infallibly in the wrong. But because the Pope's
Talent generally lies another way than in the Bible, and he may consequently be
allowed to blunder in a Book, that he is so slenderly acquainted with; I Will
proceed to another instance, which is not altogether so excusable.

Pope Gregory XIII. (whose memory we are to curse for the many Seminaries he
erected) took upon him the Authority of altering the times, and making a new
Calendar. Heretofore, as Suetonius tells us, Caesar correxit fastos pridem
vitio Pontificum per intercalandi licentiam turbatos. But now the Emperor is
not to be consulted in an affair which so nearly concerned his civil
Government, and the Roman Pontif, instead of embarrassing the Almanac as his
Predecessors had done in Julius Caesar's time, was the only man that lent his
helping hand to reform it. The Pope's Politic fetch in this alteration, was
only to embroil and entangle the Protestants, especially those that lived in
Germany, and to ruin their commerce and correspondence in all civil matters
with the Catholic Party. Baronius very pleasantly justifies the Divine
Authority of the Gregorian Calendar, by a pretended Miracle of St. Stephen's
blood at Naples, which ceased to bubble on the 30th of August, on which day St.
Stephen's body was first discovered, according to the old computation, and
bubbled upon that which fell according to the new amendment. But yet it was ill
done, with Baronius's leave, to set the two Kalenders at variance, when both of
'em had been equally countenanced by the Miracle. Now as I was saying before,
the Pope may be allowed to mistake in such an unsociable book as the Bible is,
as well as a new-made Justice is allowed to make a false Quotation, now and
then, in his Dalton, and his Statute-book: But for a Pope to make errors in an
Almanac (as your friend Gadbury will tell you Pope Gregory has done) a book of
which he makes so many men free in an years time, and which he ought to
understand as well as a Seaman should understand his Compass, or my Lord Mayor
Stow's Survey of the City; for the Pope, I say, to do such a thing, is the
Devil and all of a fault, and ought not to be forgiven him.

Talking of Red Letters and Almanacks, has, I know not by what strange
concatenation of thought, put me in mind of the Persons that inhabit the
Almanac, and that naturally leads me to think of a late Pope that composed a
very scurvy difference between two Inhabitants of that Papal Corporation.

Urban VIII. had appointed the 31th of July, for St. Ignatius's Anniversary
Festival, Hist. Pap. p. 357.
upon which those of the Society arrived to that pitch of confidence (to give
it no worse a Name) as to eject good St. German out of the Calendar, where it
seems he had enjoyed that day without any disturbance for several hundreds of
years, and underhand, set up Ignatius in his room. This Treacherous Clandestine
trick, gave a great deal of Scandal to most of the well-meaning people of
France, who had an extraordinary respect for the memory of St. German, and tho
the Prince of Conde, who was of the Jesuits party, pretended that Ignatius
appeared to him in Rome, as he was on that day Celebrating his Festival, and
was pleased to encourage his Devotions; yet they were not to be satisfied with
any such sham Stories, and the resentments, which the affront that their Saint
received had created in them, were not to be silenced with a foolish recital of
a pretended Vision. At last they brought their complaints before this
Infallible Judge, who thus decided the controversy: That the Festival of St.
German and Ignatius should be kept on the same day, but that if the two Saints
were not willing to stand together, that Ignatius (and all the reason in the
World, since he was much the younger) should even wait for Leap-year, and the
odd day which happened, to be intercalated, should be laid aside for him --
Here Is a knotty Point finely resolved for you, Mr. Bays, a Protestant Bishop
could as well carry his own Cathedral on his back, as hold the Scales even in
such an affair, and make up the difference between a brace of Saints; but
nothing I find is too difficult for your Unerring Guide to adjust -- And now
let me entreat you, Mr. Bays, to go on to some new point, for as I hope for a
fresh Bottle of Burgundy, and a fresh Mistress, I am already Dog-weary of this.


Bays. You have hitherto taken the liberty, Gentlemen, to contradict me in
whatever I have proposed, but now I hope to attack you with undeniable matter
of Fact, and that is the Novelty of your Religion; for -- Whatsoever pretense
Her Clergy Heralds make in her defense,
A second Century's not half way run,
Since the new Honors of her Blood begun.



Crites. If it is but about two hundred years since the Incarnation, I confess
we cannot pretend to a longer standing in the World than you have assigned us,
Mr. Bays. But now I have been told all along, that we stand two or three
Stories higher in Chronology than you pretend.


Bays. Stand as high as you please, I Am sure you're not a minute older than the
German Reformer. Your Ancestors were every man of them believers of
Transubstantiation, that is, in your charitable construction, rank Idolaters.
Now if this Allegation be true, pray what becomes of your boasted Succession,
for how an Idolatrous Church should convey true Orders (and elsewhere you don't
pretend to have received them) is as much a Riddle to me, as how a man should
translate the Psalms well, that Copies them at second hand from Hopkins's
Burlesque.


Eugen. Nay we are not at this time of the day to wonder at the conduct of your
Catholic Church; to ruin our succession, Mr. Bays, she takes the same Course
that Widow Black-acre did in the Plain-dealer, that would have sworn her self
a whore upon record, only to disinherit her rebellious Son Ierry.


Crites. I find, Mr. Bays, you're a mere Indian in History. What, did you never
hear of the famous contest between Austin and the British Bishops about their
subjection to the Sea of Rome, and how fatally it concluded? Did you never hear
of the Wiclevites at home, and of the Waldenses abroad, which last Herd of
Heretics as Reinerus the Inquisitor tells you, some people place as high as the
times of St. Silvester, and others as high as the very Apostles?


Bays. They may run 'em up to Noah's Flood with all my heart, and I assure you
upon my word, Mr. Crites, I Will never grudge you the honor of citing such
worthy instances to prove your antiquity.


Crites. That is not the case, Mr. Bays, for I never mentioned 'em as tho we
were descended in a downright Line from them, as they say the Kings of
Scotland are descended from Fergus, or as tho the merits of the Reformation
depended on 'em: But only to let you know that in some part of the World or
other, there never wanted a generation of men, even in the darkest and most
barbarous times, that opposed your innovations, and had the bravery to stem the
Tide of the Papal Usurpations. This might be made appear in every Century,
since your Church parted with her Maidenhead to the Man of Sin; but because it
is not to be done without an endless quotation of Authors, which is a sort of
vanity that I am not naturally very fond of, I shall even refer you to the
Historia Papatus for your farther satisfaction.

Some of your Divines have been so civil to us, as to allow us the three first
Centuries, or at least to acknowledge that all those controverted points,
wherein you and we differ, were not clearly established in the earliest times
of Christianity. The Church, it seems, had afterward fuller revelations of all
these depending matters, and some Christian Doctrines, like China-earth, were
to be buried under ground for a considerable time, before they were fit for a
discovery, and the practice of mankind.

Thus, Mr. Bays, in the opinion of your best Authors, who to be sure would
never pass such extraordinary complements upon us, if they could otherwise help
it, we have as much Antiquity on our side as we can desire. It Is very true,
that in succeeding times, your Popes served the Christian Religion, as Dr. Oats
served the Popish-plot, they found a large Foundation, upon which they raised
several superstructures of their own; now we only removed and pulled 'em down
at the beginning of the Reformation, so that we constituted no new Church, (as
some of your Dreaming Scriblers pretend) but only restored her to her primitive
purity, and simplicity.


Bays. Ay, ay, you have restored her with a witness, and you are to thank the
Wittemberg-Revolter for setting you upon so pious a performance. As for my own
part, by reading Mr. Walkers Book of Oxford, I have entertained such prejudices
against him, that all the World can never remove 'em: And I heartily thank that
learned Author for making the following observation, That whilst the Turk was
attacquing Christianity in the Front at Vienna, Luther was at the same invading
it in the Rear in Saxony.


Crites. I don't know, Mr. Bays, whether it is worth your while to take notice
of such impertinent remarques, for at the same time you oblige us of the
Reformation to look a little into History, and see whether we cannot make the
same returns upon you. I have read somewhere or other I am certain, that at the
very same juncture when Boniface set up for Universal Bishop, that Mahomet was
establishing his Alcoran in Arabia; and to pass by the like occurences in
former ages, the Brussels Gazette acquainted the world, that Count Hains the
Player, and my Lord S-l-s-b-ry were reconciled to the Church of Rome together;
and every body in the City knows that Moll. Meggs and my Lord S-nd-rl-nd were
admitted into the Popish Chapel at White Hall on the same day.


Bays. However, Mr. Crites, I can scarce be persuaded that Luther and the other
Bell-weathers of the Reformation, were ever designed by providence to restore
the Church to (what you call) her ancient purity, and to retreive her from a
long habitual course of Superstition and Idolatry (for by that cutthroat name
you slander the received usages of the Western Church) since they came not
attended with the power of Miracles, which is the usual badge of the
Missionaires of Heaven, and for his part Luther had nothing in him, to
distinguish him from the rest of the World, but a peculiar talent of reviling
Princes, aspersing his Superiors, and treating all his Adversaries with
insupportable insolence and scurrility.


Crites. As for his Heats and Passions we have no more to say, Mr. Bays, but
that your Infallible Guides have not been without 'em, witness he that
blasphemed so heartily, for having only lost a Peacock. Now I wonder that you
should fall so severely upon Luther for the freedom he took with King Henry the
8th (for I suppose you had your eye upon him, when you taxed the German just
now with the reviling of Princes) when there is scarce a Priest, or Scribler of
your party throughout the Kingdom, that has not assaulted that or any other
Princes memory with greater boldness and familiarity, who has had the hardiness
to mortify the Churchmen: you need not be informed how that Haberdasher of
Gerunds and Supines Scioppius the Grammarian, used King James the First. But a
little warm raillery in a Protestant I find is an unpa^donable sin, while the
Catholic Cause sanctifies even the vilest ribaldry, and ascribes it all to the
score of Zeal and Devotion.


Eugen. But why, Mr. Bays, should you think the worse of the Reformation for
its want of Miracles? We don't pretend to have raised a new Church, and
consequently don't stand in need of 'em, and as for the Miracles of our Savior
and the Apostles, we have as good a title to 'em as you can have. As for what
relates to all those stupid ill-contriv'd prodigies and delusions, by which the
Monks have supported their superstitious practices, ever since the days of
Gregory the Great (to whom Trajan was more beholding than to his Master
Plutarch, for he prayed him out of Hell) much good may they do you, and if I
had a mind to curse any one heartily, methinks I could not do it more
effectually than by wishing him the late Quakers stomach to devour all manner
of Offel, and for the second course, a faith capacious enough to believe all
the senseless stories in Iacobus de Voragine, and L' Escole d' Euchariste.


Crites. Under favor, Mr. Bays, I would not have you rely too much upon the
argument of Miracles, for to my certain knowledge the best and the most
gainful, nay I was going to say, the only distinguishing Doctrine of your
Church, scorns as much to be defended by a Miracle, as a Gentleman of the Town
would scorn to take a Poet or a Parson for his Second in a Duel.


Eugen. The Doctrine my Friend is talking of, Mr. Bays, will never pass the
Ordeal of miracle; for to prove Transubstantiation, a tenet that contradicts
all our Senses, by a Miracle, which is a formal appeal to 'em, is as solemn a
piece of nonsense as to go about to prove one of Euclid's propositions out of
Littleton's Tenures, or the circulation of the Blood out of Dr. Chamberlain's
Apology for Man-midwifery.


Crites. In this case, Mr. Bays, a Miracle does the same mischief, as the
Saxons did in the case of the poor Britains, it ruins the very cause it was
sent for to support. If you believe a Miracle is, as I told you, an appeal to
the Senses, it is as impossible then to justify Transubstantiation by one, as,
if you admit a Dispensing Power, to suppose there can be any such thing in the
World as an inviolable Magna Charta for Liberty of Conscience.


Eugenius. But why Mr. Bays, should you expect that condescension in the
Almighty Poet (as you are pleased to call him) which you would severely condemn
in an ordinary Tragedian? You know what Horace says to this point, and perhaps
he is as good a Casuist in the matter as any of your Trent-Divines. Nec Deus
intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
Intererit --
Now most of your pretended Miracles are delivered down to us by a pack of such
dreaming unthinking Sots, were wrought in such obscure places, under the
protection of such a Barbarous Age, and what chiefly moves me, were performed
for such trival insignificant ends, (except you think the enriching a few
strowling Spiritual jugglers cause enough to put Heaven to the perpetual
expense of Miracles) that I had much rather believe there was never any such
thing as a Miracle since the Creation, than receive all for such that your
Priests have recounted; as I can sooner persuade my self there was never such a
person as King Arthur, than that he performed all those mighty exploits that
the History relates of him.


Crites. Now we are upon this Subject Mr. Bays, there goes a Golden saying of
King James the first, Cited by my Lord of St. Albans. Kings ought to govern by
the received Laws of their Country, as God by the ordinary rules of Nature, and
ought as seldom to make use of their Prerogative, as God does of his power of
Miracles.


Bays. And what of all that Mr. Crites?


Crites. Why, in my opinion it is the noblest Apothegm that ever any Prince in
the World was guilty of, and I wish one of his Successors had followed the
advice. I have not without a great deal of regret observed in the late Reign,
that the very same persons who make the Almighty so familiarly violate the Laws
upon of Nature every frivolous account, were the men that persuaded his
Vicegerent the late unfortunate King, to dispense with, that is, to break half
the Laws of his Land, and all, for the noble end of gratifying a few Starving
Irishmen, hungry Converts, impudent Priests, and needy Officers. Now as the
Prerogative must needs grow very Cheap when it is prostituted to every saucy
Petitioner, so must the power of Miracles certainly fall into contempt, when
they are challenged upon every inconsiderable pretense.


Eugenius. To the shame of your Church be it spoken, the Heathen Poets were a
great deal more civil to the Deity than the writers of the Saints Lives among
you have been: They never Subpaena him to appear on the Stage, or to hazard
himself in a Machine, but when an intricate perplexed affair happens, which
only a Jupiter, or an Apollo is capable of unravelling: But it is otherwise with
the Monks; for they will scarce let the Saint whom they recommend, Eat or Drink,
or Sleep, or go to Stool without a Miracle to keep him Company; he never makes
the sign of a Cross, but the Devil is in as great a fear, as an overgrown Bawd
at the sight of an unmerciful Justice; and when the freak takes him to Preach
alone in the Fields, as St. Francis and St. Anthony have done, the Birds and
Beasts make an Audience for him, and listen to his harangue with as much
Complaisance and attention, as a Midwife to a discourse of a Procreation, or a
City Prentice to a story of Knight-errantry.


Bays. And is not this a down right Calumny Mr. Eugenius? Why do you father any
such reproachful things on the writers of our Communion? I dare engage to
forfeit all my Acres in Parnassus if a Syllable of such extravagant stuff, as
you have mentioned, is to be found in any of their Books.


Eugenius. Why thou art as unacquainted I perceive with the Historians of your
own Church, as a Iapannese with the affairs of Europe, or the Lyncei at Rome
with the Beaux of Covent Garden. Therefore prithee do but read some half a
score Pages in any of the Volumes of Bollandus, (for your house Mr. Bays is no
more able to contain the whole Book, than it is to lodge a whole Troop of
Horse) and you will find to your great satisfaction how finely you have Fooled
your self out of your Plantation in Parnassus. He, and Father Cressy, and the
rest of your Miracle-mongers have served those excellent persons, whose Lives
they pretended to write, just as some late Translators have served our friend
Horace; that instead of making him more ('it is your own observation Mr. Bays)
have made him less. So that I fancy what Mr. Cowly has advised in his Ode about
Wit, Jewels at Nose, and Ears but ill appear,
Rather than all be Wit let none be there,
Ought to be carefully observed in the present case; rather than every thing,
that any of your Saints does, be Miracle, let not so much as one single Miracle
be seen about him.


Bays. But what say you Gentlemen to the Life of St. Xavier which I Translated
the last year out of Pere Bouhours? I am apt to flatter my self it met with no
unkind reception in the World, for as yet I have not seen any public exception
made against it.


Crites. As for my self Mr. Bays, I seldom troub^e my head now with reading any
such kind of Histories, for a man that has read but one or two Lives of your
Saints may almost swear he has read all the rest, so uniform a Spirit of lying,
and so small a variety is there in all of 'em; just as under the Reign of Whig
and Tory, we used to say, if you had turned over one Observator, you had
virtual and in effect read all the following.


Eugenius. Nay Mr. Bays, it is a sad truth, that there is as undiscernable a
difference in the Lives of your Saints, as in the History of the Seven
Champions, where killing of Monsters, relieving of Ladies, and breaking of
Enchantments belongs in common to all: To oblige you then with the Scheme of
such a Life from the Saints Cradle down to his Canonization, it is in short
thus: He forbears to Suck by a strange kind of instinct on Wednesdays, and
Fridays, but I should have told you before, that his Mother must of necessity
have some odd Dreams about him before she is Delivered, and afterward, when
other Children are making Durt-pyes, and snipping Paper, you may be sure to
find him in the Parlor, scoring crosses on the Wall, with a little Table in the
corner placed Altar-wise, and two or three Farthing Candles upon it. Then at
the University he takes his Learning as fast as Hops, and runs over the vast
Fields of School-Divinty in a less compass of time, than the French Army
overran Alsace and the Palatinate.


Bays. A very fine piece of drollery this, Mr. Eugenius.


Eugenius. When he writes Man, Visions and Revelations become as familiar to
him as Duns to a young Student at the Temple; he is very frequently disturbed at
his Devotions by the Devil, and never fails upon occasion to be even with him,
to whom at last he appears as terrible, as a begging Forreigner that talks only
Latin to a Country Schoolmaster. He passes through never a Village but he
Cures more diseases in a day, than the College does in a Twelvemonth, and so
ruins half the Apothecaries for five Mile round him; however to make amends he
takes care always to go as ragged as a broken Chemist, or a Petitioner against
the Woollen Act, and therefore was never guilty of that damnable Sin of
breaking a Tailor or Mercer. He never paid a Farthing for Horse-hire in his
life time, but takes a strange delight in walking up to the knees in dirt, and
no Meat pleases him so well as that which comes in an Alms-basket. Upon
occasion he turns his own Surgeon, and lets himself Blood with his
Discipline, which he carries as certainly about him, as a puny pretender to wit
does his Commonplace Book.


Bays. Why, surely the Devil's in thee, Mr. Eugenius, will thou never have done?


Eugen. His other diversions and amusements are to Visit such a Shrine, or such
an Image, (for he can no more pray without such helps, than an Old Fumbler can
perform without an Aretine, or so, to improve his fancy) where he finds very
strange emotions in himself, and then it is ten to one but he falls into a fit
of Preaching, and reclaims a thousand people from their vicious courses in a
moment. Above all, he has a fine knack of feeling men's Pulses in the
Confessional, (...) whom he prescribes a tedious Pilgrimage, or a large Alms
for the health of their Souls; he is an exact Payer of Obedience to his
Superiors, and requires it as severely from his own Disciples, tho he employed
them only to water a dead Tree, or to count how often the Sails of a Windmill
turn in a days time. At last, Death takes hold of him by way of Revenge, for
rescuing so many people out of his clutches before, and then he acts the
Counter-part to Sampsons Story, and cures more diseased persons after his
decease, then he did in his life time. His Beads, his Crucifix, nay, his very
Tooth-picker, begin to trade for themselves, and work Miracles, and happy's the
man that has got a piece of his Sandal but as big as a Half-Crown, for it is an
infallible cure for the Stone and Gout. He has more people come in a year to
Visit his Shrine, than to come to see the Toombs at Westminster, or the Lions
in the Tower, and more Crutches of all sizes hang about his Tomb, than all the
Baths in Christendom can boast of. In fine, to complete his happiness, his
trusty Master of Rome, for all his faithful Services, translates his soul to
Heaven, his Picture or Image, to some stately Chapel built in memory of him;
and lastly, prefers his Name to the Almanac.


Bays. Well, Sir, have you made an an end of your rambling speech at last? I
warrant you, I shall have a care of you for the future, and not give you the
like occasion for trespassing upon my patience. But prithee tell me, dear Mr.
Crites (for we have hitherto talked nothing to the purpose) what is your
Opinion of the life of St. Xavier?


Crites. Why truly, Mr. Bays, I must needs own that it is writ with more caution
than generally such kind of Lives are, and as for the Language and the
Ornaments of the style, I have nothing to except to them, for without any more
Ceremony, they are extremely fine, both in the Original and in the Translation.


Bays. Nay, now you rejoice the cockles of my heart, honest Mr. Crites; oh I
love dearly to have my pieces commended, and all that, by a Person of
Understanding: I'gad I do, Mr. Crites, it is the greatest refreshment in the
World. Prithee, dear Rogue, let me hugg thee to pieces. Come, I Will give thee a
Dish of Tea for this --


Crites. But notwithstanding, Mr. Bays --


Bays. How, Mr. Crites, do you attack me in the rear with a But, and a
Notwithstanding too? No mortal breathing can bear it. What you are going to
kick down the Milk you have given?


Crites. It Is but your own way, Mr. Bays, as you may remember in your Verses
upon Mr. Oldham, where you tell the World that he was a very fine ingenious
Gentleman, but still did not understand the cadence of the English Tongue.


Bays. Very true Sir, but what have you to say to the Notwithstanding?


Crites. Well then, Mr. Bays, to make friends with you, I Will leave out the
Notwithstanding. But as I was saying before, I don't well apprehend the policy
either of Writing, or Translating such a Book. The design of the History runs
upon this Key, Here was a Saint that Converted whole Kingdoms to the Christian
Religion, he raised People from the Dead, he Cured all manner of Diseases; in
short, his whole life was nothing but a continued Series of Wonders and
Miracles, therefore the Doctrines he taught were Infallibly true, and the Roman
Church, of which he was so Zealous a Member, teaches nothing disagreeable to
the Will of Heaven. This is the sum and substance of the Book, is it not, Mr.
Bays?


Bays. No body makes a question on it, as I know of.


Crites. Very good. Now (say I) what advantage could the Author propose to
himself by Writing such a Book. He knew very well that we Heretics did not
believe a Syllable of the Miracles wrought here by the Fathers of the Society
in Europe, and did he then imagine we could ever be brought to believe all
their pretended Miracles in the East-Indias. This is such a piece of stuff, as
if a man that asked me to lend him half a Crown, and I thought fit to deny him
that small sum, should therefore desire me to lend him a Guinea. -- Negavi
Mill tibi nummes, millia quinque dabo?
No Mr. Bays, our understandings are not altogether so Irish, as to be thus
imposed upon. The late Leige-Letters, and the fine account they sent to Rome of
the progresses they made in Converting the three Kigdoms, have sufficiently
instructed us, what a share of Faith is to be given to the Disciples of
Ignatius. If a Protestant had been worth the saving, methinks they might have
allowed us one Miracle at least here at home. It had been as necessary I am
sure as in China or Iapan.


Eugenius. So now Mr. Bays, what Complements have you in store for this honest
friend of yours? Oh it is a fine thing to have one's performances commended by a
person of judgment! it comforts and relieves the poor heart infinitely beyond
Daffy's Elixir, or the Ros Florentinus.


Bays. Nay I gad, I think the Devil himself cannot tell me, to which of you two
I am the most indebted.


Crites. Besides Mr. Bays, there are ten thousand passages in that History,
even too gross for a Laplander's apprehension. Could not the honest Father drop
his Crucifix in the Sea, but a Crab must be presently employed to bring it
ashore? Could not he go a Shipboard as well as other People upon their Lawful
occasions, without entailing a Miracle upon it, and preserving it afterward
from the injuries of wind and weather? Could not he dye after the usual rate of
mankind, but an Old Image at his Father's Castle must out of pure pity drip at
the very same moment? Could not a poor Taper or so burn before his Image, but
the very droppings of it must immediately cure all manner of Infirmities? Could
not he be content to instruct the Infidels after the plain manner of the Old
Apostles, without teaching them the Confiteor and the Ave-Mary, and leaving
them that foolish Catechism, which you may find copied in Ludovicus Dieu? Could
he with any safe conscience reprove the Bonza's for cheating the poor people of
their Money, and pretending to return it them with Usury in the next World, and
then instruct them in the Doctrines of his Mother Church about private Masses
and Purgatory, which practices the very self same Imposture?


Bays. Well, Sir, after this rate you may ridicule every thing in the World, if
you please.


Crites. I profess, Mr. Bays, I don't see any reason why the Saint should fall
so severely upon those Indian Recluses, the Bonza's, as the History informs us
he did, since they led no other lives, than the Monks generally do here in
Christendom; they pretended to a great deal of austerity when they walked
abroad, and in their private Cells gave themselves over to all the
licentiousness imaginable, Hypocrisy was their peculiar Talent, and they were
expert masters at the Trade; one principle they held, which is, I am sure,
Orthodox enough, and very agreeable to the sentiments of your Church, viz. that
Poverty is a damnable sin, and no one can be saved who has not the grace to be
Rich. Methinks for the sake of this single Doctrine the Pious Father might have
been inclined to pass by their other infirmities, and look upon 'em not as mere
Infidels, and Aliens, but as half-converts, and fellow laborers in the
Vineyard.


Eugen. My Friend has already told you, Mr. Bays, to what little purpose the
Author writ the History of St. Xavier: Prithee then tell me what advantages you
could propose to your self in the Translating it? Was it to get a pretty round
sum of money, or so, from your friend T-ns-n? Come, I says Little Rogue thou
must tell me the reason.


Bays. Must, Mr Eugenius? What do you give the Must to a man of my Character
and Gravity? Were Reasons as cheap as Black-berries, I Would not give you one I
gad upon compulsion. What must give you a Reason, dear Mr. Eugenius?


Eugenius. Why if that will not do, Mr. Bays, I entreat and conjure thee, as thou
hopest for no Famine in this World, and no Gnashing of Teeth in the next, nay
as thou hopest for preferment for the Virtuous Sons of thy Body, and a good
Third Day for the last issue of thy brain, Don Sebastian, to acquaint me with
the Reason why thou did undertake the aforesaid Translation.


Bays. Nay, now you accost me with Civil Language and all that, I can deny you
nothing: You must know then that 'twas purely done for the sake of the Late
Queen, when she gave the people hopes of obliging 'em with a Prince of Wales.
St. Xavier was the Card she depended upon; and let me tell you he is a Person
that never fails to oblige his Votaries.


Eugen. The reason is, because he has lived but a short while in the Calender,
but when he has passed an age or two there, it is ten to one but he will grow as
sleepy and unmindful of his Clients, as the rest of his Brother Saints have
done. We see the same things practiced by our Lawyers; when they first set up
for themselves, nothing can be more diligent in attending all manner of Causes
than they are; but when they have once acquired a Reputation and an Estate, you
may dance attendance a long while at their Chambers, before you can get 'em to
mind your business.


Crites. I find, Mr. Bays, you of the Church of Rome are as passionately
affected for a new Saint, as the Gentlemen at this end of the Town are for a
new Play, a new Tavern, and a new Mistress; you know how the late famous
Cardinal of Millain St. Carlo has overtopt the name of venerable St. Ambrose.
But prithee tell me how St. Xavier came to be pitched upon in this weighty
affair, one that had herded so long amongst the Indians, and besides was not
half so well acquainted with the condition of Europe, as his contemporaries St.
Ignatius, and St. Francis de Sales were?


Bays. For a very good reason Sir. The late Queen Mother of France you must
understand for a long time had no Children, and tho she used the most effectual
means in the world to remove her barreness as the --


Eugen. As the help of Cardinal Mazarine --


Bays. Prithee, Mr. Eugenius, don't disturb me thus, as the Prayers of the
Church, and the advice of her Physicians, yet all would not do: At last she was
happily persuaded to recommend her self to the protection of St. Xavier, nor
was the counsel long with out answerable success, for to his powerful
intercession she owed the present King of France, Lovis le Grand.


Eugen. Nay if any thing on this side Hell had a hand in praying for so choice
a blessing, I dare swear it was one of the Society; and so, Mr. Bays, because
St Xavier met with such success in France, it was believed he would meet with the
like in England, and procure us an Heir Apparent to the Crown. We have already
seen the blessed effects of his mediation, and I am afraid the poor Saint will
find it a harder business by far to pray his Prince of Wales into a Throne,
than he found it to pray him into the World. -- I am in good hopes, Mr. Bays,
you have not many more Objections now in store to make against the Church of
England, for methinks we have been discoursing along while about her, therefore
pray dispatch.


Bays. For your comfort, Gentlemen, I have only one Objection more to make, and
then I have done: You may think it somewhat strange perhaps for a person of my
Profession to quarrel with your Church for her want of discipline, and
observation of fasting days, and lastly, because I am willing to sum up all my
forces at parting, for her want of Ceremonies, and that Grandeur, which is
requisite to support every Religion in the World, but yet I have done it. -- I
gad I have Gentlemen --


Crites. I must confess, Mr. Bays, it looks as odd for a Poet to be angry with
any Religion, because it is not guilty of rigor, and severity, as for a Bawd
to quarrel with the Government of the City, because it does not hang, draw, and
quarter all people that have committed Fornication: Such an Objection from a
Poet is altogether as unnatural, as it would be for an Atheist to find fault
with the Translation of Lucretius; or for a Parson that carries three Steeples
in his Pocket, to condemn the Church for allowing of Pluralities.


Bays. Well, you may pursue your Drollery as far as you please, but in my
opinion your Church is guilty of a certain sin, with a damnable hard name to
it, and the learned Dr. Walker calls it an Autocatacrisis; that is, you need no
adversary to arraign you in the present case, for you condemn your selves. In
your Ash Wednesday Service, you wish the primitive discipline were restored
again, you wish I say it were restored, but it never proceeded any farther, for
you never attempted any thing in order to establish it since the Reformation.


Crites. We may even thank your Infallible Guide for that, and no one besides;
he for a long time had taken the power upon him to lay aside the old
penitentiary Canons, and instead of those severe Mortifications, which the
Primitive Church inflicted upon Offenders, either imposed pecuniary mulcts, or
else enjoined the people for the attaining an Absolution, to go and be knocked
in the Head in the Holy Land, or else to be damned in his service in fighting
against Heretics at home. However money was still the powerful business, and
whatever the offense was, money still atoned for it. Now after so long a disuse
of the Ancient Discipline, the Reformers found it as impracticable a thing to
introduce it on the sudden, as it would be for the present Government to revive
all the old Penal Statutes, that have lain dormant ever since Henry the Seventh.


Bays. This is a very good jest I gad, Mr. Crites, we have ruined (you say)
Penance, and utterly confounded it, as if it was not still received for a
Sacrament amongst us, and kept up to the highest rigor and austerity. Well, I
perceive you are not so well acquainted with the constitutions of our Church as
you should be; Alas! you know nothing of the Pilgrimages we enjoin, or of the
Religious Exercises we prescribe in such cases.


Crites. Yes I do, Mr. Bays, but still I tell you money will make up all
matters, and repair the greatest breaches you can mention: As for your other
punishments they are so very foolish and ridiculous, that they are almost
beneath any man's consideration to expose 'em.


Eugen. A Whore has committed Fornication, and acquaints her Father Confessor
with it. Go (says he) to Loretto, or St. Winifreds- Well, and there be sure you
repeat so many Prayers a day, and leave some small Token behind you at the
Altar; and then according to the civility of your Religion, he gives her
Absolution; for it is the complaisance of your Church to grant a full release
before debt be discharged. Away she goes, and if Barefoot, so much the better;
but it is an even lay, that before she reaches her journeys end, she is guilty
of that sin a hundred times over, for which the Pilgrimage was enjoined her.


Crites. A Tradesman for some honest cheats that he uses in his Vocation, is
enjoined after the like manner to beat the Hoof to the next Saints Shrine, and
there pay his Devotions: Now what kind of commerce the Priest keeps with the
solitary Lady, all the while that the Poor Husband is upon his April-Errand, is
not difficult to imagine. For when such an intreague is designed, the Spiritual
Guide takes the same care to remove that Evil Counselor, the Cuckold, as the
Popes did to send the Western Princes out of the way by a Crusade, when they
were laying the foundations of their Temporal Greatness. In short, those idle
unaccountable performances that your Church requires, you must call Penance,
by the same Figure only, as you call eating the best Fish, and drinking the
best Wine, a Religious Fasting.


Bays. Now you remind me of Fasting, which is a duty that you of the
Reformation so seldom practice; pray tell me how you can excuse your selves for
so unpardonable a failure, or what you have to Object to us in that Particular.


Eugen. I shall make use of no other answer, Mr. Bays, than what you have
already furnished us with in one of your Plays. It Is the return of an Honest
Indian in the Conquest of Mexico upon an Impertinent Spaniard, that was
discoursing the very same things upon this occasion as you have done. Cheaply
you sin, and punish each Offense,
Not with the Souls, but Bodies Abstinence;
First injure Heaven, and when its wrath is due,
Your selves proscribe it how to punish you.
There are abundance of very smart reflections in the same Scene upon the
Pope's Supremacy, and the sawciness of your Priests; for to say the truth you
spare 'em no more when ever you meet 'em conveniently, than the French
Privateers do the English Merchantmen; but this being written, before you
received your last illumination, I shall urge it no more upon you. However, Mr.
Bays, to deal plainly with you, there is no such thing as fasting in your
Church, especially amongst people of any quality, unless you will ridicule the
regaling one self with the most provoking Meats, and the most generous Wines by
that name. The Poor indeed fast in the literal sense, because they cannot help
it, otherwise they might make a shift to relieve nature well enough; and with
such kind of devout Fasters every Church in the World is sufficiently stocked,
and ours amongst the rest, for you may find large Herds of them every day in the
Temple-Walks, the Irish Coffee-house, or the Piazza's in Covent Garden.


Eugen. The truth on it is, Mr. Bays, you had done much better to have let this
business of fasting and all that alone; because amongst Friends be it spoken,
to charge us with that, which you your selves practice with such dexterity of
management, looks as odd as it would be for a protected Parliament man's man to
rail at the privileges of Alsatia; or for one of William Pen's Herd to rail at
the Five Bishops for not swearing to the present Government; or lastly, for one
of the Heralds at Arms to quarrel with Chaplains and Poets for flattering of
Families. -- The other plea about Ceremonies is a thousand times more
justifiable, and to say the truth, is the only proper Objection that a Dramatic
Poet can make to the Reformed Religion.


Bays. Well I am glad however, that once in my lifetime, I had the grace to
light upon something which is proper (as you call it) and suitable to the
occasion. I gad I utterly despaired of meeting you in so good a humor, for
hitherto you have used me like an Infidel, and denied every thing which I
proposed -- And now, Gentlemen, let me see how you will excuse the Dishabille of
your Church as to the point of Ceremonies. You cannot but be sensible how
solemn and august the Church of Rome is in her devotion, but you I am sure can
pretend no such matter.


Crites. Very right, Mr. Bays, we cannot, while the people of your Communion
have nothing but Show and Ceremony in their Public Worship, as in the Lives of
their Saints they have nothing but sheer Miracle to entertain 'em. We have as
much Ceremony I Am sure as decency requires, as much as is sufficient to hide
the nakedness of Religion, and to use any more we think it as great a Solecism
as it had been for Adam when he only designed to cover his Nakedness, to have
clothed himself all over with Leaves, like the Green man in the Distillers
Coat of Arms.


Eugen. It Is otherwise with you, Mr. Bays, for you have laid so much Italian
Paint upon the Matron, that it is scarce discernable of what complexion she is,
whether Christian or Pagan. We yield to you I confess in the Gayety and
Chargeable Dress of Devotion, and the reason of it is very plain, for it has
ever been the Talent of the wicked World to cultivate Superstition with more
expense and cost, than the Truth it self* as you know most of the Limberhams of
this end of the Town keep their Misses a great deal finer than their Wives.

The Religious of the Three First Ages, tho it must be acknowledged that out of
a Principle of Decency they admitted as much Ceremony as was consistent with
the Nature of Christianity, yet they never carried the matter to such
extremities as afterward they were; they placed no Sanctity in the observation
of them, and the ceremonies they retained wanted no Theolological Dictionaries,
or Rationale's to explain them, they were obvious to the meanest apprehension,
and entertained upon solid substantial grounds; such as the promotion of piety,
and the like, and not for amusing the ignorance of the people, or for advancing
the interests of an ambitious Priesthood. It Is indeed very true, that every
Nation of the World tinctured the Christian Religion when it came into their
hands, more or less, with the customs of their own Country. This is visible
from the conduct of the Graecians, who being some of the earliest receivers of
Christianity, modeled it in a short time according to their own fancies and
inclinations; they were a free generous drinking people, and accustomed all
along to make much of themselves in their Sacrifices, and Libations; and so
when they made profession of a new Religion, which one would have thought might
have restrained them from sueh extravagancies, yet they were resolved to
introduce good eating, and good drinking, into their Churches; and so they did,
till at last their entertainments grew so very scandalous, and irregular, that
they were obliged to lay them aside. On the other hand, the Italians, who had
the advantage of recommending their own Scheme of Religion, to this part of the
Western World, by having the Imperial seat in their own Country, were naturally
inclined to Music and Painting, and all that Pageantry that serves to
entertain the senses. This sort of divertisement, failed not after some time to
creep into the Church, and as we read, the Old Romans used upon some
extraordinary occasions, to make whole Cities, nay, Provinces, and Countries,
free of their City; so their Successors, afterward out of the same principle
of Latitude and Generosity, made either all, or most of the Old Pagan
Ceremonies, free of the Christian Religion. The Spaniards, in their Mosarabic
service, which still continues in some Churches in Spain, made use of Horses,
and Morris Dancing, which, as a certain Bishop pleaded for them at the Council
of Trent, were very significant ceremonies; and so without question they were,
for Horses might be excused out of that Verse in the Psalms, where it is said,
He rides upon the Heavens as it were a Horse: And as for Dancing, besides that
it is sufficiently countenanced from the Levites Dancing before the Ark, may
very symbolically denote that our souls ought to observe the same agility in
the peformance of spiritual Duties, as our bodies do in that nimble exercise.
If the Danes had had the opportunity of prescribing a mode of Worship to the
world, I make no question but Kettle-Drums had been by this time Iure Divino,
and used in Churches, as well as the Ladies in America keep up the drinking of
Chocolate in their Churches, a custom which their Priests indulged them in long
before their conversion; and which, as Mr. Gage informs us, they still continue.

One that reads in Livie all that foolish superstition that was practiced in
Old Rome, and sees the same, if not a great deal grosser practiced in the New,
would certainly conclude that the Popes had transcribed all their Ceremonial
out of him, so that it had been very well for you, Mr. Bays, if Gregory the
Great could have totally destroyed that Authors Works as he endeavored, for
then, perhaps, you had either not practiced that idle Pageantry which now you
do, or else you might have passed for the Inventors, whereas we now very well
know whence you had the Originals. In Athenaeus's time, lib 9.
the Receipt of making Holy Water, was by taking a Firebrand from the Altar,
and dipping it into the Water; you retain in your Church much such a sort of
Water, but only differ in the making it; you pour in some Salt, and then
exorcise the Devil out of both the Creatures before he was ever in them, and
afterward ascribe the Lord knows what efficacy to this rare composition; but
for all that, I believe Athenaeus's Holy Water, if a man would try it, is as
good as yours to all intents and purposes, and confers a much Grace to such as
discreetly use it. Durandus, and the Doway-Catechism, give several Pious
Reasons for the Sacerdotal Tonsure. In Euterpe.
Now Herodetus tells us, the very same custom was used by the Egyptian
Priests, but they, as we are informed by him, did it not upon the score of
Religion, but only to keep themselves from being Lousy; and no question on it,
shaving in that hot Climate, where you see the fashion first began, was very
commendable, and as I take it, requisite for the Laity as well as the Clergy;
and this reason I look upon to be ten times more satisfactory and solid, than
what your Divines give for the Tonsure, for it is the easiest thing in the
World, to turn that into a Religious Observation which at first was only a
Civil Custom, and then to give abundance of fine plausible Reasons for the
doing of it. A man might easily trace the rest of your superstitious practices,
and tell you whence you had them, but that, Mr. Bays, would require too much
time, and therefore I shall on purpose pass them by.

That which vexes me most, is to see that the people of your Communion are not
content to do these foolish ridiculous things, but they must offer such reasons
for them, as if they were of Divine Institution. Let him kiss me with the kiss
of his Mouth, therefore the Priest must kiss the Altar. Thou shall see my back
parts, therefore the Priest must turn his back to the people. Wash me again,
therefore the Priest must wash his hands twice. Put off thy Shoes for this
place is holy. Therefore the Bishop at Mass must change his Shoes and
Stockings. Christ is the Rock, and therefore the Altar must be of Stone; and
therefore (say I) if such Reasons as these will hold Water, two Priests may
play a Game at Cards upon the Altar, and do no harm at all but edify the
Congregation; for the Ace may put them in mind of the Unity, and the Tray of
the Trinity, and the Knave of Judas; and so on, till they have run through the
whole History of the Christian Religion. And thus likewise they may play at
Sword and Buckler, to signify the perpetual scuffle between the Flesh and the
Spirit, and what a fine Buckler Faith is; and thus instead of Incense, they may
smoke a Pipe of Tobacco (which by the by, is less chargeable than Incense, and
will serve much better to fright the Devil out of Church) to denote that sinful
man is Dust and Ashes, and to represent the Conflagration to them. Thus they
may play at Blind-mans Buff, to show how blind the Sons of Adam are in their
Natural State, and and thus they may do ten thousand such freaks as these, and
yet not want very good reasons to support the practice of them, because there
is nothing in the World too fulsom, and gross for superstition to swallow, and
for ignorance and interest to justify.

And now, Mr. Bays, we have run over all the objections you made against the
Church of England, and endeavored to answer them. Now if you please to perform
the second part of your promise, and give us your reasons why you settled in
the Romish Communion, you will extremely oblige us. -- But first, Boy, fill us a
Dish of Tea apiece --


Bays. Well, Gentlemen, I shall give you my Reasons, tho I must tell you
beforehand, I expect no other answers to them but Banter and Drollery, from
persons of your complexion. But as I have already been a Confessor for my
Religion, so (if my Destinies require it) I am ready to be a Martyr for it, as
my Brother Poet Prudentius was before me.


Crites. Oh, I understand your meaning, you have lost your Laureats and
Historiographers place; whether you abdicated or forfeited it, is not now the
question -- Here, Boy, give Mr. Bays a Dish of Tea -- and now, dear Confessor,
prithee begin.


Bays. To make short work of it then, being well satisfied of the truth of the
Christian Religion; but --


Crites. And was it thou so little Bays? But how can a man believe thee? Come,
if the truth were known, I am sure thou have the Alcoran in the belly of thee;
nay, don't despair, dear Confessor, Louis le Grand will set the great Turk upon
his Legs again, one of these days.


Bays. Nay Sir* if you are at that sport I have done.


Eugen. Why prithee Mr. Bays, I took thee for a man of more Philosophy and all
that, than to be thus disturbed for so small a matter. I thought you had been
of Socrates's opinion, that all creatures could not affront you.


Bays. I am indeed Sir, and thank you heartily for reminding me of him, so now
I Will proceed -- Being, as I told you, very well satisfied of the truth of the
Christian Religion, but not so well satisfied that the Church of England was
the true Church; I cast my eyes round about me, and discovered in the Church of
Rome several particulars which no other Communion of Christians in the World
could pretend to, as Infallibility, Unity, Uiversality, Antiquity, and
Clemency, and therefore here I settled. After some conversation and experience,
I found here to be a Church of so severe a Discipline, so examplary a Devotion,
so admirable an Unity, so majestic a Grandeur, that I believe I may be pardoned
the expression, if I say she has been so far from debauching and corrupting,
that she has even improved the Christian Religion.


Crites. Nay, I Will say that for your Church, Mr. Bays, she has as good a hand
at improving of hints, as ever any Church in the World had. As for example, the
Rhetorical Apostrophes and Flourishes of the first Fathers to the Saints, she
has improved into a solemn Invocation of them.


Eugen. The idle conjectures of some melancholy persons, about a middle place
in the fourth Century, she has improved into a real Purgatory, peopled it with
inhabitants, and by certain refrigerium's so corrected the unwholesomness of
the air, that it would be now nothing nigh so great a punishment to pass a
winter there, as any where under the Line.


Crites. The Virgin Mary's salutation she has improved into a Prayer, the Real
Presence into a Corporal one, the civil respect that was formerly given to the
Relics of Martyrs into a Religious Veneration of them.


Eugen. Primitive Institution left us only two Sacraments, which she has since
improved into seven. The first Missionaries of our Religion, bequeathed but
twelve Articles to be believed by us, and she has lately improved them into the
jolly number of Falst aff's Buckram-men, twenty four.


Crites. St. Paul tells us of one Mediator only that makes continual
intercession for us; and she has been so civil, as to furnish us with above
forty thousand. Universal Tradition has handed down to us but twenty two books
in the Old Testament, and she has added the Apocrypha, and may in due time, if
she summons another Council at Trent, introduce the Talmud into the Canon.
Thus, Mr. Bays, your Catholic Church has improved the Christian Religion with
a witness, made the Porch bigger than the Building it self, and renewed the
Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes, where the voider exceeded the Bill of fare.


Eugen. Let us now turn the Tables, Mr. Bays, and see whether your Church
continues still in this giving humor; it would certainly exhaust the treasure
of any Church in the Universe, to be always issuing out largesses, and never
retrenching her expense; and therefore it may be worth our while, to examine
whether the Roman Church, that has been guilty of so much profuseness one way,
has not made as many retrenchments another way, to balance her accounts. The
Apostles left us the Scriptures in common, as a part of our property and
inheritance, but she for certain prudential considerations, has thought to keep
them under Lock and Key.


Crites. Primitive Institution left us the Sacrament under both kinds, Bibite
ex hoc omnes is the word, but she has retrenched us of the Cup. Our Religion
allows us a free possession of our Reason and Senses, but she obliges us to
renounce them. The Scriptures only forbid Marriage within the degrees of
Consanguinity, but she has forbid it within the degrees even of a spiritual
Relation.


Eugen. The Apostles left us at large exempt from the Jewish observations of
clean and unclean, but she has introduced them again. Praestat nubere quam uri
says you know who; no, by no means cries the Hind, let the Priests rather
commit Incest, Sodomy, and Adultery, than be allowed the liberty to Marry. Thus
you see, Mr. Bays, what the Sea gives in one place, it takes away in another;
and thus your Mother Church of Rome, if she gives with the right hand, she
takes away with the left, to make amends for her extraordinary charges, just as
you see some Gentlemen, of this end of the Town, discard their Servants, and
pinch their Families, to put themselves in a capacity of keeping a Glass-Coach,
and a single pair of Horses.


Bays. Well, Gentlemen, you have both of you run your selves out of breath with
this discourse, but not a word all this while of Infallibility.


Crites. Oh dear Confessor, I am obliged to you, for refreshing my memory as to
that point, for I love Infallibility extremely. I am clearly of thy opinion,
little Bays, that Infallibility, if it were any where to be found, were worth
both Testaments, and cast all the Creeds in Christendom into the bargain; and
now I Will tell you a Story. There was a certain Country Gentleman, no matter for
his Name, or where he lived, but he had read the Sadducismus Triumphatus, and
was so mightily taken with Dr. More's Notion of a Vehicle, that he could not
rest, till he had bought him a Vehicle, called in English a Calash; so he eat
and drank in his Vehicle, and slept in his Vehicle, and lay with his Wife in
his Vehicle, and got an Heir Apparent upon her Virtuous body in his Vehicle;
and Vehicle was his Name -- a.


Baye. And what of all this, prithee* Here Is a Story with all my heart.


Crites. Why, as foolish as it is, it shall serve for a Vehicle to another
story, which is of a certain Tooth-drawer of my acquaintance, that lived in the
Strand:


Bays. The Devil take your Tooth-drrwer for me, what have I to do with him? I
am afraid your story will prove as troublesome to me, as a fit of the
Toothache.


Crites. A very good jest i'saith; I protest, dear Rogue, thou begin'st to mend
upon it -- Why, this same fellow you must understand, had made a shift, out of
some Churchyard or other, to pick up some two or three hundred Teeth, and hung
them on a string before his Shop, to persuade the World that he was a man of
great business in his Mystery of Tooth-drawing, but all would not do, no body
came nigh him, so he was ready to starve; and (as he has since told me) he was
brought to those extremities, that he resolved one Friday, about eight in the
morning, to draw his own Teeth out, and his Wives, and his little Daughter
Bettys, and hang them on a string, because there was no occasion for them in
his Family, he having not a bit of bread in his House to employ them. At last,
(says a friend of his to whom he made known his condition) to him, " Jack,
come, down with your Sign, and set up a new one, with this Inscription, Here
lives an Operator in Teeth, that draws all manner of old Srumps, and rotten
Gums, without any manner of pain, most Infallibly, and I Will engage, that within
this fortnight, thou shall have as much business, as thou can turn thy hands
to. He followed the advice, and would you believe it, Mr. Bays, got the
greatest practice of any Touth-drawer in City or Country. In one Week, as I was
credibly informed the last year, he drew the Teeth of a hundred and fifty
Courtiers, besides, of half the Court of Aldermen, and my Lord Mayor's into the
bargain; and he has so well batten'd upon his profession, that he is in a fair
way now to keep his Vehicle.


Bays. Keep his Vehicle, so let him and be hanged an he pleases. Why, what is
all this to the purpose?


Crites. Oh, very much, Sir, for even so a certain Gentleman at Rome, do ye
mind me, Mr. Bays, when he was only Bishop of Rome, and nothing else, he had
scarce Money enough to set his Pot a boiling, but when he once got the
Tooth-drawer's trick of Writing Here lives Infallibility on his Sign, why then
he had customers from all parts of the World, and in a short time got so much
Money from his Clients, that he scorns now to trudge it a foot, as his
Predecessors used to do, and keeps a set of brawny fat Porters to carry him on
their Shoulders.


Bays. Nay, he that has the patience, Mr. Crites, to hear you tell a story, may
defy, I think, all the plagues on this side Hell, as a declaiming
Parliamentman, a Case-repealing Templar, a Quibling Justice of Peace, and an
University Critic. This is all, Sir, and so farewell.


Eugen. How, Mr. Bays, have you so soon forgot your Philosopher Socrates? Come,
I see, I must remind you of him once an hour, at least, or you will be apt to
renounce his acquaintance. Why, prithee man, he is only in jest, and there is no
harm in what he says; therefore let it not, to use Mr. Shadwell's expression,
disturb the serene tranquillity of thy sagacious Soul.


Bays. At your entreaty dear Mr. Eugenius I Will go on; and to let you see what
dexterity I use in my Ergotering (pray take notice of that word, for it is of my
own Coining) you shall see me prove the infallibility of our Church within the
compass of two lines. Then granting, this Unerring guide we want,
That such there is you stand obliged to grant.
Pray, Gentlemen, observe the force of this argument, for I protest to you it is
exceeding pretty; an Infallible guide is very necessary to direct the Church
here upon Earth, to set People in the right way, and show 'em what is Heresy
and what not. This, I Am confident, no body that has any guts in his brains,
will deny. Now from this very Principium because he is necessary, I conclude I
gad, that there is such an Infallible guide.


Crites. By your favor Mr. Bays I don't see that this conclusion of yours is
very naturally deduced; for you know we want ten thousand things in the World,
which yet are not be had for Love or Money; For instance, your Seamen that make
long Voyages, want an unfailing Pilot to conduct 'em to their Port, want
unfailing Brandy, and Biscuit, and Water to serve 'em all the way, want
unfailing breezes of Wind to carry 'em thither, and home again; and yet you
will not say, Mr. Bays, that because they want all these unfailing
circumstances, that therefore they are possessed of them. I am sure the
East India Company would allow you a better Pension than your late
Historiographer Royals place amounted to, if you could make your words good.
And therefore that solid argament in your Canon Law, Si Dominus Deus non
fecisset Papam infallibilem, Dominus Deus non fuisset discretus. Which you
Translate, he were else wanting to supply our needs: Will not pass with me,
I Will assure you.


Bays. Mr. Eugenius your friend here begins again to be rude and uncivil, he
denies plain demonstration, and therefore I have done with him. But I know you
to be of a person of a better temper, and so I Will go on. It then remains that
only Church can be
The Guide, that owns unfailing certainty.
You see I proved before that a guide was necessary, that therefore we had one.
Now IN gad, by another argument full as invincible, I Establish this undeniable
truth, that the Church which owns such a guide is certainly possessed of him.


Crites. Of what I prithee Little Bays.


Bays. Why, Lord Sir, of the Infallible Judge.


Crites. Is it the same thing then to pretend, and to have? This, I confess, is
a secret that I was never made acquainted with before; but now I intend to make
the best use on it I can. This is therefore to acquaint all the Goldsmiths,
Mercers, Vintners, and Linnen-Drapers in or about the City, and lines of
Communication, that I Crites am infallibly possessed of an Estate to the value of
ten thousand Pound per Annum, somewhere in the North, and that whosoever shall
presume to deny me credit, for two or three thousand Pounds worth of Goods, is
a rude person, and I Will throw him into Jail for his Pagan Infidelity -- But Mr.
Bays, I fancy it would be worth a manswhile, to know where this same
infallibility resides, to have a little conversation with him, for I Would
willingly be resolved in some such material points as these. Whether Mr. Hobbs,
or Dr. Wallis had the better end of the staff de Quadratura Circuli. Whether is
in the wrong, Mr. Flamsted, or Captain Blackborough about the Longitude of the
Sea. Whether a North-East passage is to be found to China. Whether it is not
rank Nonsense to prove those things, which you call unwritten Traditions out
of the written word, and if so* whether Bellarmine does not deserve to be
tossed in a Blanket, for citing twenty several places in Scripture to prove a
Purgatory by. Whether Old Mr. Sclater of Putney's Galatinus was ever
Circumcised or no; and lastly what Dr. Walker meant by his five Theses of
Church Government -- Can you satisfy a friend to this particular.


Bays. What where he Lodges? Oh most easily Sir, for you may either meet with
him at home in Cathedra with a Urinal in one hand, and feeling the pulse of
Madam Religion with the other; or else playing at Shuttle-Cock with his
Domestics in the Conclave at Ave-Mary-lane, or lastly, if it be Term time, and
a great deal of business stirring abroad, at the Sign of a General Council near
Westminster Hall.


Crites. But pray Mr. Bays, what is the reason that this same infallibility
shifts his Lodgings so often, for I am afraid he comes as dissonestly by what
he pretends to, as the French King by his acquisitions upon the Rhine --
Methinks now if it had been my good fortune to have stumbled upon this
extraordinary prize, this Unerring Elixir vitae, I should have taken the same
Methods that your City-quacks, and Captains of Ships, and Casters of Nativities
use, and certify'd the World in Bills Printed for that purpose, that I live
next door to the Pope's- Head over against the Exchange, and am to be spoke
with, at my Lodgings every Morning from Seven till Eleven, and in the Afternoon
from Two till Six, that the poor should have Advice for nothing, and that if I
had any occasions to stir abroad, I would certainly leave word with my Nephew
Don Marco Ottoboni, what Tavern, or Coffee-House I was gone to, with this Latin
Sentence in the bottom of the Paper, Nulla notitia ut experientia. -- But
before we part with this Subject, one word more, and then I have done: Suppose
Mr* Bays, any person, from the difficulty of finding out this infallible judge,
should be apt to imagine he is no where to be met with, but in the Isle of Pines
or so, how would you satisfy him pray.


Bays. Only with half a dozen lines out of my Poem, Sir, and then let me see,
whether this scruple would ever offer to stare him in the Face any more. p. 37.
The doubtful residence no proof can bring
Against the plain existence of the thing.
Show him but these lines, and the fine simile about Sight, that whether it be
per emissionem, or (as some hold) per receptionem specierum, yet that still no
body denis there is such a thing as Sight; show him but these lines, I say, and
(if you will give me leave to quibble upon my own words) I Will lay ten to one, that
he presently finds an Emission of his Scruple, and the reception of the truth.


Crites. That is as much as to say, Mr. Bays, because your own Doctors are not
yet agreed, wherein the substance of the Mass consists, for some of 'em place
it in the Act of Consecration, others make Consecration and Sumption together
the Essence of it, and some again stand up for Fraction; shall a grim Logician
thence conclude, that your Doctors believe there is no Sacrifice at all?


Bays. Shall he, Mr. Crites? shall he Sir? No I gad, unless he will prove himself
a Coxcomb for his pains.


Eugen. But, Mr. Bays, hold a little I pray; I Would desire you not to lay too
great a stress upon this Argument, for I am afraid it will scarce do the
business. The circumstance of place is in my opinion full as necessary to be
determined as the circumstance of time, and yet a learned Cusuist of your
Church, Sirmondus by name, and one of the stiffest maintainers of the blessed
Doctrine of Attrition, concludes that a man is not obliged to love God at all,
because the Schoolmen have not decided the question, when, and how often we
were to love him. So then, say I, by the same way of reasoning, a man is not
obliged to believe, there is any such thing as Infallibility in your Church,
since your Doctors have not as yet agreed where to settle it, no more than the
Heathens knew where to settle their Summum Bonum, and perhaps never will,
between this and the Resurrection.


Bays. Well, you have prettily bandied the Doctrine of Infallibility between
you both, but I can easily forgive you for it, because to my certain knowledge
it is the severest Enemy you of the Reformation have; what can you except now to
the Unity, Antiquity, and Universality of our Church?


Crites. Why I thought, Mr. Bays, we had exchanged some words about the Unity
of your Church a little while ago, when you were pleased to say, that the
Differences and Divisions amongst us, were one reason for your leaving our
Communion: So that there needs nothing to be said to that particular here, but
only this, that although you have as many divisions in your Schoolmen, and several
Orders as we have; yet as it has always been the confessed Talent of the
Children of Darkness, to be wiser in their Generation than the Children of
Light, so your Divines for example, have had the discretion not to pursue their
Controversies, to any great Extremities, for fear of breaking in pieces, and
dissolving their Ecclesiastical Kingdom. This piece of Policy* as our Savior
tells us, The Devils themselves understand and practice, and then indeed it is
no wonder to find it in the Conclave, for people naturally write after the Copy
that is set before them. I could wish our Dissenters would consider this, for
in some cases you know, Fas est, and ab Host doceri. The Antiquity of your
Church has been already considered in the Preface, and as for your pretenses of
Universality I shall return you no answer, but send you to the common Maps for
your farther information.


Eugen. Unless I am mistaken, Mr. Bays, there is another Reason still behind,
which helped to determine you in your choice of the Roman Communion, but I have
clearly forgot the name of it, and yet to the best of my knowledge, I never met
it amongst the Fifteen Marks which Bellarmine gives of the True Church.


Bays. That may be Sir, and yet it is as unquestionably true as any of the rest.
I mean the Clemency of our Church, and hope your Dissenters found by
comfortable experience, that the Doctrine of Persecution is far from being an
Article of our Faith. -- The Sheep, and harmless Hind
Were never of the Persecuting Kind.



Crites. Upon my word, Mr. Bays, I never expected to hear this passage from
you. Well, now let Nature her Old Laws forego,
And wild Disorder rule below;
Let Tiber now no longer glide
To pay his wonted Tribute to the Tide.
Since Rome sets up a kind indulgent care
For the more powerful Sword, and more convincing Spear.



Eugen. Certainly, Mr. Bays, you were not well awake when you made Good Nature
and Clemency one of the distinguishing characters of your Catholic Hind. Why
surely you think, we never traveled farther in History than the Seven
Champions, and Don Quixot, or never heard of the Albigenses, the Vaudois, the
poor men of Lions, the Patarenes, the Arnoldists, the Speronists, the
Passagenes, the Wiclevites, and the Fratricelli (as they then called 'em)
thousands of which, were formerly sacrificed to the Roman Moloc, and whose
Posterity are duly every year delivered into the Devils hands, by your Pious
Pastor in the Bulla Caenae.


Bays. I find you have been dabling lately in Old Fox's Volumes for your
knowledge, but upon my word, Mr. Eugenius, he is as scandalous an Author, as Sir
John Mandevil of famous memory, or --


Eugen. The modern Monsieur Varillas, or Pere Bouhours. But no matter for that.
Do you think we have no Frenchmen about the Town that lost a Grandfather, or a
Relation at the Paris Massacre? Do you think none of our Irish Refugees ever
discourse of the Rebellion of 41. over their Tea, and Coffee? What do we
celebrate the Fifth of November in Squibs, and Crackers, but only to
commemorate our deliverance from the Gun-powder-Plot, when (as I lately found
it in an Old Sermon.) You thought to fix, as I may say it in meter,
Saint Peter's Faith with Catholic Saltpeter.



Bays. Nay look you, Gentlemen, I am not at all concerned to justify the
irregularities of former times: But the Immortal Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience sufficiently shows, that a persecuting Spirit is not entailed upon
our Party. I remember very well, what I said then to the Dissenters, out of
Martial. Si vitare Canum morsus Lepus improbe quae ris,
Ad quae confugias Ora Leonis, habes.
The Panther's Claws would thou avoid Dissenter?
Into the Lions Mouth then enter, enter, enter.



Crites. And I remember too, Mr. Bays, what I thought of, when the Indulgence
first came out; I thought of the Trojan Horse, and the Questions that King
Priam asked about it. Quo molem hanc immanis equi Statuere? quis author?
Quid ve petunt? Quae religio? Aut Quae machina belli?
But to satisfy you that these were my Sentiments at that time, I Will show you
Laccoon's Speech in the Second AEneid, wherein he diswades the Trojans, from
letting in the Wooden Horse, imitated, and suited to that occasion. You dull
Dissenters, what vain folly blinds
Your senses thus, and captivates your minds?
Think you, this proffered liberty is free
From Tricks, and Snares, and Papal Treachery?
Think you, 'twas meant according to the Letter?
Oh! that such Plodding-Heads should know the Pope no better.
Trust me, this kindness either was designed
To increase our Quarrels, and our weakness find.
Or else, the Breach was opened at a venture,
That at one hole both Cowl and Cloak might enter.
Pray Heaven, there be no farther mischief meant,
But I Am afraid there is Roman Opium in it.



Bays. What, was there any Roman Opium in the Trojan Horse! That I never read
of in any Commentator before.


Crites. No, Mr. Bays, we are talking all this while of the late Toleration.
Be It what it will, the gilded Pill suspect,
And with a smiling scorn your proffered fate reject.
A Papist, tho ungiving, means you evil,
But when he scatters Gifts and Mercies, he is the Devil.


You may see, Mr. Bays, what was my opinion of the matter even at that time,
and I persuade my self the Dissenters thought no better of it, tho it must be
confessed, they offered as much fulsome Incense to the unfortunate King for
this gift, as was ever offered in the days of yore to Nero, or Domitian. Come,
Little Bays, I perceive by your smiling, you have got some pleasant conceit or
other within you. Now prithee what was thy opinion of the Indulgence.


Bays. Because we are all of us in a merry humor now, I Will tell you. If ever
you had the curiosity to read over the Church History of Scotland, you know
there happened a famous Dispute there whether the Lords-prayer might be said to
any of the Saints, and how it was resolved. Now those very distinctions which
were used to qualify the Lord's-prayer for the use of the Saints, will serve
for this business of the Toleration. It was meant then Formaliter, to our
party, to the other Herd of Dissenters materialiter. Ultimate to us, non
ultimate to them; principaliter to us, minus principaliter to them; to us
primario, to them secundario; capiendo stricte to us, capiendo large to them.
In short, as the Schoolmen use to distinguish in the case of Image Worship, it
was meant Terminative to us the Prototypes, but only relative to the
Dissenters, our Images.


Eugen. Why this was honestly done, Mr. Bays, to explain your meaning. And
truly now I think on it, we ought to thank Lovis le Grard for the different
conduct which he took at home, or else, for as much as I know, the trick had
succeeded. The two Kings, I don't question, were endeavoring to propagate
their Religion, but they used different methods, and so between 'em they acted
the story of Penelope, what the one did in the day, the other undid in the
night. After all, Mr. Bays, to shut our hands of this Religious Discourse,
Popery in England is like Sysiphus's Stone, the Fathers of the Society, may
perhaps roll it up to the top of the Hill, but then it will tumble down of its
own accord, and help to break the bones of those that rolled it up.


Crites. Well, Mr. Bays, I find our Conference here is likely to meet with no
better success, than other conferences of the like nature; where after a great
deal of pother and noise, to no purpose at all, both Parties continue as stiff
and unrelenting as at the first, and keep their old stations. -- So if you
please we will turn the Tables, and discourse of something else that will be more
agreeable, and edifying.


Bays. With all my heart, Mr. Crites, propose what you will.


Crites. Why, I have often considered with my self, how ticklish a thing it is
for a man that has acquired a vast stock of Reputation, as you have done, Mr.
Bays, to keep it long in his hands; the World, you know, is so very peevish and
ill-natured, that --


Bays. And what of all that, Sir?


Crites. That in my opinion, it is as difficult for any person to maintain his
Reputation still about him, as for a very pretty Lady, with a very pretty
Fortune, in this lewd and wicked Town, to keep her Maidenhead till fifteen.
Now it is otherwise with you, honest Mr. Bays, for though you have lived a
considerable time amongst us here, yet you don't decline at all in your
Authority; I mean as a Poet, not as a Casuist. IN faith, dear friend of mine,
we must still acknowledge thee the only Oracle for Wit and Poetry about the
City.


Bays. Thank you for that, Sir. Why, the business, in short, is thus -- if the
Spirit of Poetry fails me, I betake my self to Prose, and if that does not
succeed, to Poetry again. If things of my own inventing cloy the World, then
Translating comes in play; if Translating proves wearisome, why then I invent
some new business of my own, and the work's done. If honest Bawdry and Mirth
wont take, then a little touch of Religion, or Politics, or Controversy,
makes me amends; and if these don't relish (as the Devil take them they seldom
do) then commend me to a fine stroke or two of Bawdry, to quicken the appetite
of the Age. If Comedy brings me in no profit, why then Tragedy look to thy
self; and so on Vice Versa to the end of the chapter.


Crites. Very pretty this upon my word, Mr. Bays.


Bays. Thus you see, Gentlemen, that Mr. Bays the Divine keeps Mr. Bays the
Poet, and Mr. Bays the Translator keeps Mr. Bays the Author, and Mr. Bays the
Play-wright keeps the Divine, and Author, and Translator altogether, I'gad. I
must confess, I have some other Arcana's, which I could communicate to you,
that are very delicate and surprising, but I must beg your pardon, Gentlemen --


Crites. Nay no excuses will serve your turn Mr. Bays, impart 'em you must
before you stir, that is certain. I Will promise for my self and my friend here,
that we will keep 'em as secret, as a young Country Gentleman keeps his City-Clap
from his pious Grandmother, and Mistress.


Eugenius. Or a Cheapside Wife keeps the last favors she received at a
Court-Masquerade, or the Spring Garden, from her jealous Husband.


Bays. Ay, ay, or a Poet keeps the handsome Chastisement he received for his
last Lampoon, from the pretty Goddess that he daily Courts in Madrigal, and
Sonnet. Well I believe you Gentlemen, and because I know you both to be persons
of honor and all that, I Will acquaint you with the other mysteries of my
Government, tho they are things of extraordinary value, and I may safely say
there is never a Prince in Christendom that walks more by the Ragioni di Stato,
by the refined rules of policy, than my self. They talk how the Venetians have
all along preserved their Republic, by observing the rules of a certain
Manuscript they have of Tullies, about the Administration of a Commonwealth,
but I am sure it is all mere insipid stuff, to what I am going to relate --


Crites. Prithee dear Rogue proceed then.


Bays. Sometimes Mr. Crites, when I find the young Critics of the Town for want
of other employment, begin to make busy with any of my own works at home, what
do I to dissipate all these ill humors, but immediately proclaim a Miscellany
Crusade, that is, do you observe me Gentlemen, I encourage all the forward
Beaux of the Nation, to take a voyage as far as Greece or Italy, to retreive
some Captive province of Poetry out of the hands of Infidel-Invaders, where
besides the reputation which a person certainly gets, by being the leading Card
of all the Company, that list themselves for such an adventure, I am sure of
carrying away all the profit of the undertaking to my self.


Eugenius. Why, who would have taken thee for such a Politician, Mr. Bays?


Bays. That was none of my fault Sir. Sometimes when I find my revenue kept
back, which the magnificence of former Kings thought fit to bestow upon my
place, I send a consecrated Rose, that is a great of very fulsome flattery I
gad, to some great man or other about the Court, to procure my Apollo's pence,
my ancient income for me: Or if this method fails, I take the next opportunity
I have, to expose those People in a Preface Preface to Marriage Alamode.
Who have the liberality of Kings in their disposing, and who, dishonouring the
bounty of their master, suffer such to be in necessity, who endeavor at least
to please him.


Crites. You Will scarce have any occasion now, Mr. Bays, to solicit for your
Apollo's pence again, since Mr. Shadwell has got both them, and your Laurel
from you. But pray proceed.


Bays. Sometimes for an extraordinary consideration, I give leave to some noble
Baronet to father one of my Plays, and afterward when I have served my turn,
and got all I can out of him, I make bold to take the Brat home again, as I did
my Indian Queen.


Eugen. I Will swear, Mr. Bays, thou art the pleasantest fellow in the Universe,
I could dye with laughing at these conceits; but have you any more of 'em?


Bays. Any more of 'em? why I am an inexhaustible fountain; as suppose or
instance, a Play meets with the general approbation of the World, and the
Ladies clap it, and the men they admire it, and so forth, why what do I, that I
may seem better-sighted in these matters then the rest of mankind, but put the
Play in the Poetic Inquisition, and quarrel with the Author up to the Elbows, I
gad, for introducing innovations upon the Theater, such as making his Ghosts,
and Angels in the Clouds, speak better sense, than can be expected from persons
of their condition, or else for not equipping his Scene with men enough, and
divesting the Stage of that necessary grandeur and ceremony, which is requisite
to support it --


Eugenius. Better and better, upon my word Mr. Bays.


Bays. At other times when a Play has happened to be damned at the Theater, to
see how the Quicksilver varies in this Weather-glass of mine, I presently take
up the Cudgels for the Author (not that I am any more concerned at his or any
other bodies miscarriage, than one of your City Protestants would be, if the
French King should think fit in his Royal Wisdom to hang or drown himself) but
only to magnify my own Talent, and pretend to better judgment in these affairs
than any body besides. You see Gentlemen, I am Athanasius contra mundum, even
according to the letter, I vow to gad I am.


Crites. Or Ishmael rather, Mr. Bays, if you are for going according to the
Letter, remember Rose-Alley-lane else, but prithee go on.


Bays. When any of my own Comedies has failed (as the Lord knows too many of
'em have done) I frankly and freely own my self to be of a Saturnine
Complexion, and very honestly I gad acknowledge, lest some one else should do
it for me, that several of my own profession have outdone me at Comedy; But
then as for Tragedy, do ye mind me, I own, and I maintain, and solemnly
declare, that it is my own proper paternal inheritance, that no man breathing
performs that way well but my self, and that I would sooner part with my right
hand, than relinguish my pretensions to it. Now on the other hand --


Eugenius. Nay now the Devil take thee on the other hand, for a cunning Rogue
as thou art --


Bays. If I chance once in my Lifetime to have a lucky hit at the Comic
strain, as in my Spanish Friar, why then I gad I am of another opinion, and
he is to be sure a Son of a Whore, and a Block-head, and all that, for his
pains, who has the hardiness to deny the gayety of my temper, or the
agreeableness of my Conversation.


Crites. I profess Mr. Bays the things that you have communicated here are
extremely curious. Well I find Matchiavel cannot come nigh you for all his
politics --


Bays. No I gad, thank my Maker for it. Why did you never hear that I have been
courted to be Secretary to the Congregation de propaganda Fide at Rome?


Crites. Not I, In Faith little Bays.


Bays. Not you In Faith? Why then In Faith Mr. Crites you have heard nothing at
all, and to be plain with you Gentlemen, I had certainly accepted the offer, if
it had not been for the sake of some pretty Female rogues here in Covent Garden
that could not live without me.


Crites. Well, thou have bowels and compassion I see with thy policy, which few
of the Sir Pols have -- But pray Sir pursue your discourse.


Bays. Sometimes Gentlemen when the living Poets are too many for me, I betake
my self to the protection of the Dead; talk of Old Decrees, and Ancient
Constitutions, and pretend that all those passages which are imputed to me for
faults, are to be found in venerable Antiquity, as in the case of Almanzor,
who, as I affirmed, was a Gentleman as well bred and born, and of as peaceable
and civil a deportment as Homer's Achilles. But if the Scene chances to be
altered, and some prying Heretics in Poetry give out that the Ancients are of
their opinion, and that I have misunderstood, mispresented 'em, and all that,
have made false quotations, and worse deductions, I presently fall foul upon
the Old writers, and positively maintain that there is scarce one of 'em in a
hundred who was master of a refined Genius; and that it is the unquestionable
prerogative of Mr. Bays, as he is Apollo's high Pontiff, to reverse former
orders, and substitute what new Articles in Poetry he thinks convenient.


Eugenius. No question on it Mr. Bays. But have you any thing else behind?


Bays. Ay Sir, I have a certain profound stratagem still behind, my Sacra
Anchora I call it, which is only to be made use of upon extraordinary
occasions, and which I was never forced to employ but once in my time, and is
as follows. When any young Author has been so fortunate in his first
undertaking, as to win himself the applause of all the World, so that it is
impossible for one to ruin his reputation, without running the hazard of having
his Throat cut by all sort of company, I am as forward as the best of 'em all
to commend his ingenuity, to extol his parts, and promise him a Copy of Verses
before his Book, if he honors the World with a second Edition.


Crites. Very good.


Bays. At the same time I privately feel his Pulse, and examine the nature, and
inclination of the Beast. If he chances to be a little Saturnine like my self,
I set him upon a gay undertaking, where it is the Devil and all of ill luck if
he does not Shipwreck all his former credit. But if he proves a man of a brisk
and jolly temper, I persuade him of all loves to make an experiment of his
abilities upon some serious solemn subject, tell him if he ever expects to be
saved he must out of hand do justice to the Psalms and Canticles, which work
he is as incapable to manage I gad, as little David was to fight in Saul's
Armor. Thus Gentlemen by engaging the Author in a Province, where he has not
stock enough to carry on the Plantation, I never fail one way or other to
compass my designs, and at long run to defeat my competitor.


Crites. Why Mr. Bays, this is like enjoining a Painter, that has a good fancy
at drawing of Saracens Heads, and Grotesque Figures only, to draw you a Venus
or an Adonis, where he must certainly miscarry. Now I am apt to fancy you
trepanned the honest Translator of Lucretius with this profound piece of
policy, come confess the truth man. Did you not?


Bays. You could not have guessed better Mr. Crites, if you had dived into my
Diaphragma for the secret. It was not in my power you must know either to
suppress the work, or to discommend it, because, to give the Gentleman his due,
it was performed beyond all expectation, and what was a mighty matter, it
suited as pat as might be with the Philosophy of the Town that was then in
fashion. Now to undermine and ruin him to all intents and purposes I took these
measures. I flatter, hugg, and caress him like an Achitophel as I was, after
the strangest manner imaginable, professed all the respects and friendship in the
world for him; tell him, that providence had certainly reserved him for working
Miracles in Poetry; and that I had some ancient prophecies by me at home, which
declared him to be the very person that was to deliver the immortal writers of
former ages out of that Algerin captivity they had so long labored under --


Crites. Well for dawbing and wheedling I Will let thee loose to any Poet in
Christendom.


Bays. That if by his mighty Feat he could form those Irish Atoms of Lucretius
into so regular, and well disciplined an Army, could raise such harmony out of
a dull unmusical Philosopher, how glorious and exalted would his attempts be
upon Horace; or what might we not expect from so advantageous, so promising an
undertaking. And so Gentlemen with the help of a little incense and flattery, I
so cajoled this AEsops Crow, that he presently dropped his Epicurean Cheese out
of his Mouth, to sing one of his unmusical ill-turn'd Odes of Horace. I
persuaded this Welsh Courser to leave his ragged unaccessible precipices, where
there was no coming after him, to try his strength and feet upon good plain
Carpet ground, where an English Vinegar-horse I knew would easily distance him.


Crites. To deal plainly with thee little Bays, if I were in this injured
Gentleman's case I should see thee hanged before I could forgive thee.


Bays. But the best jest is still untold. To remove all manner of suspicion
from him, and let him see I dealt sincerely, and above board, I gave him my
paternal Benediction with this advice, Quit not for public toyls a College-life,
Nor take that kind of settlement, a Wife.
The drift of my meaning in dissuading him from the Town, and advising him to
continue still in the University, was to keep him at as great a distance as I
could, lest he should set up for himself here in the City, and spoil my own
Trade; and I never cared what encouragement he found at Avignon, as long as I
was the chief man at Rome; for let me tell you by the by, Parnassus tho they
say it has two tops, yet I am confident it will but just maintain one Monarch,
or one incumbent at a time. In dissuading him from Matrimony, I pretended to
have a great concern for the young Man's welfare, and cunningly insinuated,
that it was not convenient for the health of his body to be drained and sucked
by two insatiable Leeches at a time, a Muse, and a Wife.


Eugen. Faith Mr. Bays, you took the right course in assming the character of a
friend upon this occasion, for had you used him severely, perhaps the World
might have been inclined to show him the greater kindness; as they say for a
Man to cry down his Wife, is the infallible way to procure her a kind keeper;
and we have seen plainly enough, that the late immortal sufferers at Oxford
fared the better, for being so cruelly treated by the Ecclesiastical
Commissioners.


Bays. That rule of yours Mr. Eugenius does not always hold, for I have used a
noble Poet of the other University with all the ill nature and rigor in the
World, yet he never had the good fortune yet to meet one single defender to
espouse his quarrel: It Is Mr. Cleveland I am now discoursing of. You know
Gentlemen how I have treated him in my Essay upon Dramatic Poetry, a thousand
times worse I gad then any of his Presbyterian friends. I lash him there for
his tall Hyperbole's, his affected obscurity, his unworthy expressions, and
(would you think it) for his ill Husbandry in tacking together too much wit:
For you must understand I can sometimes quarrel with a man for being guilty of
too much wit, as well as for having none at all, and I am certain that in this
frugal Age, which is for retrenching all unnecessary expenses, one single
thought well managed shall go farther then twenty of 'em could formerly before
we were taught by the Gold-beaters how to extend a fancy for a furlong or two.
In short a Clevelandism and a Catachresis were with me, terms full as
conversible as --


Crites. Nay never pump for it man, as Beef and Mustard, Pork and Pease, Hand
and Glove, or Brawn and Christmas.


Bays. No, no, as Protestantism and opiniarete, Popery and Infallibility, are
with me now. Upon King Charles the First's going in disguise to his trusty
Subjects the Scots he has this passage, Heaven that the Minister of thy person
owns,
Will sue thee for dilapidations.
Now how do you think I ridiculed em? Why I could never go to my Barber to be
shaved for half a dozen years at least but I thus accosted him, and all at poor
Mr. Cleveland's charges I gad. Come Jack (said I) you must repair the
dilapidations of my face for me, for I am damnably afraid lest my maker should
endite me upon the first Chapter of Genesis verse the 23, for letting his Image
run to ruin.


Crites. Well I see Mr. Bays you can be severe with a vengeance when you
please. Thou art a very Zoilus incarnate.


Bays. Likewise he having the misfortune, to call that Domestic animal yclep'd
a Cock. The Baron Tell-clock of the Night. I could never I gad as I came home
from the Tavern meet a Watchman or so, but I presently askd him. "Baron
Tell-clock of the Night prithee how goes the time? Indeed I have of late days,
since the happy exchange I made of my Religion, found some compunctions in my
Conscience for being so severe and unkind to him, and if he were alive, I am
confident I should heartily beg his pardon, and tender him all the
acknowledgments I am capable of.


Crites. Prithee Mr. Bays how comes this qualm of good nature to seize thee on
the sudden. I am afraid all is not well with thee. Come take heart of grace
man, and never be dejected at the matter.


Bays. You cannot imagine Mr. Crites, how angry I am with my self for treating
the aforesaid Author with so much severity. Time was when no body could have
made better sport with him for these following lines than my self. Not the fair
Abbess of the Skies,
With all her Nunnery of Eyes,
Can show me such a beauteous Prize.
But now hang me up for a Dog, if I could say one malicious thing of him; for
what serious Catholic must not find himself obliged in point of honor to
respect that Gentleman, who has made Abbeys and Nunneries to be, if not Iure
Divino, yet at least Iure Coelesti. -- Si sic omnia dixisset, he had been
without question the finest Poet in Christendom, not excepting Scribonius
himself, or another of the Society that rung two and twenty thousand changes
upon the eight Bells of the Virgin Mary's good qualities. In that Verse, Tot
tibl sunt dotes, Vergo, quot sidera caelo.
-- And now, Gentlemen, to draw toward an end, for I find by my Watch I have
staid an hour beyond my time, I here take my last farewell of all the vanities
and solemn impertinencies of the world, and for the future devote my self only
to piety, and exercises of Religion. Good Life be now my task; my doubts are
done,
What more could fright my faith, than three in one?



Crites. A very pious resolution this by my troth, Mr. Bays, for not to mince
matters, you stand in need of repentance as much as any person I know of within
the Bills of mortality. There Is Libelling, and Blaspheming, and Fornicating,
and a Catalogue of Sins longer than a Jewish Pedigree to be still atton'd for.
But unless I am mistaken in thee, thou art too much a Poet and a man of the
Town to condescend to repent.


Bays. Well, Sir, you may say your pleasure of me, I cannot avoid it. But sure
you will give me leave to tell you, I know my self better than any one else. I
have already made a Magdalen of my Muse, and I think I am too old to fear a
temptation from any other quarter.


Crites. I Will lay a wager with you however, Mr. Bays, that this blessed
Magdalen of yours proves as rank a Recreant, for all her confinement, as ever
she was. Come, come, I know we shall see thee upon the Stage e're-long; thou
art too good-natured, I know, to renounce the Theater, and giving thy self the
sa^isfaction of obliging the Ladies.


Bays. That were a very shrewd temptation, I confess, if I had not for good and
all, sacrificed that fame, that darling fame which I formerly prized, to the
service of the Catholic Church, and therefore I shall take my leave of you in a
piece of Poetry, which I lately writ for my own consolation. It Is an imitation
of one of Horaces Penitential Odes, (Psalms I was going to call it) by which
you will perceive that I am mortified to the world, and have hung my Harp upon the
Willows.


Eugen. This is an extraordinary favor upon my word, Mr. Bays, and I Will study
how to requite it, for you know what a respect I pay to my Master Horace.


Bays. I.
It Is true, while active blood my viens did fire,
And vigorous youth gay thoughts inspire;
(By your leave, Courteous Reader, be it said)
I could have don't, as well as most men did.
But now I am (the more's the pity,)
The very'st Fumbler in the City.
II.
There honest Harp, that have of late
So often bore thy sinful Masters fate,
Thou a cracked Side, and I a broken Pate:
Hang up and peaceful rest enjoy,
Hang up, while poor dejected I,
Unmusical, unstrung like thee, sit mourning by.

Crites. A very sad and melancholy case in faith.

III.
And likewise all ye trusty Bars,
With whose assistance heretofore,
When Love engaged me in his Wars,
I Have battered (Heaven forgive me) many a door. Bays pulls his Hat off.
Lie there till some more able hand,
Shall you to your old pious use command.

Crites. Very devoutly done, upon honor, Mr. Bays, to pull your Hat off, when
you cried Heaven forgive me. Nay, now I have some hopes of thee, Dear Rogue. --
What upon thy Marrow-bones? Why now I see here is the Devil and all of devotion
coming forward. Bays kneels. Let me see, thou art now going to pray for --


Eugen. What should a Poet pray for, but a believing Bookseller, and an easy
open-handed Lord, a kind Audience, and a confusion to all Critics, store of
Claret, and such kind of Blessings? But pray don't disturb him in his Devotions.

IV.
But oh kind Phoebus lend a pitying Ear,
To thy old Servants humble prayer.
Let M-nt-gue, and Br-wn thy anger feel,
Lash 'em all over with Rods of Steel.
And when the Scriblers of their smart complain,
This it is, then tell 'em, to profane
J-hn Dr-d-n's Hind with an unhallowed vein.

Bays. And now, Gentlemen, your approbation of the business.


Eugen. Why I faith, Mr. Bays, your ejaculation ends somewhat of the smartest.
They had best have a care that are concerned in it. And now because I made you
a promise of requiting your Ode, if you will stay a minute or two longer, I Will
show you a Copy of Verses given me lately by a Friend. It Is called The Fable of
the Bat and the Birds, and I am glad for your sake* that I have it now about me.


Bays. The Fable of the Bat and the Birds? A very pretty subject I gad. I love
entirely any thing that comes out of AEsops mint, therefore pray let us have it.


Eugen. In ancient times (as grave Historians tell)
'Twixt Birds, and Beasts a dismal quarrel fell.
But whether this from breach of Faith did flow,
Or to Religious Iars its birth did owe,
Or depredations made, concerns us not to know.

Bays. No I gad it does not, I Will justify it. Weighty, you may be sure, the
cause was thought,
That such an universal tumult wrought.



Bays. Ay, ay, no question on it, the Birds and Beasts were wiser than to fall
out for nothing. Picqueering parties first began the fray,
A sad presage of the ensuing day;
At last the war was solemnly proclaimed,
The hour of fighting set, and both the Leaders named.



Bays. I am glad on it with all my heart, for now I hope to hear of Battle and
Murder. The foolish Bat, a bird obscene, and base,
The scorn and jest of all the feathered race;
Or by fantastic fears and scruples led,
Or with ambition moved, his party fled.
Joined with the Beasts, and eager to engage,
With popular harangues urged on a feeble rage.



Bays. This Bat I warrant you was one of the late Western Deserters. As fortune
would, on an ill-fated day,
The Beasts drew out their forces in array.
The different Kinds their grudges laid aside,
And for the common safety all provide,
Even, their old picques, and warm disputes forgot,
The Hind and Panther joined upon the spot;
And by one mutual league of friendship held,
Prepare for the rough business of the Field.



Bays. I gad I commend 'em for it. If I had been Captain to the Army I had
advised the same. When lo! the Birds in numerous bands appear,
And with repeated cries attacque the rear.
Give a fierce charge, and back like Parthians fly,
To repossess their Patrimonial Sky:
Then straight descending with redoubled might,
They spend their fury, and renew the fight.



Bays. Nay, there was no fighting with 'em say I, if they used that trick. Pale
Victory, all trembling, and dismayed,
With doubtful wings the purple Scene surveyed.
At last, propitious to her feathered kind,
Declared her favor, and the Scale inclined.
Whole Hecatombs the covered field possessed,
And gave their Foes at once a Triumph and a Feast.
Their slaughtered Young, the Rachel-dams deplored,
And many a Widdow'd Cow mourned over her horned Lord.
The Generous Eagle (so his Stars ordain)
Chases the affrighted Lion from the Plain.
Their General gone, the rest like Lightning fly,
A cheap, unfighting Herd, not worth the Victory.
And now the Birds with eager haste pursue
Through lanes, and devious tracts the scattered Crew.
Amongst the rest, beset with dangers round,
The trembling Bat was in a Cellar found.
It Is pity, Fame never chronicled his Taker,
But all Records agree they found him in Long-acre;
Pearcht on a Pole they brought him to the Bar,
Where the full House sat talking of the War:
Straight at the sight a various noise began,
Which through the Spacious Hall, and neighboring Lobby ran.
Each Member in the public mirth concurred,
And droll'd upon the poor Apostatizing Bird.
First Parrot S-ttle opened wide his Throat,
Next Cuckoo Ph-lips, always in a note;
And Peacock Ch-tw-d of the Clergy kind,
But his Poetic Feet disgraced the Train behind.
And Cr-ch and N-rris, Kites of high renown,
And Turkey Lee by his large Gizzard known:
Nay, to enhance the hardship of his woes,
Owl D-rfy clapped his Wings, and hooted in the close.
When now their raillery began to spare,
(And faith 'twas too too much for one poor Bird to bear.)
The Eagle ordered silence in the Room,
And thus aloud pronounced the shivering Lubbers doom.
Beast of a Bird! thus to desert thy Friends,
And join the Common Foe for base ungen'rous ends,
What punishment can suit so black a Crime?
Hear then, and stand accursed to all succeeding time.
From all our Diets be thou first expelled,
Or those in silent Groves, or those on Steeples held.
When our gay Tribes in youthful pomp appear,
To join in Nuptial Bands, and meet the smiling year.
Nay more, to make thee mortify and grieve,
To Buzzard Sh-dw-ll we thy places give.
Him we appoint Historian of our State,
And Poet Laureat of the Woods create.
Ont law'd our Realms, and banished from the Light,
Be thou for ever damned to steal abroad by night.



Eugen. I hope Mr. Bays, I have now made you amends for your Ode, I don't
question but you like it, because it is writ in your own style. Will you stay
now, and hear the Application of the Fable?


Bays. No I gad, Sir, I thank you heartily; I am not such a Bat neither as you
take me for: What not understand the Fable without the Application? It Is plain
enough without one, and the Author may chance to hear more from me in a short
time. No, Sir, I Will have none of your Applications, and so Good Night.


FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Second Part of Mr. Waller's Poems. Containing, his alteration of the Maids
Tragedy, and whatever of his is yet unprinted: Together with some other Poems,
Speeches, etc. that were Printed severally, and never put into the First
Collection of his Poems.

Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.


