THE LIFE OF JUSTIFICATION OPENED. Or, A Treatise grounded upon Gal. 2. 11.
Wherein the Orthodox Doctrine of Justification by Faith, and Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, is clearly expounded, solidly confirmed, and learnedly
vindicated from the various Objections of its Adversaries. Whereunto are
subjoined some Arguments against Universal Redemption. By that Faithful and
Learned Servant of Jesus Christ Mr. JOHN BROUN, sometimes Minister of the
Gospel at Wamfrey in Scotland.

JER. 23. 6. In His days JUDAH shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely:
and this is His name whereby He shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Iustificatio est Articulus stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae. LUTH. Printed in the
Year. M.DC.XCV.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT is the true wisdom of a Christian to understand aright and with a
spiritual eye to discern the great difference between the Law and the Gospel,
the Covenant of Works and that of Grace, the Legal and Euangelical
Justification, the ignorance whereof is the great Cause of most errors this
day among professed Christians. When our blessed Savior came into the world,
he found flowing out of this bad fountain a multitude of Heresies in the Jewish
Church, deceived by the Pharisees, blind Leaders of a blind People, erecting
and establishing their our Righteousness before the throne of God. And it is
certain that our Lord Jesus Christ was rejected of the Jews, because they could
not believe their own unrighteousness, misery and condemnation by the Law, nor
be made to seek in the Messiah his Sufferings and Satisfaction the true
expiation of sins and a complete Righteousness, sufficient to eternal
happiness. Certainly they understood not the promises of the Prophets,
especially that of Isaiah Chap. LIII. neither looked they to the end of the
Ceremonial oeconomie and Law which was to be abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 13. Of this
Judaical error we have a clear example in the Apostle Paul, before his
conversion a Pharisee, and by his great Masters well instructed in the letter
of the Law. For he looking upon himself, and not understanding the nature of
the Law in its Spiritual meaning, was in his own eyes no sinner, but a just
man, living, and having a right to pretend a sentence of Justification before
God upon the account of his works according to the Law. But when it pleased God
to reveal his Son to his soul, he could count all things but l^ss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, and desire only to be found in him, not
having his own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the
Faith of Christ; the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Phil. 3. 8, 9. And
so became a great example of all true Converts and Believers, and his
Conversion a Demonstration of this Euangelical Doctrine, that no man is
Justified by his works, but by the Righteousness of Christ imputed and by Faith
received and applied.

No doubt, Christian Reader, but this doctrine is the whole scope of the same
Apostle in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians. For having proved both
Jews and Gentiles to be all under sin, and supposing consequently that by the
works of the Law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God, he shows,
that all elected sinners coming short of the glory of God, must be justified
freely by his grace through the Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, whom God
has set forth to be our Propitiation through faith in his blood, so that all
boasting may be excluded; which cannot be, if a man could be justified by his
works. Yea the Apostle Chap. 4. gives a Demonstration of this doctrine out of
the examples of Abraham and David, to whom after conversion, Righteousness is
imputed and sin pardoned by faith in the promise. In his Epistle to the
Galatians, he likewise presses this Doctrine against the heresy of judaizing
Ministers, who would have mingled the Law with the Gospel, and rejects their
sentence as another Gospel worthy to be Anathematized, with every one who
teaches it, though even an Angel from Heaven; since he says upon the matter,
that Christ is dead in vain, as we see Chap. 1. 8, 11. Chap. 11. 21.

How happy were the Church in these days, if the Doctrine of
Gospel-Justification did continue pure, and could be propagated and transmitted
to the following ages! But it is too manifest that the Christian Church, by
Heathenish and Jewish errors upon the one hand, and by Pelagian infusions on
the other, has lost a great deal of her primitive sincerity and purity.
Certainly the Roman Superstitions, tending only to the establishing of humane
Righteousness in Gods sight, are clear demonstrations of a corrupted doctrine,
yea of that Apostacy of the latter times so often soretold by the Apostle Paul.
For we see that Popery is wholly erected upon a Judaical and Pelagian
Righteousness, proceeding from the bitter root of the Heathenish Free Will,
whereby the corruption of Nature is denied, sin excused, the faculties of
Nature, as sufficient to all good works, asserted; especially when they are
sustained by a sufficient grace given to all men for obtaining eternal
happiness. But this great error, worthy of the Apostles Anathema, was
abominable in the eyes of our Protestant Fathers: and therefore the Doctrine of
a contrary Gospel-Justification was the greatest reason of separation,
especially when they heard the trumpet from Heaven sounding and crying, come
out of Babel, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. And herein we must admire the wonderful providence
of God, that the Protestants did aggree in this point of Justification, even
when their minds were distracted about the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper: and
it is known how careful the Lutherians are, even to this day, in following the
Doctrine of their Master in this great Article.

But alas! it is a sad and lamentable thing, that Arminians (being fomented by
the Kings of France and Spain as the immediate way to introduce Popery, says
Wilson in his History of Great Britain page 119.) when they adopted the
Pelagian grounds, did forsake the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ,
because they could not join this great mystery of the Gospel with the opinions
of Universal Grace and Redemption, as appears in the writings of Episcopius,
Curcellaeus, Limburgh, and others, filled not only with Arminian, but also with
wicked Socinian errors against the Divinity and Satisfaction of our Savior
Jesus Christ. And how could it be thought, that those books should have been
accepted and approved by Reformed Divines and Churches, as we see they are in
our neighboring Kingdom of England? O what errors in that Nation are observed
and complained of before by Honorius Reggius in his book de Statu Ecclesiae
Britannicae, errors tending even to the ruin of the Protestant Cause! And
what shall we say of the latter books, written by Bull, Parker, Sherlock, and
others, against the principles of Reformation, expressed hitherto with great
agreement in all the Confessions of Reformed Churches. Yea even those who were
purer in appearance, pressing the moral duties and practical doctrine of piety
(I mean the followers of that famous Minister Mr. Richard Baxter) did corrupt
the true Doctrine of Justification, because they adopted Universal Grace and
Redemption. For suspending such an Universal Redemption as Conditional, upon
the virtue of Faith, taught, that Justification is depending upon this virtue,
and consequently that a man by Faith, as a virtue, must be justified: and
because Repentance should be acknowledged as a Condition of eternal happiness,
beside the virtue of Faith, therefore they imagine that Justification may be
suspended even upon Repentance; so that we must believe, that Justification is
not only by Faith, but also by Repentance.

But, O my Brethren, ye are out of the way, ye have left your first love!
Remember therefore from whence ye are fallen, and repent, and do the first
works! Remember the former days and years! Remember your former Divines at the
beginning of the Reformation, Iuel, Whitaker, Perkins, and other glorious stars
once shining in your Country! Remember the Apology of your Church against
that harlot of Rome, written by that most excellent Divine J. Iuel B. of
Salisbury, and approved of your Fathers! Remember your Confession aggreeing
with all the Confessions of Reformed Churches, and confirmed in the days of Q.
Elisabeth An. 1562. by a Synodical decree; yea by the Parliament of your
Kingdom! Remember the former ages, when the Doctrine of Anselme and
Bradwardine Archb. of Canterbury against Pelagianisme sounded and obtained in
your Churches! Yea Bradwardine his book de Causa Dei opposed to the Cause of
men defended by Pelagianisme, printed first in this age An. 1616. in the days
of King James, who himself was a great Adversary to Arminian tenets, by the
care and study of George Abboth a worthy successor of that great Divine,
because he loved the Doctrine of Grace, and could not endure that Arminian
errors should infect the Church of England, to that time depending only upon
the grace of our Savior Jesus Christ.

But what great iniquity is it now to neglect this grace, and, leaving the
principles of Protestant Religion, to rely upon, and trust to our own works for
Salvation? My Brethren, how think ye to mingle the Law with the Gospel? the
Righteousness of Christ with your own? your faith, depending alone upon your
Savior, with your works? What will ye say, when you will dye, and this weighty
case of Conscience comes to be resolved, how shall my poor, guilty and sinful
Soul be justified before a Righteous God? How can ye thus prepare the way to
return, and lead your followers back again unto Babylon? What fellowship has
Righteousness with unrighteousness? or what communion has light with darkness?

Yet glory be to God in the highest, who has reserved by his grace many
Protestant and Learned Divines against all these and the like errors. And
hence we have the learned Labors of the worthy J. BURGES, J. OWEN. A. PITCAIRN
and other eminent Divines, worthy to be remembered in all ages. And to those
great Doctors we may very warrantably add the worthy Author of the following
Treatise Mr. JOHN BROUN, whose praise liv's deservedly in the Churches, and
whose light did for a considerable space shine here in our Low Countries, when
through the iniquity of the times, he was because of his zeal, piety,
faithfulness and good Conscience obliged to leave his native Land. Yet was he
not idle: for while he was here he wrote, with a great deal of wisdom, against
the Philosophers of this time, who would subject the Scriptures to Philosophy,
setting up humane Reason for a Rule of Scripture-Interpretations. Moreover, he
was known in our Churches by his Books of the Perpetual Morality of the
Sabbath, written with a great efficacy of Arguments, and approved by Fr.
Spanheym, that worthy and most famous Divine of our age; besides what other
Treatises he wrote in English. But we have here his work of Justification as a
Posthumus, full of Wisdom, Doctrine and Piety. The Author had committed the
care of it to his very intimate and dear acquaintance, the Reverend and Learned
Mr. JAMES KOELMAN, who, while he was alive, had the care of it at the press:
but before the work was perfected, he was called home to his Masters joy, after
he had faithfully served God in his generation. And I being now desired to
prefix the accustomed Ceremony of an Epistle to this excellent book of Mr.
JOHN BROUN, I undertook it most cheerfully with all my heart. For I must give
Testimony to the Reverend and Learned Author of this work, that he wisely
expounds the mysteries of Justification according to the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the principles often he Reformed Churches: that he confirms the
expounded Doctrine with efficacious arguments able to stop the mouths of all
Adversaries; that he prudently dissolves all their vain oppositions; that he
shows himself a true Christian Minister, and a Scribe well instructed by the
Holy Spirit unto the Kingdom of God. And therefore this excellent book was
worthy to be printed, to be esteemed and loved amongst the best Treatises upon
this great and weighty Doctrine of Justification. I need say no more, the work
will speak for it self, and the Judicious Readers oun experience will testify
that it is written in the Demonstration of the Spirit and Power, profitable for
Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, Instruction in Righteousness and Consolation of
penitent souls. I pray the God of all grace, that he would give the Readers the
Spirit of Wisdom and of a sound mind, that having the eyes of their
understandings enlightened, they may know what are the great mysteries of
Redemption, and may be sound in the Faith in order to this fundamental point of
Justification here expounded and vindicated, with this full persuasion of mind
that the Reformed profession is the true way of Salvation, able to save a
sinner eternally, according to the Covenant of Grace revealed in the Gospel.

MELCHIOR LEYDECKER. S. S. Th. D. and Prof.
Dabam Ultraj. 1 Apr. 1695. P. S.
Atque haec quidem ego Britonum Sermon, ut potui. Si quid commissum est culpae
adversus linguae genium, id condonandum Belgae est. Conari and imitari
exterorum linguam, eruditis haud vulgarem, satis erat. Interim si Latino
Sermon uti licuisset, pluribus Doctrinam Ecclesiae Reformatae de Gratia and
Justificatione explicuissem, ut forte horum animum moverem, qui prima Principia
ipsius Euangelii a Paulo ad Romanos, ad Galatas, ad Ephesios demonstrata
neglexerunt, ac deseruerunt. Nunc sufficiat ex Confessione Anglicana quosdam
Articulos notasse, in quos digitum Praefatione intendebam, uti habentur in
Corpore and Syntagmate Confessionum fidei, quae in diversis Regnis and
Nationibus, Ecclesiarum nomine fuerunt Authentice editae: Haec enim ibi medium
habet locum, quod cum caeteris accurate conveniret. Utinam tali haberetur hodie
veneratione, quali fuit habita antiquitus, quando decretis Publicis, Politicis
and Ecclesiasticis fuit sancita and roborata! Sic ergo habent Articuli, quos in
Anglicum Sermonem versos exhibemus.

X. Of Free Will. This is the condition of man after Adams fall, that by his
own Power, and good works, he cannot convert, and prepare himself to Faith, and
calling upon God. Wherefore without the grace of God, which is by Christ
preventing us, that we may will, and to operating, while we will for doing
works of Piety, which are acceptable, and well pleasing to God, we can do
nothing. XI. Of Man's Justification. We are only reputed Righteous before God,
for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, not for our works
and merits. For which cause the Doctrine of our being Justified by Faith alone,
is most wholesome, and full of consolation, as it is explained in the Homily
about man's Justification, at more length. XII. Of Good Works. Good works, which
are the fruits of Faith, and follow the Justified, although they cannot expiat
our sins, or endure the severity of Divine Justice; Yet they are pleasing, and
accepted by God in Christ and necessarily flow from a true and lively Faith; So
that plainly by them a vive faith can be known, as a tree can be judged by it is
fruit. XIII. Of works before Justification. Works which are done before the
Grace of Christ, and the influence of his Spirit, since they do not proceed
from the Faith of Jesus Christ, are not at all acceptable to God; neither do
they merit the grace, which many call congruous. Yea, because they are not done
according to Gods will and command, we doubt not, but they have the nature of
sin. XVII. Of Predestination, and Election. Predestination to life, is the
eternal purpose of God, whereby He, before the settling of the foundations of
the world, by his Counsel hid indeed as to us, Immutably decreed, those whom he
had chosen in Christ out of mankind should be delivered from the curse and
destruction, and (as vessels made to honor) brought to eternal Salvation by
Christ. Hence those who are gifted with this notable favor of God, are called
in due time, according to his purpose, His own Spirit working, they obey by
Graces call, are Justified freely, are Adopted to be the sons of God, and made
consorme to the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk holily
in good works, and in end, by the mercy of God, they come to eternal happiness.
As the pious consideration of our Predestination, and Election in Christ is
sweet, pleasant, and full of ineffable consolation to the truly Godly, and to
those, who find in themselves the efficacy of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying
the deeds of the flesh, and members, which yet are upon the earth, and by force
drawing the mind to things above, both because it does much establish, and
confirm our Faith of obtaining eternal Salvation, as also because it
vehemently kindles our love toward our good: So it is a very destructive
precipice to curious and carnal men, and who are destitute of the Spirit of
Christ, to have always the sentence of Gods Predestination proposed to their
view, whereby the Devil either presses them to despair, or into equally
pernicious security of a most impure life. Thereafter, the Divine Promises most
be so embraced, as they are generally proposed to us in the holy Scriptures,
and the will of God, which we have expressly revealed in Gods word, is to be
followed by us in our actions.
Atque hi quidem sunt Ecclesiae Anglicanae de Gratia and Iustificatione
Articuli, convenientes utique cum aliarum Ecclesiarum, praesertim Ecclesiae
Scoticanae doctrina, ^ti ex hujus Confessione Art. III. VIII. XII. XIII.
manifestum est.



THE LIFE OF JUSTIFICATION, Through faith, cleared, from Gal. 3: 11. For the
Just shall live by faith.
CHAPT. I.
The Introduction; and the text (the ground of this following discourse)
opened-up.
THe Doctrine of Justification cannot but be acknowledged by all, whose
thoughts are taken up about an interest in everlasting felicity, to be of great
concernment; and debates or Controversies about the same cannot be esteemed
vain and fruitless Digladiations, and Disputes about a thing of naught; seeing
in this lies the Ground of all our Hop, peace, and Eternal Salvation; and a
Mistake or Error, as to the Theorie in this matter, followed with an
answerable and corresponding practice, (I mean as to what touches the heart
and Substance of this Divine Mystery) may, yea must of necessity, prove not
only dangerous to Souls; but even inevitably destructive. Wherefore it cannot
be justly accounted blame worthy, that Churches and particular persons, who
woule be faithful (and so accounted) unto the grand-interests of Souls,
contend, with all earnestness, for the faith once delivered to the Saints, in
this particular; this being the true Basis of all Religion, and of
Christianity; without which there can be no access to, nor Communion with, God;
No peace with God, nor true peace in owr own Consciences; no life of Comfort
here, nor true hope of Salvation for ever here after; No change of State, nor
saving change of li^e and conversation; in a word, no life of Grace here, nor
of Glory hereafter: And what then must follow upon the corrupting of this
Truth, and upon Erroneous Apprehensions and practices herein, is abundantly
obvious to all such, as have not sinned away all sense and consideration, in
these matters.

Wherefore it is no wonder, that Satan has, in all ages, labored, by one
Instrument or other, upon one occasion or other, and under one pretext, or
other, to corrupt the pure streams of this wholesome Fountain of Truth, in
one Measure or other, in one particular or other; and that by such Mediums and
Arguments, as he knew would be most taking, and seem most plausible, at these
Several times, and upon these Several occasions. What way, and how far the
corruption of this Truth was advanced, in the Antichristian Church, is yet
known; and what ground, their error in this gave un to such, as began to be
enlightened in the knowledge of the Truth, to separate from them, and to appear
against them, is manifest: and what Effaies the Devil made, about the beginning
of Reformation, or shortly after, to darken this Truth, by Questions and
Disputes, even among such, as hold the Truth fast, as to the maine, and what
since, by Several New Opinions, or new Modes and Methods (as they were called,
and given out to be) vented, and improven by Several Artifices, to seeming
different Ends, he has effectuated; to the hardening of some, in their
Misapprehensions; and to the Corrupting of the Hearts and Minds of others; and
also the Staggering and Shaking of not a few, may be called to mind with grief
and sorrow; Not to mention the bold attempt, made by Socinians, to overturne
the whole Grounds of Christian Religion; and to take away at once all the
pillars of Gospel-justification.

The devil began early, in the breaking up of the clear day of Christianity, to
darken this Sun, that the poor Church might for ever abide in darkness, if the
Church, her Head and Husband had not provided a Remedy, and had not
effectually dispelled these Clouds: And he had no small advantage of the
corrupt Jews, who had a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, and had a
very Specious pretext of crying up the Law, prescribed by God himself, and of
Obedience thereunto, and constant observation thereof, in all points, to the
prejudice of the Gospel Truth, in the matter of Justification. And though the
first rise of this difference and debate was upon occasion of the Ceremonial
Law, which was the dispensation of the Grace of God, which the ancient Church
was under, while under Tutors and Governors, and in her Nonage state; and was
never rightly obeyed, or improven, but when in led them unto the promised
Messiah, Christ, the end of that law, in a peculiar manner, the Substance
thereof, and veiled thereunder; and which they might have known, was to be done
away, when Christ, the Substance of all those shadows, came in to the world,
in the due time appointed and foretold; and which, contrare to its very Nature
and End, to the many prophecies of old, and to the signal dispensations of God,
giving clear significations of his mind, touching the evanishing of these
shadows, the Jews, principled with false Conceptions about that Law, and with
prejudices against the truth of the Gospel, and animated and encouraged by
false Teachers, raised up of Satan, to corrupt the Doctrine of the Grace of
God, did strenuously contend for the constant Observation thereof, either
Solely, as a Sufficient ground of their Justification; or in conjunction with
the Gospel: Yet, because this tookalongs with it, the observation of all that
Law, which God had prescribed of old, as the only ground, in their mistaken
apprehension, of their Justification, and acceptance with God; therefore we
find the Apostle Paul (who was especially stirred up, and immediately inspired
of the Spirit, to vindicat the Gospel-way of justification from this
corruption; after he had been singularly fitted thereunto, by being in so
signal a manner brought to embrace this Truth, (who was formerly so zealous for
the Law, and against the Gospel in all points) prosecuting the controversy to
the full; and not only handling it in reference to the immediate Rise and
occasion thereof; but in reference to that also, where-unto of necessity it
must have come, and where it must have landed, at length.

And though there have been few, since those days, and none at present, who
will contend for the Observation of the ceremonial Law, in the sense, and for
Ends, urged by the jews, and jewish false Apostles, in the primitive times;
yet we must not think, that therefore all the Doctrine of the Apostle hereanent
is if no use to us. Many debates and discourses had the Apostle, beside what we
have recorded of him in Scripture; and to think, that his Disputes and
Discourses, in his Epistles, concerning Justification, are of no more
concernment to us, as to the question about justification, because none now
adays, plead for justification by the observation of the ceremonial Law, as
did the jews, against whom Paul Disputed, is, in my judgment, no small
imputation upon the Spirit of the Lord, inspireing the Apostle to write these
Epistles, and putting them into our Canon: and of this such, in my apprehension
must be guilty, who think to wave all the Apostles Discourses, in this matter,
with this, that he is only to be understood, as speaking and Disputing against
such, as criedup the constant observation of the Ceremonial Law, as such.

But, whatever circumstantial differences, whether as to the Rise or occasion,
or as to other things of the like Import, there may seem to be, or may really
be, betwixt the Disput, as then stated, and as now prosecuted; Yet all the
Disputes and Differences about the Maine and Essentials of justification, as
also about inferior and subordinat Questions, in so far as they depend upon,
or are influenced by the Maine, will be found to be, upon the matter, one and
the same, whether managed of late or of old: For different Terms and
Expressions may be, where the matter and thing so expressed, is really one and
the same. And therefore, as we are to observe with thankfulness the Lords love
to and care of His Church, in providing and preserving, for the use and
Edification of the same, in all ages, to the end of the world, such a necessary
Depositum; and His wonderful wisdom in inspireing His Amanue^ses so to write,
as not only to refell the Error, in all its Circumstances and Branches, as it
was then broached, to the darkning of Gospel Light; but so also as the Truth
might remain full cleared, confirmed and saifguared against all the assaults
of Satan, in all time coming, by whatever Instruments, and under whatsomever
new Notions, Distinctions, Terms of art, Expressions and pretenses, the same
may come (...) be attacqued: So are we to acquaint our selves well with the
Doctrine of the Spirit of the Lord, in this matter; to the end, we may be fully
instructed in the Truth, and enabled, to maintain the same, and fortified
against all new Assaults; or, rather, old Assaults renewed, howbeit managed by
seemingly new weapons, and new filed Instruments and Arguments.

It would prove long and tedious, to handle at length (and to touch in short,
upon them, may seem to some to be but superficiary work) all the various
controversies, that are on foot this day, about the matter of justification;
and a short discovery of the truth, in this matter, as to the most principal
things controverted (to which others may be so reduced, as a Scriptural
discovery of the truth, as to those, may serve for a discussion of the rest; at
least, so pave the way, that a solution of these Inferior Controversies may be
the more easy) may therefore be sufficient to such, at least, whose
Edification and Instruction we mostly Intend here; that is, Such, as are not in
case to improve what is written of Controversies, in Scholastic and abstruse
terms. And, I judge, who ever handle this Controversy, in such terms only,
or mostly, as are above the reach of ordinary Christians, who are herein as
much concerned, as others, miss that mark, which they should mainely aim at,
that is, Edification and Instruction of such, whose high concernment this is;
and who have most need to be plainly instructed in this foundamental point of
Truth, a Practical mistake in which may prove to them deadly and destructive;
and especially of such, who, when under the pangs of an awakened Conscience,
and under the convictions of sin, and fears of wrath, pursueing for sin, are
then most ready to take any course that may seem to promise present ease and
relief; and to be led away from Christ, the only peacemaker, through the
slight of Satan, and the deceitfulness of their own heart; and through
Ignorance of, or Misinformation about the true Gospel-way of Justification and
peace with God; whereby their Ease and Relief may prove more deadly, than was
their Distemper and Disquiet. As therefore, I Judge, this concerning Truth
cannot be made plain enough; so I think, the less use be made of Philosophic
or Scholastic terms (which none but such as are well versed in these dry
Nations, can competently understand; and which, though never so handsomely, set
off, will prove very unsatisfying to awakened Consciences) it will be so much
the better; seeing, let men please themselves in them, as they will, as they are
not the language, the Spirit of the Lord has thought good to use in this
matter so they darken rather, than clear the matter, at least to me.

The Apostle (that we may in short clear the words, upon which we are to
ground our Discourse) in this verse. 11. after other Arguments, formerly adduced
to prove the Thesis, which he laid down Chap. 2. verse. 16. to wit, That a man
is not Justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ; he
brings another Argument from Scripture, after he has again repeated the one
half of the grand Thesis, by which the other is suffificiently understood, and
more emphatically included in the probation, or Testimony of Scripture adduced,
saying,

Gal. 3: 11. But that no man is Justified by the Law, in the sight of God, it
is evident; for the just shall live by faith. HE does not explain what is
meaned by that word, Justified; but presupposes that there was no doubt,
concerning the true meaning thereof, among those, with whom he had to do, in
this Disput: as Indeed none, that consider what is the constant use thereof, in
the Old Testament, (well known to the Jewish Teachers) yea and in the New
Testament also, can doubt of its true Import, how ever Papists do quite mistake
its true Nature and Import, supposing that it signifies an Inward Renovation,
or Infusion of Holiness; and so make it the same with Sanctification. But as no
man, acquainted with the Scriptures, and with what is said of justification in
them, can be ignorant of its right meaning; so every man, exercised with the
sense of his own natural condition, and of the curse of the Law, under which he
feels himself lying, according to what is here said, in the foregoing verse,
readily understands, what it is to be justified and freed from that curse and
Sentence of Condemnation; and so made free from the wrath that he is liable
unto, because of the broken Law of God: So that we need say no more of it here.

He says, No man is Justified by the Law; and so, makes no exception of any
what somever, no not of the holiest mere Man, that ever existed since the fall:
and this is of the same import with that expression Chap. 2: 16. No flesh; for
by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. So he has the same
expression Romans 3: 20.

It is here said, by the Law; in the original it is, in the Law: but the sense
is the same with that expression Chap. 2: 16. thrice repeated, by the works of
the Law. The Ethiopike Version here is rather a short Commentary: for there it
is; They are not justified doing the command of the Law. It is observable, That
the Apostle uses variety of expressions, in this matter, all tending to clear
this one thing. That there is no justification by the works of the Law; so as
no color or show of evasion might be left unto any. Romans 3. 20. he says
(...), by or out of the works of the Law; as also Gal. 2: 16. And Romans 3: 28.
(...), without the works of the Law; they having no consideration therein. Romans
4: 2. (...) by, or out of works. So that there is no justification by the Law,
nor by works; nor by the works of the Law: all which expressions are used to
signify one and the same thing. And in the following verse, he takes the Law,
and doing of them, that is, the commands of the Law, for one and the same
thing. Those that were looking to the Law for justification, he says of them
verse 10. That they are of the works of the Law and chap. 4: 21. -- Ye that
desire to be under the Law. This elsewhere viz Phil. 3: 9. he calls his own
righteousness, which it of the Law: and Tit. 3: 5. works of righteousnoss,
which we have done- and Romans 10: 3. their own righteousness and Romans 9: 31. the
Law of righteousness. But what Law is this, by which, he denies, that any can
be justified? The forementioned Expressions do Sufficiently clear, what Law he
means, even all that Law, that was the Rule of Righteousness, and was
prescribed of God, as such; and not the Ceremonial Law only: that Law, by the
works whereof he denied ( Romans 4: 1, 2.) that Abraham, the father of the
faithful, was justified. That Law, in obedience to which consisted that
righteousness, which the jews labored to cause stand; and that righteousness,
which himself desired not to be found in: That Law, which was called the Law of
righteouness: That Law, which the Gospel establishes Romans 3: 31. In a word, it
is that Law, whereof he speaks, in the preceding verse, that is, that Law,
the transgression of which, in the least particular, brings the sinner under
the curse, according to that saying. Cursed is every one, that continues not
in all things, which are contained in the book of the Law, to do them Deuteronomy. 27:
26. And here also we see the Law and the book of the Law, are one: and sure,
this book of the Law contained more, than the Ceremonial Law, even all the
Moral Commandments; in respect of which and not in respect of the Ceremonial
Law, the Gentiles, and amongst the rest, these Galatians, at least, so many of
them, as had not yet Judaized, were of the Law, and so, under the curse. It is
obvious, how useless all the Disput of the Apostle here, and in his Epistle to
the Romans, is rendered by asserting, That Paul's Disput runs only upon the
observation of the Ceremonial Law; seeing now the very Subject of the debate is
taken away from us. And, if matters be so, I would feign know, why the Apostle
should have used any other Argument, in all his Dispute, beside this one, That
by the Gospel, the subject of the question is wholly removed; the Ceremonial
Law being utterly abrogated by the Gospel? Sure, this would have Sufficiently
put an end to that debate. But this Supposal is, I confess, a short cut to
answer all the otherwise unanswerable Arguments of the Apostle against
Justification by works, but yet it is such, as cannot yield satisfaction.

He adds, in the sight of God, (...), which is the same, upon the matter,
with that expression Romans 3: 20* (...), in His sight; whereby we understand,
what justification this is, whereof the Apostle speaks; even; justification
before Gods Tribunal, in His Court, who is the Supreme and Righteous judge; as
it is with Him alone that the poor convinced and wakened Sinner has to do: And
this is the justification, that we are most concerned to know the nature of,
and to understand what way it is brought about, or to be had: This is the
justification, which the Apostle always denies to be by works, and asserteth
always to be by faith, in opposition to works. As for a justification of our
selves against the false Accusations of Satan, the unjust Surmises of our own
treacherous Hearts, and misinformed Consciences, and the groundless
Alleigances of men, judging not according to truth, but according to their own
mis-apprehensions (whereof Job's friends were guilty, in an high measure) It is
not that justification, whereof the Apostle treats. And whatever Interest
good works may have herein, as real fruits of an upright working faith, and
consequenly as evidences of our Interest in Christ, and of our being in a state
of justification; Yet they are utterly excluded from having an Interest in that
justification, which is before God, and in His sight: and here, Christ's
Righteousness, Laid hold on by faith, only takes place.

The Argument, whereby the Apostle disproveth this justification by the works
of Law, in the sight of God, is in the following words, where he ushereth-in
the argument with an, It is Manifest, (...); to show, That the Argument was
irrefragable, and that the truth thereby was certain, and beyond
Contradiction. Now, the Argument is taken from the opposition, that is betwixt
Faith, and the Law, or, the works of the Law, in the matter of justification: A
ground, whereupon the Apostle goes, in his whole Disput, upon this matter; as
we see Romans 3: 27, 28. and 4: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 9: 32. Gal. 2: 16. and
therefore it must be a certain truth, That if justification before God be by
faith, it can not be by works; and consequently, whoever assert justification
by works, destroy Gospel-justification by faith: and hence, it is also
Manifest, That justification cannot be by both together, Faith and works
conjoined; because what is of faith cannot be of works; these two being here
inconsistent Romans 11: 6.

That Gospel-justification is by faith, the Apostle proves from that known
sentence, the just shall live by faith; a sentence, which the Apostle adduced
first of all, when he was to handle this question, in his Epistle to the Romans
Chap. 1. verse 17. saying; for therein (i.e. in the Gospel) is the Righteousness
of God revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the just shall live by
faith. Where we see, that this Sentence confirms the whole nature and
contents of the Gospel, that is, That the Righteousness of God, i.e. the
Righteousness, which only will stand in Gods Court, and be accepted of him, in
order to the justifying of sinners; and which is the Righteousness of one, who
is God, is revealed from faith to says; that is to say, is hold forth to be
embraced bysinners through faith, first and last; and this Righteousness, thus
embraced and laid hold on by faith, is the only ground of the life of
justification: so that believers their living by faith, says, their faith
laith hold on the Righteousness of God, revealed in the Gospel, as the only
ground of their life.

As to the passage it self, it is cited our of Habakuk chap. 2. verse 4. where
the Prophet being told verse 3. that howbeit sometime would pass, ere the
promised delivery should come; Yet it would come; and that therefore he and all
the People of God, should wait for it, and live in the certain expectation
thereof, adds these words, as being told him of the Lord, that his Soul,
which is lifted up, is not upright in him (how variously and these words are
rendered by diverse, we need not mentione) the meaning is this, That such, as
will not, in faith and patience, wait with confidence upon the Lords promise,
that shall be made good, in His good time; but in their pride and impatience of
heart, will think to anticipate their delivery, by sinistrous and sinful
means, declare, that their heart is not upright, and that they are void of
true faith. Upon the other hand, it is said, the just shall live by his faith,
that is, Such, as are real and true believers, will wait in the exercise of
faith, till God's time come; and by this faith, trusting and leaning to the
faithful promise of God, through the Messiah, in whom all the promises are yea
and amen 2 Cor. 1: 20. they shall have a life of it, they shall be carried
through, supported, strengthened and com^orted. And much to this same Purpose,
is this passage, cited by the Apostle Hebr. 10: 37, 38. For yet a little while,
and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, now the just shall live
by faith etc. (of which we have spoken elsewhere) in all these places, the
Apostle leaves out the pronoun his, which the Prophet uses; but that makes
no great alteration, the matter being clear, and that sufficiently understood.
The Septuagints make a great alteration, when they render the words thus, The
just shall live by my faith.

The great difficulty is, how these words of the Prophet, spoken of such, as
were already justified, and believers; and his saying of them, that they shall
live by their faith (for we need not own that sense of the words; which some
think may not improbably be given, to wit, That he, who is by his faith just
(or justified) shall live) can be applicable to the Apostl'es purpose, to prove
justification by faith. Not to mentione what others say to this, nor judging it
very necessary to enquire anxiously into this matter, seeing the Spirit of the
Lord's moving and inspireing of Paul to alleige, and apply this passage of Old
Testament truth, for confirmation of what he was about to prove, may fully
satisfy us, as to its pertinency, though we should not satisfy all by
proprosing our thoughts concernin it. ^ Conceive, the ground may be this, That
this being a general truth, and universally true, that even believers, who are
already changed, and have a life begun in them, must all their life long make
use of faith, gripping to the promises, as yea, and amen in Christ, (promised
and come) who is the Substance and Kirnel of them all, to the end they may be
supported, Strengthened. Upheld, and carried through Difficulties, Distresses,
Darknesses, Temptations and the like, without fainting, or doing what is
unbeseeming a living Believer, in the day of trial; so that their whole life,
even unto the end, is kept-in and continued by faith, bringing new supplies and
influences from the head, through the promises; it will hence follow, that
without faith no man can at first attain to this life, and change from death;
yea, that in this case, faith is much more necessarily requisite, yea faith
only without works is and must be, the only way to justification of life: for
if the progress, and continuance of this life, or renewing of it after decays,
be had by faith, drawing sap, life and influence from the head, much more must
this be the way of getting the first change made from death to life. And this
way (or not much different) of argueing in this same debate, we see the Apostle
follows Romans 4. where from what was said of Abraham, a considerable time
after he was a believer, he proves justification by faith, without works, or
that Abraham was justified by faith, and not by works. The Import then of the
Testimony is, that this life, whereof believers are made partakers, is begun,
continued and carried on by faith, and therefore it is not by the works of the
Law, but by faith, that they are justified and brought into a state of life; If
it be true, that without faith, even belevers cannot be supported, nor in case
to live, as becomes, to the glory of God, and to their own peace and Comforth,
in new Trials and Difficulties; much more is it true, that without faith those,
who are in nature, and in state of Enmity to God, cannot live the life of
justification, and with it alone they can and shall.

Before we come to speak particularly to any Truths, deducable from the words,
we shall premise some few things considerable.

CHAP. II.
Naturally we are inclined to cry up Selff, in Justification.
THe Apostle, as we see, in all his writtings about this matter, is very
careful to clear the question of justification so, as Man may have no cause
of boasting, or of glorying in himself, upon the account of any thing he has,
or he has done in order to justification; that hereby he might cast a copy
unto all such, as would approve themselves faithful unto the Lord, in being
co-workers with Him, in the Gospel; and that he might so much the more set
himself against that innatelusting of heart, that is in all naturally, unto an
exalting and crying up of Self, in the matter of their justification before,
and Acceptance with God; and especially we find, how zealously, how
frequently, and with what strength and multitude of Arguments, he sets
himself against, and cries down that, which men do so naturally, and with such
a vehement byasse, incline unto; to wit, justification by their own works, or
by their own obedience to the Law; to the end, their innate pride may have
ground of venting it self, in boasting and glorying before men.

From this we may premit, in short, the consideration of these Three things, to
prepare our way unto the clearing-up of the Gospel-Doctrine in this matter.

First. That there is a corrupt byasse in the heart of men by nature, and a
strong Inclination, to reject the Gospel-Doctrine of free justification,
through faith in Christ; and to ascribe too much to themselves, in that
affair: as if they would hold the life of justification, not purely of the
free grace and rich mercy of God, through Jesus Christ; but of themselves,
either in whole, or in part, in one measure, or another.

Secondly, That it is the duty of all, who would be found faithful Ambassadors
for Christ, after the example of the Apostle, so to preach forth the Grace of
God, in this mystery, and to explain the same, as corrupt Nature within, and
such without, as are biased with mistakes about this matter, and are led away
with proud and carnal self conceits, may have no apparent or seeming ground of
boasting; nor be confirmed in their natural prejudices and Mistakes therein.

Thirdly, That in very deed, free Gospel-justification is so contrived and
ordered as that none have any real ground of boasting, or of glorying in
themselves, or of ascribing any part of the glory thereof unto themselves, as
if they, by their deeds and works, did contribute any thing to the procuring
thereof.

It will not be necessary to speak to these at any length, but only briefly to
touch upon them, to make way unto what follows to be said on this weighty
subject, which is of so much concernment to us all.

As to the First of these (to which we shall speak little, in this Chapter, and
thereafter of the rest, in their due order) it is too too apparent to be a
truth from these grounds following.

I. This is most manifest from the many Errors and false opinions, that are
Vented, Owned and Maintained, with so much Violence and corrupt zeal, and all
to cry-up Self, in less, or in more; and to cry down Grace. Hence so many do
plead, with great confidence, for an Interest of our works, in our
justification; Such as Papists, (who quite mistake the nature of true
justification) Socinians, Arminians, and Others, who side with these in less,
or in more; and will plead for a justification by our inherent Righteousnoss,
or works of Righteousness, which we do. Others, that will not plead for such an
early Interest of our works, in this matter, will plead for faith, as our
Gospel-Righteousness; and affirm, that the very act of our Obedience in us, is
imputed for a Righteousness to us, and is accounted such by God; and so, has
the same place in the New Covenant, that compleet and perfect obedience had in
the Old Covenant of works, made, with Adam; which, as shall hereafter appear,
drives us upon the same rock.

II. It is manifest likewise from the large and frequent Disputes about this
matter, that we have in Paul's Epistles. If there had not been a great pronness
in man, by nature, to cry-up himself, and to set up his own Righteousness, in
matter of justification, why would the Spirit of the Lord have been at so much
pains (to speak so) to cry down Self and our works, in this matter, as He is,
in these Epistles of Paul, if He had not seen the great necessity thereof, by
reason of this strong Inclination, that men Naturally have hereunto? We must
not think, that any thing is there spoken in vain; or that the Spirit of the
Lord would have left that Doctrine so fully cleared, wherein our works are so
expressly excluded, if there had not been a necessity for it, and if it had not
been as necessary, in all after ages of the Church, as at that time, when first
written. Whatever the truth be, that is so frequently and pungently inculcated
in the Scriptures, we may saifly suppose, that as the faith and practice of
that truth is necessary; so there must be much reluctance of Soul in us to
receive the same, and to close with it, and a strong Inclination to believe and
practice the contrary.

III. In the Infancy of Christianity, we see, what a strong Inclination there
was to cry-up works, what we do, and the Law, as the only ground of
justification; or, at least, to have a share with Christ, in that Interest,
which gave occasion to the penning of these Epistles of Paul, where this matter
is so fully and clearly handled; particularly that to the Romans, and that to
the Galatias; and unto the speaking less or more hereunto, in almost all his
other Epistles. And this Inclination to the crying up of works and the Law, in
Opposition to the pure Gospel-way of justification, was not only among the
Gentiles, who had been without God, and without Christ, and all the Means of
understanding any thing of Salvation, through a slain Savior; but even
amongst the Jews, who, by the Dispensation of the New Covenant, which they
were under, might have been better principled; for it was they, who most urged
the Interest of the Law, and of works, and thereby^ labored to corrupt the
Gentiles, and to lead them off the simplicity of the Gospel Truth; and of them,
says the Apostle Romans 10: 3. that, being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, they have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God. They sought after a Righteousness
another way, than by faith in Christ, who is the end of the Law for
righteouness, to every one that believes Romans 10: 4. but as it were by the
works of the Law Romans 9: 32.

IV. The Pharisee, who went up to the Temple Luke 18: 11, 12. and prayed thus
with himself God, I thank thee, that I am not, as other men are, Extortioners,
Unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican: I fast twice in the week, I give
Tithes of all that I possess, etc. has many followers. Many there are, who
will have confidence in the flesh, and in what they do. Nature never taught
Paul, to account all his great Privileges and Seize loss and dung; but
rather to account them gain; for he says, they were gain to him; that is,
while he was a stranger to the Gospel, and to the Grace of God, manifested
therein. Hence is it, that the last are first, and the first are last; such, as
thought themselves far advanced, and to have attained a great measure of
righteousness, and so to be children of the Kingdom, are shut out, and
Publicanes and Harlots are preferred, as being willing to renounce themselves
and their own righteousness more, than such Legalists and Iusticiaries, who
confide in something, which they themselves do, and have attained.

V. This is also manifest from the great difficulty of prevaling with such, as
seem to themselves to have in them something more than ordinary, to relinquish
and renounce these things, and to betake themselves only unto Jesus, and to
rest on Him alone, for Righteousness, Life and Salvation; and from the little
fruit that the Gospel Doctrine finds among them. How many subterfuges find
they out, under which they think to shelter themselves from the wrath of God?
How many fig leaves do they sow together, that they may cover the shame of
their nakedness withal? And at what cost, pains and charges are they, in
seeking to establish their own Righteousness? And all to fortify themselves in
their own delusions, and to keep our the pure Doctrine of the Gospel. And how
ready are some to take hold of the smallest wig, that they may hang upon it,
and find relief, if it can yield but the least ground of hop, in their
imaginations, ere they betake themselves to Christ according to the Gospel? How
many Fetches, Turnings and Windings has a Soul, pursued with wrath, and the
apprehension of death, ere it be willing to close heartily with Christ, offered
in the Gospel? Yea, if such, as have had some wakenings, come so far, as to
change something of their former outward sinful courses, and be not so loose
and profane, as formerly, how ready are they to sit down, even upon that bit
of negative righteousness? Much more, if they be brought the length, to go
about some religious duties, how will they then sit down and sing, as if all
were well? All which do plainly evince, that there is a strong Inclination in
us by nature, to follow the way of works, that we may have some share of the
honor of our own justification.

VI. This sad truth is hence apparent likewise, That when any Opinion is
broached, that but seems to give more to works, than ought to be given,
though possibly upon the matter, there be but little said, that may make any
real Difference, how ready are many to close therewith, to entertain that
Doctrine, to cry it up and commend it, and to improve the Advantages, real or
supposed, there had, to the fur^er Confirmation of that Anti-evangelik error,
which their Soul's fully comply with: when, upon the other hand, there is such
a nauseating in many too too manifest, at the Simplicity of the Gospel, and of
the Doctrine of justification by faith alone in Christ.

If it be enquired, whence does this proceed? or what can be the true causes
hereof? I answer, Many things have a powerful Influence into this, as.

I. The Natural Enmity unto all the ways of God, that each has, as a piece of
his heirship from Adam: What ever God wills, we will not, yea we will nill;
though our nilling of it be against ourselves, and we have no reason for it.
There is a Spirit of Contradiction and Enmity to God in us all by nature, that
we neither can, nor will comply with God's ways, and with what tends to set
forth His Glory. It is marked of the Jews, that they stumbled at that
stumbling stone, Jesus Christ, who was the end of the Law for righteousness, to
all such as believe Romans 10: 4. and 9: 32. They had such a prejudice at Christ,
and at the way of Salvation through Him, that they brake their necks upon Him,
who only was the rock of Salvation.

II. The innate darkness of Men's minds, touching themselves, and all the
things of God, especially the Mysteries of Salvation, is another cause of this
Opposition to the Gospel-way of justification. They neither know their own
hearts, nor their own ways and doings; nor are they acquainted with the holy
and righteous Nature of God, nor with the nature of His Laws and Commandments
etc. They know not, I say, the Corruption of their own Natures and the innate
wickedness which is there, which neither is, nor can be subject to the Law of
God. Hence ordinarily such as err, in this matter of justification, do
intertaine erroneous apprehensions about Original sin, and our innate Pravity;
as do all the S^cinians, Papists, and many Arminians and others. So they are
ignorant of the Law of God, not knowing how Holy, Good and Spiritual it is; and
how it obliges the whole man, Spirit, Soul, Judgment, Understanding, Will,
Affections and Memory; and all the out ward Man; condemning the least sin, in
Thought, word or deed, and commanding the highest pitch of holy duties, and
right Principles, Ends and Motives etc. And hence they see neither Omissions of
what is commanded, not their Commissions of what is prohibited, whether as to
their Nature, Multitude, or other Aggravations; and the ignorance of this
makes them to see less the necessity of a Righteousness without them; and to
seek for it with less earnestness and zeal: whence it comes to pass,
ordinarily (as is to be seen among Papists) that such as are most for works, in
justification, shape the Law according to their mind, and curtaile it, as did
the Pharisees of old, that it may look more conform to their works, when their
works are no way conform to it. So likewise, they are ignorant of god, and of
His Holiness, and Righteousness; and because they see, that if He be Such, as
the Orthodox say He is, according to His Word, they cannot stand before His
justice; therefore they deny His justice altogether, as do Socinians; or
Imagine Him to be all Mercy etc. and so imagine Him to be altogether such an
one, as themselves; and therefore are not very zealous for any other
righteousness, than what may come most readily to hand, and they themselves can
make up with their own diligence and care; never remembering, that the justice
of God must be satisfied; therefore deny all Satisfaction (as do Socinians;) or
suppose Christ has satisfied for all, and procured a New Covenant, or way to
life, wherein we may bring what we have, and it will be accepted, and there is
no more to do: Nor remembering, that we must have an Interest in Christ by
faith, ere we have any Interest in His Merits and Satisfaction; and that the
whole of our Salvation is so contrived, as Man may be abased, and Christ only
exalted.

III. A vain conceit, that all things in Religion must be just as we
apprehend them to be; and our blind, corrupt and biased Reason and
Understanding must be the Supreme judge and Determiner of all these Mysteries.
Hence the Socinians downright say that (...) the Scripture say what it will,
and how often it will, they are to believe and to receive nothing, but according
to their Reason: so that, what their blinded Reason cannot comprehend, they may
and will reject. And others, who possibly will not so plainly lay down this
ground; Yet in stead of conforming their judgments and Apprehensions to the
word, and of being led by it, do frame a conception of the Matters of God, in
their own heads, and then cause the Scriptures comply with their Apprehensions,
by Interpreting them accordingly. So that following a corrupt guide here, they
cannot but incline to that way, which suiteth most with that corrupt Principle;
and be most averse from compliance with the Mystery of God, which is most
opposite there-unto.

IV. Natural corrupt self love is another evil Principle, concurring to this
effect, by its malignant Influence. We love to cry-up ourselves, to have
something of our own to boast of, and to glory of before men; and hence we
cannot naturally comply so sweetly with that way, which takes away all
boasting, and leaves no ground for man to glory in any thing, save in the
Lord; and such is the way of faith, and of Gospel-justification Romans 3: 27 and
4: 2.

V. A vain and groundless high conceit, that people have of themselves, and
of what they do, as if there were worth and excellency in it, to oblige God, to
bestow upon them, what reward they think meet; not knowing, that when they have
done all they can, they are but unprofitable, and that they have nothing but
what they have received; and that for any good they do, they are more beholden
to God, than God is beholden to them; and that the best of their actions are so
defiled, that they could not answer for one of them, nor stand, if God should
enter into judgment with them, and strickly mark iniquity Psalm. 130: 3 and 143:
2.

VI. Pride of heart is another malignant cause of this Aversation and
Unwillingness, to comply with God's way; and of this strong Inclination to the
way of justification by Works. This was it, which led the jews away from
Christ, the end of the Law for righteousness: they would not submit themselves
unto the righteousness of God Romans 10: 3. and because they would not bow
themselves to take on this Righteousness, therefore they were at so much pains
and labor, to establish their own, and to cause it stand. Proud man would
work, and enjoy the reward of his labors, and will not willingly hearken to
any other way. he will not be beholden to free Grace, nor ascribe glory to the
Lord Mediator; but will still be at the old way of the first Covenant, at work
and wages; that he may have it to say, he has erned and purchased the crown of
life with his own hands and industry.

Therefore, from this we should all take warning, to look about us, and to
guard against this strong and violent torrent, that is ready to carry us
headlong to our ruin; and to be jealous of our treacherous hearts. Hence also
we may see, whence it comes, that the Gospel gets so little footing among
many; and how nothing less than the mighty power of God, will be able to
prevail with a Natural Soul, and cause it comply with the Gospel-way of
justification, and submit it self unto the Righteousness of God, and hold on
Christ by faith. Further, We need not wonder to see, so many riseing-up, in all
ages, against the Gospel of the Grace of God, and corrupting the
Gospel-Doctrine of justification, seeing blinded and unmortified Man is not in
case, to be cast in its mould, nor willing to embrace it, until he be broken,
and broken over again.

CHAP. III.
The Doctrine of justification should be kept pure with all diligence; and
what dangerous expressions should be shunned.
WE come next to speak a word unto the Second particular mentioned; to wit,
That all, who would be found faithful Ambassadors, and be accepted of the
Lord, should endeavoure, both in practice and in Doctrine, to keep this
doctrine of the Grace of God pure and unmixed: and particularly guard against
the giving ground, or occasion to proud Nature, to cry-up Self, in the matter
of justification, by any expression, used in the explication thereof. We see
here and elsewhere, how careful Paul is in this Matter, using such expressions,
as may most emphatically exclude man, and all his pains, and set free grace on
high, that God alone may be exalted; for here and elsewhere he debaseth man,
and excludes all his works, even the works of the best of men; even his works,
who was the father of the faithful: and he cries up Christ as all, and free
grace as beginning and carrying on all; consonant to what the Prophet Esaias
said Esai. 45: 24, 25. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness
and strength (or, as it is in the Margin, Surely, he shall say of me, in the
Lord is all righteousness and strength) Even to him shall men come -- In the
Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. So that such,
as look to Him (as it is verse 22.) and come to Him (as it is verse 24.) have all
their righteousnesses in the Lord, and from Him; and in Him alone are they and
shall they be justified, and shall glory; and not at all in themselves. So
Jeremiah Chap. 23: 6. expresses the matter very emphatically, holding it
forth, as one of Christ's glorious and comfortable Titles of honor, that He
shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness, thereby Importing, that all the
Saints their righteousness, in order to their justification before, and
acceptance with God, was in Christ; and that it would be a robbing of Christ of
His due honor, to seek for a righteousness else where. So Chap. 33: 14, 15. it
is promised that the Lord will cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up
unto David, and that hereby Judah should be saved, and Israel should dwell
saifely: And it is further said, that His spouse should wear her husbands name,
and be called after Him, the Lord our righteousness; thereby professing her
adherence to Him, as her Husband, and her owning of Him, as all her
righteousness, and glorying in that, that He and He alone is her righteousness.

In compliance herewith, we should beware of expressing our conceptions, about
the matter of justification so, as may give proud man ground of boasting, and
of robbing Christ of His Crown, Title and Glory, in less, or in more: and these
expressions following seem to me justly chargable herewith.

I. To say, That all works are not excluded in justification; but such only as
are done by the mere Power and Strength of Nature; and not the works of Grace,
wrought by the Spirit. But who sees not, how this is to set up proud Man, whom
Paul would have debased and kept down? And does not Paul expressly tell us, that
neither Abraham, nor David were so justified Romans 4? And that if our father
Abraham were justified by works, he should have had, whereof to glory, though
not before God verse 2? And does he not also tell us, that this would make the
reward to be reckoned not of grace, but of debt verse 4? and would exclude faith
and its operations, in reference to justification, and take away that blessed
and refreshful style of God, that He justifies the ungodly verse 5? Should we
not thus be saved by works of righteousness, which we do, and not according to
His mercy, expressly contrary to Tit. 3: 5.

2. In like manner to say, That we are not justified by the works of the
Ceremonial Law; but by obedience to the Moral Law, is peccant here also: for
the works of the moral Law are works of righteousness, which we do, and such as
obey this Law, and are considered as such, cannot be called ungodly. Neither
does the Apostle thus distinguish, that proud man might have any Interest. Nor
does he exclude only such works, when he says, that Abraham was not justified
by works; for his works were not works of the Ceremonial Law, but of the Moral,
which will as well give ground of boasting, and make the reward of debt, and
not of grace, as works of the Ceremonial Law, if not more. And it is manifest,
that Paul speaks of that Law (and of obedience to it, or of works commanded
by it) which convinces of sin, and discovers it Romans 3: 20. and 7: 7. and
makes all the world guilty Romans 3: 19. and brings them under the curse Gal.
3: 10. is established by faith Romans 3: 31. and has the promise of life annexed
to it Romans 10: 5. Gal. 3: 12. Nor does he exclude only such works, when he
speaks of himself Phil. 3: 9.

3. Likewise to say, That all works are not excluded, but only Outward works,
which are done out of Principle of fear, and not out of love and faith, and are
not inward works of grace; is to add Fuel to this fire of pride, and to
please proud Self, and proud Man: for who can think, that only such works,
would lay the ground of boasting, and of glorying before men? or that only such
would make the reward of debt? or that any in these days were pleading for
justification, upon the account only of such works? or that such works were to
be understood by the Law, as if the Law did command no other? or that such were
Abraham's works? or that Paul thought of none other, when he desired not to be
found in his own righteousness Phil. 3: 9?

4. They are guilty of the same crime, who say, That Paul only excludes the
jewish Law: for if thereby they mean only the Ceremonial Law, it is manifest
from what is said, that hereby Self and Man shall be much exalted, when
justification is made to be by, and according to the works of the Moral Law. If
they mean thereby the Judicial Law, then justification should be by obedience
to the Moral Law; yea and by obedience to the Ceremonial Law, as well as by
obedience to the Moral Law, quite contrary to the whole discourse of the
Apostle. And if they mean all the Law, that was given to the jews, then the
Moral Law is included: and so all works are excluded, which are done in
obedience to any Law of God.

5. It is no less injurious to truth, and favorable to proud Self, to say with
Socinus, That Paul only excludes perfect works, done in full conformity to
the perfect Law of God; but not our Imperfect works, which through grace are
accepted, and accounted our righteousness: for even these works being works of
righteouness, which we do, would not exclude boasting, but give ground of
glorying before men. Neither did Abraham, or Paul, or any other Saint suppose,
that their works were perfect. Nor is it Imaginable, that any in these days
did plead for justification, by their own works, upon the account, that they
were perfect, and wholly commensurat unto the Law. Nor does Paul insinuate, in
all his discourse, any such Distinction, or give any ground to think, that
Imperfect works should be the ground of justification, when Perfect works are
not. And all this is grounded upon this gross mistake, That by faith, which the
Apostle opposes to works, is meaned our Imperfect Obedience unto the Commands
of God.

6. It is injurious, upon the same account, to say, That Paul only excludes
such works, as are accompanied with a conceit of merit, and none else: for he
excludes all works, without any such Distinction, even the works of Abraham,
(who, doubtless, was far from any such fond conceit, to think, that his works
were meritorious) and all such works, as give ground of boasting before men,
though not before God. And who will say, that even Adam's works, performed in
Innocence, had any proportion, in the balance of commutative justice, or would
merit at God's hand, ex condigno? And yet, sure, such works would have made
the reward of debt, according to the Compact. Yea, the Apostle, in his way of
argueing, supposes, that works cannot be mentioned in this case, without
merits; so that merit is inseparable from them. And shall we think, that Paul
Phil. 3: 9. meaned, by his own righteouness, only such works, as he expressly
accounted meritorious? Or that he could, or did account any of his works such?

7. It runs far in the same guilt, to say, That faith it self, which is our
work, and considered as our act of obedience, is Imputed to us for
righteousness, and is that righteousness, upon which we are justified: for how
easily might proud Self lift up its head, and boast and say, it was justified,
because of some thing within it, or because of one work of righteouness, done
by it: and so glory in it self, and not in the Lord? for though it were
granted, that faith were the gift (...) God yet that would not sufficiently
keep down pride, seeing such, as plead for justification by good works, will
also grant, that these good works come from the Grace of God, and are wrought
by the Spirit: and yet such a justification would lay a foundation of boasting,
and of glorying before men; and some would have more ground of boasting, than
others, because of their stronger faith: And justification by this way, would
as well be opposite to justification through Christ, and His Imputed
righteousness, and by Grace, as justification by good works; for faith here
would not be considered, as bringing-in and laying hold on a Righteousness
without, the Righteousness of Christ imputed; but as a commanded duty, and as a
piece of obedience to the Law; and would as well make the reward of debt ex
congruo, and ex pacto, as if justification were by works.

8. It is of the same Nature, to say, That Paul excludes the works of the Law,
but not the works of the Gospel: for the same ground of pride, boasting and
glorying should be laid, that would be laid, by pleading for the works of the
Law: because these are still works of righteousness, which we do, and so
opposite, in this matter, unto mercy, Tit. 3: 5. And Paul, to exclude all
boasting and glorying before Men, opposes faith, (not considered in it Self,
but as laying hold on the Righteousness of Christ, and as carrying the Man out
of himself to Christ for Righteousness) unto works; and not Gospel-works unto
works of the Law. And, sure, we cannot say, that none of Abraham's works were
Gospel-works, or works required in the New Covenant, seeing even then he was a
believer, when the object of his faith, or that which he laid hold on by faith,
in the Gospel, which was preached unto him, was said to be imputed unto him for
righteousness. And is it not plain, that if justification were upon the
account of Gospel works, that God should not then be said to justify the
ungodly; seeing he, who is clothed with a Gospel righteousness, cannot be
called, or accounted an ungodly person? And yet faith looks out unto, and laith
hold upon a God, that justifies the ungodly Romans 4: 5. In a word, the
asserting of this would be the same, upon the matter, with asserting of
justification by the works of the Law: for what ever is required in the Gospel,
is injoined by the Law; and so is an act of obedience to the Law, which is our
perfect Rule of Righteousness, and all our obedience must be in conformity
thereunto.

9. It must also be accounted dangerous, for puffing-up of Self, to say, That
we are justified by our Inherent Righteousness: for then the Man could not say,
that all his righteousnesses were as filthy rags Esai. 64: 6. Nor could that be
true, which is Psalm. 143: 3. for in they sight no man living should be
justified, to wit, if God should enter into Judgment with him. Why should Job
have abhorred himself Chap. 42: 6. if he had a righteousness within him, and
had been justified by the Lord, upon the account of that inherent
righteousness? And had not Paul as good ground, as any, to assert his
justification by his personal inherent holiness and righteousness? Yet we hear
of no such thing out of his mouth; but on the contrary, his accounting all
things but less and dung, that he might gain Christ, and be found in His
Righteousness, has a far different import. How proud might man be, if he had
it to say, that he was justified in the sight of God by works of Righteousness,
which he had done, or by his own inherent righteousness?

10. Nor will it much help the matter, to say, That this Inherent Righteousness
is not the price laid down, but only the Condition, or Causa, sine qua non, or
the like: for still man would hereby have some thing to be proud of, and to
glory of before men; because, he would have it to say, that his own Inherent
Holiness was as well the ground of his justification, and the Condition
thereof, as Adam's obedience would have been the ground of his justification.
And who knows not, that Self can wax proud, and be puffed up, upon a smaller
occasion, than is this? And is it not strange, that Paul never once made
mention of this distinction? Shall we think, that Paul denied Abraham to have
been justified by works, because Abraham looked upon them, as the meritorious
cause, and not as the Condition only of his justification? or that Abraham
indeed did so? or that Paul included them, as the condition of his
justification, when he said, he desired not to be found in his own
Righteousness, meaning, not his own righteousness as a price, or as the
Meritorious cause of his acceptance? Why should David have spoken so
absolutely, and said Psalm. 143: 2. enter not into judgment with thy Servant;
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, seeing, even though God
should enter into judgment with His servants, they should be justified, as
having fulfilled the condition? And why should he have said Psalm. 130: 3. If
thou, Lord, should mark iniquities; o Lord, who shall stand? seeing, though
the Lord should mark iniquities, yet where the Person has fulfilled the
Condition, and has a Personal Inherent Righteousness to hold up, as the
fulfilling of the condition required, he is in case to stand in judgment, and
to plead for his justification, and absolution, upon the account of his
performing all the condition required: And would not vain man have great
ground of boasting here?

11. Neither yet will it prevent this boasting, to say, That this Inherent
Righteousness is but a Subordinat Righteousness, whereby we have right unto the
Merits of Christ, which are the Principal Righteousness, answering the
demandes of the Law: for if man have any thing in himself, that can be called a
Righteousness, though but a Subordinat Righteouness, and yet such a
Righteousness, as gives right and ground to justification, though that
justification be also called, only a subordinat justification, conform to the
New Covenant, and the Condition thereof, he will soon boast, and account his
justification not of free grace but of due debt, conform to the covenant: And
though this be called, only a Subordinat Righteousness; yet proud Self will
account it the Principal; because upon it depends all his justification; for
thereby not only has he a right unto Christ's Merits, but unto justification
it self; this being called the proper condition of the New Covenant, wherein
justification, Adoption etc. are promised (as they say) upon this condition.
And will not proud Man see, that he has a price in his hand, and a compl^^^
Righteousness, conform to the Covenant, to present unto God where-upon to
seek and expect the reward of debt, according to the covenant? And so much the
rather should we abstain from such expressions, in this matter, that we find
no mention made of two fold Righteousness, and of a twofold Justification; the
one subordinat, the other Principal, in the Scriptures; but all expressions, in
this matter, framed designedly to abase man, and make all appear to be of free
grace, that he, who glories, may glory in the Lord. And as Self will be ready,
in this, to make that, which is called a Subordinat Righteousness, a Prinpal
Righteousness; so it will have this fair and plausible ground to do so; to
wit, That upon our own Righteousness, we are Immediately accepted of God, as
Righteous; especially when the Merits of Christ are made subservient unto our
personal Righteousness, as procuring the New covenant; and that therein our
Personal Righteousness shall be accepted, and accounted perfect and compleet,
though it be not so in it self, and we thereupon immediately justified, and
accepted of God, as Righteous; as they love to speak, who assert these things.

12. Though faith be indeed the mean of our justification, that is, the only
thing required of us, in order to our Interest in Christ, and actual
participation of the benefits of His Redemption, and of justification in the
first place, according to the Gospel method: Yet it is too favorable to proud
Self, to call it such a Condition, as has a far more dangerous Import; That
is, (1.) To call it a Condition, and withal deny, that it is an instrumental
Cause, or that it is to be considered, in the matter of justification, as it
laith hold on Christ, and His Righteousness. (2.) To say, that the very act of
faith, or the (...) credere is imputed for Righteousness; and that Paul is to
be so understood Romans 4. as speaking properly, and not metonymically (3.) To
say, that this is the Righteousness, which is imputed to us, in order to
justification, and not the Righteousness of Christ, except as to its Effects,
in respect of some whereof, Yea the chief and only immediate, it is equally
Imputed to all, Reprobat, as well as Elect. (4.) To say, that this faith is our
Gospel-Righteousness, and because a Righteousness, is perfect, and adequate to
the Rule of the New Covenant. (5.) To say; that this faith has the same place
and consideration, and consequently, the same force and efficacy, in the New
Covenant, that perfect obedience had in the Old Covenant with Adam. (6.) To
say, that Christ has purchased the New Covenant, and that this shall be the
condition of persons partaking of the benefits thereon: and withal (7) To
say, that Christ has died for all, and by his death made Satisfaction to
justice for the breach of the Law; and so purchased freedom from the Curse of
the Law to all, equally, at least conditionally; whereby it is apparent, that
all are put in statu quo prius, in the state, they were once in, and that
equally; and now have new conditions proposed unto them, which, if they
perform, they are righteous, and upon that performance are freed from the
Curse, and made heirs of Glory: and thus the New Covenant is of the same Nature
and kind with the Old, only its Conditions are a little altered, and made more
easy; and their Performance of the condition must-have a (...) with it, at
least, ex pacto, though not ex condigno, as neither Adam's Perfect obedience
could have had. And the performers of this condition, in this case, may reflect
upon their own deed, and lay their weight on it, and, it being their
Righteousness, may plead upon it, as their immediate ground of right, before
God, unto justification, and Acceptance. Let any man now consider these things,
and see whether or not, the asserting of faiths being such a condition, as
this, be not a plain gratification of proud Self, and the laing down a ground
for vain man to boast, and of glorying, though not-before God, yet before
others; And whether this be not an ascribing more to faith, than is done by
such, as, yielding it to be a condition, of the mean appointed of God, and
required of us, in order to justification, say with all, that it is to be
considered not in it self, nor as an act of our obedience; but as an
Instrument, or mean laying hold upon the Righteousness of Christ without us,
that it may be ours, and our only Righteousness, where upon we may expert,
according to the Gospel justification and absolution, etc.

13. It tends too much to blow up proud Self, to say, That if works of
Obedience be not the Condition of our first justification, yet they may be
called the Condition of our Second justification, or of the Continuance of our
justification: for, as the Scripture speaks nothing of a Second
justification; so to assert our works to be the Condition thereof, is to cross
the argueings of the Apostle, and manifestly to lay a foundation of glorying
for Man: for if even Abraham had been justified by works, a considerable time,
after he was first justified, and first a believer, he should have had, whereof
to glory, though not before God, as says the Apostle Romans 4: 2. And verse 3. he
proves that he was justified by faith, and that after he had been a believer;
for that passage, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness, was not spoken of and at his first believing; and so cannot be
properly meaned of his First justification only; but some years there after:
and therefore must be true, of his Second justification, if there were any
such; Yea, the just lives by faith (a passage that the Apostle uses (as we
have seen) to prove justification by faith, both here in our Text, and Romans 1:
17.) all alongs, both first and last; so that the beginning and continuance of
this life of justification is by faith, and not by works.

14. It is also dangerous, to say, That the work of the Law, convining of sin,
with the Effects and Consequences thereof, Sorrow, grief, Anxiety, Legal
Repentance, etc. are either Dispositions, Preparations, or Conditions of
justification, or Meritorious thereof by way of Congruity; as if there were a
certain and constituted connection betwixt these and the blessing of
justification, made by any Law or promise of God; and as if none could be
justified, that had not these sensible and affecting Effects going before.
Sure, the asserting of this cannot but contribute much, to stir up and foster
pride in Man, and give occasion to think, that man himself has done or
suffered something, that calls for, procures, and, in congruity at least,
meriteth justification.

CHAP. IV.
Justification is so contrived, in the Gospel, as man may be abased, and have
no ground of boasting.
THirdly, we come to speak to the third thing mentioned above, to wit, That
justification is so contrived, begun and carried on, that man has no real, or
apparent ground of glorying before men, or of boasting in himself. A few
particulars will sufficiently clear this.

I. The Lord's ordinary and usual Method, in bringing His Chosen ones into a
justified State, is first to convince them of their Sin and Misery, by setting
home the Law, and wekening their Consciences; as Paul does Doctrinally follow
this method, when he is about to cleare-up, and explain the truth, about
Gospel-justification, in his Epistle to the Romans; where in the first place,
he convinces all of Sin, both jews and Gentiles Chap. 1. and 2. and 3.
concluding verse 23. That all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God,
and verse 9. he gives an account of his foregoing Discourse, saying, we have
before proved both jews and Gentiles; that they are all under sin. And again
verse 19. that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God. Now this work of Conviction lays the sinner low before God; for
thereby the Man is discovered to himself, to be undone in himself, to be under
Sin and Wrath, under the Sentence of the Law, having his mouth stopped, and
having nothing to plead for himself, neither by way of Extenuation, nor of
Apology; and having nothing in himself, wherewith he can come before the Lord,
to make Atonement for his Transgressions, and to make Satisfaction to justice:
And thus the man is made to despare in himself, as being irremediably gone and
undone, if free grace prevent him not.

II. Whereupon the man is made to renounce all his former grounds of Hop, and
Confidence, all his former Duties, good works, civility, Negative Holiness, and
what else he placed his Confidence in formerly; Yea all his Righteousnesses are
as filthy rags, and accounted as loss and dung. So that he has nothing within
himself, as a Righteousness, that he can expect to be justified by, before God;
but on the contrary, he finds himself under the Curse, and that what he
thought before to be his Righteousness, is now, by the light of the Law, and
the discovery he has of his natural condition, found to be sin and iniquity
before God; and therefore to be so far from bringing any relief unto him, that
thereby his anxiety is made greater, and his case more desperate.

III. The way of Gospel-justification is so contrived, and the wakened man
(whom God is about to justify) is now convinced of it, that Man must be
abased; for he is now made to see, that he is empty and poor, and has nothing
to commend him to God, no Righteousness of his own to produce; nothing within
him, or without him, except the alone Righteousness of Christ the Mediator and
Cautioner, that can stand him in stead; Nothing of his own must here come in
reckoning, neither alone, nor in conjunction with the Righteousness of Christ;
for what is of Grace, must not be of works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace
Romans 11: 6. Christ must have all the glory, and he, who glories, must glory
alone in the Lord. And therefore is Christ made Righteousness unto us. 2. Cor.
1: 30. and is become the Lord our Righteousness Ier. 23: 6. And all His must
say, That in the Lord, they have righteousness Esai. 45: 24.

IV. Nothing, that preceedeth faith, no motions or workings of the Law, no
legal Repentance, and the like, have any infallible connection with
justification; nor are they any congruous disposition thereunto, or a Condition
thereof, there being no promise made, that all such, as are convinced and
awakened, and have some legal terrors and works of the Law upon their
Spirits, shall certainly be justified; and experience proving, that several,
who have had deep convictions and Humiliations, have, with the dog, returned to
their vomit, and become afterward worse than ever, does also confirm this. So
that, after the deepest legal Humiliations and works of Terror and outward
Changes, and the like Effects of the Law (though when they are wrought by the
Lord, intending and bringing about the Elect sinner's Conversion and
justification, they have this kindly work upon the heart, to cause the Soul
more readily and willingly listen to the offers of Salvation and Mercy, in the
Gospel; and to submit to the terms and Method, which God has, in His great
wisdom and mercy, condescended unto, as to the actual Conferring and bestowing
of the blessings, purchased by Christ, for His own chosen ones) justification
is an Act purely of God's free Grace, undeserved of them, on any account; and
an act of His mere mercy and Love. So that they are justified freely by His
grace, through the Redemption, that is in Christ Romans 3: 24.

V. Unto this justification, their good Works are not required, upon what
somever account: for good works must follow justification, and not preceed it.
They must be first accepted through Christ, before their works of holiness can
be accepted. The whole Gospel does most plainly exclude works of the Law,
under whatsoever Notion, Qualification, or Restriction, as we manifested above,
and shall more manifest hereafter: Yea, all works, upon what somever account,
are excluded, as opposite to justification by faith, through Jesus Christ. The
man, who had no more to say, but God be merciful to me a sinner, went home
justified, when he, who said, God, I thank thee, I am not as other men, nor as
this Publican, etc. did miss that Privilege. Paul has so directly and
plentifully proved, that no man is justified by works, that we need say no more
of it; and therefore, in this matter of justification, man has no ground of
boasting, but must glory in the Lord alone.

VI. As without a Righteousness no man can be justified before God, because His
judgment is always according to truth, and He will pronunce no man Righteous,
who is not so, or who has no Righteousness: And as no man has a Righteousness
of his own, and in himself, that will abide the trial of God's judgment; for if
He should enter into judgment, with any that lives, they should not be able to
stand before His judgment seat, and be justified; but all, who are justified,
are in themselves ungodly, and void of all Righteousness, that can ground a
sentence of absolution from the Condemnation of the Law: So it is the
Righteousness of Christ, as Mediator and Cautioner, which is to them the only
ground of their absolution and justification; and this Surety-Righteousness of
Christ is imputed to them by God, and they are clothed therewith; and being
considered as clothed there with, are pronounced Righteous by the Lord, the
righteous judge, and dealt with as such. So that all the Righteousness, which
is the ground of their absolution from the Condemnation of the Law, is without
them, in another, who was appointed their Cautioner: and therefore all
appearance of any ground of boasting in themselves, is quite taken away by the
Law of faith Romans 3: 27. and the reward is now wholly of grace, and not of debt
Romans 4: 4.

VII. Though faith, and faith only be required of us, in order to our having
Interest in Christ and His Righteousness, and to justification therethrough;
Yet this leaves no ground of boasting unto man, or of glorying in himself; for
it is in it self a plain solemn Declaration of the Believers Sense,
Conviction, and Acknowledgment of his own Beggarliness. Poverty and Nakedness,
and of his being a dyvoure and non-solvendo, haiving no Righteousness of his
own, and renounceing all that is in him, in order to his own justification;
and, as it were, a swearing of himself bare; and a laying hold upon a
Righteousness without him, even the Righteousness of Christ, who is the End of
the Law for righteousness to every one that believes Romans 10: 3, 4. and
resting upon it; and a producing of it, as the ground of his Absolution, in
face of court, to his own shame, and to the glory of his Cautioner So. far is
it from being the man's Righteousness, that it is a plain and open declaration,
that he has no Righteousness, but must go to Christ for a Righteousness. And
so far is the believer from reflecting on it, as his Righteousness, and from
darring to present it to God, as his Righteousness, and plead for absolution
upon the ground thereof, as if it were perfect, and a full Righteousness,
according to the Gospel; that he only thereby says, in the Lord have I
Righteousness; and he looks upon it, as most weak and imperfect; and, being
encouraged by the free promise of God, he laith hold on Christ, with the
trembling and weak hand of faith, which he has; and ostentimes, so far is he
from having any confidence in his faith, that with much doubting and
hesitation, he, as almost despairing of being the better thereby, seeing no
other outgate, or remedy, ventureth, with a peradventure, he may be saved so,
and that how ever he can but perish. How far, such a soul, that is fleing to
Christ for refuge, is from conceiveing any ground of boasting in himself, is
sufficiently plain, and the sense and experience of all, so exercised, can
declare.

VIII. Even this Act of the soul, looking out, going to, gripping and laying
hold upon Jesus Christ and His Righteousness, held forth and offered in the
Gospel to all self condemned sinners, despairing in themselves, is not of
themselves; it is the gift of God Ephesians. 2: 8. The Spirit of Jesus boweth and
inclines the soul hereunto, and determines the doubting man unto this choice,
and makes him willing, whether it be in a lesser, or in a greater degree, to
flee to Christ for shelter, from the storm of wrath, and to be saved from the
Curse: And though the soul, in the mean while, be not in case to observe and
take notice of the powerful workings of grace herein; Yet afterward he is in
better case to see it, and to celebrate the rich and free grace of God, who
has visited him in his low condition, and began a work in him and never left
him, until he landed him in Christ, in whom was all fullness, and he found he
was complete, and through whom he obtained that delivery from wrath, which he
was seeking after, merely out of his wonderful free grace and mercy.

CHAP. V.
In Justification there is a State of life.
HAving premised these three particulars, not unworthy of our consideration,
and serving to prepare the way unto what follows to be spoken unto; we come
more particularly to handle the words, and to see what may be drawn out of them
for our Information and Edification, that we may be instructed concerning the
nature of this noble Privilege, and concerning the way, how it is brought
about, and persons may be made partakers thereof, as also stirred up unto a
right Improvement of the truth herein, whether we be already made partakers
thereof, or are yet strangers thereunto.

We Intend not (as we hinted at the beginning) to touch upon, far less to
discuss at lenghth, all the many and perplexed controversies, that are moved,
both of old and of late, by men of different Principles and persuasions. Nor do
we intend to handle the several Arguments, which the Apostle adduceth for
confirmation of the Truth, in this matter, But our purpose only being to touch
upon, and, at least, to endeavoure the clearing of some of the Principal
Questions, moved in this matter, in reference to the forementioned ends, we
shall satisfy our selves, at present, with speaking to such particulars, as
the Text will give ground for.

The words having been cleared, and the Scope of the Apostle declared, which
cannot be hid from the eyes of any, who will read the purpose, there are only
two things, which call for our Consideration; First The Conclusion, which the
Apostle is disproving and confuting with a manifesto; to wit, That no man is
justified in the sight of God by the Law, or by the works of the Law. Next The
argument, which the Apostle makes use of, to this end; for the just shall live
by faith.

The Apostles way of argueing here, and elsewhere, with the same, or the like
Argument, whereby he stateth an Inconsistency, yea an Opposition, betwixt
justification by the Law, and justification by faith, says, that it will not
be very necessary to speak much to that, which is here the Apostles Conclusion;
that is, to clear, that justification is not by the works of the Law: for the
clearing of justification by faith will enforce that of it self. We shall not
therefore insist upon that, howbeit we may in end, consider, what is said by
some for justification by works, and what way such think to shun the odium, of
manifestly contradicting the Apostle, and of maintaining that Error, which he
sets himself so peremp^orily against, as acted by the Spirit of God.

The Principal thing then, which we have here to do, is to consider the Import
of the Apostles argument, for the just shall live by faith, yet we are not to
consider these words, in their just length and breadth, nor particularly, in
reference to the use, which the Prophet Habbakuk makes of them. Hab. 2: 4. and
this same Apostle Heb. 10: 38. (of this we have spoken elsewhere) But only in
reference to the use, which the Apostle here makes of them, in clearing up the
way, how justification is brought about. And considering them in this respect,
we will have two things only to take notice of; First The assertion of
justification by faith. Next The Influence, that this assertion has into the
Apostles Conclusion; to wit, That therefore justification is not by the Law,
nor by the works of the Law.

In speaking to the First, we will have occasion to speak both to the
beginning, the nature and ground of this change, made in justification, as also
to the continuance of that state of justification. And then we will have
occasion to show, how both the beginning and Continuance of justification is by
faith: for as the sinner at first becomes just, or is brought into a justified
state by faith, so is he carried on and continues in that state of life, to
the end: this being always true, that first and last, the just lives by
faith; faith begins, and faith carries on this life, until the justified
man be glorified.

The Apostle (that we may come to speak something to clear the nature of this
State of justification) is asserting justification by faith, to cry down
justification by the Law, or by the works of the Law, which some false Teachers
were persuading those Galatians to believe; and he adduceth a passage of
Scripture, which says, the just shall live by faith, thereby giving us to
understand, that the just man, or the justified man, is a living man; for the
just lives. And it is too narrow, to interpret this life, of eternal life;
and this would make the Apostles argument very obscure; we must therefore
unde^stand it of a life begun here, which shall certainly end in glory: and
this is most consonant both to the Prophet's scope, and to the scope of the
Apostle here.

Whence we may gather, That in justification by faith, there is a real life
obtained: by justification the soul^ is brought into a new state of life; and
by it, such, as were really dead, are really made alive. This may be further
cleared from these particulars following.

I. Such are said to be born again Job. 3: 5. not only by the Spirit, which may
import Sanctification, but also by Water, which may import Justification,
wherein iniquities are pardoned, and the Soul is washen from its guilt, through
the blood of Jesus Christ, represented by the Water in Baptism. Thus are they
also put into a new state, being delivered from the Power of darkness, and
translated into the Kingdom of His dear Son, Col. 1: 13. Christ now owneth
them, as His, and Satan has no more power and jurisdiction over them, their
guilt being removed, and their sins being pardoned: for, because of sin has
Satan, as a jailour, had power over them, as so many prisoners, but sin being
taken away, in their justification, they are loosed from his bonds, and
delivered from his prison and power. We see Paul was sent Act. 26: 18. To open
eyes, and to turn from darkness to light, and from power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, etc.

2. Hereby they are brought into a State of Salvation, and being out of harms
way, they are said to be saved, being now in a State of life and Salvation,
through Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2: 5, 8. For by grace are ye saved through faith:
and how was this? It was by Christ, together with whom they were quickened;
when before they were dead in sins and trespasses, v. 5. So Tit. 3: 5. Not by
works of rigteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. But how was
this work of Salvation begun? See verse 7. That being justified by His grace, we
should be made heirs, according to the hop of eternal life. So that as
justification makes way for Adoption; so it brings Souls into a saife state,
a state of Salvation; so as they, in a sense, are already denominated, saved;
that is, brought out of the state of death, and put into a state of Salvation:
Thus are they also said, to be quickened together with Him, (i. e. Christ)
having forgiveness of all their sins, Col. 2: 13. This will be further clear,
if we consider how

3. Those, who are justified, shall certainly be saved, not only in respect of
the Decree and purpose of God; but in respect also of the Gospel constitution,
and the declared will of God. Therefore says the Apostle Romans 8: 1. There is
therefore now no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus. And all such,
as are in Christ Jesus, are justified; as the Gospel clears. And again more
clearly, verse 30. And whom he justified, them he also glorified. The connection
betwixt these two is indissoluble. So does the Apostle not only assert, but he
confirms this, Romans 5: 9. Much more being now justified by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath through Him. And again, verse 17. For if by one man's
offense death reigned by one, much more they, which receive abundance of
grace, and of the gift of righteousness. (That is, who welcome, embrace and
receive the rich offer of grace, and the rigteousness of Christ, freely and
graciously presented in the Gospel to all that will accept thereof) shall
reign in the life by one Jesus Christ. So likewise, verse last. That as sin
has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ, our Lord.

4. They who are justified, are brought into a state of blessedness, and
therefore may well be said to live, or to be made partakers of a life, Romans 4:
6, 7, 8. Even as David also describes the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness, without works; saying, blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord
will not impute sin. See Psalm. 32: 1, 2. If then they be brought into a state
of blessedness, they must be a in a state of life; for death and blessedness
are inconsistent.

5. They are said to be redeemed; and consequently brought out of the state of
death, wherein they were, Ephesians. 1: 7. In whom we have redemption, through his
blood, the forg^veness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. In and by
justification is this forgiveness of sins, whereby they are made partakers of
a redemption. See Col. 1. 14. Where the same is asserted by the Apo^^le.

For further clearing of this, let us see wherein this life consists; and
then we shall not only see, that it is really a life, but also, that it is a
special and excellent life. To this end therefore, let us consider these
following particulars.

1. Hereby they have Remission and pardon of their Iniquities, as was now
cleared, and is manifest from Romans 3: 24, 25. Being justified freely by this
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation for the remission of sins, that are past, etc. And by this
Remission and pardon of sins, they have a freedom and exemption from the Curse
and wrath of God, that was lying upon them, and to which they were obnoxious by
sin and guilt, Orginal and Actual, which they were to be charged with, that
being the penalty threatened in the Law, even death and the Curse of God; for it
is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in
the Law, to do them, Gal. 3: 10. Deuteronomy. 27: 26. O how excellent a life is this,
to be delivered from the wrath of the Almighty, sinrevenging God, and from the
Curse and malediction of the great Legislator, and dreadful Judge? How rightly
may they be said to live, who are freed from the sentence of death, to which
they were liable; from the penalty of the broken Law of the great God of Heaven
and Earth; and from that doom, that all, who shall not share of this rich
privilege of Remission, shall be made to hear at length, depart from me, ye
Cursed, etc. A person guilty of death, and lying in chains, looking for
nothing but the sentence and doom to be given out against him, would think
himself a living man, if in stead of that sentence, which he was every hour
looking for, he should hear of a free and gracious pardon. Much more may this
state of Remission be looked upon as a state of life. (2) They are hereby freed
from that death, Slavery and Tyranny, which the Law did exercise over them
before, and does exerce over all such, as are not yet justified, for as the Law
discovers sin, Romans 3: 20. So it works wrath Romans 4. 15. And thereby has
dominion over a man, binding him over in chains, as it were, unto the wrath and
Curse of God. But Christ has now delivered them from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for them, Gal. 3: 13. And they by faith having fled to him,
are pardoned, and the Law has no more to say, especially seeing it is satisfied
by the Cautioners being made a Curse, and having fulfilled it in our Nature and
place, Romans 8: 3, 4. Thus are they freed from and dead to the Law by the body
of Christ, Romans 7: 4. O what a noble, sweet and refreshing life is this, to be
free of this Slavery and Bondage, whereby the Law is always lying about the
neck of the poor sinner, the Curse and wrath of God, as often as he sins. And
add to this (3.) That they are freed from the just and well grounded managment
of the Law against them by Sa^an, or a wakened Conscience. I say, just and well
grounded managment; for I grant, the Devil and a misinformed Conscience can
bring forth the Law, and terrify therewith a true believer, by charging, him
with the transgressions thereof, even after these transgressions are pardoned;
but this is unjust and illegal; and the believer is under no obligation to
acknowledge these Charges, or to admit them, but, on the contrary, to reject
them, as being groundless, and contrary to the tenor of the Gospel. But the
unbeleever and unjustified Soul is laid open to all these fearful charges and
dreadful challenges, to all those summons, that are as so many poisoned darts,
shot into his very heart, every one of which is a death to him, which he sees
not how to evite. Must not then this be a considerable and noble heavenly life,
to have sin pardoned and thereby be freed from these Soul-affrighting,
Heart-pierceing, Conscience-burning and Mind-tormenting Acculations, Charges,
Libels, and Dittayes, brought home and delivered by the wicked Accuser of the
Brethren, and a wakened enligtened Conscience? Must there not be many lives in
this one?

2. Hereby they have peace and Reconciliation with God, being justified by
faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5: 1. God was in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5: 18, 19.
They are now reconciled, Romans 5: 10. So Col. 1: 20. And, (having made peace,
through the blood of His cross) by Him to reconcile all things unto Himself.
Herein also they have received the Atonement, Romans 5: 11. And the Enmity is
abolished, Ephesians. 2: 15. And slain v. 16. So that the enmity on both hands is
taken away; they are reconciled unto the Lord, who before were alienated and
enemies in their minds by wicked works, Col. 1: 21. And the Atonement being
made, the wrath of God is apaced toward them, and that Law-wrath, under which
they did formerly lie, is quite removed, and they are no more looked upon, nor
dealt with as Enemies, but owned and regarded, as reconciled friends. And who
can express the good and sweet of this life? or who can conceive what an heaven
lies wrapped up here? How justly may he be accounted a dead man, who is an Out
lawer and a Rebel to God, who tastes nothing of the Kindness and Friendship of
God, gets nothing from Him, as from a Friend, but all as from an Enemy,
even all the outward favoures he enjoys in the World; how great and glorious
so-ever they be, in the eyes of men? And, on the other hand, how happy is he,
and how justly and deservedly may he be called a living man, who can call God
his Friend; go to Him as to a Friend; receive all from Him as from a Friend,
how inconsiderable so-ever in the eyes of the World the things be, which he
gets. This is a life, the Good, the Advantage, the Joy, the Comfort, the
Peace of which, who can express?

3. Hereby they are absolved and acquitted from all, that could be justly laid
unto their charge: for justification in Scripture, is expressive of a juridical
Act of a just Judge, absolving a person from the guilt laid to his charge, and
from the sentence of the Law, due upon the account of that, where with he was
charged; and never does denote a making of righteous by infusing of
tigteousness, or by making any real physical change within, whatever Papists
say, as we see, Deuteronomy. 25: 1. 2 Samuel 15: 4. Prove. 17: 15. Esai. 50: 8. 1 King.
8: 31, 32. Ex^d. 23: 7. Mat. 12: 37. Luke 7: 29. and 16: 15. And in multitudes
of more places. O! what a life is here, when a poor self-condemned sinner
stands before the Judge, the righteous Lord, and has his sins charged upon
him, and the Law brought forth, cursing every transgressour, for every
transgression, and justice appearing against him, calling for the execution of
the sentence, according to Law, and for death and vengeance due by Law; and
upon all this can look for nothing but doom and present execution of the
dreadful sentence: what a life, I say, is it for such a sinner; standing in
this posture, to have a sentence of absolution pronounced, and be openly
declared righteous, and not worthy of death, or free of the charge given in
against him: and thus is it with Believers, according to the Gospel
constitution; for though they have sinned, and come short of the glory of God,
in themselves; yet now they are justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, and that by faith, Romans 3: 22, 23, 28. Gal.
2: 16. Though they were Unrighteous, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers,
Effeminat, Abusers of themselves with mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards,
Revilers, and Extortioners; yet now they are justified, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, 1 Cor. 6: 9, 10, 11. God justified the Ungodly, Romans 4: 5. The
Circumcision by faith and the Uncircumcision through faith, Romans 3: 30.

4. The ground of this sentence of Absolution, passed upon them, or in their
favors, will more manifest both the Reality and Excellency of this life.
Though they in themselves have been, and are sinners and ungodly, and cannot
plead not guilty, nor adduce any ground in themselve where upon they can plead
Exemption from the penalty of the Law; but as they stand guilty in Law, so they
stand convicted in their own Consciences, their mouths are stopped, and they
are become guilty, Romans 3: 19. They know and acknowledge that they have sinned,
and come short of the glory of God verse 23. and so can expect nothing, but
death and destruction, if the Lord should enter with them in jugdment, and mark
iniquity, Psalm. 130: 3. and 143. 2. Yet, the judgment of the Lord being always
according to truth, Romans 2: 2. Such as He pronunceth Righteous, and absolveth
from the sententence of the Law, as such, must be Righteous; for to justify
the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17: 15. And seeing they are not,
neither can be Righteous, in themselves, nor have a Righteousness of their own,
which they can present to justice, and in which they can appear before God, who
is a righteous Judge, they must needs have a righteousness from some other; and
this is a Surety-righteousness, the righteousness of the Mediator and
Cautioner, Jesus Christ, Imputed to them, and received by faith: and being
clothed with this noble rob of Rigteousness, with Christ, who is the Lord our
Righteousness, and bears this Name and Title, Ier. 23: 6. And who is made of
God unto us Righteousness. 1. Cor. 1: 30. They may be looked upon as living
indeed. In the Lord have they righteousness, and upon this account, in the Lord
are they justified, and shall glory, Esai. 45: 24, 25. This is the
Righteousness of God, without the Law, which is witnessed by the Law and the
Prophets; the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto
all, and upon all them that believe. Romans 3: 21, 22. This is that faith, or
object of faith, that was imputed to Abraham for righteousness, Romans 4: 3, 5,
9. And the righteousness, that God imputes without works verse 6, 11. This is
the righteousness of faith, through which the promise is, verse 13. This is the
righteousness, that shall be imputed to all, who believe on Him, that raised up
Jesus our Lord from the deed. verse 24. This is the free gift by grace, which is
by one man, Jesus Christ, that has abounded unto many, Romans 5: 15. This is
that abundance of grace, and gift of righteousness, which believers receive,
whereby they reign in life, by one Jesus Christ, verse 17. And that
righteousness of one; by which the free gift come upon all believers, unto
justification of life. verse 18. And the obedience of one, by which many are
made righteous, verse 19. And that righteousness, through which grace reigns
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ, our Lord, verse 21. This is the righteousness
of the Law, fulfilled in us, by Gods own Son, whom He sent in the likeness of
sinful flesh, Romans 8: 2, 3. This is Gods righteousness, to which the Jews
would not submit, but went about to establish their own righteousness: for
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes,
Romans 10: 3, 4. It is that righteousness, which is of faith, which the Gentiles
have attained, who followed not after righteousness; and which Israel did not
attain to, though they followed after the Law of righteousness, because they
sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, for they
stumbled at that stumbling stone, Romans 9: 30, 31, 32. By this are Believers
made the righteousness of God in Him, who, though He knew no sin, yet was made
sin for us. 2 Cor. 5: 21. This is that righteousness, which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness, which is of God by faith, Phil. 3: 7, 8, 9.
which Paul desired only to be found in, and that in opposition to his own
righteousness, which is of the Law; and for which he did account all things,
which formerly were gain to him, to be loss and dung. Now, what a noble life
of faisty and Security is this, for a poor naked sinner, void of all
righteousness, and thereby exposed to the lash of the Law, to the Curse and
wrath of God, to be covered with a compleet and perfect righteousness,
consisting in full satisfaction to all the demandes of the Law, both for doing
and suffering; with which the Self condemned sinner may now, with boldness and
confidence, think of approaching unto, and appearing before the Tribunal of
God? who can express the Serenity of Soul, the inward peace calmness, and
Quietness of mind, the Joy, Cheerfulness and Exulting of heart, that follows
here upon? How is the Drooping, Sincking, Dead and discouraged Soul, that has
any sense or feeling of this, revived and quickened? And how beit the sense of
it be away (as often it happens) yet the change, that is hereby made, when the
Lord imputes this righteousness of Christ, and causes the Soul by faith to
embrace it, and accept of it, is as a Resurrection from the dead.

5. They have, as a benefit, necessarily following upon, and inseparably
accompanying this justification, the noble and rich privilege of Adoption: For
to as many, as received Him, to them gave He power to become the Sons of God,
Joh. 1: 12. And all those, that are justified, receive Him and His
righteousness, and rest upon it. Being thus redeemed from under the Law, they
receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4: 5. And being justified by His grace,
they are made heirs, according to the hop of eternal life, Tit. 3: 7. And by
this as their State is demonstrated to be a State of life; so the many and
exceeding great and rich, yea incomprehensibly glorius and excellent favors,
Advantages, and Privileges, that lie in the womb of this comprehensive
Privilege, show their life to be an excellent life: for (1) Being thus adopted,
they have a new Relation unto God, as their Father, and they are His Children,
taken into His Family: they have His name put upon them, they are called by His
name, or His name is called upon them, Ier. 14: 9. Then is that word make good,
2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. Then is He their God in a peculiar
manner, and they are His People, Ier. 31. 1. Then have they written upon them
the name of Christ's God, and the name of the City of His God, and His own new
name, in its earnest and beginnings, Revel. 3: 12. O! what a life is here, to
stand thus related unto the great God? what an honorable life and Privilege is
this, for such, who were by Nature Children of the Devil! (2) Being thus
Adopted, they have a Relation to all the Children of the Family, and are united
unto them, as members of the same Family, as Brethren or Sisters of the chosen
Family. They are then among those, whom Christ has gathered together in one,
Ephesians. 1: 10. And belong to that Church, which is His Body, the fullness of Him,
that fills all in all, verse 22, 23. They have a relation now unto the Church
Triumphant, as well as to the Church Militant; whence that is in part verified.
Heb. 12: 22, 23. But ye are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels; to the General
Assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven. They are no
more Strangers and Foreigners but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, Ephesians. 2: 19. (3) Being by Adoption Children, they are heirs,
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8: 17. Gal. 4: 7. They are now
begotten to an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for them. 1. Pet. 1: 4. Hence they are heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1: 14. Being Abraham's seed, they are heirs according to the
promise, Gal. 3: 29. and these promises they do inherit, Heb. 6. 12. What a
life has the Son and heir of a great King, when he may look upon the many
great Dominions and Kingdoms of his Father, as his own? But what a greater
life is it, when a poor sinner, that is now adopted through faith, may look
through all the great and precious promises, contained in the Book of God, and
say all these are mine; and may look up to Heaven, and to that glory, which eye
has never seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive, and say, all that is mine, through Jesus Christ I am served heir
thereunto, and have the begun possion thereof, in mine Head and Elder Brother
Jesus Christ? (4.) Being adopted, they have the earnest of the Spirit, sealing
them to the day of Redemption: for in Christ they have obtained an inheritance,
and are sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession Ephesians. 1: 11, 13,
14. and 4: 30. And who can express what a life this is? (5) Being adopted, they
have free access to the throne of Grace with boldness, God being their Father,
the door stands open, and they may approach with liberty, freedom, and filial
Boldness; for through Christ, they have an access by the Spirit unto the Father
Ephesians. 2: 18. And in Him, they have boldness and access with Confidence, by the
faith of Him Ephesians. 3: 12. They may now come boldly unto the throne of Grace,
that they may obtain mercy, and find grace for help in time of need Heb. 4:
16. By Him they have access by faith into the grace, wherein they stand Romans 5:
2. And here certainly is a life, the riches of the joy and Comfort whereof
cannot be expressed. (6) Being adopted, they receive the Spirit of adoption,
whereby they are delivered from that Spirit of Bondage, under which they were
formerly; and are now Principled, Spirited and ^mboldened to cry Abba, Father
Romans 8. 15, That slavish fear, under which they some time were, is away, and
they have now the reverential fear of Children, which does not hinder, but
encourage them to approach, with freedom and Enlargment of Spirit and now they
have the Spirit of prayer and Supplication, whereby they can call on God, as
their Father in Christ; because they are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit
of His Son, into there hearts crying Abba, Father Gal. 4: 6. What a
resurrection from Death unto life is this, to have heart and tongue loosed, and
to be in case to speak unto the Father, in the language of the Spirit through
Jesus Christ? (7.) Being adopted, they have a right to all the Privileges of
the Sons of God, and are under the Fatherly Care, Inspection, Provision,
Protection, Leading, Teaching and Chastisement of their kind God and Father
Psalm. 103: 13: Prove. 3: 11, 12. and 14: 26. Mat. 6: 30, 32. 1 Pet. 5: 7. Heb.
12: 6. And o! what a bundle of Mercies of life is here? The believer may
welcome all the Dispensations of God, and receive them, as out of the hand of a
tenderhearted Father; and say, Thus and thus does my Father unto me; this is
the hand and working of a Father about me: This how sharp so ever it seem to
be, yet is the effect of tender love, and flows from the heart and bowels of
a kind and compassionat Father to me.

6. Their justification says, They are translated out of nature, and delivered
from that death, under which they did lie formerly, unable to perform any,
even the least, vital act of life: for before justification, they are united
unto Christ by faith, life is begun in their soul, the seed of life is
beginning to bud in them, and to bring forth fruit, when they are enabled to
believe, and to act faith upon, and to receive Jesus Christ, as He is offered
in the Gospel. The spiritual life is in them, and is working, when it moves
them Christ-ward, and powerfully draws and inclines their Soul, to close
with Christ. This faith is the work of the Spirit of God alone; It is not of
our selves, but the gift of God Ephesians. 2: 8. This believing is according to the
working of his mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead Ephesians. 1: 19, 20. Therefore is the Spirit called, the Spirit of
faith, which all believers have 2 Cor. 4: 13. for now, in order to the
effectual producing of this grace of faith in the Soul, their minds are
enlightened to understand Spiritually and Savingly, the things of God Act. 26:
18. For God reveals them unto them by His Spirit, who only knows the things
of God; which Spirit they have received, that they might know the things, that
are freely given them of God 1 Cor. 2: 10, 11, 12. Now they have received the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the knowledge of Him, the eyes of their
understandings being enlightened Ephesians. 1: 17, 18. And as their minds are
changed, so is their heart; for the heart of stone is taken away, and the heart
of flesh is given, according as was promised Ezekiel. 36: 26. and their wills are
renewed and inclined unto good: They have gotten the one heart, and the New
Spirit, Ezekiel. 11: 19. The Lord has wrought in them both to will and to do
Phil. 2: 13. Their heart is circumcised to love the Lord, according as was
promised Deuteronomy. 30: 6. And the Lord has put His Spirit in them Ezekiel. 26: 27.
and thereby has drawn them unto Christ Ioh. 6: 44, 45. all which says, that
the life of God and of Grace is begun in their souls; and the Spirit of life
has taken possession of them, and abides there and works.

These things clear, how justly the justified soul may be said to live; and in
what respects, the justified state is a real state of life.

CHAP. VI.
What mysteries are in Justification.
WHat was said in the foregoing Chapter may by way of use, First, discover unto
us that Kindness and Love of God our Savior, that has appeared unto men,
whereof the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3: 4. For this is one remarkable Instance
thereof, and calls for Admiration and praise from us, upon that account. O!
what Tenderness, Love and Pity appears here! And what a wonderful Grace is
this, that is here manifested? what condescension of Love and free Grace is
clearly legible in this business? And how clear and distinct will all this
appear to a self condemned sinner, arraigned in its convinced Conscience,
before the tribunal of God; and then sees, in the Gospel, a well contrived way
of absolution, and closes with it? How will all this shine forth unto them
with a heavenly Luster and Majesty? And how sweetly will their hearts
acquiesce in this Sure and Saife way of obtaining life?

Secondly, This may discover unto us, what a manifold wisdom of God is to be
seen and observed, in the Gospel dispensation, that even Principalities and
powers may look into, and wonder at; as it is said to be made known unto them,
by the Church, Ephesians. 3: 10. That is, by what they see and observe, in the
administration thereof, in the Church. And in this part of Gospel-device, there
are several things remarkable, that may give us ground to wonder at this
manifold Wisdom of God. The whole is a mystery, and this is a prime part of
the mystery, and in this mystery there are many mysteries, a short view of
which may be of some use to us.

1. What a mysterious and wonderful thing is it, That such, as are dead by Law,
lying under the sentence thereof, and so bound over to the wrath of God,
according to the threatening of the Law, which is just and righteous in all
points; and such, as have nothing to defend themselves by from the threatened
death, unto which they are obnoxious; nor any thing, whereby to make
Satisfaction to the demandes of the Law, or to the offended Lawmaker, or where
with to appease Him; should notwithstanding hereof be Really, Formally and
Effectually absolved from the sentence of the Law, by the sentence of the
Judge; and so made and declared to live juridically and in Law-sense; and to be
as free of the curse and penalty of the Law, as if they had never been guilty
of the transgression thereof. And thus is it here indeed; Such, as were dead in
trespasses and sins, and in the uncircumcision of the flesh, are quickened
together with Christ, Ephesians. 2: 1, 5. Col. 2: 13. He, who before had the wrath
of God on him, and abiding on him, by believing on the Son of God, has
everlasting life, Ioh. 3: 36. And they, who were in a manner condemned already,
yet, by believing on Him, are not condemned, yea have eternal life, Ioh. 3: 15,
18.

2. What a mystery is this, That God, who is righteous and just, and the
righteous Judge of the World, and who has declared, that he looks upon it,
as an abomination for any man to justify the wicked Prove. 17: 15. And whose
judgment is always according to truth. Romans 2: 2. Should be one that
justifies the Ungodly? And yet so is He said to be, and so is He styled, and
so is He held forth, as the object of faith, Romans 4. 5. But to him that works
not, but believes on Him, that justifies the Ungodly, his faith is counted
for righteousness, Papists and others, who will not suffer their Reason to
follow Revelation, but will measure all the mysteries of the Gospel, by the
corrupt rule of Reason; and wiredraw those, according to the dictats of this,
pretend an Inconsistency here; and therefore will rather pervert the whole
nature of Gospel-justification, than yield to the Spirits Revelation of the
matter. Hence it is, that they say, a person cannot be justified by God, until
he be a Godly man, and have a Righteousness within him, upon the account of
which he must be justified; little adverting, That by their own principles it
would follow, that no man should ever be justified: for, seeing God is a God of
righteousness, and it is a sure and certain thing, that His judgment is
always according to truth, He could not absolve a Person as righteous, that
were not perfectly righteous, and void of all sin; and where is the man, (not
out of his wits) that dar say this, remembering what David said, Psalm. 130. 3.
and 143. 2. But here lies the truth and the mystery. Such as are really and
truly Ungodly in themselves, and have nothing of their own, but
unrighteousness within them, and whose righteousnesses are but as filthy rags,
Esai. 64: 6. are yet justified by God upon the account of a perfect
righteousness, imputed to them, and received by faith. In the judgment of God,
such, as in themselves are Ungodly, are considered as clothed with the perfect
righteousness of the Mediator, Christ, that Head and publik person, which free
grace puts on them, and they receive and stand under by faith; and so are
justified and declared to be righteous by God, whose judgment herein and
sentence is most righteous, and most consonant to truth: for he justifies
such, as are righteous, though not with their own inherent righteousness, yet
with the righteousness of their cautioner, now made theirs.

3. Here is another piece of this mystery, That Transgressors of the Law shall
be Absolved and Justified; and yet the Law established, which threatens death
to Transgressors, and promises life only to such, as observe it in all
points. Who can reconcile this seeming Contradiction, that is not acquanted
with the glorious mystery of the Gospel? Paul, a man well acquanted with this
mystery, tells us expressly, that the Gospel-way of justification, which he
preached, and fully cleared in his Epistles, derogateth nothing from the Law,
but establishes it, Romans 3: 31. Where, after he had cleared and confirmed the
Nature and Causes of Gospel-justification, and had said verse 30. that He was
one God, who would justify the circumcision (or Jews) by faith, and the
uncircumcision (that is, the Gentiles) through faith; hy obv^ateth this
objection, that some might have proposed, and said, What shall then become of
the Law? you make it void, by speaking of faith, and ascribing justification to
it, as a mean, in opposition and contradiction to works: he answers. Do we
then make void the Law, through faith? That be far from us, yea we establish
the Law. So that there is nothing, in this Gospel justification, that
weakeneth, or makes void the Law; but, on the contrary, it is thereby more
fully confirmed and established: for, what the Law could not do, in that it was
weak, through the flesh, God sending His own Son, in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteouness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8: 2, 3. Here is then the mystery,
Transgressors of the Law are justified, upon the account of what their
Mediator, and Surety, their publik person and Representer did and suffered, for
Satisfaction to Law, Justice and the Lawgiver; and by what He did and
suffered, the Law is more established, then it would have been by any thing
that we did, or could suffer; for He made Satisfaction to all its demands;
there was perfect obedience given thereunto, and its commands answered, in all
points, by our Lord Jesus Christ, who knew no sin, nor was deceit found in His
mouth, 2 Cor. 5: 21. Esai. 53: 9. And because it was violated by sinners, and
the Curse threatened was due, therefore, He did also satisfy that demand, by
dying the shameful death of the cross, and undergoing the wrath and curse, due
to us for sin; and thereby making a more perfect Satisfaction unto the Sanction
and threatening part of the Law, than we could have done, by lying in hell for
ever more. And by faith, closeing with Christ, and resting upon Him, as such a
satisfying Cautioner and Redeemer, the sinner acknowledges the Law, in all its
force, confessing himself a Transhressour, and obnoxious to the Curse; and now
presenting to the Law and Lawgiver the obedience and Satisfaction of Christ,
whereby both its commands and Sanction are fully answered; and resting
thereupon, as the only ground of his Absolution from the sentence of the Law
for his guilt, and of his right to the Crown, which he formerly had forfeited.

4. Here is another mystery. That such, as are unrighteous, and Ungodly, should
be declared and pronunced Righteous. In justification, the person is declared
not guilty, of what was laid to his charge, in order to punishment, and that
juridically; and so he is declared free from the punishment, that the Accuser
was seeking to have inflicted upon him; and so is declared and pronunced to be
a righteous man, though not one, that has not sins, yet now one, that is
juridically righteous, But how can this be, seeing every man and woman is guilty
before God, and is come short of the glory of God? The mystery lies here (as
was said) The righteousness of their Cautioner, Christ, is reckoned upon their
score, and is imputed to them, and they receive it by faith, and so it becomes
theirs; for now by faith they are united unto Christ, and become members of His
mystical body, He being the Head and true Representative; and thereby He and
they are one Person in Law, (being one Spirit) as the Husband and the Wife are
one person in Law (being one flesh) and as the Representer and Represented, the
Cautioner and principal debtor: and thus they have a true Interest in His
Righteousness and obedience to the Law, which He yielded, not upon His own
account, being not obliged thereunto, antecedently to His own voluntary
condescension for us; for as to His person, He was God, and so not obnoxious to
any such Law, imposed upon man, who is in the way to the obtaining of a Crown,
as the end of his race: yea nor was this requisite, as to His humane Nature,
which, by virtue of the personal union with the Godhead was, as to it self,
either in Patria, and in possession of the State of blessedness; or in a
capacity thereto, without working therefore: And it is certain, that therefore
His being made under the Law, was for His own people, that, in their room, He
might, in the Nature of Man, give perfect obedience to the Law; and so make up
a righteousness, with which they might all become clothed, by Imputation on
Gods part, and by faith receiving it, on their part; and so be justified.
Hence-saith the Apostle, by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous,
Romans 5: 19. And thus are they, who are unrighteous in themselves, being
Transgressors of the Law, constituted righteous as to the Commands of the Law
by the righteousness of their Cautioner. As also they are, though guilty in
themselves and obnoxious to wrath, yet pronunced free, and absolved from that
charge, by the Imputation of the Satisfaction of Christ, made in His
sufferings, and death, who did bear our griefs, and carry our sorrows, and was
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and with His stripes we are healed,
Esai. 53: 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2: 24. And his own self bear our sins, in His own body
on the tree.

3. There is likewise a mystery here, That the Imputation of the obedience and
Righteousness of Christ does not take away the Imputation of His Satisfaction,
nor make His Satisfaction useless and of no Importance, or necessity, as
Socinians imagine, who cast the whole Gospel in the mould of their own corrupt
Reason and understanding: For they think, if Christ's Righteousness be imputed
to us, we are perfectly righteous; and if we be perfectly righteous, we have no
sin; and if we have no sin, there is no need of Satisfaction for our sin. But
they little consider, that we are both guilty of the broken Law, and also
nothwithstanding obliged to perfect obedience. It is unreasonable to think,
that Adam, by his breach of the Law, was exeemed and delivered from any
obligation to obey the Law; sin does not, neither can, dissolve that
obligation; otherwise, the best way of being freed from the Laws of God, or
Man, were to break them, and cast them at our heels. We then being
transgressors, and still under the obligation of obedience to the whole Law,
our Mediator and Cautioner must not only obey the Law for us, to the end, we
may inherit the promised reward; but must also make Satisfaction, for the
Violation of the Law, to the end we may escape Gods Curse and wrath, threatened
in the Law, and due to us for the breach of the same. Had we perfectly kept the
Law, we had then had no need of any Satisfaction for our breach thereof: but
being guilty of sin, this Satisfaction and the Imputation thereof to us, is
absolutely necessary. And though we need not nicely here distinguish betwixt
this Righteouness and Satisfaction, in reference to the different ends; and
say, that by His Righteousness imputed to us, we have right to the Crown, and
by His Satisfaction, freedom from death, which was the penalty of the broken
Law: for God has joined both together for both ends; and what He has thus
joined together, as we should not separat, so neither may we nicely and
scrupulously distinguish; but adore the wonderful wisdom of God in this
contrivance, and observing our necessity of both, sweetly acquiesce in and
thankfully accept of both. But you will say, if we be perfectly righteous by
the Imputation of Christ's righteousness, what need have we of any more? are we
not possessed of right to the reward, and being righteous, are we not free of
our sin? I answer. It is true indeed, if we said, that Christ's Righteousness,
or compleet obedience, was first imputed to us; or if the Scripture gave any
ground to say so, there might be some color for this Exception: but, as the
Scripture gives no such ground; so neither do we assert it: Only we have need
of both, and both are graciously imputed, and received by faith: yea, we being
sinners, if we might speak of an order here, Satisfaction must first be
imputed, that thereby we may be freed from the sentence of the Law, which most
presses a wakened, convinced sinner, who is most anxious hereanent, crying
out, How shall I escape the wrath and curse of God? But, as the Lord has
graciously and wonderfully knit the effects together, so is the Cause. Both
Christ's obedience and Sufferings were so woven together, that they belonged
both to, and made up His state of humiliation; and by both imputed by God, and
received by faith, the believer receives the whole Effect, that is, both
Immunity from punishment, and a Right to the reward promised to obedience, or
to the Crown. As Christ, the Messiah, made an end of sins, and made
reconciliation for iniquity; so He brought in an everlastingh righteousness,
Dan. 9: 24. And believers have the benefit of both; for as they receive the
grace of God, and the gift by grace, and abundance of grace, and of the gift
of righteousness; so they shall reign in life; and grace through righteousness
reigns unto eternal life, Romans 5: 15, 17, 21.

5. Upon the other hand, this mystery is also observable. That Christ's
Satisfaction takes not away the necessity of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness and obedience; as some do say, who think, that because we have
full pardon of all sins, by virtue of the Satisfaction of Christ; therefore
we need no more; a person, who is pardoned, being therefore one, that is not
unrighteous; and one that is not unrighteous, being righteous, for (say they)
there is no mids betwixt just, or righteous, and not unjust, or not
unrighteous; and he, who is righteous, having done all his duty, and so having
a right to the promised reward of life. So that, upon this ground they suppose,
there is need of no more, in order to obtaining of life: and beside, say they,
the Scripture says, that the man is blessed, to whom the Lord imputes not
sin; and he, who is blessed upon this account, needs no righteousness to be
added, to render him blessed, and to give a right unto glory. But (1) we were
(as was said) guilty of the breach of the Law, and so, liable to punishment,
and were also under obligation, to give perfect obedience unto the Law;
Satisfaction therefore for our breach, and our pardon upon Satisfaction, faith
not, that we have not broken the Law; and if we have broken the Law, we cannot
be said to have yielded perfect obedience unto the Law, when God pardons upon
a Satisfaction made, He does not judge, or suppose, that the person pardoned
has perfectly kept the Law; for His judgment is according to truth; and the
very pardon supposes a Transgression; and a Transgression takes away perfect
obedience; as perfect obedience destroys or rendereth useless all pardon.
Wherefore neither before God, nor man, can a person, merely because of Pardon,
be said, or be accounted to have all that was required. Upon Pardon, it is
true, he is as much exeemed from the obligation to punishment, as if he had
kept the whole Law; but yet, by that pardon, he is not made, nor accounted to
be one, who never broke the Law, and there upon has a right unto the reward
promised: As (supposing for illustrations sake) when a Prince makes a Law, and
commands such and such persons to obey the same, under the pain of death;
and with all promises to such, as observe the Law, and do what is commanded,
that they shall enjoy a rich reward, and become heirs of a great Kingdom; and
the persons, after they have broken the Law and become guilty of death, are
pardoned, upon the Interposition of some great person, and Satisfaction made by
the same for the failure; they cannot, upon the account of this Satisfaction,
and their pardon thereupon, be said to have done what was commanded, nor to
have right unto the reward, and to the Inheritance, promised to such, as obeyed
the Law. (2) Therefore, though a person, that is pardoned, be one that is not
unrighteous, that is, obnoxious to the penalty; yet he is not one that is
righteous positively, or in reference to the reward; but only one that is
negatively righteous; that is, one that though he has no right to the reward,
yet he is not liable to the punishment: and therefore, though he be thus
negatively not unrighteous, that is, one that is freed from the punishment; yet
he cannot be accounted one, that has done all that was commanded; and so he
cannot be accounted Righteous, in reference to the reward. (3) So that there is
a manifest mids betwixt being righteous, that is, one having a right to the
reward, and being not unrighteous, that is, not obnoxious to the punishment, as
is clear by the Instance of Adam, before his fall; for during that time (how
long, or how short so ever it was) he could not be said to be untighteous,
because he had not yet sinned; nor could he be said to be righteous, in
reference to the reward, that was promised, on condition of perfect obedience
to the end; that is, such as had done all his duty: for if he had then done all
his duty, or all that was required, in order to the reward, he had then had a
full and complete right to the reward of life promised, and God would have
given it to him, according to the Covenant and Promise. But we know it was not
so; for he was to finish his course and run his race to the end, before he
could have challenged a right to the promised inheritance; and this he did not.
So that before he fell by transgression, it might have been said of him, that
he was not unrighteous, that is, that he was one, that had not yet
transgressed, and deserved the punishment-threatned; but he could not be said
to have been fully and positively righteous, that is one, that had done all his
duty; and therefore had now a full and complete right unto the reward. (4) It
is true, the Scripture says, that the man is blessed, to whom the Lord does
not impute sin: but it does not say, That he is blessed, to whom the Lord only
imputes not sin, or to whom He gives no more: nor does the Scripture say,
that this pardoning, or not imputing of sin, purely and abstractively
considered, that is, considered alone without any more (as it must be
considered by such, as oppose us here) is that complete blessedness, whereof
the Scripture speaks. But the reason, why such are said to be blessed, to
whom the Lord does not impute sin, is, because Imputation of ^ighteousness is
inseparebly annexed with non-imputation of sin: and therefore in that same
place of Scripture; to wit, Romans 4. 6. It is said, that David Psalm. 32: 1, 2.
describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness,
while he says, blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord will not impute sin,
etc. Whereby we see, that both these are so firmly connected by the Lord, that
the one clears and confirms the other; and that who ever has the one, has
the other also; and upon that account are blessed, enjoying the whole Effect of
the Imputation of Christ's whole Surety-righteousness: and these two, to wit,
pardon of sins, and the Right to the Inheritance, flowing from the Imputation
of Christ's Satisfaction, and of His obedience, though they are never separated,
yet they are distinguished, and spoken of distinctly in Scripture. It is one
thing to be delivered from under the Law, and another thing to receive the
Adoption of Sons, and the blessing of Abraham, Gal. 3: 13, 14. and 4: 4, 5. As
it is one thing to finish the Transgression, to make an end of sin, and to make
Reconciliation for iniquity; and another thing to bring-in Everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9: 24. Yea, the redemption from the Law and from its curse
is mentioned, as preceding the other; as the finishing of transgression is
also mentioned before the bringing-in of Righteousness, in the passages cited.
And thus, as these Effects are distinguished, though inseparable, so is the
Cause. By the Imputation of Christ's Satisfaction, we have pardon of sin, being
redeemed from the curse of the Law, by His being made a curse for us, and by
the Imputation of His Rigteousness, and obedience, we are looked upon as
Righteous, and so have a right to the promise and Inheritance: Though we need
not thus distinctly consider both, save only to demonstrat the necessity of the
Imputation of both: for Christ by His death did also purchase the Inheritance
for us; and by His obedience made Satisfaction for sin, it being a piece of His
Humiliation. So that both, in the deep wisdom of God, make up one cause of that
one Effect, which comprehends all Blessedness; that is, both pardon of sins
and Right to the Inheritance, etc. By the Imputation of both, or of this
complete Surety-righteousness of Christ including both, believers are pardoned
and adjudged unto life. Hence our pardon and justification are often ascribed
unto Christ's death, not as distinctly considered, or as excluding His
Righteousness and obedience; but, among other reasons, because that was the
completing Act of His obedience; and to which all the rest preceding had a
respect, as to that, which should complete the whole Meritorious part of His
Mediation. And hereby His obedience can no more be excluded, than His foregoing
soul-sufferings. Nay His death did presuppose and include His obedience; for it
was the death of one, who had perfectly obeyed the Law; which death and
obedience, being His Mediatory work in the state of His Humiliation, was a
complete Righteousness, for the blessedness and advantage of all those, for
whom He appeared, and whose debt He undertook to pay. (5.) That the obedience
of Christ must also be imputed to sinners, is manifest from this, That
otherwise they should have no Righteousness at all imputed to them, that
properly can be called a Righteousness: for if nothing but that, which is
commonly called Christ's passive obedience, or His Sufferings, be imputed, there
can no Righteousness be said to be imputed; for dying and suffering the
penalty, as such, are no righteousness; being no obedience to the commands of
the Law, in conformity to which consists proper Righteousness: as when one
dies for his crime of Murder, he cannot be said to be thereby a righteous
man, or to have obeyed the Law, forbidding Murder, nor can we be said properly
to have obeyed the Law, when Christ in our room did suffer the penalty of
death, due to us for the breach of it. They who are in hell, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, cannot be said to be obeying the Law. It is true,
Christ in dying did obey a command, Imposed upon Him by the Father; but that
was no command of the Moral Law, prescribed unto man: and thereafter in dying
and Suffering, He gave no obedience to that Law, under the obligation to which
we were standing; no more than He can be said to have Suffered the penalty,
while He was obeying the Law; these two being so manifestly different. So that
it is clear, that if Christ's obedience be not imputed to us, no proper
Righteousness is, or can be said to be imputed to us. Yea (6) If Christ's
obedience be not imputed to us, that Law, which says, do this and live, is not
fulfilled; but rather abrogated and quite abolished: and it must be said, that
not withstanding of that constitution of Gods, we live, though we neither do
this; nor is our Cautioners doing of it imputed to us. And so we have a right
to the Reward, and get it at lenght, without the Righteousness required in
order thereunto. Let us therefore admire the harmonious perfection of this
Effect, and Work of infinite wisdom. I know several things are objected against
this Truth, as there are many other grounds and Reasons adduced for the same;
but these I shall speak to at more length afterward.

7. This is also a mystery here to be noticed, That a Righteousness, that is
not ours inherently, but Christ's, should be made ours, made over to us, and
reckoned upon our score, or we become clothed therewith, and there upon
justified as Righteous, as really and effectually, as if we had wrought it our
selves, and it had been properly inherent in us. Socinians, Papists, Arminians
and others, who will not subject their reason unto this mystery, and give
credit to Revelation, will acknowledge no such imputation of Righteousness:
but at most do grant but an improper imputation; that is an imputation as to
Effects: so that with them, Christ neither Suffered, nor obeyed, in our stead
and room; but only for our good and advantage; and that too conditionally only,
in case, we believe and perform the Gospel-condition. But this imputation as
to Effects only, is no imputation at all, there being no thing thereby Imputed;
not the Righteousness of Christ it self; for this they expressly deny; nor yet
the Effects themselves, for we no where read of Imputed Justification,
Adoption, Pardon etc. which are the Effects. Yea, it is not enough to them to
deny this Imputed Righteousness; but in contempt and scorn, they call that,
which we name an Imputed Righteousness, a putative Righteousness, as if it were
a mere imaginary thing. But whatever such in decision think or say, the Gospel
holds forth to us a Righteousness imputed, or the Righteousness of Christ,
graciously bestowed upon and made over to belevers, or freely given unto them,
so that they are dealt with by God, as Righteous Juridically and legally, or as
possessours of such a complete and perfect Righteousness, and that as really,
and to all Effects, as if it had been their own inherently, and performed by
them, and so had been theirs without any such Imputation. And because this, as
the cause, is imputed to them and made theirs; therefore all the Effects
thereof shall really and certainly be bestowed upon them, in God's appointed
time and method. This is the Truth, which the Gospel holds forth, to the
solid peace, joy and comfort of Believers; the full clearing and vindicating
of which would require a just Treatise. I shall therefore here propose but a
few clear and manifest Grounds of this refreshful and comfortable truth,
leaving the further prosecution and vindication of them, and of other
arguments, that are used in this matter, with the examination of what is
objected on the contrary, till afterward. First therefore, we say, as Christ,
who knew no sin, was made sin; that is; had the sins of His people laid upon
Him, and imputed to Him; so that they were all caused to meet together on Him
Esai. 53: 6. and He therefore was made a Sacrifice for sin, or dealt with and
punished, as a sinner, though no sinner inherently, but only by Imputation, for
He did bear our griefs, and carried our sorrows, and was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, Esai. 53: 4, 5. to wit, now
imputed to Him by God, and reckoned upon His account, who knew no sin in
Himself inherently: So are we made the Righteousness of God in Him 2 Cor. 5:
21. that is, have His Righteousness, who is God, imputed to us, who were in our
selves and inherently sinners; and being in Him by faith are dealt with as
Righteous. The manifest scope of the place, and the plain Import of the word,
must enforce this truth, on all, who are not more than ordinarily blinded with
prejudice. Secondly as Adam's posterity, who were not existing, when he
transgressed the Law of God, but were only in his loins, and federally
comprehended with him, in that covenant, by God's voluntary disignation and
appointment; and so did not actually, and really eat that fruit, which Adam did
eat; yet have that sin and guilt so imputed unto them, that it is really
accounted theirs; and not merely in its Effects, for its Effects are not truly
Imputed, neither can be said to be so; for that natural contagion and
corruption of Nature, which is truly propagated to the posterity, and all
actual trangressions, the fruits thereof, cannot be said to be imputed,
because they are really theirs, and inherent in them. But that original sin,
which is the guilt of Adam's first sin, is only it, which can be imputed
(unless we mean such an Imputation, whereby our actual sins, which we commit,
are said to be imputed to us, when they are laid to our charge, and we actually
punished therefore) to them, who did not actually commit it, in their own
person; and by virtue of this Imputation, they are accounted guilty of that
self same sin; and therefore are dealt with and punished, upon the account
thereof, no less than if they had actually committed it themselves, in their
own persons; and no less than Adam himselfs was punished therefore. So are
Believers, being by faith united unto Christ, and made real members of His
mystical body, and now interessed in Him, as His Children and Brethren, made
partakers of His Righteousness, and have it imputed unto them, for all ends and
uses, as if it had been their own, without any Imputation. The reading of the
Apostles discourse Romans 5. from verse 12. and forward to the end, may satisfy
any as to this whole affair, who will yield themselves captives unto Truth:
for upon this does the Apostle found His whole discourse and explication of the
rich advantages, had by Christ and His Righteousness, clearing, and
illustrating the same by that similitude of Adam, whom He expressly calls the
figure of Him, that was to come verse 14. and so asserteth, that as by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all,
because all did sin; so by one man, Jesus Christ, the second Adam,
righteousness ontered into the world, and life by it, and so life passed upon
all, that were in Him, because they are righteous in Him, or have His
righteousness imputed unto them. Nay, in the following verses, the matter is
cleared with an advantage unto Believers in Christ. But (says he verse 15, 16,
17, 18, 19.) not as the offense, so also is the free gift; for if through the
offense of one, many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the gift by
grace, by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many, etc. And so he goes
on to show what and how great things believers receive from Christ, with no
less, Yea rather with much more of a certainety, than the Posterity of Adam
were interessed in what he did: and therefore, as judgment was by one to
condemnation; (says he) so the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification; and if by one man's offense, death reigned by one, much more they
who believe or receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness,
shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. And as the offense of one Adam was
imputed unto all, and thereby guilt and judgment came upon all, making them
liable to condemnation: So by the righteousness of one Jesus Christ, imputed to
all, that receive this abundance of grace and of the gift of righteouseess,
the free gift of justification comes unto them, reconciling them to God, and
instating them for life. And the ground and reason of this is laid down verse
19. for as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners; and so were
guilty, and made liable to judgment and condemnation; So by the obedience of
one, that perfect obedience to the Law, that Christ performed, opposite to
Adam's transgression and disobedience, shall many be made righteous, that is,
constituted righteous; and therefore dealt with as such, through this imputed
righteousness; and so justified and made heirs of life: for verse 21. he adds
as sin has reigned unto death, even so grace must reign, through
righteousness, unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ, our Lord. They then, who
will deny, or oppose themselves unto this Imputation of Christ's righteousness,
must do manifest violence unto the whole discourse of the Apostle, in this
place. Thirly. Hence another evidencing ground of this imputation: for as what
is done by a public person, representing others, whether upon one ground, and
after one manner, or another, is accounted legally to be done by those, who are
represented, and they are dealt with accordingly, as Adam was a public person,
representing all his posterity, that were to come of him by ordinary
generation, according to the ordination and appointment of God: So Christ, of
whom Adam was a figure, was a public person, representing all, whom the Father
had given to Him, and for whom He had undertaken, and for whose sake He
sanctified Himself Ioh. 17, 19. and become their Brother taking on their
Nature. Heb. 2: 11, 14. and becoming like them in all things, sin only excepted
Heb. 2: 17. comp: with Heb. 3: 15. Therefore He took not upon Him the Nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham Heb. 2: 16. and He was the Captain of their
Salvation, verse 10. He is also made and called the Head of the Church, which
is, His body and fullness Ephesians 1: 22, 23. and 5: 23. Col. 1: 18. and so He with
His Church make up one mystical body, whereof He is the Head, and Believers are
members; Thus there is a closs and mystical union betwixt Christ and Believers;
beyond any union, that is in Nature, whether it be that of Head and members, of
Root and Branches, of King and Subjects, or of that betwixt Husband and wife,
for all these are but dark resemblances of this Spiritual Union betwixt Christ
and Believers, which is therefore compared unto these, and in part explained
thereby, for our better understanding of the matter: but none of them, nor all
of them do fully unfold the mystery. And in it there is ground enough to
suppose, Christ to be a public person and a Representative; as also for
asserting of this Imputation; because Believers being thus united unto Christ,
are made partakers of His righteousness, and of what He, as Head and Husband,
did and suffered, in their room and place; and they thereupon are blessed with
all the fruits and effects thereof. Fourthly His being called a Surety Heb. 7:
22. does also give ground and confirmation unto this Imputation: for as He who
becomes Surety for another, undertaketh to do or suffer, what he, for whom he
is Surety, was obliged to do, or suffer: As when Paul became Surety for
Onesimus; and bound himself, as such, unto Philemon, he would have Philemon,
requiring all, that Onesimus was due to him, at his hand, and reckoned upon his
score; and he undertook to satisfy him for this debt, or for what he could
crave of Onesimus; as we see Philem. verse 18, 19. If he has wronged thee, or
owes thee ought, put that upon mine account, I Paul have written it with mine
own hand, I will repay it. So what the cautioner does, or suffers, as such,
or according to his undertaking, is reckoned upon the score of the Principul
debtor; as Paul's paying of what Onesimus and imputed to was endue te Philemon,
was to be reckoned on the score of Onesimus, him, that he thereby might be
freed from all pursuit of Law, or action against him, at the Instance of
Philemon. Wherefore as Christ, becoming Surety for His Children, and saying to
the Father, Lo, I come, in the volumne of they book it is written of me, I
delight to do thy will; o God Psalm. 40: 7, 8. Heb. 10. 7. did take upon Himself
the debt of sinners, and engaged to pay all; that is, both to give perfect
Obedience to the Law, and fulfill all Righteousness, Mat. 3: 15. as also to pay
the penalty, to make Satisfaction to Justice, by becoming a Curse, and
suffering Griefs, Sorrows, Bruisings, Mockings, and the cursed death of the
Cross: for all this He did willingly and cheerfully. I have (said He) a
baptism to be baptized with, (meaning His death) and how am I straitened (or
pained) until it be accomplished Luke 12: 50. He laid down His life, that He
might take it again; and no man took His life from Him, against His will; but
He laid it down of His own accord Ioh. 10: 17, 18. And as Christ did really and
actually perform all, that He did undertake, so that He said upon the Cross,
it is finished: It must of necessity follow, that all they, for whom He became
Surety, and undertook to do and suffer what was laid upon Him, must have that
Imputed, and made over unto them, and they must be clothed with that rob of
Righteousness, which He did make for them, and must appear before the throne of
justice clothed therewith. Fifthly Christ's making proper and full Satisfaction
to the Father, in the Name and room of His people, says also, That there is an
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness unto them, for whom He performed that
Righteousness; as His Satifaction must be for them. So that if Imputation be
denied, Satisfaction also must be denied. Hence the Socinians wickedly deny
both: and indeed, who ever deny the one, must also deny the other, or not speak
consequentially; for when one laith down a satisfactory price for another, it
must be reckoned upon the score of and imputed to that other; to the end, he
may be dealt with, as if he had laid it down himself; and thereby be freed from
what otherwise he must have undergone: and if upon the account of that
Satisfaction, he be not so freed, it cannot be called a Satisfaction for him.
When Christ laith dwon his life for His sheep, His sheep must not dye and
perish; for if they perish, He did not die for them; and if they perish not
because of His dying for them, His death must be imputed to them; and upon the
account of it they must be saved So that Christ's dying for His own is dying in
their Room, Person, place and Stead, as the particle for manifestly imports 2 Samuel 18: 33. Genesis 44: 33. Numb. 3: 12. Romans 5: 6, 7. Hence His Ransom is
expressly called (...), 1 Timothy 2: 6. Many more arguments might be here adduced,
for confirmation of this Truth; but I shall satisfy my self at present, with
these few and plain ones; and so proceed.

8. This Mystery is also considerable here, That both the justice of God, the
Mercy and free Grace of God, take place in this matter. Socinians cry up the
Mercy and free Grace of God, in the matter if justification: but it is to this
end, that they may, with more desperate confidence, shut out the Justice of God,
so as it may have no place there: and therefore they deny all Satisfaction,
Redemption and Atonement etc. (except what is merely metaphorical) because they
cannot see, how justice and mercy both can with joint hands concur to our
justification. But the Apostle, better taught than they, and better acquainted
with the mind of Christ, in this Mystery, than they are, sees no
Inconsistency; But rather declares the sweet and and perfect harmony and
concurrence of these, in this mystery; telling us Romans 3: 24, 25, 26. That we
are justified freely by His grace; and yet adds, through the redemption, that
is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith
in His blood, to declare His righteonsness, etc. And again, to declare His
righteousness, that He might be just, and the justifier, of him, which
believes in Jesus. Here is a free grace triumphing; and yet Justifice declared
and manifested; God declared to be just, and His righteousness manifested; and
yet sinners and believers justified freely by grace. So Ephesians. 1: 7, 8. There is
a Redemption through the price of blood; and yet a free pardon of sins,
according to the riches of Gods grace, wherein He has abounded toward us, in
all wisdom and prudence. But if it be enquired, wherein appear to this mercy
and freedom of grace, in our justification, seeing there was a Satisfaction made
to justice, for all the sins of His peaple? I answer, (1) was it not an Act
of wonderful free grace and mercy, that, when the Lord might have executed the
sentence of the Law upon us, according to that threatening, that day thou eats,
thou shall die; and so have made us, sinners, who transgressed the Law, to die
and suffer; yet He would accept of a Satisfaction, at the hands of a Surety and
Cautioner? (2) Was it not Act of grace and mercy to us, that He himself would
provide a Surety and put His name in our obligation; and so make Him sin for
us, who know no sin, and lay all our iniquities upon Him, that He might bear
the punishment, due to us for the same? See Ioh. 3: 16. (3) Was it no Act of
Sovereign grace and mercy, that God should both provide a Mediator and Surety
for us, and accept of His Mediation and Satisfaction, most freely, out of free
Grace and Love, when we neither had done, nor could do any thing to move Him
hereunto, or to procure this at His hands; yea, when all our carriage, and all
that He could see in us, did rather cry aloud for the contrary dealing? (4) Was
it no Act of Sovereign Grace, that God should provide all this remedy for a
few, whom He did choose for Him self out of free Grace and Love, and gave away
to Christ, to be redeemed by Him, leaving the rest, and passing them by,
though no more unworthy, than such, as were chosen? (5) Is it no Act of grace
and mercy, that in order to this great favor of justification, no more should
be required on our part, than faith in Jesus Christ; seeing this very faith,
including an Union with and a marriag-consent unto Christ, is, in it self, a
favor nothing, in a manner, inferior to the pardon of all our sins, and to
the accepting of us as Righteous, in His sight? (6) Is justification no Act of
grace and mercy, though it be upon the account of the obedience and
Satisfaction of Christ; when that very faith, which is only required of us, in
order to our full interest in Christ and His merits, is also the free gift of
God, Ephesians. 2: 8? If these particulars will not abundantly say that we are
saved in justification by grace, and by the exceeding riches of Gods grace and
kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus, according to Ephesians. 2: 7. what will!

9. Here is a great and wonderful mystery, in this matter, That the Innocent
should suffer, and the guilty escape and go free. The Socinians, that they may
strengthen them selves in their mischievous prejudices against the Satisfaction
of Christ, imagine an Impossibility here, and an Inconsistency with Justice,
that an Innocent person should be put to suffer. But what ever they dream, who
will walk in these mysterious matters by no other guide, than the dim light of
corrupt nature, it comporteth abundantly with Justice, that the Surety be put
to pay what he has undertaken to pay, for the principal debtor. And here was
no wrong done to our Surety, Jesus Christ, who willingly undertook this debt,
and was lord of His own life, having absolute power to lay it down, and power
to take it up again, and to raise him self from the dead; and knowing withal,
how richly to compensate and make up that loss another way, so as He should be
no loser, when He should see His Seed, and receive the rich reward of His
labors from the Father, whose Servant He was, in this affair. Here is then a
mystery of wisdom, Grace and Love, that the Innocent Lamb of God, who knew no
sin, who did no violence, nor was guile found in his mouth, 2 Cor. ^: 21. Esai.
53: 9. Who; when He was reviled, reviled not again. 1 Pet. 2: 22, 23. Who was
Holy, harmless, undesiled and separat from sinners, Heb. 7: 26. That He should
be made sin by God, 2 Cor. 5: 21. And so legally guilty, and obnoxious to the
punishment due for sin; that He should be made an High Priest to offer up Him
self a sacrifice for sin, Heb. 9: 14, 28. That He should bear our grieves, and
carry our sorrows* and be wounded for our Transgressions, and bruised for our
Iniquities; that the punishment of our peace should be upon Him; and He should
stripes, and be oppressed and afflicted, and be cut off out of the Land of the
living; have strokes upon Him, and make His grave with the wicked; be bruised
and be put to grief, and make His soul an offering for sin. Esai, 53: 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10. That he, who could not be charged with sin, should yet be put
to suffer most grieveous torments, immediately in his soul, Mat. 26: 37, 38. and
27: 46. Luke 22: 44 Ioh. 12: 27. And pains in his body, Mat. 26. and 27.
Chapters. That He should die, and that He should die the Shamful, Painful, and
cursed death of the Cross, Gal. 3: 13. Phil. 2. 8. And, upon the other hand,
that we, who were the sinners, and guilty, and so obnoxious to all the miseries
of this life, to death it self, and to the pains of hell and wrath of God for
ever, should escape, and be healed by His stripes, Esai. 53: 5. 1 Pet 2: 24.
and become the righteousness of God in Him. 2 Cor. 5: 21. And be justified and
made heirs of the promises; O! what an unsearchable mystery of Love and free
grace shines forth here?

10. This is also a Part of this Mystery, That nothing should be forgiven, and
yet all should be forgiven. Nothing was forgiven to our Surety, He paid all
that was required of Him; for the Lord laid on Him the iniquity of us all. He
gave full obedience to the Law, in all its demandes, and made a perfect and
complete Satisfaction for our Offenses; so that the Father was well pleased in
Him; and the same was at two several times declared, and expressed out of
heaven; once at His Baptism, Mat. 3: 17. and again at His Transfiguration,
Mat. 17: 5. The sword of Justice was awakened against Him, though He was Gods
fellow, Zech. 13: 7. And did abate Him nothing of what was due. The Lord Jesus
gave him self for us, an offering and a Sacrifie to God, for a sweet smelling
savor, Ephesians. 5: 2. He is a perfect High Priest, continueing for ever, having
an unchangable Priesthood, and therefore is able to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by Him; for He needs not daily as the High
Priests under the Law to offer up Sacrifie first for His own sins, and then
for the People; for this He did once, when He offered up Himself: for the word
of the Oath makes Him a Priest, who is consecrated for ever more, Heb. 7: 24,
25, 26, 27. And yet, though He had nothing forgiven or abated to Him, while
standing in our room, but paid all to the outmost farthing; all notwithstanding
is freely forgiven to us, and we have blessedness, by the Lords forgiving our
Iniquities, and covering our sins, or not imputing them to us, Psalm. 32: 1, 2.
Romans 4: 7, 8. Our Redemption is forgiveness of sins Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14.
And all sins must be forgiven to us, or our Redemption should not be perfect,
nor we saved; for one sin would ruin us for ever; because if the Lord should
mark iniquity, and enter in to judgment, no man should stand, and no flesh
should be justified Psalm. 130: 3. and 143: 2.

11. Here is another Mystery, considerable in our justification, That though
thereby we be declared and pronounced righteous, and so acquit and absolved
from what was, or might be charged upon us; Yet we have need of Pardor, and
must be freely pardoned. Socinians cannot or will not (...) Conexion, that
Infinite Wisdom has made here; and therefore make use of forgiveness and free
pardon of sins, as an Argument, wherewith to fight against true Gospel
justification, or the justification of a sinner upon the account of the Imputed
Righteousness of Christ; and against the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
to this end, that the sinner may be absolved and pronounced righteous, and
accepted as such. But the Scripture sees no Inconsistenry or Repugnancy here,
but an harmonious and sweet accord betwixt the Lord's causing people their
iniquities pass from them, and His clothing them with change of raiment Zach.
3: 4. And the Apostle joineth both, as inseparable; yea he declares the
necessity of both, saying Romans 3: 21, 22. That now the righteousness of God
without the Law is manifested -- even the righteousness of God, which is by
faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe. where upon it
follows, verse 24. that they are freely justified by His grace. But then, what
need is there of Remission? might one say: does not this quite take away all
Remission? No; for he adds verse 24, 25. through the redemption, that is in
Jesus Christ, whom God has setforth to be a propitiation, through faith in His
blood, to declare His righteousness for the remission of sins, that are past.
Yea, the forgiveness of sins establishes and confirms the Imputation of
righteousness, where by we are justified; for thus speaks the Apostle Romans 4:
6, 7, 8. Even as David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom
God imputes righteousness without works, saying, blessed are they, whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; blessed is the man, unto
whom the Lord will not impute sin. Where we see, that non-imputation of sins is
so far from shutting out Imputation of Righteousness, that it confirms it,
and proves it, and is in separable from it, and must necessarily presuppose
it: for we, being sinners, can have no Absolution, until the Satisfaction of
Christ be applied to us, and made ours by Imputation: and where this is imputed
by God, the soul must be absolved from all that can be laid to its charge.
Therefore in justification, as we are declared righteous, by reason of the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us and received by faith; so have we thereby
a full remission of all our sins. Paul tells us 2 Cor. 5: 19. That God was in
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them. And what gives he for the ground of this? See verse 21. for) says he) He
has made Him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Him.

12. It is also observable in this mysterious business, That though our
jestification be an act of God's free grace, wherein, only upon the account of
the Righteousness of Christ Imputed to us by God; and not upon the account of
any thing in us, or done by us, He pardons our sins and accepts our persons
as righteous: Yet this is not with an exclusion, bur rather with an Inclusion
of faith, which is a Receiving, a laying hold upon, and a Leaning unto the
righteousness of Christ, imputed to us, So^inians and others are utter
strangers unto this mystery; and make use of their wit here, to plead against
the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, the only ground of our
justification; because faith is required of us, in order to our justification,
and (...) (as they say) it self (...) to us as our Righteousneis; upon the
account of which we are justified. They suppose, that if Christ's Righteousness
be imputed to a person, and he thereupon acquit and pardoned of all his
sins, that person must be righteous, pardoned and Justified, whether he
believe, or not; and the Righteousness of Christ must be his, before he
believe, But, leaving the debating of that Question, whether faith properly
taken, that is, as our act, done in obedience to the command of God, be Imputed
to us, as our righteousness? until we come to the next part of the words. I
shall only now say, as to the other thing here alleiged, That they, as ignorant
of the Gospel, feign an opposition in things, among which the Gospel points
forth to us a perpetual and harmonious agreement; and upon the other hand, they
will patch up a reconciliation and agreement betwixt those things, which the
Gospel sets at perfect Opposition and variance: for Paul, better acquainted
with the Gospel, and with the nature of Gospel-justification, than they, tells
us, yea he proves it by many Arguments, That by the deeds of the Law, there
shall no flesh be-justified; and consequently, not by faith, as one deed or
work of the Law. And he makes mention of the righteousness of God without the
Law; and says, that that righteousness of God is imputed to and upon all them,
that believe. And notwithstanding of this; he tells us, that this Righteousness
is by faith of Jesus Christ, and imputed to all that believe, exclusive of
others Romans 3: 20, 21, 22. And again he tells us, that as we are justified
freely by bis grace; yet it is through the Redemption, that is in Jesus Christ,
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in His blood verse
24, 25. And again verse 26: as God is declared in this matter to be just; so is
he the justifier of him only, that believes in Jesus. Moreover verse. 27. he
mentions the Law of faith, as opposite to the Law of works, in that it
excludes boasting; and concludes again verse 28. That a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds of the Law, and verse 30. that God justifies by faith
and through faith. Yet we never hear, that he faith, we are justified for faith
or upon the account of faith. Further, That faith is required, in order to
justification, is clear from Romans 9: 31, 32. where it is said, that Israel
which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not attained to the Law of
righteousness, because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works
of the Law. This also is fully proved by the same Apostle, in this Epistle to
the Galatians, knowing (says he Chap. 2: 16.) that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the faith of jesus Christ; even we have believed
in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ. And to
point forth this Interest of faith; and yet not as imputed for our
righteousness; when properly taken, the same Apostle Phil. 3: 9. calls that
righteousness, which he opposes unto his own righteousness, which is of the
Law, a righteousness, which is through the faith of Christ, and the
righteousness which is of God by faith. By all which, and many other passages
mentioning our justification by faith, which might be cited, we see that the
Lord has so ordered the matter, that faith should have an Interest in
justification as an Instrumental cause, or some such thing (for to contend
about words, is not much to edification) as may fully denote and point forth
the Emphasis of the Scripture expressions herein; such as are to be found Romans
3: 22, 28, 30. and in other places now cited; and that because faith carries a
poor convicted and self-condemned sinner out of himself, to seek a
righteousness in Christ, in and upon the acount of which, he may be accepted of
God and justified: and so brings him to close with Christ and to accept of
His righteousness, and put it on, that he may appear in it before God, and so
receive the Atonement and abundance of grace and and of the gift of
righteousness Romans 5: 11, 17. And albest it may satisfy us to know, that so
the Lord God has ordained it, that the self-condemned sinner should flee to
the Righteousness of Christ, held forth in the Gospel, lay hold on it, and lean
to it, thereby he may attain Justification and Remission, without enquireing
after reasons of this Contrivance: Yet we may clearly see the wisdom of God
shining forth, in this appointed way of justification: for the sinner is hereby
brought to swear (as it were) himself bare, to renounce all in himself, to
declare and profess himself a plain bankrupt; and so to despare in himself;
that the riches of the free grace of God, and everlasting love may shine forth
in him, in a more divine luster, and in a singular heavenly beauty: and hereby
all ground of pride, boasting, or glorying in himself is taken away; and the
sinner is made to see and to subscribe unto the glorious wisdom, that then
appears in that contrivance, and to wonder; as also to see his everlasting
obligation unto the Lord contriver, and to the Lord Ransomer. So is he made to
see the perfect ground of security and saifty in this way, when he sees, that,
in order to his partaking of the great blessings and favoures, his soul longs
for, he must first be united unto Jesus Christ himself, and married unto Him,
in a perpetual marriage-Covenant, that shall never be dissolved. And he wins
hereby to a sure ground of peace and Tranquillity of soul, when he sees, that
it is nothing in himself, that is taken, as Satisfaction to the Infinite
justice of God; but the Righteousness of Christ who is God and Man in one
person; and so a perfect and Infinite Righteousness, able fully to repare the
breach made, and to make Satisfaction for the wrong done to the Infinite God.
So that upon this ground, he may boast and glory in the Lord alone, and triumph
over all assaults and Temptations of Satan. Hereby then as the Lord has
consulted His own glory; for the sinner, fleing to the Righteousness of Christ,
as his only refuge, and resting there, does proclaim God to be Holy, Just,
Righteous, Gracious and only Wise; so he has consulted the saifty, Peac, joy,
and Confidence of His own. The consideration whereof should make us comply
sweetly with this noble contrivance; and in stead of disputing against it, or
ourselves out of it, acquiesce with all our heart in it, and rest there.

13. We may observe further another mystery, in this matter of justification to
wit. That the way of justification, through the Imputed Righteousness of
Christ, does not take away the necessity and Usefulness of the Exercise of the
Grace of Repentance. Socinians and others, who follow their footsteps, can
observe no harmony here, and cry-out against the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, because (as they suppose) it (...) the Use and Necessity of
Repentance, and enervateth all the commands enjoining it. But (1) This mistake
must certainly flow from a misconception of the true Nature Use and ends of
Gospel-repentance, for they must of necessity Suppose, that Gospel-Repentance
is required for the same Ends and Uses, for which the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness is required; otherwise they could not think, that the asserting
of the one should tend to the justling out of the other. But whatever they
imagine, we assert no such thing; but affirm. That Christ has purchased the
whole of our Remission: and Repentance, whatever Papists say, has no interest
herein; nor has it any merit with-it, whether ex condigno, or ex congruo, to
procure Remission, and the Favor of God, or Reconciliation with Him; but it
is only required in its own place, to accompany faith, and to follow upon it,
as a suitable and profitable exercise for sinners, advanced to such high
favoures and Privileges. And the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, can no
more prejudge the exercise of this grace, than of any other Gospel Grace, or
duty, such as Love, Fear, Hop, prayer, Patience etc. but rather incite and
encourage to it (2.) what was formerly said of faith and its harmonious
agreement with the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, will sufficiently also
clear and confirm this: for if the Adversaries speak of legal Repentance, the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness will no more take that away, than faith,
for it preceedeth faith, whereby the sinner laith hold on Christ. And if they
speak of Gospel Repentance (which is more to the purpose) they must know, that
though in its Exercise (at least in its remarkakle exercise) it does follow
faith, and in order of Nature is posteriour to it; Yet it is
inseparably-connected therewith; so that where faith is, there is and must also
be Repentance, at least, in its root and begun exercise: for a sinner cannot
rightly accept of and close with Christ, as offered in the Gospel, for Gospel
ends, and in a Gospel manner, and according to the call of the Gospel, but
withal he must have a sight and sense of his sins, and a hatred thereof, as
also a purpose firm and fixed, to turn from them unto God, as also an
Endeavor after new obedience. Yea, we find sometimes, Repentance pressed, as
including faith in it; as when pressed in order to pardon and acceptance with
God: Sometimes again it is mentioned together with faith, as being inseparable
therefrom. (3.) As the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, and the
justification of believers thereupon, does not put them in such a case, as they
shall sin no more afterward, so neither does it take away the Usefulness and
necessity of renewed Acts of faith and Repentance; nor in the least weaken the
after exercise of these Graces, but rather does excite thereunto, each in their
proper place, and to their proper ends, in order to actual pardon, according to
the Gospel Method, in which it is required, that justified persons or Believers
repent of their after sins, and by faith flee to Christ for pardon, and as at
the first, so afterward there can be no true exercise of faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, for pardon of after sins, without a true exercise of Repentance
toward God, these perpetually accompanying other: yet we must not think, that
Repentance considered by it self, and as distinct from faith, has the same
Interest in the Covenant, for pardon, first or last, that faith has: for
neither does it so act on Christ and his Righteousness, in order to pardon, as
faith does; nor is it appointed or called for, for that end: and when it is
enjoined and mentioned, in order to Remission, it is to be taken as distinct,
far less as separated from faith, but as including faith, being the necessary
concomitant and consequent thereof, as also the public and sensible expression
and evidence of true and lively faith: for Repentance being toward God, and a
turning to God, from whom Sin draws the Soul away, must of necessity have
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, accompanying it, and laying a ground for
it, seeing there is no coming to the Father, but by the Son. Ioh. 14: 6. (4.) To
say, that by Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, we should have no more need
of Repentance, than Christ had, who was wholly without Sin, is to imagine, that
we dream of such an Imputation, as makes us to have been no Sinners, or under
no guilt; and consequently to have stood in need of no gracious Imputation. But
we assert no such thing; for we were Sinners, and so stood in need of a
Righteousness to be imputed to us, in order to our justification. And he who
graciously did provide this Righteousness for us, might also, without the least
derogation from the freedom and glory of his Grace and Favor, as appointe the
means, Method and way, how he will have us made partakers of the benefits of
this Grace and Imputed Righteousness first and last; so also to prescribe what
duties He thought meet for such, as He had so visited with Grace and Mercy.

14. Another part of this Mystery lies in this, That justification through the
Imputed Righteousness of Christ, takes not away the rich and honorable
privilege of Adoption. Such, as are Adversaries unto this Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, alleige that there is no consistency here; because, say
they, if Christ's Righteousness or Obedience should be imputed unto us, that so
we may have a Right and Title to life, according to the tenor of the Covenant,
do this and live, Adoption, by which this Title and Right is conveyed,
according to the Scriptures, is rendered Useless. But not to mentione the great
difference, that is betwixt the Life and Privileges of Life, a Right whereunto
is solemnly had in Adoption; and the Life, that was promised in the old
Covenant, by these words, do this and Live. They consider not, that the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness does no more destroy or take away
Adoption, than it does destroy, or take away pardon; and that it is so far,
from rendering either Useless, that it establishes both, and is the ground and
firm Basis of both: for as without the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
and Satisfaction, there can be no ground for pardon; so without the Imputation
of his Righteousness and obedience there is no ground for Adoption. As
justification is a solemn and formal stating of a person in Favor and
reconciliation with God, and in pardon of Sins; so Adoption is a Solemn and
formal stating of a person in a Right to glory and to all the Privileges of
Sonship here and hereafter. Now netther of these are rendered Useless, through
the Doctrine of Imputation; but both are the more cleared, confirmed and
secured thereby. The Imputation of Righteousness is not formally pardon it
self, nor is it formally a Right to glory; but the necessary ground of both.
Christ's Righteousness is Imputed, that we may be justified, and that we may be
Adopted; that is, solemnly and formally placed in a state of pardon and
Reconciliation, and into a state of Right and Interest in the Privilege of
Sonship. As the producing of the cautioners payment, in judgment, is not
formally the absotion of the debtor, but the ground of a formal sentence of
absolution; so the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness and Satisfaction, is
not the formal sentence of Absolution and pardon, but the ground thereof: And
as the paying of the price condescended on for Land or houses, is not a formal
infeofing, or a formal and legal conveyance of Right and Title, by Charter and
Seasing, but the ground thereof; So the Imputation of Christ's merits and
obedience is not the formal and legal Conveyance of Right to the Inheritance of
glory, and glorious Privileges of Sonship; but is the ground thereof, upon
which necessarily follows adoption, which is, as it were, the Believers
Infeosment and Seasing, whereby Right is formally and legally, conveyed unto
him, to all these Privileges.

15. This is also a mystery in this matter, that such as are adversaries to the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, cannot understand, to wit, That Believers
should be accounted Righteous, and there upon justified, through the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ; and yet the Lord should see sin in them. They
say, if believers be righteous with the righteousness of Christ, God can no
more see sin in them, than in Christ. But they distinguish not betwixt the
being of sin, and obnoxiousness to punishment, which is separable from the
being of sin, otherwise there could be no pardon. In such, as are coered with
the Righteousness of Christ, imputed by God, and received by faith, God sees
sin in its being, for He pardons it, and pardon does not make sin to have
been no sin; nor say, that the man has not sinned; for then pardon should be
no pardon, seeing all pardon supposes sin: but he sees not sin so, as to
punish and condemn for it: for in respect of this Reatus, guilt and obligation
to punishment, sin is taken away, forgotten, cast behind God's back, and in to
the depths of the sea etc. As the Scripture expresses this matter. The judge
sees not the debtor guilty and obnoxious to the sentence, when the payment
made by the cautioner is instructed in open court: yet He cannot but see, that
he has contracted debt, and was thereupon obnoxious to the sentence. Neither
do our Adversaries here consider, that by this way of argueing, they destroy
all pardon; for when a man is pardoned, he is no more obnoxious to punishment;
and God cannot see sin in him, in order to condemnation, because it is
pardoned; and thereby that obligation to condemnation is taken away: And so, if
they mean this only, by God's not seeing of sin, when they deny this, they must
deny Remission, nor yet do we say, that the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness takes away the being of all after sins, and makes them no sins;
but only that it ensureth their pardon. Nor do we argue the not being of after
sins, or God's not seeing of them, from this Imputation, but only the Non
imputation of them unto condemnation; for we know, that sin, in its being, is
killed and mortified another way viz by the work of Sanctification.

16. To the same end, we may consider. That though by the way of justification
through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and faith laying hold on the
same, the Law is not made void, but established; as the Apostle says Romans 3:
31. and the righteousness of the Law is in some sense fulfilled in us, being
fulfilled in our Nature, by Christ, the Mediator and Surety Romans 8: 4. yet we
are not justified by the Law, but by the Gospel; not by the Covenant of works,
but by the Covenant of Grace. The Adversaries to Imputation alleige, that we,
by asserting the same, do establish justification by the works of the Law,
because the obedience of Christ was obedience to the Law, and so legal
Righteousness; and if that be imputed to us, so as we are accounted to have
done what he did, we must be justified by Law-righteousness, and consequently
by the Law; which is contrary to the Scriptures. But in answer to this I say
(1.) They advert not, that some of themselves do expressly call Christ's
Righteousness, our legal, or prolegal righteousness; and therefore it must be a
righteousness answering the Law, and also made ours. (2.) Nor do they observe,
that justification by the Law, or by the works of the Law, which the Scriptures
speak so much against, is not to be understood in their sense; the obvious,
plain and only meaning thereof being this, that no man can be justified by his
own personal obedience to the Law, for by the Law, the doers only of the Law
are justified Romans 2: 13. The plain tenor of the Law is Set down: Romans 10: 5.
Where Moses is mentioned, as describing the Righteousness of the Law to be
this, that the man, who does those things, shall live by them. Levis. 18: 5.
When therefore the Law says, that the man, that does these things, shall live
by them, and not, the man that either does those himself, or gets a
cautioner to do them for him, shall be justified; it is manifest, that we are
not justified by the Law, seeing we do not these things ourselves, in our oun
persons; but by the Gospel, which only provideth this Surety, and proposes
justification through His Righteousness imputed and received by faith. Thus we
see. That justification through the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, does
quite annull and destroy our Justification by the Law: all Imputation being
inconsistent with Law-justification, and repugnant thereunto, because it is of
grace; and what is of Grace, neither is, not can be of works, Romans 11: 6. (3.)
We assert not Imputation in this sense, to wit: That we are accounted and
reputed to have done what Christ did; for that cannot be, God cannot judge
amiss; but He should judge amiss, if He should judge, that we did what Christ
did. Our meaning is this, that the Believer, being now united unto Christ, has
an Interest in Christ's Righteousness and upon the account thereof, now
reckoned upon his Score by Imputation, he is freed from all that the Law could
charge upon him, and that as fully, to all ends, as if he had performed that
Righteousness himself.

17. It is likewise here considerable, That we are justified upon the account
of the Righteousness of Christ imputed; and yet this Righteousness of Christ is
the proper meritorious cause of our justification, and of all that follows
there upon. Some, who oppose this Imputation, imagine an opposition here: But
mistakingly they think, that the Righteousness of Christ must be made the
meritorious cause of it self, or of that Righteousness, which is imputed;
whileas we only say, That Christ's Rightteousness is the meritorious cause of
our justification, Adoption etc. and that it is also imputed to us, for this
end, that we may be thereby formally righteous, juridically and in Law sense;
and so justified. etc. And who sees not, that it must be so, seeing we can be
justified by no Righteousness, which is not a proper meritorious cause of our
justification: and consequently, that we cannot be justified by any other
Righteousness than the Righteousness of Christ; and so not by our own
Gospel-righteousness, nor by faith, as suchs a Righteousness; for that cannot
be a meritorious cause of our justification.

18. This is also a considerable part of this mystery, which carnal eyes cannot
see, and which men, carried away with prejudice at the pure doctrine of the
Grace of God, in the Gospel, cannot sweetly comply with; to wit. That our
justification is Solely upon the account of the Imputed Righteousness of
Christ, and not upon the account, or because of any thing wrought in us, or
done by us: and yet our obligation to holiness and conformity to the Law of
God, in all points, is not hereby in the least weakened. Paul's frequent
preoccupying of this Objection, in his Epistles, may let us see, how ready
carnal hearts are to abuse the doctrine of the Grace of God, revealed in the
Gospel, to carnal liberty; and what a propensity there is in us, to look for
justification upon the account of our works only; so that if we hear of any
thing, to put us of this apprehension, we presently are ready to conclude, that
all study of and endeavor after holiness, is wholly useless and unnecessary:
and that we need not wonder much at Socinians and others, who do thus reasone
against the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. But Paul does clear to
us a sweet consistency betwixt free justification upon the account of Christ's
Righteousness imputed, and the serious study of holiness. He saw no
Inconsistency betwixt the study of obedience to the Law, in all points, and the
expectation of justification by faith in Christ alone, whatever men, who would
seem sharp-sighted, and zealous for the study of holiness, do suppose they
cannot but see. And albeit men in those days were ready enough to except
against free justification, through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ; and to
pretend, that the asserting thereof did take away all study of holiness: yet
(and this is very remarkable) the Apostle, to remove that objection, never
gives the least hint of the necessity of our works of obedience, in order to
our justification. And though He does frequently press to holiness; yet he
never makes use of any argument thereunto, which might so much as insinuat,
that we were justified by works, in one measure, or other. Nay, we will find,
that He draws arguments, pressing unto holiness, from the very nature of
their Gospel-justification, and of their State by virtue thereof. And
experience proves, this day: that the most effectual Medium to holiness, is
taken from free justification, through faith in Christ alone; and that the
holiness and obedience of such, as practice the orthodox doctrine, concerning
justification, has another heavenly luster (as it flows from another
fountain, and stands upon another ground) and looks more like true
holiness, and universal sincere obedience, than what is to be seen among such,
as lay most weight upon their own duties, whether we speak of Papists,
Socinians, Arminians, or of others. And whatever inconsistency men may imagine
to be betwixt free justification, through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ,
and the Universal, Sincere, and Acceptable study of holiness, yet the Gospel
knows no such thing; but presses holiness, though not for this end, that we
may thereby be put into a state of justification, or might sweat and foil, run
and work for the prize, as the hire and ways of our work; yet upon more
Spiritual and Gospel like grounds; and by Arguments more suitable to the state
of the justified, who only are in case to perform acts of obedience, and
duties of holiness, acceptably unto God; Such as the Image of God proposed for
our Imitation; the perpetual obligation of His Law; the Relation they stand
into; the holy appointment of God; the engagments they stand under, the
Spiritual help and furniture, which is at hand, the Nature of holiness it self;
the genius and kindly inclination of the new Nature, whereof they are
partakers; and the many advantages thereof here and hereafter, too many, here
to be mentioned. Let any consider the Arguments, used to this purpose by Paul
Romans 6. and 7. and 8. Chapters, and in many places elsewhere, and he shall
find this true

CHAP. VII.
Justification through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, cleared out of the
Old Testament, and the Passages Vindicated from the exceptions of JOHN GOODWINE.
WE shall now proced unto another use, and mentione another way, how this
Truth, That belevers in Christ attain unto a life in justification, ought to
be improved, to wit Secondly That we may hence take notice of a loud call
herein to all Persons, not yet justified, to beware of a cheat in this matter,
and not fix upon a wrong bottom in Justification, nor lay their weight on any
thing within themselves, or on any thing else whatever, except upon the Imputed
Righteousness of Christ alone, which they are to embrace and to lean to by
faith. If they lean to their own works, and make them the condition and ground
of their justification, they will be disappointed; for by the works of the
Law^an no man be justified, in the sight of God, as the Apostle asserteth, and
proves, in our Text, and irresragably concludes Romans 3: 20, 28. and in
several other places. Yea, if they lean unto faith it self, which is called
for only to interesse us in the Righteousness of Christ, that free grace may be
exalted, and proud man abased, they deceive themselves; and not only disappoint
themselves of what they are expecting, but even destroy the very Nature and
Ends of true Gospel-justifying faith: for its native and proper work is, to
carry the man out of him self wholly unto Christ, for Righteousness, Life and
Salvation: for faith is the Man's looking to Christ, as the stung Israelite in
the wilderness did look unto the brazen serpent Ioh. 3: 14, 15. and saying, as
it is Esai. 45: 24. In the Lord have I righteousness: and it is the believers
putting-on of the Lord Jesus, that he may be found in Him, and clothed with His
Righteousness Phil. 3: 9. It is the Man's receiving of Christ Ioh. 1: 12, and
receiving of the Atonement in Him, and through Him. Romans 5: 11. and of
abundance of grace and of the gift of Righteousness. Romans 5: 17. Therefore it
is called a believing on His name. Ioh. 1: 12. and on Him, whom the Father has
sent etc. Ioh. 6: 29 and 7: 35. and 17: 20. Act. 16: 31. and 19: 25. And
because faith laid hold on this Righteousness of Christ; therefore is this
Righteousness called the Righteousness of faith Romans 4: 11. and the
righteousness, which is of faith Romans 9: 30. and that, which is through the
faith of Christ, the Righteousness, which is of God by faith, Phil. 3: 9. Now
if this be the native work of justifying faith (as we shall more fully clear
afterward) to receive Christ, and His Righteousness; and consequently to carry
the Man out of himself, that he may find and partake of that al sufficient
Righteousness of Christ, to the end he may with confidence stand before God,
and expect pardon and Acceptance; It cannot be said without destroying the and
Native work of justifying faith, that faith is that Gospel-Righteousness, unto
which they may lean, and upon the account of which they may expect
justification. Faith, in this matter, is as the eye of the Soul^, that, sees
not it self, but looks out to another. Beside, this would overturne the whole
Nature of the Covenant of Grace, and is irreconcilable with the doctrine of the
Apostle Paul about justification, as shall be manifested hereafter. Therefore,
all, who would live the life of justification, must betake themselves to Jesus
Christ, and lean to Him, and to His Righteousness: for with the rob of His
Righteousness must they alone be clothed, and in Christ alone must they be
found; and they must think of standing before God, having on His Righteousness,
that God imputes unto Believers, and which they receive by faith, in order to
their justification.

I know, this doctrine is not favourie to many, now adays, and as Papists,
Socinians and Arminians do oppose themselves with all their Industry and
learning unto this doctrine of the Imputation of the Surety-Righteousness of
Christ; so there are now a days, and have been of late, who would not
willingly be reckoned among either of these mentioned, and yet do oppose this
foundamental truth, the sure ground of our Hop, Peace and Comfort. As the
Principles, whereupon these mentioned go, are different, so are the grounds,
upon which they plead against this truth; yet they do unanimous enough join in
this: (...), and argu^ against this Imputation, which the Orthodox have owned
and do own.

Before I come to consider the chief (at least) of their Arguments against the
Truth, which has been now asserted, I shall, with what brevity and plainness I
can, lay down and vindicate the Grounds and Reasons of our Assertion; and then
take notice of their contrary Objections; that this Truth may be made plain
and clear to such, as are concerned therein. As to our Grounds, I shall first
begin with Scripture Authority; and here propose our Reasons from the Old
Testament.

First The First passage to this purpose, which I shall take notice of, is
Esai. 45: 24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness, (or in
the Lord is all righteousnesses) to wit, for me: and this following upon what
was said verse 22. look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth;
which was an Invitation and call to them, to act faith upon Him, in order to
their Salvation; as the stung Israelites did look unto the brazen serpent, in
order to their recovery; this looking being clearly explained by coming verse
24. Even to Him shall men come (and we know how frequently faith is held forth
and expressed by coming, in the Gospel) says, that hereby is pointed forth the
rich Advantage, that such shall have, who look and come to Him by faith, and
submit unto Him heartily and cheerfully, imported by bowing of the knee, and
swearing with the tongue, to wit. That they shall have a righteousness in Him;
and this they shall avow and profess: and this being exclusive of all others,
as the Context clears, says, that they should be brought to that, that they
should renounce all other righteousness what somever, and rest on this God
alone, who is the only God verse 22. and on His righteousness; for in Him they
shall be made to look for it, and that in rich abundance: And upon this
follows their justification, and glorying in the Lord alone verse 25. In the
Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. This passage
therefore does clearly hold forth a justification, through the righteousness of
the Messiah, of the true and living God, laid hold upon and applied by faith,
or owned and embraced, as their only righteousness: and this righteousness is
not a righteousness wrought in them; for such a righteousness is abundantly
hold forth by the word strength; but a righteousness made over over Believers,
and which they own as theirs, and rest upon.

It is too narrow and scanty an Interpretation, to limite this justification,
to the Lords vindicating of His peoples sincerity and Innocence, in respect of
their Enemies, at whose hands they suffered great things, and that unjustly;
and not to take in their Spiritual justification, and delivery from the guilt
of sin, through faith in the Messiah; especially seeing there is an Invitation
going before to them, to lay hold on the Lord Messiah by faith, according to
the Gospel Method; and upon this follows their glorying in the Lord conform
to what the Apostle says 1 Cor. 1: 30, 31. that the Lord Jesus is made of God
Righteousness to His people, that he that glories, may glory in the Lord.

Nor is there any weight in that, which Io (...) in this Treatise of
justification Part. 2. page 129. 130. alleigeth, to Infringe the authority of
this Testimony, to wit. That the meaning only is this, that they receive these
favoures, of the free grace and donation of God, by Jesus Christ. For, as the
expressions are more emphatick; so all the circumstances of the Text, point
out their eyeing of the Lord, and coming to Him, and that in order to their
justification and Salvation; together with their profession of owneing the
Lord's Righteousness alone, for their Righteousness, renouncing all other
Righteousness, in themselves, or in others, in order to justification: and
thereby declaring, that they look upon it as necessary for them to have a
Righteousness; and that this is only the Righteousness of Jehovah, or of the
Messiah, where with they desire to be clothed, and rest satisfied. All which
import the Lords bestowing of this Righteousness upon them, that is, imputing
of it unto them; for without this they cannot have it, nor glory in it, as
their own.

Secondly, it is faid Esai. 61: 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord; My Soul
shall be joyful in my God; for He has clothed me with garments of Salvation,
He has covered me with the rob of Righteousness etc. And this coming in upon
the back of what was said, in the beginning of the Chapter, concerning Christ's
furniture for His work of Mediation, His Call thereto, and His special work, or
the End, for which He was sent, to wit, to bind up the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty to the Captives etc. points forth the sweet welcome, and
hearty acceptance, that the anointed Messiah should have among His own chosen
ones: for these words hold forth their expression of their sense of what they
had received from Him, and of their joy upon the account thereof. They profess
openly their joy and rejoiceing in the Lord, because He had clothed and covered
them with the garments of Salvation, and with the rob of Righteousness. Now
this rob could not be a rob of their own making; nor can it be understood of
their Inherent holiness; for it is a Garment put on, and wherewith they are
covered. Thus are we said to put on the Lord Jesus Romans 13: 14. Gal. 3: 27. And
John Rev. 19: 8. helps us to understand the meaning of this Expression, when
he says. And to her was granted, that the should be arrayed in white Linen,
clean and white: for the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints.

Against this Testimony; the forenamed Author Io. Goodwin. page 130. etc.
makes some Exceptions. as 1, These Expressions (sai's he) concern the jews
only, and are meaned of their deliverance out of Babylon; if not out of their
present Condition; which is an effect of God's faithfulness and truth, or of
his goodness and graciousness. Ans. (1.) To limite this to the jews, and to
their outward and temporal delivery, is but a part of their Socinian fiction,
without any apparent ground in the Text. Nay, the first part of the Chapter,
which Christ applies to Himself Luke 4. and the several particulars there
mentioned, may shame this out of countenance; unless we mind to make Christ
only a temporal deliverer^, as the jews did dream their Messiah would be. And
the Gospel reaches us Spiritually to expound, as pointing forth Spiritual
promises, even such promises, as savoure more of temporal things, as to the
letter, that what are here mentioned do (2.) it is but ground-less to imagine
(and a piece of the ordinary course of Socinians, in evading clear Testimonies
of Scripture, brought against them) that Righteousness here does signify God's
faithfulness: for though somewhere, where mention is made of God's
Righteousness, and other circumstances of the Text make it evident, this sense
might be admitted; yet it cannot be so understood here, where the Righteousness
is said to be granted to the people, as a rob and a garment to cover them: and
the very following words of the verse show, that this is meaned of Some thing,
bestowed upon them, for it is added, as a bridegroom decketh himself with
ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her self with her jewels; or, as Some render
the words, He has decked me with ornaments, as a bridegroom, and with jewels
as a bride.

2. He excepteth, If these words be taken in a Spiritual sense, the promise,
which is contained in them, cannot suite the Church; because the Church is at
all times and always clothed with Christ's Righteousness, being justified in
Him Ans. This one answer will destroy all the Spiritual promises, hold forth
by the prophets, as the fruits and effects of Christ's coming; for the Church
of true and faithful believers was really, in some measure answerable to that
more dark dispensation, made partaker of these Saving and Spiritual benefits,
both at that time, and before, even from the beginning: and thus there shall be
no promises in all the old Testam of Spiritual things, touching pardon of Sin,
Justification, Grace and Sanctification, and the like, made unto the Church;
but all of them must be interpreted of carnal things: though the New Test.
teaches us the contrary, as might be evinced by multitudes of places. But the
matter is clear, to wit. That this is mentioned, as the open profession of the
Church, with joy and thankfulness, of what she was blessed with, and made
partaker of in Christ; and had, as a fruit and effect of His performing His
Mediatory work; that is, That she was clothed with a rob of Righteousness; and
that by Him, which was, and would be to her a ground of perpetual joy, and
rejoiceing in the Lord.

Against that passage Rev. 19: 8. which was adduced for clearing of the place,
now under hand, he excepteth thus, These words only point forth the honor and
dignity, which Christ now conferreth upon the Church, in remembrance of her
Righteousness: for it is parallel to that other place Rev. 3: 4. Ans. This is
nothing, but a plain perversion of the Scriptures; for it is not said, for her
Righteousness; nor for the Righteousness of the Saints: but in these words a
reason is given, why by this araying in fine Linen, the bride is said to be
made ready; and withal hereby the signification and Import of that finelinen
is held forth, when it is said, for the fine linen is the Righteousness of the
Saints. The Spirit of the Lord is here speaking of the return of the jews,
and of their marrying of new with their former husband, from whom they had so
long departed, by playing the harlot; (as worthy and judicious M. Durham
shows, in his comment on the place) and of this new Bride it is said, that
she is arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; and this linen is explained to be
the Righteousness of Saints, or justifications of Saints, the word is (...),
the same, that is used Romans 5: 16, 18. Where it is translated justification;
and it is called here the Righteousness, or justifications of Saints, because
it is no other, than that which is common to all Saints; whereby is signified,
that the jews, at their conversion, shall be accepted and justified, after the
same manner, that all the Saints have been; even after that self same manner,
at which they formerly stumbled, and which wickedly and peremptorily they
refused and rejected. This Righteousness therefore can be nothing else, than
the Righteousness of Christ imputed: for this only is clean and white, all
other having spots and defilements. This is not within, but from without, and
is put on, and is granted to the Church, and so imputed.

Against that saying of putting on Christ, twice mentioned, he excepteth
saying. That none of them speak of justification, but that Romans 13: 14.
speaks of Sanstification; and that Gal. 3: 27. of profession. Ans. If we are
said to put on Christ in Sanctification, and as to a profession, much more may
we be said, to put Him on in justification, which is the basis and ground work
of Sanctification, and the truth and reality of that which is professed.
Without justification there is no Sanctification; and except we be clothed with
Christ, and put Him on in order to justification, we cannot put Him on, in
order to Sanctification. And as such, as are baptized in Christ, have declared,
that they have put on Christ; so such have done it in truth and reality, who
are the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, and are Christ's and are
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise Gal. 3: 26, 29. Not could
they be said to do this outwardly, as to a profession, in their Baptism, if a
real putting on of Christ were not to be found in such, as had the Spiritual
and inward thing Imported and signified by outward Baptism.

Thirely a 3 passage is Ier. 23: 5, 6. Bohold the days come, says the Lord,
that I will raise unto David a Righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and
prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice, in the earth. In his days
judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell saifly: and this is His name,
whereby He shall becalled, the Lord, our Righteousness. It is undeniable and
manifest, that this is spoken of Christ, who was the Branch, raised up unto
David; and the King that should reign and prosper; and it is through Him, that
judah is saved, and Israel made to dwell sai^ly. Now of this Righteous Branch,
it is said, that His name shall be called Jehovah our Righteousness: He shall
be owned and embraced as such; whereby it is declared, that as we have need of
a Righteousuess, and have none of our own; so this Righteous Branch shall
become a Righteousness to us: in Him, and in Him alone shall all His people
have a Righteousness: He and His Righteousness shall be made over unto them.
And as they shall glory in Him, acknowledging all their Righteousness to be in
and from Him; so He shall glory in that style and Title, which shall be given
to Him upon that account, and He shall own it, as His glorious Title and Name,
for their further refreshment and Consolation. He shall look upon that, as His
greatest honor, to be called the Lord our Righteousness, Jehovah that
purchases and prepares for and bestows a sufficient Righteousness on His
people. This passage with its forcible light so opened the eyes of Bellarmine,
the popish adversary to the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, that he
was forced to confess, That Christ is said to be our Righteousness, because he
has made Satisfaction for us to the Father; and does so give and communicate
that Satisfastion unto us, when He justifies us, that it may be said to be our
Satisfaction and Righteousness -- and in this sense, it would not be absurd, if
any should say, that the Righteousness of Christ and His merits are imputed
unti us, as if we our selves had satisfied. De justif. lib. 2. cap. 10.

Fourthly, add to this Ier. 33: 15, 16. where, as Iunius and the Dutch
translation have it, this same Title is repeated, as given unto the righteous
Branch: but if we take the words, as they are rendered by others, and as they
are in our Translation, as the Style and name of the Church, they willcon
tribute not a little to our present purpose. And this, wherewith she shallbe
called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS: for hereby is clearly Imported the Churches
glorying in that Title, and in having all her righteousness in and through her
Head and Husband; that as she owned herself to be the Spouse of Christ, and had
His name called upon her; so this would be all the name, that she would own,
as her greatest glory; and by that alone would she be called; thereby
professing, with glorying and satisfaction, that she had no righteousness of
her own; and if any would know her aright, and give her her highest titles,
they should know her under that notion, and give her that Name, that should
openly declare, that she were void of Righteousness in her self, and were
ungodly, and had all her Righteousness from her husband, and would appear
before God in no righteousness, but in her husbands. So that she would own
that Title alone, which should be a proclamation to all the world, that she was
covered with her Husbands, righteousness, and with that alone, and a constant
Memorandum, to keep her in the fresh conviction, Faith and Profession of this.

Against these clear and pregnant passages Ioh. Goodwine excepteth. page 127.
saying, It is not here said, the righteousness of the Lord shall be our
righteousness, or shall be imputed to us for righteousness. Avs. Though this be
not said, in so many words and syllabs, yet that same is said in a more clear,
convinceing and emphatick manner: so that he, who sees not this lying in these
words, must be more blind than Bellarmine was. When this righteous Branch is
raised up by Jehovah, and gotteth this name, the Lord our Righteousness, what
can be more manifest, than that, He is made Righteousness to His people; Yea
and all their Righteousness; and that this Righteousness is made over to them;
so that He is, in a manner, wholly theirs, and nothing but theirs, and all that
He has is theirs; and particularly that His Righteousness is all the
Righteousness they own, as their Righteousness.

He excepteth 2 That in no tolerable sense, can Christ, being a person, be said
to be imputed to us. Ans. Do we not hear, that a child was born to us, and a
Son was given to us? Esai. 9: 6. and was not that child and Son a person? And
may not a person be as well said to be Imputed, as given, seeing imputation,
upon the matter, is nothing but a giving, or bestowing? Yet we do not say, that
Christ is Imputed; but that this expression here used, does manifestly evince,
that we are righteous through the righteousness of Christ made ours, and that
Christ is become the Lord our righteousness, and that true believers receive
and own Him, as such, and rest upon His righteousness alone by faith.

He excepteth 3. The plain and direct meaning is, that He shall be generally
acknowledged and celebrated by his people of the jews, as the great author and
procurer of that righteousness, or justification in the sight of God, upon
which abundance of outward glory, peace and prosperity should be cast upon
them, Ans. (1.) That this is not to be restricted to the jews, is manifest,
seeing it is spoken of the Gospel times, when the righteous Branch shall be
raised up unto David, and a King shall reign and prosper. (2.) It is too
carnal an Interpretation, to think, the text speaks only of such a
justification, as is followed with abundance of outward Glory, peace and
Prosperity; whileas the whole Gospel informs us of something more spiritual,
attending upon and following justification. (3.) Righteousness and
justification are here made Synonymous, which ought not to be; though these two
be inseparably lincked together; yet they are formally different. (4.) Wherein
stands this righteousness and justification? He tells us, in the place, to
which he here refers us, that it stands in Remission of sins: But pardon
of sins is no righteousness; though a man pardoned has freedom from the
obnoxiousness to punishment; yet righteousness is another thing, and respects
the obligation to duty, required in the Law. (5.) Though it is true, Christ is
indeed the author of our justification and pardon (which is an effect of God's
pronouncing us righteous, and of His accepting of us, as righteous in
justification) as of our peace; yet that needs not destroy what we assert,
there being no inconsistency here, but a necessary and essential agreement
betwixt the Imputation of Christ' righteousness and justification; but it
rather contributeth to the establishment of our Assertion: Yet it is obvious,
that when Christ is called the Lord our Righteousness, there is more Imported,
than His being the author of our peace and justification; even the way also,
how He brings about our peace and justification, is here denoted, to wit, His
being made of God righteousness to His people; so that His righteousness
becomes theirs, in order to their peace and justification.

But to confirm his Interpretation, he tells us, 1. That the Imposition of name
upon either thing or person, often notes the quality, or proprity in either, or
same benefit redounding from either, answereable thereunto, as Esai. 9. his
name shall be called wonderful, that is, he shall be acknowledged and looked
upon by men, as a doer of things very strange. Ans. Seeing all these names given
to Christ Esai. 9. cannot be so interpreted, as to have this import mentioned;
for who will say, that the name everlasting Father, and the mighty God can be
so interpreted, as to denote only some answerable benefit redounding there
from; who sees not how little this can satisfy? But (2.) be it so, that this
name shall denote some benefit, redounding therefrom, why may it not denote
this Effect, which is only answerable hereunto, to wit, that His people shall
be made partaker of His Surety-righteousness, and have the same made over unto
them, as they become united unto Him, and have His name called upon them.

He tells us 2. That it is familiar to attribute the Effect to its Cause, or
Author, by a verb substantive only; as when Christ is called our Hop, our
life, Resurrection, peace and Glory, meaning that he is the author and
purchaser of all these. Ans. Yet this proves not, that He is the author of all
these Effects after one and the same way. He is otherwise our hope, of which He
is the Object* as well as the Author, than He is our life: And He is otherwise
our life and peace, which He works and creates in us, than He is our
Resurrection and Glory. So He is our Righteousness, by making us partaker of
His Surety-righteousness, and imputing it unto us, that it may be reckoned on
our Score; for this the nature of the thing requires, seeing a Righteousness we
must have, ere we be justified; and a Righteousness of our own we have not;
and therefore must have one imputed to us: and what Righteousness can suite us
better than His, who is THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS?

He tells us 3. That by Righteousness is meaned that justification, which
stands in Remission of Sins: and the meaning is, that through Him God would
be reconceled to them and pacified with them. Ans. Justification is something
else, than pardon of sins; for a justified man is one, that is declared and
pronunced Righteous in order to pardon of Sins; and in order to a persons being
declared such, by God, who always judges according to truth, he must be
Righteous; and Righteous can no man be in the sight of God, in order to his
justification, by what is in himself; and therefore he must have a
Righteousness from some other: and seeing Christ is called, the Lord our
Righteousness, it must be His Righteousness, which must be bestowed upon them,
in order to God's being reconciled to them, and pacified with them.

Fifthly another passage is Dan. 9: 24. to finish the transgression, and to make
an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting Righteousness. That all this is to be understood of the great and
spiritual effects of power and Grace, which are to be brought about by the
Messiah, no Christian candeny; and among the rest we see, He is to bring in a
Righteousness, and a Righteousness of ages, an everlasting Righteousness, that
shall endure for ever, and shall have everlasting effects: and this
Righteousness is something more, than Remission of Sins, and is distinct from
it, which is sufficiently held forth by the foregoing Expressions of finishing
transgressions, of making an end of Sins, and of making reconciliation for
iniquity: which says, that to justification there is a Righteousness required,
and that this Righteousness is not mere Remission of Sins; but some thing
beside, that must endure, when sin is taken away. This Righteousness is to be
brought in by the Messiah, as a favor, distinct from the preceding, and yet
inseparable there from, and firmly connected therewith. This Righteousness,
which the Messiah is to bring in, being something beside Remission of Sins,
must be a Righteousness wrought by the Messiah, and brought in for the use and
advantage of His people, who, as they are to be made partaker of the foregoing
favoures, are also to be made partaker of this; and consequently must have it
imputed to them* seeing no other way, it can be made theirs.

Sixthly We way adduce to this purpose, Zech. 3: 4. take away the filthy
garments from him: and unto him he said, behold, I have caused thine iniquity
to go from thee; I will cloth thee with change of raiment. Here by a vision is
signified to the propher, how the Lord would at length be reconciled to His
Church, and bring her in to His favor again, that her service might become
acceptable to Him, which now was wholly defiled, and so defiled, that even
their High priest, who should wear the holy garments, whereupon was engraven
Holiness to the Lord, is said to have had on filthy garments; whereby the
accuser of the Brethren, Satan the enemy, had no small advantage against them:
and the way is set down in borrowed terms, which are in part explained. First
the Lord caused to take away the filthy garments from the High Priest; and this
is more plainly expressed, in these words, I have caused thine iniquity to go
from thee. But beside this, there is a Righteousness required, in order to
acceptance with God, as was said above: therefore that this work of
justification may be completed, it is added, and I will cloth thee with change
of raiment. Some, it is true, would refer this to Sanctification; but others
unto justification. Iunius's Notes, and the English annot, take in both: and
sure, if this be true of Sanctification, which is wrought in us, it is much
more true of the Righteousness, that is required unto justification, which is
without us, and must be put on. And the Chaldee Paraphrase turns it thus,
behold I have taken away thine iniquity, and have clothed thee with
Righteousness. The word in the original, which is translated change of raiment,
imports some suite of apparel, that is not for ordinary wearing, but kept
for solemn times, and so may well import the Saints wedding or Marriage-suite:
and that which is added in the sollowing verse, may be understood, as denoting
Sanctification, which is added with the Mitre on his head, signifying the
graces of the Spirit, qualifying the High priest, for his work.

CHAP. VIII.
Some passages of the New Test. confirming the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Vindicated from the exceptions of JOHN GOODWINE.
HAving seen, what countenance the Old Test. gives unto the Truth, we are
asserting; and vindicat some of these passages from the Exceptions of John
Goodwine. We come next to search for confirmation of this truth, out of the New
Test. and I shall here begin with such, as the said Author takes notice of,
in order to excepting against them, in his Treatise of justification.

First Romans 3: 21, 22. But now the Righteousness of God without the Law, is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the Righteousness
of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that
believe. But if men would disput against this truth, they should except against
whole Chapters, in that Epistle; and disput against the very scope and design,
yea and all the Arguments of the Apostle, who, in the first part of that
Epistle, is about to clear and confirm that, which he sets down Chap. 1:
17. as the sum of the whole Gospel, and clear demonstration of its being the
power of God unto Salvation etc. to wit, that in it the Righteousness of God is
revealed from faith to faith; a Righteousness revealed, laid open, and offered
to all, that hear the Gospel, that they may lay hold on it by faith: a
Righteousness, revealed from the true and faithful God, unto our faith (as
Ambrose, P. Martyr and others understand it) or revealed from faith to faith,
that is only to faith, (as Pareus) or ( as Calvin, Beza, Musculus and others)
from a weak faith, to a stronger faith: or rather, to faith first and last,
through the whole of a Saints life here, as the following words clear it, as it
is written, the just shall live by faith. Yet let us see, what he excepteth
page 136.

He 1. Supposes, that he has proved before, that this passage speaks
plainly for the imputation of faith for Righteousness; but no way for the
imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, for any such purpose. And. We may
have occasion hereafter to examine his grounds, both from this and other
passages, for the Imputation of faith, in opposition to the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness. I shall only say at present, that this Righteousness
cannot be faith it self, because it is revealed to faith; and it is called the
Righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ; and so not faith it
self. One thing cannot be both the Act, and the Object of that Act. And what
sense would that make, to say, faith is upon all them that believe.

2. He said. By the Righteousness of God some under stand here His truth and
faithfulness, in keeping promise. Ans. But though God's Righteousness may
elsewhere import and signify His faithfulness in keeping promise; yet that is
not the Righteousness here understood; for this suiteth a guilty sinner; such
as the Apostle has been proving, in his foregoing discourse, both jews and
Gentiles to be; and is such a Righteousness as is requisite to such, as would
be justified in God's sight verse 20. and cannot be had by man's doing the deeds
of the Law, by which is the knowledge of sin, and which therefore rendereth
their case more desperate; and such a Righteousness, as is had by faith, and
which is unto all and upon all them that believe verse 20, 22. and such a
Righteousness, as is manifested without the Law verse 21. All which, and much
more, which might be mentioned, show, that some other thing is here understood
by the Righteousness of God, than His Faithfulness and Truth; even the
Righteousness of God, which is imputed unto, and bestowed upon all that believe.

3. He says. Hereby is mea^t that way, method and means, which God himself
has found out to justisis, or make men Righteous: or else that very
Righteousness, by which we stand justified, or Righteous, in the sight of God.
But not the Righteousness of Christ: nor is there the least appearance in the
context of any necessity to take is so. Ans. It is true, the (...) is here
showing the whole way, method and means of our justification; and
particularly, what that Righteousness is, by which poor sinners can stand
justified and Righteous in the sight of God; even a Righteousness, that is not
had by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: and this
sufficiently evinceth, that the Righteousness of God, here spoken of, is the
Righteousness of Christ, which says seeks in, and goes to Christ for, that
it may be imputed; for faith has no other end or errand to Christ, in
reference to a freedom from the wrath and Curse of God, but to lay hold on a
Righteousness, in which the poor self condemned sinner may appear before God.
Beside that the following words verse 24, 25, 26. where the Redemption and
propitiation of Christ, which was His Surety-righteousness, is mentioned, may
Satisfy us, as to what is meaned by this Righteousness of God. Sure, there is
not the least appearance of Paul's understanding that Mean and Method, which
this Excepter supposes to be the only Method, to wit. That our faith,
considered, as our Act, is that: as if that were the Righteousness of God, and
could constitute us Righteous, in the sight of God, and were a Righteousness
had without works and without the Law, and received by all that believe.

Secondly, Romans 3. last Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid;
yea we establish the Law. Where the Apostle, preoceupying an objection,
asserteth; That through justification by faith, he did not make void the law,
but rather did establish it; the ground whereof is this, That by the Gospel-way
of justification, the law gets full Satisfaction, in all points, because
Christ not only Satisfied for the penalty thereof, which we were guilty of, and
did lie under; but did also yield a perfect obedience thereunto; that so He
might make up a full and complete Surety-righteousness, by the Imputation of
which unto His own, or the Lord's reckoning it upon their score, when they
receive it by faith, they may be justified. And thus, though sinners, who have
broken the Law, and so have forfeited the reward, promised to such as observe
it in all points, and are come under the Curse, threatened to Transgressors, be
not only freed from the Curse, but receive the rich Recompense of reward; yet
the law is not made null and void, but is rather established and confirmed in
its full force, both as to its Commands and Sanction.

John Goodwine excepteth 1. There is no necessity, that by the Law, in
thisplace, should be meaned precisely the moral law; others understand it as
well of the Ceremonial Law. Ans. But sure, Paul's doctrine was not for
establishing of the Ceremonial Law, in whole, or in part. The Law, whereof the
Apostle is speaking, is that Law, by which both Gentiles and jews were
convinced of sin, and had their mouths stopped, and were become guilty before
God verse 19. and that Law, which makes a discovery of sin verse 20. comp. with
Romans 7: 7. and by the deeds of which no flesh shall be justified, in the sight
of God verse 20, 28. It is that Law, by the works whereof even Abraham could not
be justified, nor David Romans 4: 1, 2, 6, 7, 8.

2. He said, It is much more probable, that Paul should here assert the
establishing of the Ceremonial Law, than of the Moral 1. Because the jews were
more tender and jealous over the Ceremonial Law, placing the far greatest part,
if not the whole of their hop of justification and Salvation, in the
observation thereof. 2. Because the Doctrine of faith did not carry any such
color of opposition to the Moral, as to the Ceremonial part of their Law. Ans.
To imagine, that no Law is here to be understood, but the Ceremonial Law, is to
make the Apostle establish here, what he destroys else where, particularly in
his Epistles to the Galatians and Colossians, and in his whole doctrine: yea
this would make the Apostle, to cross the whole intent and design of the
Gospel, which who dar once have the least thought of? The Law here does
plainly signify that, which was the Rule of Righteousness and of Obedience,
and was publicly given unto the jews for that end; and by obedience to and
observation of which Law, they were expecting justification and life; as by the
young man is manifest, who came to Christ to enquire what he should do to be
saved; and said, he had observed all these etc. As to his reasons, they have no
force: for. 1. The jews had a zeal for the whole Law, but not according to
knowledge, and went about to establish their own Righteousness, which was not in
mere Ceremonials but in obedience and full conformity (as they supposed) unto
the Righteousness, which they sought after, yea followed and hunted after Romans
9: 31. and 10. 3. (2.) The doctrine of faith carries the same color of
opposition to the Moral Law, that it does to the Ceremonial, in the point of
justification. And it is not the doctrine of faith that carries any color of
opposition to the Ceremonial Law; though the doctrine of the
Gospel-administration does; else we must ^ay, there was nothing of the doctrine
of faith, under the Law, or that old dispensation.

3. He says. Though the moral Law were precisely here understood; yet there is
no necessity to say, that it is established by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness: for, Some affirm, that the Law is therefore said to be
established by faith, because faith compasses and attaineth that
righteousness, which the Law sought after, and could not attain. 2. The Moral
Law may in this sense be said to be established; because faith purges the
hearts of believers, and so promotes the observation of it. Ans. As for the
first, I do not understand, what the meaning of it is. What is that
Righteousness, which faith compasses, and the Law sought after, and could not
attain? It would seem to be nothing else but Holiness and Sanctification: and
if so, the two make but one: and therefore I answer to this also, by saying to
the Second. That albeit Subordinates can well consist together, and this sense
needs not thrust out our sense; yet I judge, this is not the maine Objection,
that Paul obviateth here: he reserveth a peculiar place for that hereafter,
where he speaks fully to it Chap. 6. and 7. But he speaks of the
establishing of the Law, both in its commanding power and Sanction; for having
spoken so much of justification by faith in opposition to justification by the
Law; and having said in the foregoing verse that the circumcision shall be
justified by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith: and neither the one,
nor the other by or through the Law; some might have thought, that by his thus
crying up of faith, and speaking so much of it, and only of it, as to
justification, he was quite casheering and rendering the Law null and void: And
therefore he answers, That he is so far from making the Law void through
faith, that he rather does establish the same, as was shown above.

4. He says. The Law may be said to be established by says, in as much as the
threatenings of the Law are by the doctrine of faith declared not to be in
vain, Christ's sufferings being a full confirmation of the force, efficacy and
authority of the Curse of the Law. Ans. This is so fargood: But why shall not
also His obedience be a full confirmation of the force, efficacy and authority
of the commanding power of the Law? This being principally intended in the Law,
belongs as much, at least, to the establishment thereof, as the Sanction. We
assert not the one with an exclusion of the other; but assert the establishment
of both by faith: and thus the Law is by faith fully established, in all its
parts and demands.

5. He says. The best Interpretation is, that by the Law here is meant that
part of the Old Test. which comprehends the writting of Moses, with those
other books, which together with the writtings of the Prophets, make up the
entire body thereof, as it was used verse 21. and in this sense, the Law may
most properly be said to be established by Paul teaching the Doctrine of faith,
because it is fully consonant and agreeable to those things, that are written
there. Ans. But this sense is not the same with the sense of the word Law v.
21. for the Law there is mentioned, as distinct from the Prophets. And if that
part of the Old. Test. be meaned, which is different from the book of the
Prophets, what ground was there to think, that the doctrine of faith did more
seem to cross what was con ained in the one, than what was contained in the
other? especially seeing he had said v. 21. that the Righteousness, he spoke of,
was witnessed both by the Law and the Prophets. And if both should be here
understood, seeing the Apostle did fully enough declare his mind as to that
v.21. what ground is there to think, that he was called to remove that
objection here again? And what imaginable color can be from any thing that
the Apostle spoke, in the foregoing words, for such an objection, as this? This
manifestly is nothing but a groundless invention of men, that know not else
what to say.

Thirdly Romans 4: 6. where mention is made of a Righteousness imputed without
works, and that as the ground of a man's blessedness and justification: for it
is of the blessedness of justification that the Apostle is there speaking, and
he shows, that this is attained, not by the works of the Law, but by an
imputed Righteousness, which can be none else, that the Righteousness of God,
spoken of in the preceding Chapter; or of Christ, who wrought the Redemption,
and was set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood.

Against this He excepteth page 140. saying 1. If we^will needs here understand
a positive legal Righteousness, it is much more probable, He should mean a
Righteousness consisting of such, or of such an obedience to the Law, as has
an absolute and perfect agreableness to every man's condition and calling
respectively, than the Righteousness of Christ, which has no such property in
it. Ans. The Apostle speaks of a Righteousness, and of a Righteousness
imputed, and all Righteousness must consist in obedience to the Law, and in
full conformity thereto: and seeing it is said to be imputed, and not by our
works, it must of necessity follow, that the Apostle is to be understood, as
speaking of the Surety-righteousness of Christ. And if the Righteousness of
Christ, who gave perfect obedience to the Law, and was constituted Mediator and
Surety by the Father, and as such did give full Satisfaction both in obeying
the Law, and in paying the penalty, be not such an obedience to the Law, as
will serve every Believers turn, where else will the believer find a more
adequat Righteousness? Shall we think, that his act of says, which is but one
act of obedience to the Law, or an act of obedience to one command of the Law,
has a more perfect and absolute agreablness to every man's condition
respectively, than the perfect obedience and Righteousness of Christ! Let such
believe this, as can.

2. He says. The Righteousness, which God is said here to impute, is placed in
Remission of Sins. Ans. That Imputation of Righteousness and pardon of sins
do inseparably go together, is true; and that the one proves the other, is
also clear from these words. But it is not proved, nor can it be proved, that
Imputed Righteousness and Remission of Sins are the same; seeing it is obvious
enough, that Righteousness is one thing, and pardon of sins is another
distinct thing. No man will say, that a pardoned thief, is a Righteous man;
for that were as much, as to say, He was never a thief. It is true, by pardon
He is no more obnoxious to the penalty; the obligation to underlye that being
now taken away: yet that will not evince, that He is a Righteous man: and there
is still a difference betwixt him, and one that never was chargable with that
guilt: this man, as to this, is indeed a Righteous man, but not the other.

3. He says. The phrase of imputing Righteousness is best understood by the
contrary expression of imputing sin; and this signifies either to look upon a
person, as justly liable to punishment; or to inflict punishment upon him, in
consideration of sin. Therefore doubtless to impute Righteousness imports
nothing else, but either to look upon a man as righteous, or to confer upon
him the privileges, belonging to persons truly righteous. Ans. This is true,
if we speak of a person, who is truly Righteous, antecedently unto this
Imputation; as the sinner is supposed to be truly a sinner antecedently unto
this Imputation. But when sin is imputed to a Righteous person, or to one, who,
before the imputation, was not guilty, nor looked upon as a Sinner, as Sin was
imputed to Christ, the Holy and Righteous one, who knew no sin; and as Sin
through injustice, was imputed to Naboth, who was not guilty of what was laid
to his charge; Imputation, in this case, must import some thing else, than
either of these two mentioned, and that antecedently to an holding of that
person liable to punishment, or to a punishing of him, with consideration to
that sin: thus before Christ could be looked upon, as a person liable to
punishment, or could be punished for sin, by the Righteous God, sin must first
have been imputed to Him, and reckoned upon His Score; and that Righteously,
because of His undertaking and willingly submitting to the debt, as Surety: as
when Iezabel would have Noboth killed as a Malefactor, she first by injustice
and indirect means, made him guilty of sin, and then held him liable to
punishment, and dealt with him accordingly. So, upon the other hand, when
Righteousness is imputed to a sinner (as we all are sinners) before He can be
looked upon as a Righteous person, or be dealt with, as a Righteous person, He
must first have a Righteousness imputed to him, and bestowed upon him: for how
can God, whose judgment is according to truth, look upon a person as
Righteous, and confer privileges upon him, due only to such as are Righteous,
who is not Righteous indeed? Must He not first bestow a Righteousness upon him,
and reckon a Righteousness upon his Score, to the end He may be just and
Righteous, when He is the justifier of him that believes?

Lastly He said. Here is neither peer nor peep of the least ground or reason to
perceive, that by Righteousness, in this Scripture, should be meant the
Righteousness of Christ. Ans. It is enough that the Text says, Righteousness
is imputed: for the man here spoken of, has not a Righteousness of his own, as
the Apostle has proved in the preceding Chapters, and does here, take for
granted: And therefore this Imputed Righteousness must be the Righteousness of
another; and it must be such a Righteousness of another as can found free
Remission of Sins. And whose Righteousness else can this be, if it be not
Christ's? Is there any third competitour here imaginable? must it not be the
Righteousness of Him, whom faith goes out unto and laith hold on, in order to
justification? Must it not be His Righteousness, who was the Mediator, who laid
down the price of Redemption, and was a propitiation, as He told us in the
preceding Chapter? Some men, in alleiging a difference, betwixt a
Righteousness imputed to us Sinners, and the Righteousness of Christ, as if
there could be any other Righteousness imputable to us, except the
Surety-righteousness of Christ; as they expressly in this join with Socinians
(See Volkel de vera Relig. lib. 5. cap. 21. p. 565.) and with Papists and
Arminians; so they declare themselves utter strangers to the Gospel; yea
greater strangers; than those were, against whom the Apostle wrote, who took it
for granted, that if any Righteousness from without, or that was not by any
thing, which we do, were imputed, it behoved to be the Righteousness of the
Mediator: And this, we may conceive, is the reason, why the Apostle does not
say, in so many express words, that it was the Righteousness of Christ; for who
could have thought of another?

Fourthly Romans 5: 19. a place, with its whole contexture pregnant for our
purpose: for the Apostle is not only here confirming, but also illustrating
this whole matter, from the Imputation of Adam's Sin unto his posterity; and
after many various and emphatick expressions, used there-anent from verse 12.
and forward, he says here verse 19* for as by one man's disobedience, many were
made Sinners; so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Socinus
de Servat. lib. 4. cap. 6. is so bold as to tell us, That he supposes, there
is nothing written in the Scriptures, that has given us a greater occasion of
erring, than that comparison betwixt Adam and Christ, which Paul made and did
prosecute at length here. And he would clear to us the comparison thus, That
as by Adam's Sin and disobedience, it came to pass, that all men were
condemned and died; so by Christ's righteousness and obedience it came to
pass, that they wero absolvod, and did live: for Christ by His own
Righteousness and Obedience, by virtue of the decree of God, did penetrate the
heavens, there to reign for ever, and there he begote eternal life and
everlasting blessedness both to Himself, and to His. How aliene this is from
the whole of the Apostle's discourse, needs not be declared, seeing there is not
one word giving the least hint of the Apostle's design to be, to declare how
and what way Christ obtained power and authority to save: Yet He goes on to
tell us, That as Adam's fault made him guilty of death, whence it came to
pass, that all mankind, that are procreat of him after that guilt, is
obnoxious to death: so Christ by His Righteousness purchased to Himself eternal
life; whence it comes te pass, that who ever are procreat of him, partake of
this life. But He never once takes notice, that Paul gives for the ground of
all mankind's becoming guilty of death, their sinning in him verse 12. even
such, as had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression verse 14.
yea, in every verse this cause is noted, or pointed at: and it being Notour of
it self, that ifall mankind did sin in Adan, Adam's sin must be imputed unto
them; so Christ's Righteousness must be imputed unto all His, inreference to
their justification, and that with a much more.

Let us now see what John Goodwine excepteth page 142. etc. It is not here
(said He) said, that by the Imputation of Adam's disobedience, men are made
formally Sinners, but simply sinners, that is, either obnoxious to death and
condemnation, or else sinners by propagation, not Imputation. Ans. This is the
same upon the matter, with Bellarmin's answer de justif. lib. 2. cap. 9. and
here we have a distinction proposed without any explication, to wit. betwixt
simply sinners, and formally sinners* And what can he mean by formally
sinners? possibly he means that, which otherwise is expressed by inherently
sinners: And if so, though Adam's posterity, so soon as they come to have a
being, have an universal corruption of Nature convoyed by propagation; yet that
is not it, which is properly said to be Imputed: for that which is imputed, is
the guilt of Adam's sin, whereby they become sinners, that is guilty legally,
and so obnoxious to punishment, death and condemnation: and this is enough for
us; for as the posterity of Adam have the sin of Adam so imputed to them, that
they become guilty and obnoxious to wrath; so Believers have the Righteousness
of Christ imputed unto them, and they thereupon are accounted legally
righteous. (2) Whileas he will not grant, that Adam's posterity are sinners by
imputation, he joineth with the Socinians, who turn these words verse 12. (...)
not in whom; but because, or whereas, which the Ethiopick version does better
sense, saying. Because that sin is imputed unto all men, even unto them who
know not what is that sin; And the Arabic turn thus, seeing all have now
sinned: and the Syriack word is Behi, or Bhi, which may as well be interpreted
in whom, as because. And in several other places, this praeposition so
construed, as here in the Greek, has this same import; as Mark 2. 4. Luk 5:
25. and 11: 22. Romans 6: 21. Phil. 4: 10. 1. These. 3: 7. But enough of this
here, seeing that matter is sufficiently cleared by the orthodox, writting
against the Socinians; and we have also spoken of it against the Quakers.

Again says He, Neither does the Apostle here oppose unto, or compare the
Obedience of Christ, with the disobedience of Adam, as one Act unto or with
another; but as Satisfaction to and with the provocation; or the Remedy to and
with the disease. Otherwise he should make sins of Omission to be no
disobedience, be cause Omissions are no Acts. Ans. The Apostle so compares the
Obedience of Christ with the disobedience of Adam, as the Satisfaction with the
provocation, or as the Remedy with the disease; as that withal and chiesly,
he clears up the manner and way thereof to be by Imputation, thus, That as
Adam's sin of disobedience (which includes both Omission and Commission, being
a Violation of the Law, and of the Covenant) was imputed to his posterity, and
they hence became guilty and obnoxious to death, yea and were punished with
original Corruption, (which comes by propagation) and the consequences
thereof; so Christ's obedience, which was full and complete, is imputed unto
Believers, whereupon they become Righteous, in order to their recovery out of
their Natural state of sin and misery.

Further He says, By that obedience of Christ, whereby it is here said, that
many are, or shall be made Righteous, that is jus^ified, we cannot understand
that Righteousness of Christ, which consists only in obedience to the Moral
Law; but that Satisfactory Righteousness, or obedience, which He performed to
that peculiar Law of Mediation, which was imposed upon him, and which chiesly
consisted in his sufferings. Ans. By the obedience of Christ unto the Law of
Mediation, strickly so taken, as distinguished from His obedience to the Moral
Law, believers could not be made Righteous, as the posterity of Adam are made
sinners by his disobedience; for that could not be properly imputed, as this
is, as has been shown; and so Paul's similitude should halt. But (2.) Why is
Christ's obedience to the Law of Mediation set in opposition to His obedience
to the Moral Law, seeing this was a part of that, and unto this He obliged
Himself, in undertaking the Mediation. Was He not by the Law of Mediation bound
as well to give obedience to the Law, as to suffer the penalty? And was He not
obliged to both, as Surety, in room and place? And then why may not both be
imputed unto them? (3.) Why should obedience here be thus restricked to the Law
of Mediation? He adds two reasons, but neither are valide. The 1. is this,
Because otherwise the opposition ^etwixt Adam's disobedience, which was but one
single Act, and Christ's Obedience, if it were his universal conformity to the
Law, would not hold. Ans. This same man told us in his former exception, That
Christ's obedience, in respect of Adam's disobedience, was considered and
opposed, as the Satisfaction to the provocation, and as the Remedy to the
disease: now if this be true, Christ made Satisfaction for no provocation, but
for that single act of eating the forbidden fruit: and what He did and suffered
should be only a Remedy for that one distemper: and if so, how shall the rest
of the Provocations and diseases be taken away? or are there no more
Provocations or diseases? (2.) Adam's disobedience was no Single act of
disobedience; but a disobedience including the breach of the whole Moral Law:
Says not James, that he who offends in one, is guilty of all? Iam. 2: 10.
and prove it too, in the following verse? The 2. is this, The Effect that is
here attributed to this obedience of Christ, to wit, justification, or
Righteous making of many, is constantly appropriated to the death and blood of
Christ. Ans. This that is attributed to the blood and death of Christ
elsewhere, to wit, our justification, shows, that the death of Christ is not
understood exclusively; for by His death, exclusivly considered, we cannot-be
made Righteous; for the Imputation of another's suffering, though it may exeem
from death and suffering; yet it cannot constitute Righteous, in reference to
the commanding Law. (2.) The death of Christ must not be looked on, as one act
of obedience; but as including all His foregoing acts of obedience, belonging
to His State of humiliation, whereof His death was the crowning piece; and so
as including as His whole suffering; so His whole obedience to the Law, under
which he was made: for He is said to have been obedient unto death, even unto
the death of the cross Phil. 2: 8. not that the death of the cross was all His
obedience, as it was not the whole state of His humiliation, but the
terminating remarkable act thereof; as it was not all His suffering, His whole
life being a life of suffering. (3.) If this obedience be understood of this
one act of obedience in His dying, and justification be looked upon, as the
effect of this only, what shall become of His Soul-sufferings, while He was in
an agony in the garden? But if the act of obedience in His death, include
these, why not His whole state of humiliation? And if it include all this, why
not also His obedience to the Law, seeing His being made under the Law,
belongs to His state of humiliation, as the Apostle tells us Gal. 4: 4.

He excepteth further, saying, Suppose, that by the obedience of Christ, we
should here undorstand, His active obedience to the Moral Law, yet it will not
hence follow, that men must be justified, or made Righteous by it, in such a
way of imputation. Ans. If by Christ's obedience to the Moral Law, we be made
Righteous, as the posterity of Adam were made sinners by the disobedience of
Adam, that obedience of Christ must necessarily be imputed to us, as Adam's
disobedience was imputed to his posterity: for there is no other way
imaginable. Let us hear his reason to the contrary.

For certain it is (said he) that that justification or Righteous-making,
whereof the Apostle speaks verse 19. is the same with that, which He had
spoken of v. 16, 17, 18. Now that Righteousness verse 17. is described verse 16.
to be the gift (i.e. the forgiveness) of many offenses i.e. of all the
offenses, whereof a man either does, or shall stand guilty of before God, unto
justification: and evident it is, that that Righteousness etc. cannot stand in
the Imputation of a fulfilling of the Law. Ans. (1.) Though making Righteous
and justification be inseparable; yet they are not formally one and the same;
but Righteous-making (to wit by Imputation) is antecedent unto justification,
and the ground thereof, as becoming sinners is not formally to be condemned,
but is prior to it, and the ground thereof. (2.) That free gift mentioned verse
16. is not free forgiveness, but is that, which is opposite to judgment, or
guilt, or reatus, tending to condemnation; and so is the same with that which
is called the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace verse 15. and the gift of
Righteousness verse 17. which is in order to justification and free pardon. As
therefore the (...), guilt is not the same with (...) condemnation; but tends
thereunto; so neither is the (...) the free gift the same with (...)
justification, but leads thereunto, and is followed therewith. (3.) Nor can
the Adversary Himself take these words verse 16. the free gift is of many
offenses, to be the same with free pardon of many offenses, else he must say,
that this free pardon goes before justification and consequently is not
justification it self, as he says else where; for the text says, that the
free gift is of many offenses unto justification; as judgment or (...) was
antecedent to condemnation. (4.) So then, the true meaning is, that the free
gift of Righteousness has respect unto many sins, to the end, that
justification and pardon, that follows thereupon, might be full, whileas the
guilt, that was imputed to Adam's posterity, had respect only to his first
breach of the Covenant, for which all were made obnoxious to condemnation.

Lastly He says. It is but loose and unsavory argueing, to reason from a
thing simply done, to a determinat manner of doing of it: so is it to reason
from being made Righteous, to a being made Righteous by Imputation. Ans. The
particular manner or way how we are made Righteous, is abundantly signified by
our being made and constitute Righteous by the Righteousness of another, who
was our Head, Representative and Surety: and that because it can be imagined to
be no other way, than by Imputation. And Further, the whole discurse of the
Apostle here, and particularly the comparison so much here insisted upon,
puts the matter beyond all debate. As Adam's sin was imputed to his
posterity, whereby all were accounted sinners, and dealt with as such, even as
guilty, by reason of Adam's act of sin: So Christ's Righteousness becomes ours
by Imputation, and we are made Righteous and accounted such and dealt with as
such, upon the account thereof. No man can imagine, how one shall be accounted
guilty, and punished as guilty of a sinful act, done by another, unless the
guilt of that sinful act be imputed to him; so no man can imagine, how one can
be accounted Righteous, and dealt with as such, upon the account of the
Righteousness of another, if that Righteousness of the other be not imputed to
him. And beside, This is called a gift, a free gift, and a free gift of
Righteousness, and a free gift of Righteousness received, which fully point
forth this Imputation, which we contend for.

Fifthly. Romans 8: 3, 4. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God, sending His own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might
be fulfilled in us. The Law could not help a sinner from under the Curse, nor
unto the recompense of reward, because it was weak through the flesh, through
the sin and corruption of man, whereby he could not give right and full
obedience thereunto. And therefore God sent His Son, in the likeness of sinful
flesh, who by His obedience and suffering, in His state of humiliation, took
away the sting of death, and the strength of sin, by satisfying all the
demandes of the Law, the whole (...), the jus and right of the Law, which
consisted in yielding full and perfect obedience, and in making full
Satisfaction for the violation committed: for the Law said, cursed is every
one, that continues not in all things, which are written therein, to do them
Deuteronomy. 27: 26. Gal. 3: 13. And the Righteousness, which is of the Law, is, that
the man, who does these things, shall live by them. And this was so ordered,
that the Righteousness of the Law, the (...) of the Law, the jus and demand of
the Law mentioned, might be fulfilled in us, that is, in our Nature, by the
Redeemer and Surety, who did and suffered all this in and for His own. The
Ethiopik Version is a clear commentary, and when we were impotent to do the
commands of the Law, God sent His own Son for that sin, who took on our body of
sin, and condemned sin it self in our body, that he might justify us, and be
propitious unto us, and that so he might fulfill the work of the commands of
the Law for them, who walk in the Law of the holy Spirit. Let us now see what
John Goodwine excepteth p. 145. etc.

He says. (1.) Some understand this rather of Sanctification, than of
justification; and by the fulfilling of the Righteousness of the Law, that
Evangelical obedience to the precepts thereof, which all those, that truly
believe in Christ, do in part perform, and desire and strive to perform more
perfectly. Ans. Gospel justification and Gospel-Sanctification agree well
together, and Christ is the true foundation and cause of both. But that this is
to be understood rather of justification, appears hence. (1.) That this is a
further explication and confirmation of what was said verse 1. There is
therefore now no Condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus (2.) all that
measure of Sanctification, which the Saints through Grace attain unto here,
cannot be called a fulfilling of the Righteousness of the Law, the Laws
demands are not thereby satisfied; for it calls for perfect obedience, which
none of the Sanctified can give. (3.) If this were understood of
Sanctification, why are these words added, who walk not after the flesh, bue
after the Spirit?

2. He said. By the Righteousness of the Law, which is here said to be
fulfilled in believers, cannot be meant the Righteousness or active obedience
of Christ imputed, because it must of necessity be such a Righteousness and
such a fulfilling, as may be apprehended as a proper and suitable effect of
Christ's condemning sin in the flesh, as the particle (...) declares. But it
is unpessible that the active obedience of Christ, or the imputation of it,
should be any proper effect of condemning sin in the flesh, that is of the
abolishing or taking away the guilt, or the accusing and condemning power of
sin; for when the guilt of sin is purged away, there needs no other
Righteousness, nor Imputation of Righteousness for justification. Ans. (1.)
Christ's obedience and Suffering need not be distinguished, both being done in
His state of humiliation, and belonging-thereto, and both being necessary to
answer the demand of the Law, which we did lie under: Christ performed both,
to the end the whole (...), or jus and right of the Law might be ful^illed in
us, and for us, by this Surety. And before guilt be purged away, we must have
both imputed to us; for justification by says must not make the Law void, but
rather establish it. (2.) Neither is this verse 4. to be looked on, as holding
forth the end of that, which did immediately preceed in the end of verse 3. or of
Christ's condemning sin in the flesh; but rather as a further end of God's
sending His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh; or as a comprehensive end of
all that was mentioned before.

3. He says. That clause in them still notes either a subjective inhesion of
some things in persons, or else some kind of Efficiency. But the Righteousness
of Christ is Subjectively and inherently in Himself only; nor are we the
workers of this righteousness. Ans. Though the Righteousness of Christ be
subjected in Him only, and wrought by Him alone: yet the same being imputed
unto Believers, the Righteousness of the Law may be said to be fulfilled in
them because by faith they are in Christ, and Christ is in them: and in them,
is as much, as for them, or upon them, or on their account (as this same person
hereafter grants, in a like case) and so it is accepted of God for all ends,
as if it were performed by them; and so it is fulfilled in our nature, for for
this end, He came in the likeness of sinful flesh.

3. He says. If by Righteousness of the Law we understand that entire
obedience, which every believer, according to the great variety of their
several conditions, callings, and relations stand bound to perform, it cannot
be said to be fulfilled in them, by the imputation of Christ's righteousness:
for every believer is bound to many more particular acts, than can be found in
all that golden Catalogue of works of Righteousness performed by Christ. Ans.
If the works of Righteousness, performed by Christ, shall not be a complete
Righteousness, that can Satisfy the demandes of the Law, where shall believers
get a compleet Righteousness? Shall their poor imperfect obedience, wherewith
themselves are not satisfied, but complain much of, and mourn for, be a more
perfect and complete fulfilling of the Righteousness of the Law, than was the
perfect obedience of Christ, with which the Father was well pleased? Or shall
the single and weak act of their Faith (as this Author says) be a more entire
fulfilling of the (...) of the Law, than the Catalogue of the works of
Righteousness, performed by Christ? What probable ground is there for this
imagination? (2.) Christ's obedience was perfect, and the Lawgiver was
satisfied there with, and accepted of it, in the behalf of all the chosen
ones, and all their defects and sins, in their various conditions, callings
and Relations, were done away by the Satisfaction made by Christ: so that the
(...) of the Law was perfectly fulfilled, in their behalf; and this being
imputed unto them and received by faith, no more is requisite unto a stateing
of them into a state of pardon and right to glory.

5. He says. The word (...) signifies not obedience to or conformity with the
Law, but rather that justification, which was the end and intent of the Law, or
rather that jus, or right, or Law ( as it were) of the Law. Ans. But all this
will not weaken our Argument: for that right, jus, or demand of the Law was, as
to us now sinners, both Satisfaction for transgressions committed, and full and
complete obedience; and till both were done and performed, there could be no
justification of sinners: and so this rather establishes than hurts the
doctrine of Imputation, whatever he may imagine.

6. He says By the word Law, cannot necessarily be understood the Moral Law
for 1. The weakness of the Law extends also to the judicial and Ceremonial. 2.
The jews, to whom he specially addresseth himself, in all this disputati^n,
built as much on the observation of the Ceremonial Law. 3. The Moral Law,
though perfectly observed, could not have justified all men, at least, not the
jews, who were obliged to the observation of other Laws. 4. The Imputation of
the observation of the Moral Law would not have served for the justification of
the jews, who were under the transgression of, other Laws. Ans. It wi^^
satisfy us, if by the Law here be understood, that universal Rule of
Righteousness, which God prescribed unto men, and that certainly is the Moral
Law, whereof, as to the jews, the Ceremonial and judicial were a part, or were
reduced unto: and particularly the Ceremonial Law, being God's instituted
worship, they were obliged to observe it by virtue of the Second command. And
thus both the Exception, and all the Reasons confirming it, evanish: for (1.)
we take not the Law here so narrowly, as to exclude the other laws, which God
gave to the jews, seeing they are all reduced there unto, and comprehended
thereunder. (2.) Paul is here mainly writting for Information of the Gentiles,
the Church of Rome; and though there might be some jews among them, and what
he says may be also for their use: yet this will not prove that by the Law, he
understands any other, than that perfect rule of Righteousness, which God
gave unto them, comprehending these other Laws, as appendices thereof. (3.)
The Moral Law, thus taken, if observed, could have justified even jews, if we
suppose they had not been born sinners. (4.) Christ having fulfilled all
Righteousness, His Righteousness was an observation of this Universal Law: and
therefore the Imputation thereof can serve for the justification both of jews
and Gentiles.

Lastly He says. The clear meaning of the place seems to be this, That that
justification, or way of making men Righteous, which the writings of Moses
prophefied of long since, to wit, by faith in the Messiah, might be
accomplished, made good, and fully manifested in us, or upon us, viz in our
justification, who by an eminency of holiness in our lives, above the strain
and pitch of men under the Law, give testimony unto the world, that the
Messiah, the great justifier, is indeed come into the world, and having
suffered for sin and overcome death, has poured out the Spirit of Grace
abundantly upon those that believe. Ans. (1.) To take the Law here for the
mere writtings of Moses, and then to Interpret the fulfilling thereof, as is
here done, is to exclude the witnessing of the Prophets, which Paul expressly
mentions Romans 3: 21. (2.) What could this contribute to prove, that there was
now no condemnation to such, as were in Christ Jesus, among the Gentiles? (3.)
How can this be a proof of what was said verse 3. foregoing? (4.) How can this
be the end of Christ's condemning sin in the flesh, as himself said it was,
Except 2? (5.) He told us before, that (...) did properly Signify jus, right,
or Law of the Law, now I pray, what is this (...), this jus, right, of Moses's
writtings? And how is that (...) o^ Righteousness fulfilled? (6.) What then can
be meant by the weakness of Moses's writtings? or how could they be said to be
weak through the flesh? (7.) And how could God be said, by this Interpretation,
to send His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, because Moses's writtings were
weak through the flesh? (8.) I see then, in us may import the same that upon us
imports, though it was excepted against formerly, as we heard (9.) It seems
by this Interpretation, that there was no Eminency of holiness or walking after
the Spirit, among those, who were under the Law; which is utterly false* (10.)
Christ, by His coming, did not only fulfill Moses's writtings, but also all the
predictions and prophecies, many of which are else where to be found, than in
Moses's writtings. Yet to fortify this Audacious and groundless Interpretation.

He tells us 1. That this Interpretation (as far at least, as ^oncerneth the
clause in question, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us)
is confirmed by the sweet proportion between, such a fulfilling etc. as the
effect, and that sending of Christ etc. as the cause or means thereof. Ans.
But before this proportion appear to be so sweet, it must be shown to us, what
proportion there is hereby kept with the manifest scope of the Apostle, which
is to clear and explain, how there is now no condemnation to them, which are
in Christ Jesus, notwithstanding of the weakness of the Law, through the flesh.
As also it must be shown to us, what interest these words, for what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, have, or can have, in this
Interpretation: for a proportion, that suiteth not all the parts of the Text,
is but a disproportion, being a plain perversion of the true meaning of the
words.

He tells us. 2. In this Interpretation the word (...) fulfilled has its proper
and genuine force, which is to signify the accomplishment, making good, or full
manifestation of a thing, which before was only promised, or foretold. Ans. Not
only the verb (...) and (...) is often taken in another sense than is here
alleged, as we see Romans 13: 8. Gal. 5: 14. but the very verb in the same Tense
and Mood, that is here viz. (...) is used, to import some other thing, than a
fulfilling of what was promised, as we see 2. Cor. 10: 6. when your obedience
is fulfilled, that is, perfected, established and confirmed. So Ioh. 15: 11.
and that your joy might be full, or fulfilled, that is, might be abundant and
full in all points, and upon all considerations. So Luke 22: 16. until it be
fulfilled in the Kingdom of heaven, that is, perfected.

He tells us. 3. The Righteousness of the Law here must be the same with that
mentioned. Romans 3: 21, 31. Ans. The Righteousness of the Law here, is the Laws
(...), jus, right and demand, which was Satisfied by what Christ, the Surety,
did and Suffered. But that Righteousness, mentioned Romans 3: 21. is the
Righteousness of God, or of Christ, which he performed, to Satisfy the (...)
or Righteousness of the Law; and so they are not the same formally, this being
the obligation, and that the payment. It is true, the Law here and Romans 3: 31.
is the same; and that makes for us, as appears by our foregoing Vindication
of that place.

He tells us* 4. By this Interpretation, this passage is of perfect Sympathy
with those Romans 3: 21, 22, 25. Ans. This also will make for us, as appears by
our foregoing Vindication, where this gloss was rejected: and I wonder, how he
could imagine such a perfect agreement, seeing there mention is made of the
Prophets, as well as of the Law, giving countenance to Gospel Justification:
but here by his Interpretation, only the Law of Moses is understood: where then
will he make his harmony appear? And what would he hence infer? 1. (says he)
That the righteousness of God, that is, the way that God holds for
justification of men, stands in remission of sins Ans. Of this we have
hithertill seen neither peer nor peep: pardon of sins has no affinity with the
(...) legis, the righteousness of the law. 2. Says he That this righteousness
or justification of his is witnessed, that is, asserted and vindicated by the
law, that is, the writtings of Moses. Ans. Neither is Righteousness and
justification one and the same thing, as we said above, nor are the writtings
of Moses all the law and the prophets. Neither is witnessed by the law the
same, with fulfilling of the law. 3. Says he, That this way was not
manifested, declared, or fulfilled, that is, fully revealed to the bottom and
foundation of it, till the coming of Christ, and dying for sin. Ans. What ever
truth be in this, there is no foundation for it here, but in his Imagination;
as is manifest from what is said. And thus this place is vindicated.

Sixthly. He mentions next, that he may except against, Romans 9: 31, 32. But
why is not verse 30. mentioned? Is it because the matter is there too clearly
hold forth? The Apostle does there expressly say, That the Gentiles, which
followed not after righteousness, That is, did not pretend to justification by
the^r own works; nor once think, by their own works to patch up a
righteousness, wherein they might appear before God, and be absolved) have
attained to righteousness. even the righteousness which is of faith (that is,
have a righteousness imputed to them, and they made possessours there of by
faith, laying hold upon it) But Israel (as it follows verse 31.) who followed
after the law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness,
(That is. Isra^l, who conceiting their own works, and crying them up, and
seeking after Absolution, justification and life, by the law of righteousness,
and their conformity thereunto, and that with all earnestness and eager
persecution, have not attained to that, they were pursueing after) verse 32.
Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of
the law (that is, They would not submit to the Gospel-way of justification,
through the righteousness of Christ, laid hold on by faith; but would still be
essaying the way of works; though all they did, was rather a shadow of
obedience, or of conformity to the law, than a true performance of what was
commanded.) The Aethiopick Version, though a corrupt Translation, yet hinteth
something of the true sen^e, saying, But Israel, following after their law,
could not be justified because they did not perform completely the commands of
the law. Wherefore? Because the law does not justify, but only is by faith,
which perfecteth the accomplishment thereof. And we may further notice here,
that what the Apostle, when speaking of the Jews, calls the law of
righteousness, he called, while speaking of the Gentiles, simply Righteousness:
and what he there called the righteousness of faith; he here, speaking of the
jews* calls by faith, in opposition to the works of the law. What excepteth
Mr. Goodwine?

He says 1. That by the law of righteousness here cannot be meant the moral
law, or any law: for God had prevented them with the gift of all these, so that
they needed not have soughs after them. Ans. But Cal^in thinks there is an
Hypallage here, and the law of Righteousness is put for the Righteousness of
the law. And if we take the law of Righteousness here for the law of that law
(as he himself spoke above) that is that form of righteousness and holiness,
which the law called for, will not this satisfy? But the matter is plain,
Their fault was, that they sought after a righteousness, by their own
obedience to the law; and neglected that righteousness, which the Gentiles
attained by faith, viz. the Righteousness of Christ, at whom they stumbled,
verse 32. 33. And the Righteousness of God, of which they were wholly ignorant,
Romans 10: 3. This was not a simple endeavor of keeping the law (as he hinteth
in the following words, where he would preoccupy this objection; and then tell
us, that this study could be no cause of their coming short of righteousness,
as Christians are never further off from justification, by keeping the commands
of God) but a proposeing of that design of attaining a Righteousness by their
own works, whereby alone they might be justified. And when Christians endeavor
after holiness, but not from Gospel-principles, nor upon Gospel-grounds; but to
the end they may attain unto a Righteousness of their own, by their works of
obedience; they prejudge themselves of justification: for thus they do not lay
hold on Christ, but reject Him, and stumble at that stumbling stone, that is at
Christ, who is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10: 4.

2. He faith, neither Calvine, nor any other restaine the law to the Moral law.
Ans. Nor do we so restrain it to that law, strikly so taken; but comprehend
thereby all that God prescribed for a righteousness; and this is the Moral law,
in its full sense; the ceremonial and judicial being parts thereof and
appendices thereto.

3. He says, There is no reason to limite this to the Moral law only, for the
jews sought righteousness by the Ceremonial also. Ans. This is but the same
with the former; and we have told him, that the Ceremonial law was then
enjoined by the Moral law; and so the Moral law did comprehend it, so long as
the Ceremonial law was unrepealed. And whatever law it was, their seeking of
righteousness by it, and their refusing of Christ and his Righteousness went
together; and they so pursued after it, that they sought Righteousness by their
obedience to it; and did not seek by faith after Christ's Righteousness, nor
would they submit thereunto.

4. He says, The righteousness of the Moral law alone, suppose they should
have attained to it by believing, could have stood them in no stead, they being
bound also to the observation of the Ceremonial law. Ans. This has been
answered before. Christ fulfilled all righteousness, and satisfied that law of
righteousness, which was an Universal Rule of righteousness; and so
comprehended the ceremonial laws, so long as they were in force: so that if
they had forsaken their own righteousness, and embraced by faith the
righteousness of Christ, they had been certainly saved; and the Imputation of
this Righteousness had made them up.

Lastly, he says, The clear sense is, that the law of righteousness is
justification it self, or righteousness simply and, indefinitely taken, which
the jews seeking to attain to by the works of the law, that is, by
themselves, and the merits of their own doings, and not by faith in Jesus
Christ's, lost Gods favor and perished in their sins. Ans. (1) That the jews
sought after justification by the merits of their own works, otherwise than
merits are included in all works, is not manifest, in this place. (2)
Otherwise this may pass for part of the sense, for by faith he understands
the act of faith it self, as our righteousness, and not the Righteousness of
Christ, which faith laith hold on, or faith as laying hold on and receiving a
Surety-righteousness, which is here imported, when the contrary is expressed of
the jews, and of them it is said, that they stumbled at that stumbling stone;
and in the next chapter it is said, they would not submit themselves unto the
righteousness of God. What he adds, as a confirmation of this interpretation,
is to no purpose, for he speaks nothing to clear the maine thing in doubt;
but all is to prove, that by the law of righteousness, Righteousness is meaned;
which is not denied: and withal he takes for granted, what is not proved, and
has been denied, viz. That Righteousness and Justification are one and the
same thing.

Seventhly, Romans 10: 3, 4. A passage cleat and pregnant for our purpose, where
the Apostle is but prosecuting the same purpose, as to the jews, and showing
whence their disappointement and missing of that came, which they so earnestly
endeavored after, viz. A righteousnss by which they might be justified before
God: for (says the Apostle) they being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
unto the Righteousness of God: for Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes. There is a Righteousness here called
Gods Righteousness, which is opposite to, and inconsistent with men's own
righteousness, that is, all that is done by them in conformity to the law of
God, as a righteousness, whereupon to be justified: yea, so great is this
opposition, that who ever labors most to establish and set on foot his own
Righteousness, or to seek after a Righteousness by his own performances, is
furthest from the Righteousness of God, as being both ignorant thereof, and in
pride refuising to submit thereunto. This Righteousness of God is explained
verse 4. to be the end of the law, that is, the full righteousness, which the
law, in its primitive institution, called for, and which is the accomplishment
of the laws design, as proposed to be a Rule of Righteousness, and the
condition of life promised, upon the performance thereof. And Christ is said to
be this end of the law for righteousness. He, by yielding perfect obedience,
has brought forth a righteousness, in which the law has its End, And Christ
is this, to every one that believes, the righteousness being made over unto
them, who believe, and by faith lay hold on him; which, because the Gentiles
did, they therefore attained to this righteousness, Romans 9: 30.

Mr. Goodwine, page 137. etc. excepteth several ways, 1 There is (says he) no
color of Reason, that by the law here should be meaned precisely and
determinatly the Moral law; because the jews never dreamed of justification by
this law only, but chiefly by the Ceremonial law. Besides, verse 5. he cites
that description, which Moses gives of the righteousness of the law not out of
any passage of the Moral law; but out of the heart, as is were of the
ceremonial law, Lev. 18: 5. Ans. The first part of this Exception has been
often answered: we take not the Moral law so precisely and determinatly, as not
to include, as parts or appendices, all other laws given by God. And the last
part of this Exception will say nothing, unless he think, this law is precisely
and determinatly to be understood of the Ceremonial law, excluding all others,
and especially the Moral law, taken as distinct from judicial and ceremonial.
But why does he say, that this description of the righteousness of the law is
taken out of the heart of Ceremonials, seeing in the place cited, both before
and after the words, morals are mentioned? yea that whole Chapt. is taken up,
in rehearsing morals.

Except 2. Neiter is it any ways agreeable to truth, that the Righteousness of
Christ imputed to believers, should be called; the end of the moral Law, for no
Law, considered simply as such, is any cause or means of justifing a person,
than by the observation of it self; and consequently justification by Christ
cannot be conceived to be the end of the moral Law: for nothing can properly be
said to be the intent or end of a thing, but that which in likelihood may be
obtained by it. Now it is impossible that justification by Christ should be
procured by the moral Law. It may be said, with a for more favorable aspect to
truth, that Christ is the end of the Ceremonial Law; yet not simply considered,
as a Law, but as comprehending in it such and such usages and rites typifying
Christ. Ans. (1.) This whole Exception looks with a very ill favored aspect
both to truth and modesty: For its scope and drift is not so much against the
truth which we maintain, as against the Apostle Paul himself, and against the
language of the Spirit of Lord; for it faith this in effect; that either the
Apostle spoke not truth, or spoke not good sense, when he said, that Christ was
the end of the Law: for (to use Mr. Goodwin's reason) as nothing can be
properly said to be the Intent or end of a thing but that which in likelihood
may be obtained by it; so nothing can be said to be the Intent and end of a
Law, but what in likelihood may be obtained by it: But how can any think, that
Christ can be, in any likelihood obtained by the Law? (2.) But we say not, that
justification by Christ is had by the moral Law: yet, why the righteousness of
Christ, consisting in perfect obedience to the Law, and in full answering of
the same, in all its demands, may not be called the end or fulfulling of the
Law, I see not; especially seeing the Apostle says expressly, that Christ is the
end of the Law for righteousness. The question being moved about a
Righteousness, required by the Law, and this not being to be found in Man's
obedience, but in Christ's, who was the end of the Law for righteousness, the
Law has its full accomplissement in him also when He suffered, and satisfied
the Sanction of the Law, the Law had satisfaction, or the Lawgiver rather, and
the Law its end and accomplishement, Now this Righteousness of Christ being
imputed to believers, they are thereupon justified, and the Law is satisfied.
And though the Law because it was weak throuw the flesh, could not bring about
this righteousness, and this end, in us; yet Christ having answered all the
demands of the Law, and given full Satisfaction both in point of obedience, and
in point of Suffering, the Law has its full accomplishment in Him, and that
End, which is here meaned (3) We do not say, that the Righteousness of Christ,
imputed to beleeleevers, is, or is called, the end of the moral Law: but that
Christ came, and was made under the Law, that He might answer all the demands
thereof; and both satisfy for its violation, and yield perfect obedience unto
its commands; and so fulfill it in all points: So that it had its end and
accomplishment in and through Him, and what He did and suffered: and that He
submitted Himself hereunto, that He might make up a righteousness, wherewith
the Law should be satisfied, for the justification of Believers. (4.) Though
the Moral Law, nor no Law, considered in it self, can be any cause or means of
justifying a person, otherwise than by the observation of it self; and though
justification by Christ cannot be conceived to be the end of moral Law: yet in
Christ's obedience and Suffering, the Law may be said to have received its
Accomplishment and Satisfaction; and thereby a complete Righteousness may be
said to be obtained for all Believers.

Except. 3. The Greek Expositors make Christ in this sense, to be called the
end of the law for righteousness, because he performed, or exhibited unto them
that, which the law propounded to it self, as its end, and would have
performed, but could not, to wit, their justification. Ans. Seeing the law
ptopounded their justification, as its end, only by the perfect observation of
it self, or by a full and perfect conformity unto it, Christ cannot be called
the end or accomplishment of the law, unless He had performed all that, which
the law required: nor could He be called the end of the law for righteousness,
unless He had fully satisfied the law; and thereby made up a Righteousness, in
the behalf, and for the behove of Believers, to whom it being Imputed, they
might be accepted, and justified upon the account thereof. And this
righteousness, where with the law was satisfied, and wherein it had its full
accomplishment, is, I grant, exhibited in the Gospel, to the end, that all, who
would be justified, may lay hold on it, receive it, and rest upon it, as the
only righteousness, in and through which they desire to be accepted, and to
stand before God, the righteous judge.

Except. 4. Some conceive, that Christ is said to be the end of the law, etc.
Because the law, by convinceing men of sin, and exacting of them a
Righteousness, which it does not enable them to perform; and again by
threatening and condemning them for the want of it, it does as good as lead them
by hand to Christ by whom they are freely justified. But neither does this seem
to be the meaning of the place. Ans. Seeing he himself is not satisfied with
this interpretation, he might have forborne to have added it. But as for the
interpretation it self, I judge the thing said to be true, and that it has a
subordinat aspect unto what we have said; and holds forth part of the truth;
though it be not a plain and full exposition of the place: for there is
mention made here of a Righteousness of God, which the jews neither
understood, not would submit unto: but in opposition to this they went about to
establish their own righteousness, that is, to seek after a righteousness by
their own works, or by their own obedience to the law; and therefore did miss
their end: for this righteousness, which they were seeking after* and which
they could not attain unto, by all their own acts of obedience; that is, a
righteousness, that was a perfect obedience and conformity to the law, and
withal a Sufficient compensation and Satisfaction for the breaches of the law,
already committed, was only to be found in Christ, who is the end of the law
for righteousness, that is, made full Satisfaction for the breaches committed,
and performed complete and perfect obedience, which the law did principally
require (what ever other accidental ends it might have had, or the lawgiver in
promulgating it, and accompanying it with other things, as to the Nation of the
jews) because for this end was the law, as a law, given by the lawgiver, that
Subjects might walk according to the same, and that they might become thereby
righteous, and have a right to the reward promised, by fulfilling this
condition of the Covenant. Now, when these ends (or this end, putting these
together as one) were only attained by what Christ did and suffered, the
jews, who stumbled at this stumbling stone, and rejected this righteousness of
God, could never be justified by all their own acts of obedience to the law,
how zealously so ever they should have sougt after a rigteousness thereby.

Except. 6. (The 5. we pass, because he laith no weight on it him self) The
plain and direct meaning is, that the law, that is, the whole Mosaical
dispensation was for that end given by God to the jews, that whilst it did
continue, it might instruct and teach them, concerning the Messiah, who was yet
to come, and by his death to make atonement for their sins, that so they
might believe in Him accordingly and be justified: and further that in time,
that Nation might be trained up and prepared for the Messiah himself, and that
Economy and perfection of worship and service, which He should bring with him,
and establish in the world at his coming. Ans. What was said to the two
foregoing Exceptions, may serve for an answer to this: for what ever truth may
be in this; yet it is no true sense and exposition of the place; because Christ
is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes; and so to
the Gentiles, as well as to the jews; whereas this gloss limiteth and
restricketh all to the jews. (2) There is nothing here, keeping correspondence
with what is said, verse 3. touching their going about to establish their own
righteousness and refuising to submit unto the righteousness of God. 3. The
righteousness of the law, described by Moses, and here cited verse 5. has no
interest in the Mosaical Economy, as given for the mentioned end to the jews.
(4) If Christ made an atonement for sins, and was to be bele^ved in
accordingly, by such as would be justified, then that atonement was to be made
over unto them and reckoned upon their score, to the end they might be
justified upon the account thereof. (5) The Text says, that Christ was the end
of the law for righteousness; and so was to bring in everlasting Righteousness,
as well as to make atonement for sins, Dan. 9: 24. (6) The perfection of that
service and worship, which Christ was to establish at His coming, was a clearer
manifestation of the Gospel of the Grace of God, whereby the Righteousness of
God, or the Surety-righteousness of Christ, was imputed unto Believers, and
received by faith, in order to justification, as the whole Gospel declares.

He labors to confirm this gloss with two reasons, 1. Because the jews
sought Righteousness and self justification, as well from the observation of
the Ceremonial, as of the Moral law. 2. Because Christ is held forth; as the
end of this dispensation, 2 Cor. 3: 13. Gal. 3: 24. Ans. As to the first of the
reasons, we have often replied to it already. And the second will not prove,
that there is no other interpretation of this passage, that can have place. And
beside, That whole Economy did point out and lead them to the Messiah, that
in Him they might find that, which they were seeking after by their own works,
and all in vain; even the Righteousness of God, which will sufficiently cloth
all believers, and both keep them from wrath due for sin, and give them a right
to glory. So that even this sense, if rightly understood, does rather
strengthen than hurt imputed Righteousness.

Eighthly. 1 Cor. 1: 30. Is excepted against by him page 162. etc. To which we
may add verse 29. and 31. Which will help to clear the matter. That no flesh
should glory in His presence: but of Him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. That
according at it is written, he that glories, let him glory in the Lord. All
the work of God in and about His chosen ones, is so contrived, that no flesh
should have ground to glory in the presence of God; but that he, who glories,
should glory in the Lord: and therefore He has made Christ to be all things to
them, that they stand in need of, in order to their everlasting enjoyment of
Himself; and particulary, Christ is said to be made of God to us (among other
things, which our necessity calls for) Righteousness, answering His Name the
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Ier. 23: 6. And a Righteousness he cannot be made unto
us, any other way, than by clothing us (who are naked and have no righteousness
of our own) with a Righteousness; that is, by Imputing to us His Righteousness,
that we may thereby become Righteous, and be looked upon, as such, and so be
accepted of God, and justified.

Except. 1. Christ is no other way said to be made righteousness, then He is
said to be made Wisdom, etc. Therefore we may as well plead for the Imputation
of His Wisdom, or His Sanctification: there is no more intimation made of the
Imputation of the one then of the other. Ans. This is but the old exception of
Socinus part. 4. de Servant, Cap. 5. And of Volkel. De vera Relig. Cap. 21. p.
566. And it stands upon this only ground, That Christ is made all these
particulars to us here mentioned, after one and the same manner: and what that
manner is, should be declared: and of necessity it must be a very general one,
otherwise it shall not agree to all these particulars. Therefore Socinus has
devised a very general manner of way, saying in the place cited: That all this
signifies nothing else, than that we have attained to that by Gods providence,
through Christ, that we are become wise, holy and redeemed before Gods: and
that therefore Christ is said to be righteousness to us, because through the
providence of God by Christ, we have attained to be just before God. But this
general way makes us not one white wiser. Volkelius, in the place cited,
gives us no relief, but only tells us, That Christ is said to be made all these
to us; because he was the cause of all these; and because God, by his means,
made us wise and holy, and will at length redeem us. Bellarm. condescendeth to
tell us, that He is said to be our Righ^eousness, because He is the efficient
cause thereof. But how that is, he does not explain: But Bellarm. next answer
is to some better purpose; Christ (says he) is said to be our Righteousness
because He satisfied the Father for us; and does so give and communicate that
Satisfaction to us, when he justifies us, that it may be called our
Satisfaction and Righteousness. (2) Such as oppose us here, do (and must
necessarily so do) speak of this matter, as if Righteousness and Sanctification
were one and the same thing; and so give us here a most needless Tautologie.
And others, who will not yield to imputed Righteousness, and yet will grant a
difference betwixt Righteousness and Sanctification, must tell us distinctly,
how He is the one, and how He is the other, to His chosen ones. (3.) Wisdom and
Sanctification are of a different Nature from Righteousness; for Righteousness
cannot be here taken for Inherent Grace and Holiness; for then it should be the
same with Sanctification, and so there must needs be here a Tautology; and
withal no perfect enumeration of the several great things, we stand in need
of, and Christ is made to be unto us of God: and seeing they are different,
there is ground to say, that He is not to us Righteousness, the same way that
He is Sanctification; Sanctification is wrought in us by His Spirit; but so is
not Righteousness; for if we had a Righteousness wrought in us, we should be
justified by virtue thereof, and upon the account thereof; and if we be
justified by a Righteousness within us, we are justified by our own works, and
by the law, contrary to all the Apostles disput, and contrary to what
preceedeth and follows the words under consideration; for then he who
glories might glory in himself, and not in the Lord alone. 4. Al these
particulars here mentioned, we must have or find in Christ, as the Ae^^^opik
version has it, and each, according to its Nature. And withal we must be made
partakers and pos^essors of them all, according as the Nature of the benefit
will admit: and therefore, as Christ is forthcoming to His chosen ones, for
Wisdom, so as they may really become wise; for Sanctification, that they may
become holy; and for Redemption, that they may be redeemed: so is He
forthcoming to His own for Righteousness, that they may be justified; for
though Righteousness and justified be not one and the same, as our Excepter
often alleigeth; yet they have constant respect to other, and are inseparable,
in our case. If then we find a Righteousness in Christ, for justification,
that Righteousness must be made ours, and this being a Righteousness, that is
not our own, before it be made our own, it must be imputed to us, that we may
be there by justified.

He adds, Suppose, Christ were made Righteousness unto us by Imputation: yet
this special manner of his being righteousness to us, must be made out by other
Scriptures, than this: as because a rich man has silver and gold and jewels in
possession, it will not follow, that he has silver in one chest, and gold in
another, jewels in a third. Ans. Christ's being made Righteousness to us, who
have no Righteousness of our own, in order to our justification, says, that
the Righteousness, we have from Him, can be no otherwise ours than by
Imputation, for it cannot be wrought in us, else it should be the same with
Holiness and Sanctification. And therefore the similitude of gold, silver and
jewels is not worth a straw, in this case; because the dissimilitude is obvious.

Except. 2. The meaning only is this, That Christ is made, ordained of God, to
be the author, or sole means, by way of merit of our justification. Ans. (1)
According to his former exception, it will follow hence, that He works not
Holiness and Wisdom in us, by His Word and Spirit; but only is the means
thereof, by way of merit: for he will have Christ to be all these particulars
to us, one and the same way. (2) This differs little from the answer of
Schlightingius cont. Meisnerum, p. 250. who says, It is enough that Christ's
righteousness be the cause of our justification: and Christ may be said to be
made righteousness to us, because his righteousness redoundeth to our good and
justification. (3) It is not said, that Christ is made justification to us; but
it is said, He is made Righteousness to us, and though it is true, that He has
merited our justification; yet when He is said to be made of God Righteousness
to us, it is apparent, that He bestows a Righteousness upon us, in order to
justification, or He must be Righteousness to us, ere we be justified: and how
shall we partake of His Righteousness, if not by Imputation? (4) Christ can not
be the Author, or sole means, by way of merit, of our justification, till we
have a Righteousness; that is, He must be the sole Author and Means of a
Righteousness; for we must not say, That He has merited, that we shall be
justified without a Righteousness, it being an abomination to the Lord, that
even a terrene judge should justify one, that has no Righteousness. If then
He has merited, that we shall be justified by having a Righteousness, that
Righteousness must be within us, or without us: if within us, then He has
merited, that we shall be justified by the works of righteousness, which we do,
and by the law, and by the works of the law, contrary to the whole Gospel: If
without us, then it must either be Christ's own Righteousness, or the
Righteousness of some other. It cannot be the Righteousness of any other, as
will easily be granted: and if it be Christ's Righteousness, it must be imputed
to us, to the end it may be ours, and we justified thereby: and this is the
thing we press.

He adds, to confirm this sense, That Righteousness is very frequently used
for justification. Ans. Thus he gains nothing: for. (1) That will not prove,
that it is so used here. (2) And though it did Import justification here; yet
seeing there is no justification before God, without a Righteousness, it would
say, That Christ were our Righteousness too, or that He merited a Righteousness
for us: and what is that Righteousness, that He has procured, that we shall
have, in order to our justification? Is it the Righteousness of our own works?
Then He has merited, that our works shall merit justification; and why not
also glorification? Is not this to overturne the (...) Gospel*

He adds. 2. Righteousness or justification, which Believers have in or by
Christ, is still attributed unto His death and Sufferings, and never to His
active obedience. Ans. But he has forgetten what is said, Romans 4: 25. Who was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification. Sure,
His Resurrection was neither His death, nor His Sufferings. He has forgotten
also what is said, Romans 5: 19. So by the obedience of one, shall many be made
righteous. And to be Righteous, and to be justified, is all one with him, as we
have oft-times heard.

Except. 3. This will not say, That Christ's active obedience only is imputed;
or that he only, by his active obedience, is made righteousness to us. Ans. I
plead not for the sole Imputation of Christ's active obedience, but for the
Imputation of Christ's whole Surety Righteousness, that is, His compleet
obedience and Suffering, or of what He did and suffered in answering all the
demands of the law, which we were lying under.

Except. 4. Many sound and able expositors are for this sense; understanding
nothing by this, but our justification, or righteous making by Him; some
placeing this justification in Remission of sins; some ascribing it to the
Sufferings of Christ. Ans. We ^ould also cite sound and able expositors for our
sense, and bring-in beside the general Verdict of such, as write against
Socinians, and Papists, and others also: but this is not our present work. (2.)
Justification and Righteous-making are not one and the same. If we be made
righteous by Him, it must be by His Righteousness: an^ if we made righteous by
His Righteousness, it must be imputed to us. (3) That justifi^ation is nothing
but Remission of sins, is not yet proved. (4.) We have hea^d Paul say, That by
the obedience of one (i e: Christ) (in opposition to the disobedience of Adam,
whereby all his posterity were made sinners) many are made righteous, Romans 5:
19.

Ninthly, 2 Cor. 5: 21. For he has made Him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in Him. This is added, as a
confirmation and further explication of what was said, verse 18, 19. Concerning
the reconciliation of a sin^ul world unto God, in and through Christ, and of
Gods imputing their Trespasses unto them. As if he had said, all our Salvation,
and all the way how it is brought about, is of God, who, in and through Christ,
reconcileth the sinful world of His own chosen ones to Himself, and Pardons
their sins, by laying them all on Christ, and making Him bear the guilt and
punishment of all; that the chosen ones might be made partakers of that
Righteousness, and have it imputed unto them, as their sins were imputed unto
Christ; and so become the Righteousness of God in Him, or by being in Him, and
united to Him. This place is pregnant and full of proof: so that the whole
matter cannot be more clearly and emphatically expressed, than it is here hold
forth. Yet Mr. Goodwine labors to darken it with his Exceptions, page 164.
etc. let us hear him.

Except. 1. Here is nothing said, touching any Imputation of our sins to
Christ: and consequently here can be nothing to build a reciprocal Imputation
of His righteousness unto us upon. Ans. If that Expression of Gods making
Christ to be sin who knew no sin, and that for us, will not enforce an
imputation of our sins to Christ, it must be so only with such, as will hold
fast their opinion, let Scripture speak what it will to the contrary: for when
it is said, that Christ, who knew no sin, i. e. was guilty of no sin, by
committing of it, in thought, word or deed; was yet made sin by God, and that
for us, what words can be imagined, that shall more emphatically express this
Imputation? And the Greek commentators (whom our adversary does often cite, when
he finds it any thing to his advantage) give the meaning to be, That he was
made a great sinner, and was handled, as if he had been the worst of sinners,
even very wickedness it self. And Esaias tells us, Chap. 53: 6. That the Lord
laid all our iniquities on Him, or caused them to meet in one upon Him. And
nothing can be alleiged against this, except it be said, the meaning is, He was
made an offering or Sacrifice for sin. But this is so far from weakening the
truth, concerning the Imputation of our sins to Christ, that it abundantly
confirms it: for there was a real imputation of the guilt of the sinner upon
the Sacrifie, as is expressly said, Lev. 16: 21, 22. And Aaron shall lay both
his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all this
iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their trespasses in all their
sins, putting them upon the head of goat, and the goat shall bear upon him
all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited. And the people were to lay
their hands on the head of the Sacrifice, to signify their rolling of their
guilt over upon the expiatory Sacrifie, Levit. 1: 4. and 3: 2, 8, 13. and 4: 4,
15, 24, 29, 33. So that if Christ was made sin, that is, a Sacrifice for sin
(though the word (...) is no where in the New Test. so taken) it must needs be
granted, that guilt was transferred upon Him, in order to His becoming a
Sacrifice for sin: justice could not exact upon Him, if it had not been so, He
having been free of all sin and guilt, in His own person.

Except. 2. Some of the most judicious and learned assistants of the way of
this Imputation, absolutely reject this equality or reciprocation of Imputation
between the sins of believers unto Christ, and the Righteousness of Christ
unto them. There is not the same force and power of our unrighteousness to make
Christ unrighteous; which is of His Righteousness to make believers righteous.
Therefore we are not made formally righteous by such an Imputation. Ans. We
willingly grant several differences, beside what is mentioned: yet this
agreement and correspondency (which is all we seek) is manifest, That, as
Christ, who knew no sin, as to Himself, was made sin, or had the guilt of sin
laid upon Him, and was handled by justice as a sinner legally; so we, who have
no righteousness of our own, have Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, and
bestowed upon us; and upon the account thereof are dealt with as legally
righteous. We do not speak of Christ's obedience only; but assert the Imputation
of His Sufferings too. Nor do we say, that we are hereby made formally
Righteous, if the term formally import inherently; but that by the Imputation
thereof to us, we are accounted and looked upon by God as Righteous formally in
a legal sense; and as such are accepted of God and justified.

Except. 3. There is not so much, as the face or appearance, in this place of
any comparison between Christ's being made sin for us, and our being made the
Righteousness of God, in Him; but only the latter is affirmed, as the end,
consequent, or effect of the former. Ans. Though the latter be a consequent of
the former; yet every word holds forth a comparison, or correspondence;
Christ made sin, and we become Righteous: Christ made sin, or a sinner for us,
and we made Righteousness, or Righteous in Him: Christ knew no sin, and yet was
made sin; and we, who were sinners land rebels, standing in need of
reconciliation (as the preceding words evidence, and as is undeniable) are
made Righteous.

Except. 4. That the weight of that particle, in Him, should be by the
Imputation of His active obedience unto us, has neither Instance or parellel
expression in Scripture, nor rule in Grammar, nor figure in Rhetoric, to make
probable in the lowest or lightest degree. Ans. We plead not solely for the
Imputation of Christ's active obedience, as is said; but for the Imputation of
His whole Surety-righteousness. And though these words in Him, that denote
Believers Union with Him, as the ground of their Interest in His Righteousness,
should not be asserted, to Import this Imputation: yet this words, that we
might be made the Righteousness of God, will be a rock, whereupon Imputation
may stand: for they hold this forth unto us, That as God made Christ sin by
Imputation; so He makes us righteous, yea the Righteousness of God, by
Imputation.

Except. 5. The clear meaning is this, that God for that end made Christ sin,
that is, an offering or Sacrifice for sin, for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in Him, that is, that we might be justified, or made a
Society or Remnant of Righteous ones, after that peculiar manner of
justification, which God has established, through that Sacrifice of His Son.
Ans. When Christ was made an offering for sin, the guilt of sin was laid upon
Him, even the guilt of our sin. And if we be justified, or made a Society of
justified ones, we must be made a Society of righteous ones: and if we be made
a Society of Righteous ones, we must first have a Righteousness; seeing we have
not a Righteousness of our own, we must have a Righteousness made over to us:
and seeing we have this Righteousness made over to us, as being in Christ, it
must be the Righteousness of God. So that though this Interpretation be very
far fetched, and has no countenance from the words, and destroys the
cohesion of these words with the former, as also the reason, that is contained
in them, adduced for confirmation of what was said, verse 19. yet it cannot
destroy the doctrine of Imputation; but must contribute to its support, though
a little more remotely.

He labors to give strength to this his Interpretation by alleiging. 1. That
it is a frequent Scripture expression, to call the sin-offering, or the
Sacrifice for sin, by the name of sin simply,as Exodus 29: 14. and 30: 10.
Levit. 5: 6, 16, 18, 19, and 7: 1, 2, 7 and 9: 7. Ezekiel. 44: 27. and 45: 19. 23.
Hos. 4: 8. Ans. Though it be true, that the Hebrew words (...) and (...) do
sometimes signify sin, and sometimes, an offering for sin: yet the Greek word
(...) does always signify sin in the New Test. and the 70 do not use this
Greek word in the places cited, except Exodus 29: 14. and there, in the version
that is in the Biblia Polyglot, Land. It is in the Genitive case (...) of sin:
and the chald-paraph calls it an Expiation Targ. Ionath. and Hierof. say, it
is a sin, and so does the persik version: and the Samaritan Version turns it,
that is for sin; and the Arabik, an Expiation. But further, though it were
granted to be so taken here; yet our cause would hereby suffer no prejudice;
but be rather confirmed, as was lately shown. And when the same word used to
express a Sacrifice for sin, which signifies sin it self, we may hence be
confirmed in this, that that Sacrifice for sin has guilt laid upon it, before
it can be Sacrifice for sin; and it must be sin, in respect of this, before it
be a due Sacrifice, or oblation for sin. And therefore Christ must have been
sin, in law, by Imputation, or have the guilt of sin laid upon Him, before He
could be a fit Sacrifice for sin.

He alleigeth. 2. To express a Number of justified or righteous persons by the
abstract term of Righteousness, is very agreeable to the Scripture dialect, in
other places, as poverty for poor, captivity for captives. Ans. (1) Yet no one
instance can be given, where the word Righteousness has this Import. (2) But
how ever, as was said, these justified, or righteous persons, must be
righteous, else they cannot make up such a company; as captivity can never
signify a company of men, that are not captives; nor poverty a company of
persons, that are not poor. So that this company of righteous ones must needs
be righteous, and that in order to justification: and seeing they have no
Righteousness of their own, for in themselves they are ungodly, they must have
a Righteousness by Imputation. (3) Why should they be called the Righteousness
of God, according to this Interpretation? And how is the opposition here
observed, betwixt Christ's being made sin, and their being made the
Righteousness of God in Him? But this man, by this Interpretation,
transgresses all lines of Correspondence.

He alleigeth 3. That addition of God imports, that that righteousness or
justification, which believers obtain by the Sacrifice of Christ, is not only
Righteousness of Gods free donation, but of His special procurement and
contrivement for them. Ans. (1) Righteousness and justification are not one and
the same, how often so ever he name them as Synonymous. (2) We grant, that the
Righteousness and the Justification, which Believers obtain, are both Gods
free gift and His contrivement: But notwithstanding hereof, yea so much the
rather, is there a Righteousness imputed to them, and the Righteousness of
Christ, who is God, and a Righteousness, which will be accepted of God, whose
judgment is according to truth, as a sufficient ground, whereupon to pronounce
such, as in themselves are ungodly, to be Righteous, and so to justify them.

He alleigeth 4. That by the grammatical construction and dependence of the
latter clause, our being made the Righteousness of God in Christ, upon the
former, it is evident, that in the latter such an Effect must of necessity be
signified, which may answer that cause, to wit, the death of Christ for us;
and this is deliverance from the guilt and punishment of sin, not the
Imputation of His active obedience. Ans. As Christ's death could not be
separated from His Obedience, which is thereby presupposed. His death being the
Sacrifice of one, who is made under the law, and was obedient thereunto unto
death, and that in the room and stead of His own; So the Imputation of
Righteousness to us should not be separated from the Imputation of His
Sufferings, both being necessarily required unto sinners, who had sinned, and
yet remained under the obligation of the law, in order to their acceptance with
God, and Justification.

He alleigeth 5. The Scriptures, when they speak of the Sufferings of Christ,
as a cause, inrespect of justification, never ascribe any other effect unto
them, but only, either the Remission of sins, deliverance from wrath,
Redemption, or the like. Ans. As the Scriptures making so frequent mention of
the Sufferings of Christ, do not exclude His Obedience; so neither do they
exclude the Imputation of His Obedience, in order to our justification, and
receiving a Right to glory: yea they make our being constitute Righteous, an
Effect of His Obedience; and Righteousness or Righteous-making is accompanied
with Justification. So that though the Scriptures speak sometimes more expressly
of the Sufferings, and sometimes more expressly of the obedience of Christ,
according to the exigence of the cause handled; yet both are inseparable, as a
cause; and so is our Righteousness and Justification inseparable, as the full
Effect.

CHAP. IX.
Other passages of the N. T. briefly mentioned, which plead for this Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness.
THere are other passages of Scripture, beside these mentioned, in the
preceding chapter, and against which I find no Exceptions made by Mr.
Goodwine, in the forecited Book, which yet do with no small clearness and
fullness of evidence plead for the truth, which we own, to wit, The Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ unto Believers, in order to their Justification.
These we shall not insist upon, but only mentione in short; seeing the full
insisting upon them will not be necessary, after what is said, in the
Explication and Vindication of foregoing passages.

1 Romans 1: 17. For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, as it is written, the just shall live by faith. The Apostle is here
giving a reason, proving the Gospel, whereof he was not ashamed to be a
preacher of, to be the power of God unto Salvation, and that to every one that
believes, be he jew, or be he Gentile; viz. Because there is a Righteousness
revealed therein, which sinners only stand in need of; and that Righteousness
of God; that is, not only a Righteousness, which is devised by God, and is
accepted in His sight; but an excellent Righteousness, even the Righteousness
of one, who is God; and a Righteousness revealed for faith to lay hold on and
receive, and that which faith leans to first and last, when it is weakest,
and when it is strongest; that thereby the poor sinner, who formerly was dead
by law, may live, as one reconciled to God. So that hence we see, Sinners have
need of a Righteousness; and this Righteousness is the Righteousness of God,
and is revealed in the Gospel, that it may be received by faith, and so Imputed
and made over to the poor sinner, in order to his Justification, and acceptance
with God.

2 Romans 4: 11. And he (i. e. Abraham) received the sign of circumcision, a
seal of the Righteousness of the faith, which he had, yet being uncircumcised,
that righteousness might be imputed to them also. Here is a Righteousness, and
a Righteousness called the Righteousness of faith, because received and applied
only by faith; and a Righteousness, whereof circumsion was appointed a seal,
and granted to Abraham as such; and a Righteousness, which was imputed to
Abraham, that he might be the Father of all them, that believe: for it is
added, that Righteousness might be Imputed to them also: And this must be the
same Righteousness, that was Imputed to Abraham, and the same way Imputed, and
the same way received, that there migt be no essential difference betwixt the
way of justification of Father and Children. The Aethiopick Version may serve
for a commentary, and he had circumsion, a sign of his righteousness, which He
gave him, and the sign thereof; that this might be made known unto him, that
God justified Abraham by faith, when he was not at that time circumcised, that
they may know, that they also are justified by faith.

3. Romans 4: 24, 25. But for us also, to whom it shall be Imputed, if we believe
on Him, who raised up tesus, our Lord, from the dead, who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification. Here is some thing said
to be Imputed, and this must be in order to justification: And this that is
Imputed, cannot be faith it self, or our act of believing; for what is said to
be Imputed, is promised to be Imputed upon condition of faith, or our believing
on Him, who raised up Jesus our Lord. So that it must be the Righteousness of
Christ, consisting in His Mediatory work, which He undertook and performed for
His own: for it is added, that He was delivered for their offenses; that is,
He was delivered unto the death, to make satisfaction for their sins; and He
rose again, that He might declare, He had given full Satisfaction; and that He
might apply this Surety-righteousness of His, to the end, they might be
justified. Socinus does not understand this, and therefore de Servat. part. 4.
p. 333 says, It is most certain, that the Apostle does not speak of any
Imputation of the righteousness of Christ; but assert, that the faith or
credit, we give God, because He has called Jesus Christ, our Head, from death
to eternal life, shall be accounted unto us, in the place of righteousness;
just as faith, whereby Abraham gave credit to the words of God, was Imputed to
him for righteousness. But the Text hereby is manifestly perverted: for it
says, that some thing shall be imputed, if we believe, which can not be faith;
but something distinct from faith, which is to be Imputed, upon condition of
faith. And what can this be else, than the Surety-righteousness of Christ, who
is here mentioned, as dying and riseing, in the place, and for (...) good of
His people, that they might be justified. And further, if it were faith it
self, that were here said to be Imputed, in order to justification, the
justified man should not be one, that is in himself ungodly, because he has a
Righteousness in himself; and he, who has a Righteousness in himself, is not
ungodly: and yet it is said, Romans 4: 5. That God justifies the ungodly.
Again, That, which is Imputed, must be a Righteousness without works, verse 6.
but if faith it self be Imputed, a work is Imputed, and not a Righteousness
without works: and this would also lay down a ground of boasting, and make the
reward of debt, and not of grace, v. 14.

4. Romans 10: 10. For with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made unto Salvation. The Apostle had been before verse
4. telling us, That Christ was the end of the law for righteousness to every
one that believes; and thereafter he discriminateth the way of justification
by the law and by the Gospel, under the Notion of a Righteousness which is of
the law, and a Righteousness, which is of faith: and then more particularly he
describes the Righteousness of faith, or a Righteousness is had unto
Salvation, in and through faith verse 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from
the dead, thou shall be saved; which he proves in the 10. verse, now cited; and
therein shows, how by this believing that God has raised the Lord Jesus from
the dead, Salvation is brought about; viz. That by believing with the heart, a
Righteousness is obtained and received: and this righteousness must be Christ's,
even His Surety-righteousness; for faith looks on Him, as raised from the
dead, and that by God, as having now received full Satisfaction from Him; and
thereupon bringing Him, as it were, out of prison. And in the Text cited, we
see, that by faith a Righteousness is received; or faith is the way unto the
possession of a Righteousness, as Confession is the way unto Salvation, or as
the actual possession of Salvation is had by Confession. And as Confession it
self is not Salvation, but the way thereto, and the mean thereof; so faith it
self is not the Righteousness, but the way thereunto, and the mean or medium
thereof.

5. Gal. 2: 21. I do not frustrat the grace of God; for if Righteousness come
by the law, Christ is dead in vain. Whence we see, that a Righteousness must
be had; and that this cannot be had by the law, or by our obedience to the law;
but by Christ; and to deny this, is in plain terms, to frustrat the grace of
God, and to say, that Christ is dead in vain. And if we look back to verse 16.
and forward, we shall see, that the Apostle is speaking of justification by
faith in opposition to the works of the law; that is, by faith in Jesus Christ,
receiving a Righteousness, which He has wrought in His estate of Humiliation.

6. Gal. 3: 21, 22. For if there had been a law given, which could have given
life, verily righteousness should have been by the law: but the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be
given to them that believe. Whence we see, that Righteousness is required unto
life, viz. the life of justification; and by whatever way life is had, by the
same is Righteousness had: and that neither life, nor Righteousness is had by
the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: and both are held forth in a free
promise, and given to the Believer in Christ.

7. Gal. 4: 4, 5. But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth His
Son, made of a Woman, made under the law, to redeem them, that were under the
law, that we might receive the Adoption of sons. Christ, we see, was made
under the law, and that to redeem such, as were under the law, that they might
be freed from what they were liable to by the law, and by being under the law,
and withal receive the Adoption of sons, which necessarily takes in His
Obedience, as the Aethiopik Version explaineth it saying, He was begotten of a
Woman, and was a doer of the command, in the law. And that His Sufferings are
here included, is plain from the one end assigned, that he might redeem them,
who were under the law, or under the laws curse. The end therefore here being
twofold, viz. Deliverance from under the law, and receiving the Adoption of
sons; the Cause must have a subtableness thereunto; and say, That this
complete Righteousness, comprehending both, must be Imputed unto us, for the
ends mentioned.

8. Gal. 5: 5. For we through the Spirit, wait for the hope of Righteousness by
faith. Whether we take here the hope of Righteousness, for justification, as
the Aethiopick Version does, translating the words thus, and we in the Holy
Spirit, and in faith hope to be justified; to which also the scope may give
some countenance; or for the Recompense of glory, which is the thing hoped for;
that which we intend, will be equally confirmed; for if Justification be
immediately here spoken of, it is manifest, that hereunto a Righteousness is
requisite, and that this Righteousness is had by faith; and so is not in our
selves; and therefore must be the Righteousness of Christ's, unto whom faith
carries forth the soul, and of whom he spoke, verse 4. Saying, Christ is become
of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law. If glory
be here immediately intended, we may see, that the Apostle, to persuade the
Galatians, not to seek after a Righteousness by the law, tells them, what he and
others did, and were resolved to do; to wit, how they ventured their whole
Salvation on the truth he delivered; for they waited and looked for heaven and
happiness (which is here called, hop, by a Metonymy) not by the works of the
law (for heaven with them was not the hop of the law, or of the works of the
law) but by the Righteousness of faith; that is, by and through that
Righteousness, which is by faith; and therefore it is called the hope of
Righteousness by faith; that is, that which they hope for, through the help of
the Spirit, and expect in and through the Righteousness of Christ; which
Righteousness is had by faith in Christ: and that this Righteousness is none
else but the Righteousness of Christ, the following verse clears, where he
says; for in Jesus Christ, etc.

9. Philipp. 3: 8, 9. That I may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having
mine own Righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the Righteousness, which is of God by faith. This place is so
clear and full, that by speaking much of it, we may rather darken it, than
explain it. We see, what was the maine thing Paul designed, in opposition to
what he once intended and sought after: what he did formerly look upon, as
gain, and was hot in the pursuit of, he now had no better account of, than
of as much loss and dung: yea he had no better esteem of all things beside
Christ, and in this judgment, he persisted, accounting all but dung, that he
might win Christ, and have Him for all his gain. And what would he make of
Christ? He would be found in Him, hid in Him, covered with Him, and united to
Him. In opposition to this, he desires not to be found in, or having on his
own righteousness, which is of the law; thereby showing us, That it was the
Righteousness of Christ, he desired to be clothed with, and found in; and
therefore adds; but that (i. e. that Righteousness) which is through the
faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by faith. The he was
seeking, is the Righteousness of God, and which is of God by faith, and is had
through the faith of Christ; and all this was said in opposition to the way,
that the dogs, the evil workers, the concision, mentioned verse 2. were crying
up, and following, viz. the observation of the law, in order to justification.

10. Hebr. 11: 7. By faith Noah became heir of the righteousness, which is by
faith: Where there is a Metonymy, the Cause puth for the Effect; Righteousness
put for that life, which is had by this righteousness: which shows, that a
righteousness is necessarily required, unto the life of acceptance with God,
and unto Salvation; and that this righteousness is not in or of our selves, but
in and from another; for it is had by faith; and therefore is called, the
Righteousness, which is by faith: and faith lays hold on no Righteousness,
but on that, which is Christ's.

These and other passages, which might be mentioned, are evident proofs of the
Truth, we are asserting, with all such, as are unprejudiced, in the point;
beside all those passages, which prove justification not to be by the works of
the law, but by faith; for they also confirm this truth, That in order to our
justification and Salvation; we must be clothed with the Righteousness of
Christ; which is that, which faith grippeth to and apprehends, that the shame
of our nakedness may not appear, and we may be in case to stand before the
Tribunal of God.

CHAP. X.
Some Arguments for the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, Vindicated from
the Exceptions of John Goodwine.
THe truth concerning the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, has been
hitherto asserted from Scripture; and several of these passages have been
vindicated from the Exceptions of Mr. Goodwine, a maine adversary thereunto.
For further clearing of the matter, we shall see what Exceptions the same man
bringeth-in against the Arguments, which are made use of by the Orthodox for
the truth asserted.

Argum. 1. If there be no standing in judgment before God, unless we be endued
with perfect Righteousness; then must the Righteousness of Christ be imputed to
us, in our justification. But there is no standing for us in judgment before
God, unless we be endued with a perfect Righteousness. Ergo, etc.

Against this he excepteth, page 192. Chap. 7. saying, That the consequence of
the former proposition is not good. And so does Bellar. answer de Iustific.
lib. 2. cap. 7. So do also the Socinians. But let us hear his reasons. Remissin
of sins (says he) which is the purchase and procurement of the death of
Christ, is a perfect Righteousness, and is every way able to bear us out in
judgment. Ans. Remission of sins neither is, nor can be called righteousness;
^or a pardoned person is no^ the same with one, that has kept the law: though
by virtue of this pardon, he is freed from the punishment, due to the
transgressors of the law; yet has he no right to the reward, promised to the
keepers of the law. (2) Remission of sins being the purchase of Christ's death
and Sufferings, cannot be had without the Imputation of the death and
Sufferings of Christ unto the Believer: and so hereby one half of the truth
must be granted. But His Sufferings and Obedience going together and both
making up one Mediatory and Surety-righteousness, performed by Christ in His
estate of humiliation, both most be Imputed, and made over to the Believer, to
the end he may receive pardon, and right to Glory.

Arg. 2. He that is justified by the Righteousness of another, and not by his
own, must needs be justified by the righteousness of Christ imputed; because
there is no righteousness to be found in any other, for the justification of a
person, in the sight of God. But every man, that is justified, is justified by
the righteousness of another, and not by his own. Ergo, etc.

He excepteth 1. The Major is false, because the passive obedience of Christ is
the Righteousness of another: and men may be and are thoroughly and fully
justified by the merit hereof, communicated to them in the free pardon of
their sins; and so need not the imputation of His active obedience. Ans. (1)
We plead not for the sole Imputation of Christ's active obedience; but for the
Imputation of all, that He did and suffered, for and in the room and stead of
His own. (2) Where are Christ's mere Sufferings, as distinguished from His
obedience, called a righteousness? or how can mere Sufferings, as such, or
bearing of the punishment threatened by the law, be called a righteousness?
does not righteousness denote the conformity of actions unto the law? (3) When
it is said, the merit of Christ's passive obedience is communicated unto us,
the meaning must be one of these two; either that it self is properly made over
and imputed to us; or only in its effect, free pardon of sins. If this
latter be said, Then no other Imputation is granted, than what Socinians will
yield unto: and how can it be said to be Imputed, as to its Effects, when it
self is not Imputed, in order to the partaking of these effects? If the former
be said, then there is something, that is in it self imputed, and not merely in
its Effects. And if Christ's Passions and Sufferings be imputed, abstracted from
His righteousness and Active obedience, they shall be justified without a
righteousness. And it neither is, nor ever will be proved, that pardon of
sins is the whole of justification; or that a pardoned man is, (...) ipso,
that he is pardoned, a righteous man; or that a pardoned man, merely as such,
has right to the recompense of reward, promised to the fulfiller of the law.

Except 2. to the Minor, A man may be said (says he) to be justified by the
Righteousness of another, and not by his own, in a double sense, Either 1. by
way of merit; and then it is true, that every one is justified by the
Righteousness of another, that is, by the merit of the righteousness of
another, or 2. by way of form; and so it is altogether untrue; for that
Righteousness, where with a man is formally made Righteous, is always a man's
own by donation and Possession. Ans. (1) When a man is justified by the merit
of the Righteousness of another, that Righteousness of the other must be
imputed to the justified person; or we have no other Imputation, than what
Socinians yield to (2.) If the righteousness, whereby one is formally
justified, be his own by donation and possession, and no other possession be
thereunto requisite, then we may be said to be formally justified by the
righteousness of Christ: for we affirm, that Believers are possessed thereof
by Gods free donation and Imputation: and thus the whole is granted; for
nothwithstanding hereof, that same righteousness, which is made over to the
Believer, by free donation and Imputation, is Christ's Inherently, and so is the
righteousness of another. Whereby we see, that the members of this distinction
thus explained, are not different. Yet, we must not think, that this
righteousness of Christ is so given to us, as that it is inherent in us, and
wrought in us, as Faith and Repentance are: for even Remission of sins,
whereby he will have us formally justified, is not so in us, as Faith and
Repentance are in us: And through Gods Imputation and Donation, the
righteousness of Christ may be the Believers, when it is received by faith, as
well as Remission of sins: for, to speak in his own language, that which is
given unto man by God, may truly and properly be called his own. (3) That
remission of sins is formal justification, will never be proved: and seeing he
will have Remission of sins to be the pure Effect of Christ's Sufferings and
death; so must justification be: and then, why says the Apostle, Romans 4: 25.
Who was delivered (viz. to Sufferings and death) for our offenses, and raised
again for our justification?

Arg. 3. If Believers have a true and real communion with Christ, then is his
Righteousness theirs by imputation. But the former is true, etc. It may be, he
proposes the Argument, in such a mode and way, as may be most to His own
advantage; for who argues thus, he names not. Yet it is true, that the Union,
which believers have with Christ, is the ground or their communion with Him in
all things, which He was made or God to be for them, and which their necessity
called for; among which His whole Surety-righteousness does challenge a chief
p^ace. Nor would I argue from the Union and communion in general; but from such
a particular Union and communion, as is darkly shadowed forth unto us in the
Scriptures, by such and such similitudes; such as the Union betwixt Man and
Wife, who are one flesh, as Christ and Believers are one Spirit; as the Union
betwixt the principal debtor and the Cautioner; and betwixt the public Head
and Representative, and the Members represented; as betwixt the Redeemer and
the Redeemed and the like. And to argue from such an Union, for such a peculiar
end, to such a communion, as we here plead for, may stand against all his
Exceptions, page 195. etc. Which are these following.

Except 1. The Major wants truth, because a true and real communion with Christ
may stand, without His active obedience being made theirs by Imputation. There
is a real Union and communion between the head and the feet, in the same
Natural body; yet is not the brain, or the proper functions and operations of
the head, made the brain or functions of the feet. So between the Husband and
the Wife; yet is not the holiness, strength and Wisdom of the Husband made over
to the Wife by Imputation. And. Similitudes go not always upon four ^eet: and
as these Similitudes come short of expressing the Union and Communion, that is
betwixt Christ and Believers; so they are not appos^^ely here applied: for
neither is the end of the Union and Communion between the Head and the Feet,
that the brains and operations of the Head should be communicate to the feet;
but that the head should use its proper operations and functions for the good
of the feet: nor do the feet stand in need of any other thing from the head.
And thus also is it in the other Similitude, as to the particulars Instanced:
yet in other particulars, this last Similitude will come nearer to our
business; for though the Husbands Wisdom, Holiness or Strength (which are not
communicable) be not imputable to the Wife; yet his Honor and Riches can be
and are imputed or communicated: for, though before the Marriage, the Woman was
in a base condition, yet being matched with on honorable person, she partaketh
of his honor; and being, before the marriage, a person in debt, her Husbands
riches are so imputed to her, that she may be and is made thereby solvendo, and
freed from her Creditors pursuit, and her Husband and she becomes one person
in law, and he becomes chargable with her debt, and obliged to pay it So that
as there is an Imputation, or a real devolving by law of the debt of the Wife
upon the Husband; so his making payment and Satisfaction for the same, is by
law accounted hers; and she is thereupon freed from all charge and trouble from
her creditours.

Except 2. The Major wants reason; for there is no color of truth in it,
that that Union and Communion, which believers have with Christ, should of
necessity draw after it the Imputation of His active obedience; so that this
obedience of His should become their formal Righteousness; more than the
Imputation of His Wisdom, Power and Glory. Ans. (1) If by formal righteousness
he understand with Papists, inherent holiness, or righteousness, it is nothing
to the purpose; for we assert no such Imputation. (2) That the whole of Christ's
Surety-righteousness be so imputed to believers, as that it becomes theirs; so
that they, merely upon the account thereof, and clothed therewith, may be and
are repute and held to be persons just, in the account of God, and so be
justified in His sight, is the thing we assert: and that this does necessarily
flow from Believers Union with Him by faith, and is a part of the Communion
they have with Him, and that upon a double account, First because He became
Surety, and undertook their debt; and so was made under the law, and obeyed and
Suffered all that it could have demanded of them; for this end and purpose,
that what He thus did and suffered, as a public person or Surety, might stand
for them, and be accepted on their behalf. Secondly because their case and
necessity called for this, in order to their justification and Acceptance with
God. (3) His Wisdom and power are other waves improven, and laid forth to their
advantage, according to the Nature of the thing, and necessity.

Arg. 4. If there be no other principal End, Reason, or Necessity, why Christ
should fulfill the law; but only that His obedience thereunto might be imputed
to us for Righteousness, in our Justification, then is not the Imputation
thereof to be denied. But the former is true. Ergo, etc. And sure, if Christ's
obedience to the law, was not necessary in respect of Himself, it must have
been performed upon the account of Believers; and that principally and mainely
for their Justification and Salvation; and therefore for this end, that it
might be imputed unto them. Against this, page 197. etc. He,

Except. There are diverse other ends, reasons and necessities to be assigned
hereof. Ans. This is not the maine thing, that is here denied; nor will all
this help our Adversary, unless it can be shown, that those other Ends, which
we deny not, are prejudicial unto, and inconsistent with that, which we look
upon, as the chief, and as peculiar to Him, as Mediator and Surety, standing
in the room of His people, who did mainely stand in need of this. Let us now
see the particular ends he touches.

1. One reason (says he) might be, to procure the greater Authority and deeper
reverence to the Doctrine, which he taught, Matt. 7: 28. Ans. (1) The
Socinians, upon the same account, deny, that His death was any proper
Satisfaction for Believers: and if this be a weak argument in their mouth, it
cannot be strong in the mouth of our present Opposites. (2) This End is but
subordinat unto, and no way inconsistent with the principal End, which we have
mentioned. (3) Though Christ's Miracles had a more direct tendency to procure
this Reverence, than His Holy life; yet neither the one, nor the other were
peculiar to Him alone: for both the Miracles, wrought by others, such as
Prophets and Apostles, and their holy life, had a tendency to procure Reverence
and Belief to their Doctrine: And himself confirms this in the following
words, saying. It is a truth of general acknowledgment, that the holiness,
uprightness and unblameableness of the lives of Teachers have a powerful
Influence into the consciences of Men, to render them more observant and awful
in their attention to the things, which are taught by them, citeing Mat. 2^:
32. Ioh. 5: 35. and 8: 46. 1 Timothy 4: 12. 2 Timothy 3: 14. (4) We are to consider
Christ, as Mediator and Surety, in what He did, as well, as in what He
Suffered, in His state of Humiliation: for to us a Child was born, and to us a
Son was given; He was made under the law for us, that he might redeem such, as
^ere under the law, that they might receive the Adoption of Sons. Esai. 9: 5.
Gal. 4: 4, 5.

2. This active obedience of Christ, (says he) was serviceable to that same
great End, whereunto our righteousness and obedience are subservient, viz. the
glory of God, and the advancement of His Kingdom, Ioh. 8: 49. and 7: 18. Ans.
And was not His death and Sufferings also subservient unto this great end? Will
it therefore follow, that He died not, to make Satisfaction to justice, for the
sins of His people? And if this cannot follow, what ever Socinians imagine;
how shall it, or can it hence follow, that His obedience was not to satisfy
the demands of the law, and to procure the reward to His people? Is there any
Inconsistency betwixt His fulfilling the law, as Mediator and Surety, in the
room of His people; and His doing it for the glory of God, and the advancement
of His Kingdom?

3. Another en^ (says he) is the exemplariness of it. Ans. This is but another
arrow, taken out of the quiver of the Socinians; and is of no force to weaken
our argument; seeing a subordinat and less principal end does not destroy a more
principal end. Was He not exemplary to us in His death and Sufferings? shall we
therefore say, That there was no satisfaction for sins intended thereby? And
what is there here peculiar unto Christ, as Lord Mediator, seeing the lives of
other Saints are also exemplary?

4. It had (says he) an excellent Importance to draw to Imitation. Ans. This
is the same with the preceding, and deserves no further answer.

5. It was (says he) a means of continueing His person in the love and
complac^ncy of His Father, which was a thing of absolute necessity, for the
carrying on of the great work of Redemption: for if He had once miscarried, who
should have mediated for Him? Ioh. 15: 10. and 8: 29. Ans. As to His Person, He
was God equal with the Father, in power and Glory: It were therefore blasphemy
once to suppose, that His person stood in need of this, for any such end: or to
suppose, that He could have failed, as to any act of obedience, and thereby
have displeased God. Wherefore His obedience being the obedience of one, who
was and is God over all, blessed for ever, it could not be necessary to Himself
unto any such end. Therefore it behoved to be wholly for us, for whom He was
made under the law; as He was given to us, and borne for us.

6. It was (says he) of absolute necessity to qualify and fit the Sacrifice
for the Altar, and render Him a person meet by His death and Sacrifice of
Himself, to make atonement for the world, and to purge and take away the sin
of it. Ans. Shall we think that He, who was God, was not a fit enoug Sacrifice
for the world; but that He must be made fit and prepared by acts of obedience?
And as for His Humane Nature, which was no person, but did subsist in the
Divine Nature, being assumed into the subsistence thereof, was it not
sufficiently fitted to be a Sacrifice, by its personal union with the Godhead?
was it not thereby Holy Harmless and undefiled and separat from sinners, which
is all that the Apostle requires, Heb. 7: 26? Was not the Humane Nature
personally united unto the Godhead, from the very first moment of conception?
The holiness then, that consists in Acts of Actual obedience, was not
required unto this Union: and after this Union it was not possible, that He
could sin: as it is not possible, that the glorified now in Heaven can break
the Laws, that we break here, while on earth; and yet it will not follow, that
they are under the same particular obligations to particular acts of commanded
duties, that we stand under: So nor was Christ, as to Himself, under the
obligation of the p^rticular duties of the law, to which He willingly submitted
Himself, and gave obedience; but all this was for us: Nor was this necessarily
required to make His Sacrifice Holy; for His Humane Nature, being once united,
to the Divine, could not otherwise be but holy and without sin; and so a
sinless and holy Sacrifice. And withal we would take notice, that the Actions
of the Mediator, were the Actions of the person, and not of either of the
Natures alone; and therefore must not be looked upon, as the Actions of a mere
man. So that His acts of obedience, were the acts of obedience of God man, or
of that person, that was God. He needs not then tell us, that the Absolute
holiness and Righteousness of the humanity it self was of necessary concurrence
unto His obedience: for we grant it, and this flowed from the hypostatical
union: but that, which we deny, is, That there was an Holiness and
Righteousness in acts of outward obedience to the law requisite thereunto; as
if the humane Nature, by virtue of the hypostatical union, had not been holy
and harmless, untecedently unto those outward acts of obedience; and so had not
been a sinless and holy Sacrifice, if He had been offered up in His Infancy, or
before He was in capacity to do any commanded acts. He needs not say (as he
does page 204.) that we conceive, that Christ-man might have been righteous
without doing the works of Righteousness, which is all one, as to say, that He
might have been Righteous, though He had transgressed; for not to keep the law,
in those, to whom the law is given, is nothing else, but to transgress. For we
neither do, nor need assert any such thing: for by virtue of the hypostatical
union, He was Righteous, and could not transgress, or do any thing contrary to
what was imposed upon Him: but we say, that by virtue of this union, as to
Himself, the Humane Nature was not under the law, as we are; but He was under
the law, that He might fulfill it for others; and not to fit and qualify Him
to be a meet Sacrifice, as if for this His Humane Nature had not been meet
enough before. To this he says, page 205. Let this Supposition be admitted,
that Christ had suffered in the womb, and that this Suffering of His had been
fully Satisfactory; yet had He been as perfectly righteous, in this case; and
consequently had kept the law perfectly, as now He has done; for the law
requires of Infants, during their Infancy, nothing but holiness of Nature. I
Ans. (1.) This is enoug to confirm what we say, viz. That all His after actual
obedience was not necessary to this end. (2) And beside though this holiness of
Nature was conform to the law upon the matter, yet it was not a formal
obedience unto the law, if we speak of Him in reference to Himself; for the
Humane Nature had this Holiness by virtue of the Hypostatical union: and
Christ, when the Humane Nature was first conceived, was God-man; and the person
was under no law; and so was not under the obligation of any such law; but was
made under the law, as Mediator; and so, for us, and not for himself; nor it is
any more to advantage, to except again and say, that His meaning is not, that
there was an absolute necessity, that he should keep the law, upon the same
terms, every ways, which now He has done, as that He should perform the
same Individual acts of obedience, or the same number of acts, in case He had
been called to suffer any white sooner: but that until the very Instant, in
which He should suffer, whether it were sooner, or later, He should in all
things submit himself unto the good pleasure of God. For it does hence
sufficiently appear, That all his after obedience, in all these particular
acts, was not necessary to fit Him, as a Sacrifice; and so could not be
necessary for Himself. And therefore seeing He had been a sufficiently holy
Sacrifice, had He been offered up before the actual performance of these
commanded duties in the law, it is manifest, that these duties were not
required unto the end alleiged: but that, as He was made under the law for us;
so all His actual obedience to the law was for us, and not for himself. The
Excepter, in end, perceiving the Invalidity of all his own discourse here,
closes the matter thus, page 206. But however suppose this necessity or use of
the Righteousness of Christ could not be sufficiently cleared; yet since there
are many others of undeniable evidence, the position so much contended for; to
wit, that the Godhead of Christ sufficiently qualified Him for such a
Sacrifice, as He was, makes nothing at all for the Imputation of His
Righteousness. Therefore we shall not trouble either our selves, or our Reader
any further with untying an Impertinent knot. What these others of undeniable
evidence are, we have not yet seen: and, sure, this one ground is sufficient to
demonstrat, that his obedience to the law, in all points, was not for himself,
nor to qualify him, as a Sacrifice; but for us: and therefore it must be
imputed, and made over to us and become our Righteousness, whereby and
whereupon, together with his Sufferings, made over to us also, we are to be
justified and accepted of God, as Righteous; and not only have pardon of
sins, but also a Right to the Inheritance, and to the reward promised upon
obedience.

7. As Christ (says he, p. 206.) was a Sacrifice; so was He and yet is, and is
to be for ever, Hebr. 7: 27. etc. An High Priest; and that Righteousness of His
we speak of, qualifieth Him, that is, contributeth to His qualification for
Priesthood, as well as it did for His Sacrifice. Ans. Seeing it cannot be
proved, that his actual obedience to the law (which is the Righteousness we are
here speaking of) was necessary to qualify him to be a Sacrifice here on
earth; much less can it be proven, that it was necessary to qualify him for
his Priesthood in heaven. And all these qualifications mentioned, Heb. 7: 26,
He had, before that actual obedience was either performed, or he in a capacity
to perform it: and therefore his actual obedience was not necessary thereunto.

8. That holy pleasure (says he) and contentment, which Christ himself took in
these works of Righteousness, may be looked upon, as one considerable end, Ioh.
4: 34. Ans. So took He pleasure and delight to Suffer: He had a Baptism to be
baptized with, and how was he straightened, or pained, till it was accomplished,
Luke 12: 50. Shall we then say, that therefore his death was not to make
Satisfaction for the sins of his own? These are but Socinian Evasions, that
have no force to weaken the truth, in the least. And thus, notwithstanding of
all his Exceptions, this Argument abides in its strength. We proceed to
another.

Arg. 5. If we be debtors unto the law, and that not only in matter of
punishment, but in perfection of obedience also; then did Christ ^ot only
suffer death for us, that we might be delivered from the Curse; but also
fulfilled the law, that so we may be reputed to have fulfilled the law in him,
or by the Imputation of His fulfilling of the law to us. Otherwise the law
should yet remain to be fulfilled by us. But the former is true. Ergo, etc.
The force of the Argum. lies here, that we were debtors unto the law, not only
as to the punishment, which we had deserved by transgression; but also as to
perfect conformity thereunto: and therefore coming in our law-place, and taking
on our debt, did not only undergo the punishment for us, but did also yield
perfect obedience: And this compleet Surety-righteousness of Christ, consisting
both in doing and Suffering, must be imputed unto us, and reckoned upon our
score, to the end, we may be justified and Accepted of God, as Righteous; and
have Right not only to Impunity, but also to the Reward, promised to the
obedient.

He excepteth p. 208. etc. Against the Minor, upon these grounds. 1. If the
meaning (says he) be, that we, who are believers, are debtors to the law in
perfection for our justification; it is false. But as for these, that believe
not in Christ, it may be true, in this sense; that if they mean to be
justified, and to escape the punishment, otherwise than by Christ, they must
keep the whole law. Ans. (1) We say not, that Believers, who are already
justified, through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, are debtors unto the
law, for this end: but that ere they could be justified and accepted of God, as
Righteous, they were obliged to perfect obedience, as well as to suffer the
penalty: and seeing this was impossible unto them, their Surety was to do it,
and he did it, and what he did was imputed unto them, and reckoned upon their
score. (2) As for Unbeleevers (ans such are all by Nature) seeing it is
confessed, that they ere under this obligation, then it is necessary, that
before they be justified, either they, or a Surety for them, must satisfy both
these demands of the law. And though none be now under a command, to give
perfect obedience unto the law, to the end, they may be justified; but such as
hear the Gospel are commanded to believe in Christ, and to accept of him by
faith, that they may have an Interest in his Righteousness, and so be
justified: yet that takes not away this Imputation, but establishes it
rather; because Christ having satisfied all the demands of the law, both in
doing and in Suffering, and that as a Surety, Head, Redeemer and public
Person, by believing in him, they receive this, and have it made over unto them.

2. If the proposition (says he) means, that Believers are debtors of
perfect obedience to the law, in a way of Sanctification and thankfulness. This
is true, but it concerns not the question. Ans. Nor do we speak of this,
knowing that it is nothing to the present question: But this we say, That all
men by nature, and so Believers, before they be justified by faith in Christ,
are not only under the Curse, because of sin; but are under the demand of the
law, or the commanding power of the law, requiring perfect obedience, in order
to the reward: And that therefore both these demands of the law must be
satisfied by their Surety, and the same must be imputed to them and reckoned
upon their score, before they can be looked on, as free of the Curse, and as
heirs of the Reward, promised to full and perfect obedience.

3. We are not (says he) therefore exempted from keeping the law, no not in
respect of justification it self, because we have transgressed it, but because
1. having once transgressed it, we are utterly incapable of such an
observation, whether personally, or by imputation, which may amount to
justification, or exemption from punishment. 2. That relaxation or release from
an observation of, or dependence upon the law by justification accrueth unto us
by means of our dependence upon Christ for justification, through his death,
Romans 7: 4. Ans. (1) If our transgression of the law does not exeem us from the
obligation to keep it perfectly, in order to justification, then, ere we be
justified, that obligation must be satisfied, as well, as the obligation to
punishment; and so the law must be perfectly kept, as well as its penalty
suffered: And seeing we our selves can do neither, our Surety must do it for us,
and that must be accepted for us, and imputed to us. (2) Nor can it be said,
that our uncapableness to keep it, so as may amount to justification, does
exeem us from the obligation, or destroy the laws power to require that of us;
more than our uncapableness to suffer the penalty, so as may amount to a
justification, does or can exeem us from the obligation to suffer, or destroy
the laws power to require the penalty of us. It is true, that no man now is
called of God to endeavoure this way of justification: yet all such, as live
without the Gospel have not the better and more sure way, through faith in
Christ made known unto them. The obligation to perfect obedience remaining
after the transgression, says, that, ere a man, that was both obliged to
Suffer, and to yield perfect obedience, can be justified, the law, as to both
these demands, must be satisfied, and the Sureties Satisfaction to both must be
reckoned upon his score. (3) Justification and Exemption from punishment are
not one and the same, in our case, more than pardon and Righteousness. (4) The
Exemption, that accrueth to believers, says not, that there was no obligation
upon mankind both to suffer and to obey, in order to justification, anteriour
to Christ's doing both.

4. God never required (says he page 210.) of any man, but only of Christ,
both exactness of obedience to the law, and subjection to punishment, due to
the transgression of the law conjunctim, but divisim only. He that shall
perfectly keep the law, is not bound to suffer the penalty. Ans. (1) Then our
transgressing of the law should exeem us from the obligation to obedience,
contrare to what was granted in the First Exception. (2) Though he, who
perfectly keeps the law, is obnoxious to no punishment; yet he, who breaks
the law (as we all did in Adam, beside our daily transgressions) is obnoxious
to punishment; and this obnoxiousness to punishment no more dissolveth his
obligation to obedience, than his transgression was able to do. And therefore
we are all, considered in our Natural state, obliged to both conjunctim; for we
are borne sinners, and yet born under the obligation of keeping the law of God.
(3) Gods requiring both of Christ, who was Mediator and Surety, says, that
both were required of us: for what was required of him, as Surety, was required
of the principal debtors.

5. He says, In case a Man has transgressed the law, and has suffered
(whether by himself, or by some other for him) the full punishment threatened,
he is no further a debtor unto the law, neither in point of punishment, nor of
obedience: for the punishment is of equal consideration to the law, with the
most absolute conformity: and as no man can be obliged to fulfill the law twice
for his justification; so neither is it reasonable to conceive, that he, who
has suffered the full penalty, that being as satisfactory to the law, as the
exactest obedience, should be still bound to the observation of the law. Ans.
When the law promises life to the fulfillers, as well as threatens death to
the transgressors, the suffering of death for the transgression, is not such a
fulfilling of the law, as has the promise of life annexed to it: Devils,
though now suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, the death threatened, yet
cannot be said to be fulfilling the law, or obeying unto life; nor can they be
said to be justified, nor to be suffering any thing, in order thereunto. In
order therefore to our justification and Acceptance with God, as heirs of the
life promised, who were both obnoxious to punishment, and also obliged to give
perfect obedience to the law, the law as to both, must be satisfied. Nor can we
say, that the punishment of Devils is of equal consideration to the law, with
the conformity yielded thereunto by the confirmed Angels. And though the
suffering of the penalty in laws penal or such as promise no reward unto the
obeyers, may be said to be of equal consideration with the keeping of the law;
yet this cannot be said in laws, which promise a Reward to the observers, as
well as threaten a punishment to transgressors: Nor can the man, that
suffers the punishment, suppose to the full, that is threatened in the law,
be said to have fulfilled the law, and to have deserved the reward promised to
obeyers. (2) Though Christ has both obeyed the law, and suffered the
punishment; yet the law is not twice fulfilled, but once, because, as was
granted, such as were sinners and obnoxious to punishment, were also obliged to
yield perfect obedience: for transgression did not destroy this obligation. As
when a man is punished for breach of a law, that not only required obedience
under such a penalty, but also promised a reward to the observers, when he is
put to perform what was commanded, ere he can have the promised reward, he is
not put to fulfill the law twice: for his punishment was but Satisfaction to
one part of the law, or to threatening; but it was no satisfaction of the law,
as to the reward promised.

Arg. 6. If there be no justification, without a perfect Righteousness, and no
such Righteousness to be found, but the Righteousness of Christ performed to
the law, then of Necessity this Righteousness must be imputed to us unto
justification. But the former is true. Ergo, etc. The ground of this Argument
is, that justification is the pronouncing of a person righteous, and
justification being Gods act, the person justified must be righteous, ere God
can judge and pronounce him to be such; for the judgment of God is always
according to truth; and no person having a righteousness of his own, all that
are justified must have a Righteousness imputed to them; and there is no
Righteousness that can be said to be imputed, but the Surety righteousness of
Christ, and particularly, in satisfying all the demands of the law.

He Excepteth, page 211. against the Minor 1. That however it be true, that
justification cannot take place, without a perfect Righteousness, being nothing
else than the making of a man perfectly Righteous: yet a Righteousness
consisting determinatly of such a tale of righteous acts, as Christ performed
unto the Moral law, is not absolutely necessary: for in reference to the jews,
there must have been righteous acts performed unto the ceremonial law also.
Ans. (1) Justification is not the making of a man perfectly righteous; but the
judicial pronouncing and declaring of a man to be so, through the
Righteouseness of Christ, imputed to him and received by faith. (2) A perfect
Righteousness, consisting in complete obedience the law is required: we urge
not such a determination of acts, in number and tale to the moral, or to the
Ceremonial law: only we assert the necessity of a full obedience to the Rule of
Righteousness, which God prescribed unto men, and this was the Moral law:
Though, as to the jews there were other prescriptions proposed, than were to
others of the world; yet these same prescriptions, consisting in Ceremonials,
or in Judicials, were reduced to the Moral law, and were enjoined thereby, so
long as they stood in force, and were not repealed by the Supreme Law giver.

Except 2. Neither is it so absolutely true, that there is no perfect
Righteousness to be found, beside Christ's. There is a Righteousness in the law
as absolut and complete. And it is much more probable, that if God Imputes a
legal Righteousness unto Men in justification, He fournisheth them this way out
of the law. Ans. But what is that Righteousness in the law? does the law hold
forth any Righteousness, but perfect obedience? and how can God furnish them
with this, but by Imputing unto them the perfect obedience of Christ, seeing He
has not so ordered matters, as they shall be in case, while here, perfectly to
keep the law themselves. (2) He remitteth us to what he said formerly in the
same Treatise; and in that place, he makes this complete Righteousness to
consist in Remission of sins. And yet, it is certain, that Remission is no
obedience; nor is it a Righteousness held forth in the law; not is it any
Satisfaction to the law: yea, it agrees noth with common sense, nor with
Reason to say, that by Remission of sins men are made formally Righteous.

Except. 3. That perfect Righteousness, wherein justification consists, and
where with men are made formally Righteous, when they are justified, is nothing
else but Remission of sins, Romans 4: 6, 7. Ans. Remission of sins is not a
perfect Righteousness. This has no countenance, from Scripture, nor from
Reason, or common sense. Who ever thought, or said, that a pardoned Thief or
Murderer was a Righteous man? or that his pardon made him formally Rightheous,
and an observer of the law? Though thereupon he be freed from the penalty, or
from the punishment threatened in the law against such transgressors; yet is he
nor thereupon either made or declared to be Righteous; but his pardon is a
virtual declaration, that he is not Righteous, but a Transgressour. How that
place, Romans 4: 6, 7. is perverted, when adduced to give countenance to this
fiction, is declared already.

He adds, page 215. two Reasons for this: the first is, That remission of
sins is equivalent unto, and virtually contains and comprehends in it, the
most absolute and entire obedience unto the law. Ans. Remission of sins, as
such, is so far from being equivalent to this, or from comprehending this in
it, that it is a plain declaration of the contrary: for where entire obedience
is, there Remission has no place, and Remission must presuppose a
Transgression. The next is, Because (swaith he) it has all these great and
high privileges annexed to it, and depending upon it, which a Righteousness,
most strickly so called, could have, as the Love, Favor, acceptance and
approbation of God. Ans. If we speak of Remission of sins, in it self, and
abstractly considered, this is also false: for though a pardoned man be freed
from the punishment, due to Transgressors; yet, as merely pardoned, he has no
right to Reward, promised to the perfect observers of the law: Nothwithstanding
hereof, we grant that the man pardoned of God has all these high and great
privileges; but not by virtue of his mere pardon; but because there is a
Righteousness, imputed to him, upon which these privileges do depend, and
Exemption from punishment depends upon his pardon.

He has two other Reasons elsewhere, page 5, 6. to this purpose; as 1. That
Remission includes the acknowledgment of the observation of the whole law,
even as the Imputation of the law fulfilled, necessarily includes the
non-imputation of sin. Ans. Though in our justification, this might be granted
to be true, upon the matter, because there is an Imputation of the whole
Surety-righteousness of Christ together; and the one part is not separated from
the other; so that the one consequently infers the other. But when it is
thus reasoned against the Imputation of the one, the Inference here must be
understood of a formal Inference, and so it is false, that Remission includes
the acknowledgment of the observation of the whole law; for it only includes
the non-Imputation of guilt, notwithstanding that the law was broken: yea, as
is said, it manifestly supposes the contrary, viz. That the law was not
perfectly observed, for had the law been perfectly observed, there had been no
place for pardon. Moreover, Remission as such, gives no Right to the reward,
promised unto perfect obedience; but only impunity from the punishment,
threatened for disobedience. 2. says he. He cannot be said to have all this
sins fully forgiven, who is yet looked upon, as one that has transgressed,
either by Omission, or Commission, and intended to be dealt with all as such.
Ans. Though he, whose sins are fully forgiven, cannot be dealt with, as one
guilty of sin, that is, as one liable to the punishment; yet he may be looked
on, as one, that was guilty, and so did not give full and perfect obedience:
and therefore, though he cannot be dealt with as a Transgressour; yet neither
can he be dealt with, upon the account of his Remission, as one that has
yielded perfect obedience, and did never transgress. Wherefore, seeing he cannot
be looked upon, as one that never transgressed, he cannot be looked upon, as
one that has a perfect Righteousness, and so, a Right to the Reward. The
similitudes taken from a phisician, restoreing his patient to health, by
recovering him from his sickness; and from the Sun, in one act expelling
darkness and bringing in light, which are here adduced for illustration, have
no force to prove any thing here, in regard, there is no correspondence in all
points, betwixt Matters Natural, and Matters merely Moral, or Political. There
is no Medium betwixt light and darkness, or the habit and its privation; but
there is a Medium here betwixt Transgressing of the law, and perfect obedience
to the law unto the end, Adam, so long as he stood, was no Transgressour; yet
he had not then given perfect obedience to the end, according to the Covenant.
So there is a Medium betwixt Freedom from the Penalty, and the Right to the
Reward, as was shown above.

Arg. 7. If do this and live, be an everlasting Rule of God, and which shall
never be dissolved, then must the Active obedience of Christ be imputed unto
Men, in justification, that so they may be said to have done this, and so live.
But the former is true, Ergo, etc. That these words, do this and live, contain
a determination and constitution of the Lord, as unalterable, as these words,
That day thou eats, thou shall die, cannot well be denied: and therefore, if
because of this latter, no man can be saved, unless their Surety die for them;
so because of that former, no man can have right to the reward, unless his
Surety perform perfect obedience. And as the one is imputed to the Believer,
so must the other be Imputed also, in order to his complete Salvation.

Against this he excepteth, page 216. etc. thus, In this sense, I grant, that
do this and live, is an everlasting Rule, that is, it is, has been, and shall
be everlastingly true, that who so ever shall fulfill the law perfectly, shall
live. But not in this sense, that it is the only perpetual and standing Rule,
whereby and according to which, men must be justified, and so saved: for in
this sense, it neither is, nor ever was, nor ever shall be a rule of God: for
God has always had, and for ever will have another rule for the justification
of men. Ans. (1.) Was it not a Rule of life and justification to Adam, in the
state of Innocence? was he not, according to that Covenant, where in he stood,
to purchase the good promised by his doing? It may be, the Excepter thinks,
with the Socinians, that no more was promised to Adam, than what he had in
possession. (2.) We do not assert it, as a standing rule, whereby we should now
expect to be justified; but we say, that it being a constitution of God's, as
well as the other, viz. That day thou eats, thou shall die, It must be
satisfied, as well as the other. And as the rule of faith takes not away
Christ's suffering of death, according to what was threatened in the law; so nor
does the law of faith take away His obedience, according to the command of the
law: and as Christ's paying down of the Penalty was necessary for our freedom
from death; so His giving full obedience to the law is necessary to our life;
though, as was said, we need not nicely thus distinguish, save to show the
necessity of the Imputation of both.

Arg. 8. That Righteousness, which God accepts on our behalf, is the
Righteousness imputed to us in justification. But the Righteousness of Christ
is that Righteousness, which God accepts on our behalf, Ergo, etc.

He excepteth, page 217. 1. Denying the Major, because God may and does accept
that for us, or on our behalf, which yet He need not impute to us; at He
accepted of Abrahanis prayer, in the behalf of Ismael; and of the prayer of
Elisha for the Shumanites Son, and yet neither was imputed to the other. Ans.
But all this, and a thousand Instances of the like nature, can evince nothing;
for the Argument speaks of what is accepted of God, in order to
justification, as the ground and meritorious cause thereof; which the Instances
adduced come not nigh unto. He adds, In like manner, these, in whose behalf,
Christ's Sufferings were accepted, receive an unspeakable benefit and blessing
by them; but this operats nothing to the Inference of the Imputation pleaded
for; that is, that God must look upon these Sufferings of Christ, as if they
had personally endured them, on whose behalf they are accepted. Ans. Then it
seems not only is the Imputation of Christ's active obedience denied; but also
the Imputation of His death and Sufferings; and no more is granted, than what
Socinians will yield unto. (2) The Imputation, we plead for, is not such as
makes God to look upon these Sufferings of Christ, as if Believers had
personally endured them: but such, as makes God to look upon them, as the
Sufferings of Christ, as Surety, Head and Public person, in the room and stead
of His chosen ones; which Sufferings and payment of the Penalty by the Surety,
being made over unto, and reckoned upon the score of Believers, they are, upon
the account thereof, accepted and dealt with, as if they themselves had so
Suffered and Satisfied, in their own persons.

2. He distinguishes thus, If by the Righteousness of Christ the proposition
means, precisely that obedience, which He exhibited to that general and
common law, whereunto all Men are obliged, considered apart from His obedience
to that particular law of Mediator, given to Himself alone, so it is false. If
by Righteousness be here meant that obedience of Christ, commonly called
passive, or both active and passive together; so it may be true: but then the
other will be found tardy. Ans. (1) Christ's obedience to that general law, by
which all men were obliged, did as well belong to His law of Mediation, and was
comprehended under it, as His giving up Himself to Suffering and to death: for
as Mediator He was made under the law, as well as suffered the Curse. (2) The
Minor proposition is to be understood of the whole Surety-righteousness,
consisting not only in Suffering; but also in actual obedience to the law: and
when this is granted, the whole we seek is granted. Neither is the former
proposition found tardy, as appears from what is said; and the Syllogism is
good, and no Paralogisme, what ever he supposes.

Arg. 9. If Christ were a public Person, standing in the place or stead of all
those that should believe in Him; then all that He did and Suffered, is to be
looked upon and reputed by God, as done and Suffered by these, and consequently
are Imputed to them. But the former is true, Ergo, etc. Sure, if Christ was a
publik person, standing in the place and room of the chosen ones, all that He
did, as such a person, or as a Surety, as to that wh^^h law and justice
required of them, and they were obliged unto, must needs be imputed unto them,
and reckoned upon their score; and they must be dealt with upon the account
thereof, as if all had been done and suffered by themselves. We do not say,
that all He did and Suffered, is or must be Imputed: but that all, which He did
and suffered, in Satisfaction of the law, and in payment of that, which we were
liable unto, and stood under the obligation of, is and must of necessity be
imputed, to the end we may be deliver^^ from under the former obligation.

He excepteth, page 220. etc. 1. The publickness of Christ's person, or His
standing in the place of those, that should believe, is no sufficient ground to
build this Inference upon, That therefore all He did and suffered, are looked
upon by God, as done and suffered by them; such as His conception, Birth, etc.
Ans. We have obviated this already, by showing, that the Major is to be limited
to, and understood of those things only, which the law required of us, and
which we were under the obligation of, and were debtors to do and suffer,
amongst which none of the particulars mentioned, and many more suchlike, can be
reckoned. His after rambling discourse upon this mistake, is not worth the
noticeing: And who sees not, how vain it is for him to say, that then God
should look upon men, as having redeemed the world: For, as the law did not
require this of us; so to speak thus, destroys all acts of Sutetyship: for
the Sureties acts can never be so imputed to the debtor, as to make him thereby
the Surety. We know, that Sureties and public persons may do many things,
which cannot be said to be imputed to the deb^ors and persons represented: but
these things are not done by them, as such public persons and Sureties, but in
another capacity. And it is folly hence to infer, that therefore the Sureties
payment of the debt cannot be said to be imputed to the debtor; or that wherein
the public person was a publik person, and which he did as such, cannot be
said to be imputed to those, whom he represented.

2. Except. Itagreeth not with Scripture expression, to say, that the
Sufferings of Christ are by God looked upon, as our Sufferings, or to conceive,
that we should suffer in Him. It is not all one to say, we were punished in
Christ, and Christ was punished for us. This last as warranted by Esai. 53: 6.
But the other cannot be affirmed; for seeing in Christ's death, we have remission
of sins, we cannot be said, for the same sins to be punished in and with
Christ. Ans. This is wholly founded upon his own way of wording the Argument,
so as he thought it would give him most advantage: for all this looks to
these words, in the Major propos. are to be looked upon, and are reputed by
God, as done and suffered by those; which words might have been left out,
without any hurt to our cause: the Argum. without them would have been full and
concludent for us, whether any have argued so, or he has framed the Argum* to
his own mind, I know not. Sure, there is no necessity for adding of these
words: yet the words may admit of a candide Interpretation; for it has no
repugnancy, or dissonancy to Scripture expression, to say, that the Sufferings
of Christ are looked upon as the believers sufferings, when they are impu^^d to
him; not as if God should think, judge or conceive, that the believer, in his
own Physical person, had suffered, that which Christ did suffer; but that he
has a special legal interest in these Sufferings, as being in a special manner
interessed in Christ: and are now dealt with by God, no otherwise, than as if
he himself had, in his own person, laid down that satisfactory price. And in
this sense, there is no difference betwixt the saying, that we are punished in
Christ, and that Christ was punished for us: for we (...) only punished in
Christ legally, as Christ suffered for us, as coming in ^ur law-place. Neither
does the saving, in this sense, That we are punished in Christ, take a way
Remission of sins, but does rather establish the same, as being the only ground
thereof: for till we have an Interest in Christ, and in His Sufferings, by the
Imputation thereof to us, and our leaning to them by faith, we can have no
Remission, according to the Gospelway.

Except. 3. The publikeness of a person, who negatiats the affairs of others,
does no further, nor any other ways, interesse those, whose affairs he
mannageth, in what he does in, or about such a transaction: buth only with
reference to the issue, and success of what he does for them, in that behalf:
so that his dishonest, or unconscientious way, in the miscarying, or his wisdom
and faithfulness, in the right managing, are no ways imputable to the persons,
whose business is negotiated. Ans. It is not necessary, that that special
manner of managment should be so imputed unto the persons, whose affair is
negotiated, it being sufficient, that the persons represented be interessed in
the transaction it self, in reference to an interest in the issue in the same
affair managed: and the transaction it self is so imputed to the persons
represented, in reference to the effects, as if it had been done by themselves.
So in our case, though the Wisdom, Faithfulness and patience of Christ, used in
the managment of that public affair entrusted to Him, as a public person,
undertaking for, and representing all His Children, be not imputed unto them:
yet the business it self, with which He was entrusted, viz. Giving satisfaction
to the law in all points, by Suffering and Obedience, which the law required of
us, is imputed to us, and must be so, in order to our partaking of the
benefits and advantage thereof.

Except. 4. It is not altogether so solid or sound, as is supposed, that
Christ stood in the place and stead of those, that should believe in Him,
especially in all things, performed by Him, and which tended to the
qualification of His person. To stand in the place and stead of another,
implies a necessity of his being in the same place, and doing the same things
himself, wherein he stands, and which he does, who is supposed to stand in his
stead, unless they had been done by this other for him. Ans. This last
Exception is the same with the first, and needs little more consideration. We
do not assert, that He did so stand in the place and stead of believers, as to
all things He did and suffered; but only that He stood in in our room and
stead, in the whole of His active and passive obedience, or in making
satisfaction to the demands of the law, in His state of humiliation, this being
it, for and in reference to which, He was appointed to be a public person: all
other things He did, as His Miracles, assuming a body, and the like, need not
be said to be imputed to us; though, in that they concerned His person, and
were requisite thereunto, and to the work He was employed in, they carry a
special advantage in them for Believers; and were in a particular manner
designed for their good, and were subservient to that maine design.

Arg. 10. If we cannot be justified by the Righteousness of Christ otherwise
than by the Imputation of it, then must it needs be imputed to us, in our
justification. But the former is true. Ergo. etc.

He excepteth p. 225. The Righteousness of Christ concurreth toward
justification, by qualifying His person for that Sacrifice of himself, by which
justification has been purchased for all those that believe Ans. The Argum. is
to be understood of His whole Surety-righteousness, and not of His active
obedience only. (2) Even as to this, it was answered above, that it was not
requisite unto this end, His humane nature being sufficiently hereunto
qualified, by the personal union, by which His blood became the blood of God,
and all He did and Suffered was the deed and Suffering of Him, who was God.

Arg. 11. If we may truly be said to be dead and crucified with Christ, to be
quickened and have risen again with Him, etc. then may we truly be said to
have fulfilled the law with Christ; and consequently that should be imputed to
us. But the former is true, Ergo, etc. These expressions point forth the closs
union, that is betwixt Christ and Believers, and thereupon their Interest in
what He did and suffered, as Mediator, Surety and public person, to the end
they may have right to, and possession of the great benefits, purchased and
procured by Him. So they hold forth Christ's suffering, dying, riseing, etc. as
a public person in their room and in their stead, and as their Representative:
so that it is r^ckoned for them, and upon their score, and they are so
interessed therein, as that they are to be dealt with, as if all these things
had been done and suffered by themselves. And though, in these expressions
mentioned, there be no express mention made of Christ's fulfilling the law; yet
they sufficiently hold forth that, which by parity of reason will enforce this,
as well as the other: for they point forth Believers their union and communion
with Christ, as to His Mediatory work, to which His fulfilling of the law did
belong.

Against the consequence he says, These expressions have no such Inference:
for if we could be said to have fulfilled the law with Christ, our own
fulfilling it in Him should rather be said to be imputed to us, than His
fulfilling it for us. Ans. (1) This will say as much against the Imputation of
Christ's sufferings; for we are said to be dead with Christ; and therefore not
Christ's death, but our own death in Him should be said to be imputed to us: But
the Scripture knows no such thing. (2) The meaning of the expression is, we
say, but to denote emphatically the imputation of what Christ did and suffered,
unto us: for our own fulfilling of the law in Him, is but His fulfilling of it
for us, and the same imputed to us; so as we are dealt with no otherwise, than
if we had done it our selves; as our being dead and buried with Christ, is but
His dying in our place and stead, or our having such an Interest in His death
and burial, as that we are dealt with, as if, in a manner, we had died our
selves. But he supposes, there is a difference, as to this, betwixt Christ's
dying and His fulfilling the law, saying, When the Scripture says, we are dead
etc. with Christ, the meaning is not, that God looked upon us, as if we had
laid down our Natural lives by death, when he laid down His; and as if this
laying down our lives were a satisfaction to His justice; for then we might be
said, to have satisfied for and redeemed our selves: But these expressions
import either a profession of such a death in us, which holds proportion with,
or has a likeness to the death of Christ, or else this death it self really
wrought in us, by that death of Christ. Ans. We do not asserte the meaning of
these expressions to be, That God looks upon us, as if we had laid down our
Natural lives, etc. But that believers have such an Interest in Christ's death,
as being the death of their Surety, Redeemer, Head, Husband and public person,
that they receive the benefits and advantag^^ thereof, no less really and
effectually, than if they themselves, in their own persons, had dyed and
satisfied, the same being now imputed unto them, and laid hold on by faith. (2)
Though these expressions, at least some of them, and in some places of
Scripture, as Romans 6. may and do import what is here expressed; yet the full
import of these Expressions is not hereby exhausted, as the scope and
circumstances of the places may clear; as particularly that expression, Gal.
2: 20. I am crucified with Christ: and these Ephesians. 2: 5. 6.

He adds against this. That Gal. 2: 20. The expression is taken in the latter
sense, importing that the natural death of Christ for Paul and others, had
wrought upon him, in a way of assimilation to it self, and had made him a dead
man to the world. Ans. Paul is rather clearing and confirming, how he was
become dead to the law, and alive unto God, verse 19. in and through the virtue
of Christ's death and crucifixion, in which he had such an Interest, that he
accounted him self, as it were hinging-on the cross in and with Christ; and did
so rest upon that by faith, and own that Sacrifice alone, that he and Christ,
as it were, were become one person; and he owed his being dead unto the law
only thereunto, and had it as really flowing therefrom and following
thereupon, as if he himself had hung upon the cross, as a satisfactory
Sacrifice.

To that Ephesians. 2: 5, 6. he says, The meaning is not, that God looks upon
them, as quickened from a natural or corporal death, as Christ's quickening and
riseing again was. Ans. Nor do we say, that this is the meaning, nor need we
either think, or say so: but this we say, that the expression holds this
forth, that Christ dyed and rose again, as a public person and Surety; and
that Believers have so near an Interest in His Mediatory work, and so closs an
union with the Mediator, that they are as one person in law; so that they are
really made partakers of some of the fruits of what Christ did and suffered,
already, and shall as really partake of what is yet to be communicated, as if
they themselves had laid down that purchasing price. Let us hear what he gives
for the meaning.

The meaning (says he) is either to signify the profession, that is made by
us of that newness of life, which in way of a Spiritual Analogy, answers that
life, whereunto Christ was quickened and rose again; or else the new life it
self wrought in us. Ans. That the Apostle is not here speaking of a mere
profession, is manifest: nor is he speaking only of a new life, wrought in
them; for he adds, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus: Nor does that, which he says, invalidate the meaning, which we give;
for that effect, or inwrough quickening is spoken of, as flowing from Christ's
dying and riseing, and from their Interst in His dying and riseing, and their
union with Him in all that, as being one person in law with Him; and so as
virtually riseing with Him, and now sitting with Him, who is their common Head
and Representative All which does abundantly confirm the Doctrine of
Imputation, which we plead for.

He adds finally, But on the other hand, as there is no such expression in
Scripture, as this, we have fulfilled the law with Christ; so neither^ if there
were, would it make any thing at all to salve the truth of the proposition,
under question: for what if we should be said either to profess such a
fulfilling of the law, as holds proportion with Christ's fulfilling it, or
really and personally to fulfill the law, after such a manner? Ans. The
expressions already mentioned do sufficiently evince this union and communion,
that believers have with Christ, in His mediatory work, which is a solid
ground of Imputation of the same unto them, as the foundation of their
partaking of the benefits flowing therefrom: for there cannot any show of
reason be given for the one, which will not hold good for the other also. And
it is said, but not proved, that these and the like expressions hold forth no
more, but one or both of these two things alleiged: yea the scope of the
places, and the Import of the words, hold forth much more, as is said.

Arg. 12. Whosoever is a sinner, and so continues whilst he lives, cannot be
justified other ways, than by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. But
every man (Christ excepted) is a sinner, etc. Therefore, etc.

He excepteth, page 219. etc. If there be no other means of justifying, the
condition of the whole world is hopless; for there is no such Imputation. Ans.
The contrary has been shown, and shall be more demonstrated hereafter. He
adds, Without Imputation there is another door opened. What is this? Those
that truly believe in Jesus Christ, being not under the law, but under grace,
are not liable to condemnation for their daily sins, 1 Ioh. 2: 1, 2. Ans.
True, but what then? How come they to be under grace, and not under the law? Is
is not by virtue of the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto them,
unto their Justification; and because of their Interest in Christ, as Mediator,
as their Head, Husband, Surety, Interessour and Advocat? He adds. So that for
the dissolving and taking away of all guilt, there needs no Imputation of the
active obedience of Christ. The propitiation, which He is unto them, by His
blood and Intercession, has done this service to them, before this Imputation
is supposed to come at them. Ans. We plead for the Imputation of His whole
Surety and Mediatory work; and say that it is wholly imputed, and that at once,
and not one part now, and another at another time. Nor do we say, that Christ's
death did procur^ one thing, and His obedience another thing: but that in and
by both, He, as Surety, performed what the law required of us; and thereby
procured all to us, that we stand in need of, to make us happy.

Thus have we vindicated the Arguments, which this Author thought good to make
any answer unto: others might be mentioned, but we shall forbear mentioning of
them, till some other occasion.

CHAP. XI.
Objections taken out of Scripture by Mr. Goodwine, against the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ unto Justification, Answered.
HAving in the foregoing Chapters proved, both from Scripture and Reason, That
Christ's Righteousness is imputed unto Believers unto justification; and having
vindicated such of them, as were excepted against by Mr. Goodwine; we shall now
come and examine the Arguments, by which he oppugneth the Doctrine of
Imputation, in the first part of his Treatise of justification; Where he
marshalleth his Arguments under two heads, viz. of Scripture and Reason. He
begins with his supposed Scripture proofs, Chap. 2. etc. As to the first of
which, largely prosecuted Chap. 2. we shall speak to it afterward, when we come
to speak of the Interest of faith in Justification; for thereunto it does more
properly belong, being rather a proof of the Imputation of faith, in a proper
sense, as our Righteousness, unto justification, than of the Non-Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ.

Leaving therefore the examination of this to its proper place, we come to see
what other Scriptures, adduced by him against the Truth hitherto asserted, do
say, in this question under debate; and that the more willingly, because Mr.
Baxter in his late book against D. Tully, refers us to this man for
Arguments.

First, he adduceth such passages, as absolutely exclude the works of the law
from justification, as Romans 3: 28. Gal. 2: 16. Romans 3: 20. We spoke something
to this matter, while we were mentioning the Mysteries, remarkable in
justification: yet we shall here consider what he says. He thus reasons,
page 55. If a man be justified by the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto him,
he shall be justified by the works of the law; because that Righteousness of
Christ, we now speak of, consists of these works. Ans. The vainity and falsehood
of the Consequence is obvious: nor does the reason added, make any supply. It
is true the Righteousness of Christ did consist in works of obedience, required
by the law; yet though this be imputed to us, it does not follow, that we are
justified by the works of the law ^^ccording to the Scripture sense of that
expression: for the Scripture means works of the law, which we do in our own
persons, Tit. 3: 5. And the whole Scope, Drift and purpose of the Spirit of the
Lord, in all these places cited, and in all others, evinceth this; and all the
Arguments mentioned in Scripture against justification by the works of the law,
demonstrat this to be the true and only impo^^ of that expression, as cannot
but be plain to any considering person. Yet he has 4. answers, and he adds
several other things, which we must examine.

He says I. Where the Holy Ghost delivers a truth simply and indefinitly and
in a way of a General and Universal conclusion, without imposeing any necessity
there, or else where, to limite or distinguish upon it; for men to interpose by
distinctions and limitations, to overrule the express meaning of the words, is
to usurp authority over the Scriptures. Ans. I grant, to adhibite distinctions
or limitations, which the Scripture gives no warrant for, to over rule the
express meaning of the words of the Holy Ghost, is to exercise an unlawful
authority over the Scriptures, and savoureth of audacious profanity. And I
judge, that there are not afew of such distinctions and limitations to be
found, in his Book, making him fall under the lash of this censure. But to
assert such a general and universal sense of a Scripture expression, as neither
will agree with other Scriptures, nor with common Sense and Reason; yea which
so directly crosses the whole Gospel, and destroys the Scope, Cohesion, and
obvious Sense of the whole purpose, and of every sentence, used by the Spirit
of the Lord in that matter, is to usurp a Supra-papal power and Authority over
the Scriptures of truth, and a most ready way to render them wholly useless.
(2) As for our sense of this Expression, who, that will willingly be ruled by
the Scriptures, cannot submit unto it? Let us but look to the very first place
cited by himself, Romans 3. and consider the whole preceding discourse of the
Apostle from Chap. I: 18. and forward, and particularly Chap. 3: 19. Where the
Apostle closes his discourse, tending to evince both jews and Gentiles to be
under the Curse, by saying, Now we know, that what things so ever the law
says, it says to them who are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped,
and all the world may become guilty before God. Is not this to be understood,
in respect of their own personal deeds and works? See then his conclusion, verse
20. Therefore by the deeds of of the law, there shall no flesh be justified in
his sight. Can any man, that has not renounced common sense, understand this
otherwise, than that no man shall be justified in the sight of God by his own
personal works; seeing this is the only native conclusion, that flows from the
premises; seeing by their own personal works they can be justified before men;
and seeing the following words, for by the law is the knowledge of sin, that is,
the law proves and evinceth all, that we do, to be short and sinful, enforce
this likewise? Is not this also enforced by these words, verse 23. For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God? Is it imaginable, that
justification, through the Imputed obedience of Christ to the law can evince,
that we are not justified freely by His grace through the Redemption, that is
in Jesus Christ, verse 24? If this general sense were the true meaning, what
ground was there for that verse 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By
what law? of works? no, by the law of faith? Would Justification by Christ's
obedience give ground of boasting? And what ground were there for that
objection verse 31. Do we then make void the law, etc. and in the following
Chapter, when speaking of Abraham, does he or can any man imagine, that the
Apostle does mean any other works, when be denies that Abraham was justified
by works, than Abraham's own personal works? And means he, or can he mean
any other works, when he says verse 4. Now to him, that works is the reward
not reckoned of grace, but of debt? But it were tedious to prosecute this
matter further, that is so clear in it self to every ordinary Reader, that it
must needs argue a desperate design, together with unpasrallel'd boldness,
thus, with confidence and peremptoriness, to assert the contrary.

He says 2. If the Apostles charge had been, in delivering of this doctrine,
either to have made, or to have given allowance for any such distinction,
certainly he should have been unfaithful in his trust, in giving the honor,
due to the works of Christ, unto a thing of a far inferior nature, viz to
faith, as he does Gal. 2: 16. Where he says not, but by the works of Jesus
Christ, but by faith Ans. This answer is, in a great measure, sick of the same
distemper of presumption, with the former. We must not think, that the Apostle
is still to be blamed for unfaithfulness, when he speaks not, as we would
have him speak: Christian sobr^ety should reach us, to search for Gods mind, in
the expressions He has thought good to use, for signifying of His mind. These,
against whom the Apostle here wrote, and whose error, in the matter of
justification, he was confuting, never had a thought of such a general
groundless sense, as we have here obtruded upon us; nor can it come into the
thought of any rational man; and when then should we suppose, that the Apo^^le
should have spoken to such a thing? (2) Paul gives not the honor, due to the
works of Christ's, unto any thing of an Inferior Nature, no not to faith,
whatever this Author, misunderstanding the Apostle's mind, and perverting his
words, would make his Reader believe, as we shall have occasion to show
hereafter. This Author setreth Christ and Faith at variance, whileas the
Apostle every where shows their agreement and indissoluble union. (3) Taking
faith, in this Authors sense, we see, That by his own Confession, the ascribing
of that unto faith, which he does ascribe to it, in the matter of
^ustification, is a giving of that honor unto it, which, we say, is due to
Christ's obedience. So that the question betwixt him and us, is, whether Christ
and His obedience, or Faith of a far inferior Nature, must have that honor?
We see no ground to imagine, that Paul would give the honor, that Universal
obedience might call for, unto one act of obedience, or think that he would cry
up one act of obedience, that is, faith, and cry down all other acts of
obedience: far less that he would cry up faith, in prejudice of the full and
perfect obedience of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer and Surety.

He says 3. If Paul's intent had been, to have reserved a place in
Justification, for the works of the law, as performed by Christ, his indefinite
expression would have been, as a snare upon men, to cause them pass over the
great things of their Justification. Ans. Paul's indefinite expression neither
was, nor could have been a snare unto any; nor came such an imagination ever in
the head of any man, but such an one, as can stumble in the most even path,
being blinded with prejudice at the truth, and drunk with love to his own
Inventions, which he cannot otherwise maintain, but by new and unheard of
fictions. What great things of justification could, I pray, Paul's expressions
cause any pass over? Why are not some of these great things mentioned?

He says 4. If this had been Paul's meaning, it cannot be once imagined, but
that he would have made use of such a distinction, or reservation, and would
have been glad, if, without trenching upon some Gospel Truth, he could have
come over so near unto the jews, who where chiefly incensed against Paul, for
passing over the law in justification. Now had he said, that be did not exclude
the righteousness of the law by faith, but advance it rather; only he preached
that they could not be justified by their own observation of it; who sees not
how this would have taken off great part of their opposition, Ans. It is a
wonder to see, how some men can shut their eyes, that they should not see what
is most obvious, and what is in plain terms asserted in the Scriptures. Did
not Paul say expressly enough, Romans 3. ult. That he did not make void the law
through faith, but did establish it? does he not also plainly tell us, where
the difference lay betwixt him and the jews; and what it was especially, at
which they stumbled, when he said, Romans 9: 31, 32. But Israel, which followed
after the law of Righteousness, has not attained to the law of Righteousness;
wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of
the law, for they stumbled at that stumbling stone. And again Romans 10: 3, 4.
But they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to establish
their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness
of God; for Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, etc. Is it not
hence clear, that they rejected Christ, and would not own Him, as the end of
the law for Righteousness: and that they stumbled at Him, seeking after
justification and life, by their own personal following after the law of
Righteousness, and by seeking to establish their own righteousness? How then
can this man say page 61. That Paul was as far from holding justification by
the works of the law, as performed by Christ, as the jews were, who would have
nothing to do with Christ, but stumbled at Him, while as Paul sought only to be
found in Him, not having his own Righteousness, which is of the law; but that
which is through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
faith, Phil. 3: 9. And proclaimed Christ to be the end of the law for
Righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10: 4.

Against Fit. 3: 5. where mention is made of the works of righteousness; which
we have done; and a sufficient ground laid for the distinction mentioned, and
to prevent the stumbling of such, as love to walk in the light, he advances
several answers, page 62. etc. As I. He never said, that the active
righteousness of Christ should be made a stander-by; but that it has a blessed
influence into justification, as it issues into His passive obedience, which
together may be called a Righteousness for which, but not with which we are
justified, except it can be proved to be either the Material, or formal, or
instrumental cause of justification, and whoever attempt to do this, will
wholly dissolve the merit of it. Ans. (1) All this makes nothing to the
purpose now in hand, which is to show, that Paul by this expression clears
sufficiently, what he means by the works of the law, which he excludes from
having any interest in justification, viz. The works of the law, performed by
us in our own persons. (2) What influence the active obedience of Christ has
in justication, when he will not admit it to be any part of that
Surety-righteousness, which is imputed unto us, he shows not; nor what way it
issues in to His passive obedience. If all this influence be to make Him fit
to be a Sacrifice, we have shown above, that the personal Union did that; and
consequently His active obedience, if it had no other influence, is made a mere
stander by. (3.) A Righteousness for which, and a Righteousness with which, is
a distinction, in our case, without a difference; for the one does no way
oppugn, or exclude the other, because the meritorious cause imputed, made over
to and reckoned upon the score of believers, can be also that Righteousness
with which they are justified. (4) Whether it may be called the Material, or
Formal cause of justification (that any ever called it the instrumental cause,
is more than I know) is no great matter, seeing it may be either, as the terms
shall be explained, which men are at freedom to do, according to their own
mind, when they apply them unto this matter, which has so little affinity
with Effects merely Natural, unto the causes of which these terms are properly
applied: though I should choose rather to call it the formal objective cause,
if necessitated to use here philosophik terms. (3) That to call Christ's whole
Righteousness either the Material or Formal cause of justification, is to
overthrow the merit of it, is said, but not proved: It is not these
philosophical terms themselves, but the explication of them by such, as use
them in this matter, that is to be regarded: and none shall ever show, that
either of these terms, as explained by the orthodox, does overthrow the merit
of Christ's Righteousness, both does rather establish it.

He says, 2. The H. Ghost may reject the works of men from being the cause of
such or such a thing, and yet no ways intimat, that the works of any other
should be the cause thereof, If the words had gone thus, not by the works of
Righteousness, which we our selves had done, this had been some what an higher
ground, to have inferred the opposite member of the distinction upon, viz. by
the works of another, or of Christ. Ans. This exception is as little to the
purpose, as the former; for these words were here brought only to show, what
the Apostle meant by the works of the law, which he excluded from
justification, viz. the works which we do: and not to prove immediately, that
the works of any other were understood hereby. (2) It is foolish thing to
imagine a distinction, betwixt works, which we do and works, which we our
selves, do, the same word in the original, which verse 5. is rendered we, is
rendered we our selves, verse 3. What poor shifts are these, which men take to
support a desperate cause?

He says 3. To put the matter out of all question, that excluding the works of
the law, which we had done, he had no intent to imply the works, which another
might do, he expresses the opposition thus, according to His mercy. Ans. The
mistake is still continued in: By these words, we only clear what the works
are, which are excluded; viz. our personal works, or works, which we do, or
have done: whose works else are accepted, other places prove expressly, and this
by consequence, unless the work of a third could be alleiged. (2) The
opposition here made, destroys not the opposition, which we make: for when we
are justified and Saved by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, we
are justified and saved according to His mercy; as well as we are justified
freely by His grace, when justified through the Redemption, that is in Jesus
Christ, Romans 3: 24.

He says 4. and thereby seems to reply to what is last said. The Apostle
delivers himself distinctly of that, wherein this Mercy of God, be speaks of,
consists, viz. regenerating us, etc. Ans. But, I hope, the Apostles
mentioning of Regeneration, does not exclude the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, the ground thereof; nor can he suppose this, unless he plead
with Papists for justification by our good works, done after Regeneration, and
the new birth.

He says 5. Such an inference is neither probable, nor pertinent to the
purpose; because the Apostle rejects the works of righteousness, which he
names, from being any cause, antecedaneously moving God to save us; and not
from being the formal cause of justification: and we our selves (says he) will
not say, that the works of the law, which Christ has done, moved God to
saveus. Ans. (1) The Inference, which he here speaks of, is his own, and not
ours, as we have said. (2) The Salvation here mentioned is comprehensive, and
includes Justification and Adoption, as verse 7. clears; and the Mercy,
mentioned, v. 5. comprehends all other subordinat causes and means, which
the Lord has appointed: and though the obedience of Christ be no cause, moving
God to decree to save; yet it may be a cause of justification. But then (says
he page 65.) This will only establish the merit of Christ's Righteousness in
justification, but overthrow the formality of it. And why so? Because (sait be)
it is unpossible, that one and the self same thing, in respect of one and the
self same effect, should put on the different habitude both of the Formal and
Efficient cause. Ans. All this is but vain talk, and a reasoning from terms
of art, or philosophical notions taken improperly, to the same taken most
properly and strickly; as if a Moral, polititical or legal effect were every
way the same, with a Natural physical effect: and yet in physical Effects, as
such, meritorious causes have no proper Efficiency: But, as to our case, we
plainly say, that Christ's Righteousness is the meritorious cause of our
justification, and yet may be called the formal cause thereof, as that term
may be adapted and fitly explained, according as the matter will bear; or the
formal objective cause, which we rather incline to.

He speaks against Gal. 4: 4. page 66. saying, that it is adduced to prove,
that Paul mentions the works of the law, as done by Christ, in the discourse
of justification; and consequently, that he had no intent to exclude the works
of the law, as done by Christ from having their part in justification. But, as
was shown above, there are many other places of Scripture evincing this. Yet
let us see what he says. 1. The law, under which Christ was made, is the
ceremonial law, as is clear verse 5. we are not redeemed from the Moral law,
which is of eternal obligation; but from the Ceremonial law. Ans. (1) That
Christ was made under the Ceremonial law only, no reason can evince; for He was
made under that law, under the curse whereof we were, who were to be delivered
there from by Him, Gal. 3: 10, 12. But this was not the Ceremonial law only;
otherwise he should have died only for the jews. Again, The law, which he
speaks of, was ordained by Angels, in the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3: 17, 19.
but this was the Moral law, contained in the decalogue. Is the ceremonial law
only that law, that cannot give life verse 21. was nothing a Schoolmaster to
Christ, but the ceremonial part of the law, verse 24. (2) To be under the law,
is not only to be under the laws obligation, but chiefly to be under the laws
Curse, which is the same with being concluded under sin, Gal. 3: 22. (3) If
being under the law be thus limited, or restricked, to a being under the
obligation of the ceremonial law, no more can be meaned, by receiving the
Adoptions of Sons, there mentioned, as the opposite mercy, than a freedom from
the yoke of the ceremonial law! but this, I suppose, will be too narrow an
Interpretation. (4) Though none be redeemed from obedience to the Moral law;
yet they may be delivered there from, as the sole condition of the Covenant,
and as the sole way of obtaining life. 2. He says, hereby may be meaned His
subjection to the curse of the law. Ans. That this may be part of the meaning,
may very easily be granted: and what then can hence follow? The expression of
being under the law, has not always this single and sole import, as we see in
that same Chapter, verse 21.

Secondly, Chap. 4. page 69. He argues from Romans 3: 21, 22. thus, If the
Righteousness, of faith, which is here called the Righteousness of God,
consists in the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, then is it not, nor can it
be, made manifest without the law, that is, without the works of the law. But
the Righteousness of faith is sufficiently manifested without the law, that is
without the works or Righteousness of the law. Ergo. The connection of the Major
he thus confirms. Because to such a Righteousness the law, and the works
thereof, are every white as necessary than faith it self; for faith is made
only a Means of the derivation of it upon men; but the body and substance of
the Righteousness it self is nothing else, but the pure law, and the works of
it. Ans. The connection of the Major is unsound, and its probation is founded
upon a manifest wresting, or misinterpretation of the place: for the meaning of
these words, The Righteousness of God without the law, is this, The
Righteousness of God, which is not had by our performance of the commands of
the law, or, does not consist therein; not, the Righteousness of God, which is
without all obedience to the law: for there be no such Righteousness; all
Righteousness being a conformity to the law of God; and if Righteousness
consist not in obeying the law of God, wherein shall it consist? The
Righteousness then of God is a Righteousness consisting indeed in full
obedience to the law; but yet a Righteousness consisting in obedience to the
law, performed by one, who was God (and therefore also called the Righteousness
of God; and not merely because invented by God; or because bestowed by Him upon
men; or because such, as will only be accepted of by Him, as he says; though
these be also true, and may in part ground the denomination) and not by ou
rselves, who were properly and originally under the obligation of the law.

This will not satisfy him, and therefore he says. I. This sanctuary has
been polluted, and the horns of ibis altar broken down, in the demonstration
of the former proof. Ans. The contrary is manifest from our foregoing
examination of that supposed demonstration.

He says 2. There is not the least intimation given, that the Apostle should
have any such by, or back meaning, as this. Ans. Nor was there any necessity,
for any express mention hereof; not only because the party, the Apostle had
here mainely to deal with, understood nothing else by the law, but our
obedience performed thereunto; knowing the meaning of the law to be this, he
that does these things shall live by them; but also because the whole scope and
manner of argueing of the Apostle, and his whole procedure in this debate,
manifest this to be the meaning: for having convinced both jews and Gentiles
to be under the law, as guilty before God, he infers, that therefore by the
deeds of the law, there shall no flesh be justified, Romans 3: 20. That is, by
their own deeds or actions: for the law to them can do nothing, but convince of
sin, and bind guilt more upon them. But it did not so to Christ, who yielded
perfect obedience. We might also demonstrate this from the Apostles following
discourse, if it were necessary; but we said enough of this, in answer to the
foregoing objection.

He says 3. The works of the law are never the less the works of the law,
because performed by Christ. Ans. Yet when performed by Christ, they are not
the works of the law done by us, who did lie under the obligation; and by the
Imputation of such an obedience, as was performed by Christ, we have no ground
of boasting or of glorying, either before God, or Man: and it is against such
an obedience to the law, as the ground of justification, as does not exclude
glorying or boasting, and such as consists in works of Righteousness, which
we have done, and is exclusive offree grace, that the Apostle disputes.

He says 4. This righteousness is said to receive testimony from the law, that
is, from that part of Scripture, which is often called the law; and from the
Prophe^^. Now, neither of these give any testimony to such a Righteousness, but
to a Righteousness procured or derived upon a man by faith, Genesis 15: 6. Hab. 2:
4. Ans. It is true, this Righteousness receives testimony from the law, and
from the writtings of the Prophets; and we plead for no other Righteousness,
but such, as is so testified of, and has the concurrent consent both of the O.
and of the N. Testament. Both law and Prophets, that spoke of the seed of the
Woman, and of the Messiah, and of His being the Lord our Righteousness, or
spoke of the peoples duty in reference to Him, as such, did bear witness to
this Truth. (2) What is that Righteousness, which is here said to be procured,
or derived upon a Man by faith? Is it the Righteousness of Christ? Then the
cause is yielded. Is it the Righteousness of men themselves? Then justification
by works is established, and the whole Gospel is overthrown. And how, I pray,
can this besaid to be procured or derived upon a man by faith? The places cited
speak of no such thing, but have a far contrary Import, as may hereafter appear.

He says 5. This Righteousness of God is said to be unto all, and upon all
(...) by or through faith, by way of opposition to the works of the law: Now
between Faith and the works of the law, there is a constant opposition; but
between the law and the works of righteousness of Christ, there is no
opposition. Ans. (1) If this Righteousness be unto and upon all, by or through
faith, it must of necessity be the Righteousness of another, in bringing home
and applying of which, faith is an Instrument: and to this way of bringing in
the Righteousness of God by faith from without, is the seeking of Righteousness
by our own works, or by our own acts of obedience to the law, manifestly
opposite and irreconcilable: and this is the opposition, which the Scripture
always makes, betwixt justification by the law, and by faith, as the very
Scriptures, cited by himself, make manifest, to wit, Romans 3: 27, 28. and 4: 13,
14. and 9: 32. and 10: 5, 6. Gal. 2: 16. and 3: 5, 11, 12. etc. (2) This
argument and all the steps of its prosecution, make against himself, who will
have our act of faith to be the Righteousness of God, though it be no where so
called; and cannot be that, which is by, or through faith; for faith is not by
or through faith; nor does faith become a Righteousness by, or through faith:
nor is faith, as our act, against the law, otherwise it should be no act of
obedience, but a piece of willworship; and consequently no righteousness at all
but an unrighteousness, and a plain disobedience, or a work of Supererogation:
nor do the law or Prophets, any where, testify to this, as our Righteousness.

Thirdly Chap. 5. page 73. He reasons from Romans 5: 16, 17. thus. The gift of
righteousness (as it is called verse 17.) which is by Christ, in the Gospel, and
is said verse 16. to be a free gift of many offenses unto justification, that is
the forgiveness of many offenses, cannot be a perfect legal righteousness
imputed unto us, or made ours by Imputation, but the righteousness which is by
Christ in the Gospel, is the gift of many offenses. Ergo, etc. The Major he
thus confirms. That righteousness, which extends unto a man's justification,
by the forginess of sins, can be no perfect legal righteousness imputed. But
the righteousness of Christ, in the Gospel, by which we are justified,
extends unto a man's justification, by the forgiveness of sins. Ergo, etc. The
Major of this, he thus proves. Because a legal or perfect righteousness does
not proceed to justify a man's person by way of forgiveness of sins; but is
of it self intrinsecally and essen^ially a man's justification ^t yea such a
justification, with which forgiveness of sins, is not competible: for what need
has he, that is legally righteous, or has a legal righteousness imputed to
him, of forgiveness of sins, when as such a rightousness excluded all sin, and
all guilt of sin from his person.

To all which I ans. (1) The Major propos. of the two Syllogis^es, is true only
of a perfect righteousness, wrought by our selves, in conformity to the law;
and not of the Righteousness of another imputed to us; which though it may be
called legal, as to Christ, as consisting in perfect obedience and conformity
to the law; yet is rather to be called Evangelical, as to us, upon the account
of its discovery and revelation, and manner of communication unto us. (2) The
confirmation of the Major is likewise only true of a righteousness performed by
our selves: for that indeed excludes all Remission: and therefore if our faith
be accounted our righteousness (as he faith) it must be our justification, and
so, inconsistent with free forgiveness. (3) As to the Scripture, where upon all
this founded. I say, The text says not, that our righteousness is only free
forgiveness; but that in reference to pardon and free forgiveness, there is a
gift bestowed; and that this gift by grace, which abounds unto many, is
attended with free forgiveness, as a necessary consequent. It is the free gift,
that comes upon all men unto justification verse 18. and that, by which many
are made righteous verse 19. and therefore is called the gift of righteousness,
verse 17.

He objecteth against himself thus, A man's sins are first forgiven him, and
then this perfect righteousness of Christ is imputed unto him; and so he is
justified. But this is not the thing we would say, but on the contrary, That
first the perfect Righteousness of Christ is imputed, whereupon the believer is
justified and pardoned, Let us hear his answer.

1. He says, If we will needs distinguish the effects of the active and
passive obedience of Christ, so as from the active part to fetch a perfect
righteousness for Imputation, and from the passive remission of sins; yet
whether it be any ways reasonable to invert the order, I leave to sober
consideration. Christ did not first die, and after death keep the law;
therefore reason requires, that what is first purchased, should be first
received and applied. Ans. I see no necessity of distinguishing, after this
manner, the Effects of Christ's active and passive obedience; but judge it
best, to keep as conjoined what divine wisdom has firmerly and inseparably
joined together: But though we should thus needlessly distinguish these effects;
yet there is no necessity of saying, That Christ's obedience, because first
existing, should be first imputed unto justification; and then His death to
Remission: for neither do we assign justification to His active obedience
only; nor is the same order to be observed, in the application of the Effects,
that was observed in Christ's performance, of what was laid upon Him, and
required of Him, as our Sponsor: for the Nature of the thing required, that
Christ should first have obeyed, before He died: and on the other hand, the
condition of sinners requires, that they be first justified and pardoned,
before they have a right to all the Effects of Christ's active obedience
imputed.

2. He says, If a man has once sinned, it is not any legal righteousness what
so ever imputed, that can justify him. Ans. This is granted; But in order to
justification we say, That Christ's whole Surety-righteousness is imputed; and
this comprehends both His active and His passive obedience, so usually
distinguished.

3. He says, If a man's sins be once forgiven him, he has no need of any
further righteousness for his justification; because forgiveness of sins
reaches home, and amounts unto a full justification with God. Ans. If
justification were nothing else, but forgiveness of sins, there would be some
color for this: but in justification there is also an accepting of the man as
righteous, and to this a mere pardon of sins will not serve: for a
Righteousness is hereunto requisite; and pardon of sins and Righteousness are
not one thing. It is false then to say, as he adds, That this is all the
justification, the Scripture knows, or speaks of, the forgiveness of sins, or
acquiting from condemnation. For both according to Scripture, and the native
import, and universal usage of the word, justification denotes a constituting
legally and declaring solemnly a person to be righteous, or free of the
accusation, given in against him; or a pronouncing of an accused man to be
righteous; and therefore supposes, when the sentence is just, that the person
is a righteous person: and, in our case, the sentence of God being according to
truth, the person justified, having no righteousness of his own, must be
clothed with the Surety-righteousness of Christ, as Surety, Head and Husband,
imputed to him and received by faith.

He adds, That righteousness, which we have by Christ, and where with we are
said to be justified, is only a negative righteousness, not a positive: It is
nothing else, but a non-Imputation of sin, which I therefore call a
Righteousness by Imputation, as having the privileges, but not the nature and
substance of a perfect legal righteousness, Ans. A Righteousness not positive,
but merely negative, is no righteousness at all; for a true Righteousness is a
positive conformity unto the law, the Rule of Righteousness; and as the
Righteousness is but negative and Interpretatively such; so must the
justification be, that is founded thereupon. He thinks to prove this from
Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. and adds, a Righteousness without works must needs be a
negative or privative Righteousness. The Imputation of righteousness verse 6. is
interpreted verse 7, 8. to be a not imputing of sin. Ans. The place cited, as we
declared above, gives no countenance unto this sense of the word
justification; but evinceth rather the contrary. A righteousness without our
works (which is the Apostles meaning) may be, and is no negative, nor privative
Righteousness; but a positive, full and complete Righteousness, being the
Surety-righteousnes of Christ, the Sponsor: and the Text says, not, That this
Righteousness is nothing else, than a non-Imputation of sin, but infers
rather the Imputation of Righteousness, as the cause, from the Non-Imputation
of sin, as the Effect; and all this to prove, that justification is not by the
works of the law.

He tells us, that we have the like description of this Righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.
that which verse 19. he calls in God, the not imputing of our sins unto us, he
calls in us verse 21. a being made the righteousness of God in Him. Ans. This is
a plain perversion of the scope of the meaning of the words: for verse 21. the
Apostle is giving the ground and reason of what was said verse 19. and showing
how this Reconciliation and Non-Imputation of sin is founded, and what is the
special ground thereof; as appears by the particle for verse 21. for He has
made Him sin, etc. He says, This is most plain, Act. 13: 38, 39. where
forgiveness of sins is immediately thereafter called justification. Ans. All
that can be hence inferred, is, that in justification sins are pardoned; or
that such as have forgiveness of sins are justified; or that these do
inseparably go together: But no appearance of proof here, that they are both
one thing; or that in justification there is no more, but pardon of sins.

He prosecuteth this purpose yet further, saying, This is the most usual and
proper signification of the word, justify, not to signify the giving or
bestowing of a complete positive righteousness; but only an acquiting or
discharging and setting a man free from guilt and penalty, due unto such
things, as were laid to his charge. Ans. (1) Nor do we say, that justification
signifies such a giving and bestowing of a complete, positive Righteousness;
but that it signifies a declaring and pronouncing of a person to be righteous:
and therefore presupposes this giving or be stowing of a complete
Righteousness; for the man, whom God declares and pronounces to be Righteous,
must be Righteous; and seeing he has no Righteousness of his own, he must have
his Suretie's Righteousness imputed to him. (2) And so, in this sense,
justification is an acquitting, or setting a man free from the guilt and
penalty, due to such things, as were laid to his charge; for he is pronounced
Righteous. But it is not a simple discharge of the person from the guilt and
penalty, upon a pardon and Remission: for a pardoned man is not a justified
man, but rather is supposed to be guilty, and is pardoned, because guilty.

He proceeds, In the Scripture, it is usually opposed to condemning Prove. 17:
15. Where, by justifying the wicked, nothing is meart, but the making of them
just, in the rights and privileges of just men, which are freedom from censure,
punishment, etc. So that by justifying the wicked, nothing else is meant, but
the not condemning of him, Romans 8: 33, 34, and 5: 19. Therefore by justifying
nothing else is meant, but acquitting from condemnation; and so to be justified
and live are equipollent, Gal. 3: 11, 21. Esai, 53: 11. Ans. (1) That
justifying is opposed to condemning, is granted; but this makes for us; for
condemning is something-else, than a not pardoning, even a pronouncing or
declaring of a person guilty; and therefore an adjuging of him to the
punishment, due for the guilt; and therefore justification must be something
else than pardon. (2) Justification is more than not condemning; for not
condemning may be a mere suspending of the sentence of condemnation; and while
the Process is under trial, or the guilty person not yet convicted in law, he
is not condemned; yet he is not therefore justified. (3) When justification and
life are said to be equipollent, it is manifest, that justification is more
than pardon, even an adjudging of one to the reward promised: for life here is
not a mere Negative or privative life, but a positive life, called a Reigning
in life, Romans 5: 17. and the blessing of Abraham Gal. 3: 14. the promise of the
Spirit, ibid. and all the blessings of the Covenant verse 17. and the
Inheritance verse 18. Here then is a difference betwixt justification in our
case, and justification among men: for among men, justification is usually in
reference to the Accusation given-in; and the accusation bears a reference
only unto the sin committed and to the punishment due to such or such
transgressors: so that the justified man is declared not guilty, and therefore
not liable unto the penalty; but there is no word here of a Reward, due to the
observers of the law, unless in cases, where a reward is expressly promised. And
yet, even where there is no more, but a simple declaring of the person not
guilty, and so not liable to the punishment, justification is more than mere
pardon. But in our case, when the Lord justifies the Believer, He not only
declares him not liable to the punishment, due to transgressors of the law;
but also adjudgeth him to the Reward promised to the observers: and therefore
here the person is declared and pronounced righteous, having a right to the
reward, through imputed righteousness.

Fourhtly, He objecteth from Phil. 3: 9. This objection must be hard-headed,
and shows, with what confidence, some men, once in love with their own
darling conceit, can abuse the most plain passages of Scripture: for what can
be more plain and full against our Adversaries, than is this Text? The Apostle
is here showing, upon what ground he desired to stand, in his appearing before
God, and expressly renounceth all his former privileges, and what once he had an
high esteem for; and particularly also his own Righteousness, of whatsoever
kind, that consisted in his obedience to the law; and he says not, which
consists in my full obedience to the law; but, in mine own righteousness,
which is of the law. And, in opposition to all this, he desires to be found in
Christ, stated and hid in Him, which includes Christ's Righteousness: for
Christ and His Righteousness are not separated; and the Righteousness he also
expressly mentions, calling it, that which is through the faith of Christ, and
again, the Righteousness, which is of God by faith. By which he cannot mean
the act of faith, for that is his own righteousness, all which he renounced;
for it was conform to the law and commandment, being enjoined by the law of
God, otherwise it had been no act of obedience. Moreover; Faith is not through
faith, nor by faith; but this Righteousness, which Paul sought after, is a
righteousness, that is through faith and by faith, as an Instrument laying hold
upon it, and applying it; Faith cannot be that Righteousness, which is through
faith, or by the faith of Christ; for if so, Christ should be rendered useless,
and the nature of faith in Christ should be changed, seeing true faith in Christ
carries the soul out of it self to Christ, to the end a Righteousness may be
had. Faith, sure, is not the Righteousness, which is of God, wrought by God,
and imputed by Him. So that when Paul desired to be found in Christ, having the
Righteousness, which is through faith in Christ, even the Righteousness, which
is of God by faith, what can be more plain, than that he desired to be found
in the Righteousness of Christ, which is imputed by God, and received by faith?

As to this place, our Adversary frames no formal argument therefrom, but has
some observes, tending rather to make it useless to our point, than directly to
confirm his own Chap. 6. page 84. I shall only take notice of such things, as
he alleigeth to darken the glorious light of the grace of God, shineing with a
meridian brightness in this passage.

He (i. e. Paul) does not say (says he) that he may be found in His
righteousness; much less in His righteousness imputed to him; but simply in
Himself; which is an usual expression in Scripture of the Spiritual state and
condition of a Believer. Ans. (1) To be found in Christ, who is the public
person and Surety, is to be found in His Surety-righteousness: for Christ and
His Righteousness are no more separated, than a Surety, as such, and his
Surety-payment and satisfaction: And therefore, when Paul spoke of being found
in Him, he emphatically enough expressed what we say. (2) It is true, the
expression, in Christ, does elsewhere denote a spiritual state, but here Paul
speaks not simply of being in Christ, but of being in Him, in order to the
having of a Righteousness, wherewith to appear before God; in order to which,
he had renounced all his former privileges and seize.

What it is (says he) to be found in Christ, he expresses, negatively thus,
not having mine own righteousness, yet not simply and altogether, no
righteousness, that may in no sense be called his own; but precisely and
determinatly no such righteousness, as his own, which stands in works of the
law; such he must be sure, not to have; i. e. not to trust to, or to shroud and
shelter himself under, from the stroke of Gods justice. Ans. Then faith,
considered as an act of obedience, must not be that Righteousness, under which
he could think to shelter himself from the stroke of justice: for that stands
in one work of the law; and if that righteousness be renounced, which stands
in works of the law; much more must that be renounced, which stands in one
work of the law. (2) The Righteousness of Christ, imputed and received by
faith, may in some sense be called the Believers own: but that Righteousness,
which the Apostle calls his own here, is opposed to the Righteousness of
another, and comprehends all his own acts and works, done in obedience to the
command of God.

Next (he says) affirmativly thus, but that, which is through the faith of
Christ, etc. Here is not the least jot or title of any Righteousness, he should
have by Imputation, no nor of any Righteousness by or through tht Righteousness
of Christ; but only such a Righteousness, as is through the faith of Christ.
Ans. (1) When all that Righteousness is excluded, which is in man's self, or in
any acts of obedience to the law, which he does; and yet a Righteousness
mentioned as the only refuge and sheltering place, what can this Righteousness
be else, than an Imputed Righteousness? and what can this Imputed Righteousness
be: if it be not the Righteousness of Christ? Is there any other that will do
our business? (2) A Righteousness through faith in Christ is most clearly a
Righteousness obtained, possessed and laid hold on by faith.

The Apostle adds (says he) by way of commendation of this Righteousness,
that it is the Righteousness of God i.e. a righteousness, which God himself
has found out, and which He will own and countenance, even the righteousness
of God, which is in faith, i. which comes, and ac^rueth, and is derived upon a
man by faith. Ans. (1) It is not only a Righteousness, which God himself has
found out, and which He owneth and countenanceth; but a Righteousness also,
which is in God, or is in Him, who is God, and is derived from Him to man; for
it is a Righteousness, that is not to be found in man, or in any thing he does,
in conformity to the law of God, all such Righteousness being already renounced
by the Apostle. (2) The Righteousness of God, which is by, or through says,
and comes, accrueth, or is derived upon a man in and by faith, must needs be
some thing else, than faith it self, even the Righteousness, that is without a
man, and is derived unto him from another, viz. from Him, who is God, and on
whom faith laith hold, that is, Jesus Christ, in whom alone the Apostle was
seeking to be found.

Fifthly, Chap. 7. page 88. etc. He abuses to this end all those Scriptures,
wherein justification is ascribed unto faith, as Romans 3: 28. and 5: 1. As to
the Interest of faith, in the matter of justification, we will have occasion
hereafter to speak of it, at some length: here we are only enquiring after that
Righteousness, upon the account of which, we are justified, which our
Adversary, as it would appear, places only in faith: and so, in stead of
making faith the mean of applying and bringing home the Surety-righteousness
of Christ, he makes it the very formal righteousness it self, upon the account
of, and because of which we are justified. Let us hear what he says.

When men say (says he) that faith justifies, I demand, what is it, they
mean by faith? do they not mean their believing of act or faith? Ans. When
the Scripture ^aith, That we are justified by faith, faith is taken for our act
of faith, laying hold on Christ and on His Righteousness, it being the mean
appointed of God for this end, by interessing us in and uniting us with Christ,
and applying that Surety-righteousness of His. But this can no way prove, that
therefore faith it selt is that Riphteousness, upon the account whereof we are
declared Righteous in the sight of God, in order to justification; or is the
formal objective Reason of our justification. Though faith be said to justify,
as an Instrumental cause (as this Author himself afterward confesses) it will
not follow, that therefore it justifies as a principal cause, or as the formal
objective cause. The hand receiving riches does instrumentally enrich; but is
not the principal cause of the man's riches. The producing, in face of court, of
the Surety's payment, by the principal debtor, now pursued by the creditor, is
not the formal ground of the debtor's absolution from the charge, but the
payment it self, which is instructed, is the only formal ground, though the
Instruction of that payment by the debtor, in face of court, be requisite in
its place, and a mean to the debtor's absolution.

He says, he conceives not of faith as divided, or severed from its object,
either Christ in person, or Christ in promise. Ans. It is true, the act cannot
be conceived without its object; and all the consideration of the object here
had by him, is by virtue of the act reaching the object, and so the act is only
considered by him no further, than as a commanded duty, or as any other act of
the Soul, which is commanded: and beside, this faith, thus acting on Christ, is
but an historical faith: for if he consider faith, as acting on Christ,
according to the Gospel, and as it is called Justifying or Saving faith, in
distinction from the faith of Miracles, and from Historical faith, he must look
upon it, as the soul's fleeing out of it self to Christ for refuge; and as
laying hold on His Righteousness as only sufficient; and as receiving,
embraceing, leaning to and resting upon Christ and His Righteousness; whence it
is manifest, that it cannot be conceived, nor looked to, nor rested upon, as
our Righteousness, its use and work being to bring-in and receive another
gifted Righteousness, and to rest upon that for life, Justification and
Salvation.

He ^^ls us next, That he also confesses, that says justifies
instrumentally, and not otherwise; and that he has neither said, nor intended
to say any other thing. Ans. But how this can agree with what he has said, and
with what hereafter we shall hear him saying, let men of understanding judge.
Did ever man before acknowledge faith, to justify instrumentally, and yet deny
the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, as he does? and yet assert that
this Instrument faith is imputed for our Righteousness, for our only
Righteousness, and as the only formal ground of our justification, as he does?
Did ever man assert this Instrumentality of faith, to shoulder-out the chief
and principal Interest, that the Surety-righteousness of Christ has, in the
business? This therefore must be looked upon, as inconsistent with his only
design, in this whole book; and as an unwary expression overturning all; or
else that he must have said all this in an hid sense, not yet understood.

To that, That faith justifies, as it takes hold of Christ's Righteousness,
he answers, That yet it is the act of faith that justifies. Ans. And did
ever any mean otherwise, when they spoke of faith as an Instrument, or mean?
But that is not our present question: we are now enquireing after that
Righteousness, for which, and upon the account of which we are justified; and
not after the Instrument, or Mean, by which we are possessed of that
Righteousness, upon the account of which alone we are justified, and by which
we are put into a state of Justification. So that all this waste of words is to
no purpose.

He moves another objection against himself, thus, If it be said, that when we
are justified by faith, the meaning is, we are justified by that, which faith
apprehends; and this is far from saying, that faith is imputed for
Righteousness.

Here I can observe nothing but confusion, and a jumbling together, as one,
these two far different Questions, viz. What is that Righteousness, for,
because and upon the account of which we are justified: and what is that way,
Mean, or Instrument, by which we partake of Righteousness, unto Justification,
and are justified. Here is a manifest confounding of the principal Meritorious
cause, and the Instrumental cause: of the formal objective cause (which some
call the Formal, others the Material cause) and the Inferior Mean, or
Instrumental cause. Here also these two are confounded and made one, viz. We
are justified by faith; and faith is Imputed unto Righteousness. That these are
far different, shall be cleared hereafter. But what answers he? He says 1.
If their meaning be simply so, that we are justified by that, which faith
apprehends, they speak more truth, than they are aware of. But that
whatsoever faith apprehends should justify, is not true. Ans. Who speaks
thus, I know not; yet I see little danger in it, their meaning being only this,
in that expression, we are justified by that, which faith apprendeth, that
Christ and His Righteousness, which justifying faith, in the act of justifying,
laith hold on* is the formal objective cause, or that upon the account of which
we are justified: and this no way says, that our faith is that Righteousness,
for which we are justified.

Next he says, If men ascribe justification, in every respect, to that, which
faith apprehends, they destroy the Instrumental Justification of faith. Ans.
No man, that I know, does or will ascribe Justification, in every respect, unto
that which faith apprehends, and so, they need not destroy the Instrumental
use of faith in Justification; for as to the Instrumental justification of
faith, I understand it not; it seems to be a very catachrestick expression.

In end, he adds, If faith justifies any way, it must of necessity be by
Imputation, or account from God, for righteousness; because it is all that God
requires of men to their justification, in stead of the righteousness of the
law. Therefore if God shall not impute, or account it to them for this
righteousness, it would stand them in no stead at all to their justification;
because there is nothing useful, or available to any holy, or saving purpose,
but only to that, whereunto God has assigned it. If God in the New Covenant,
requires faith in Christ, for our justification, in stead of the righteousness
of the law, in the old, and this faith will not pass in account with him for
such righteousness, but his command and Covenant for believing, and the
obedience it self of believing, will both become void, and of none effect, the
entire benefit of them being suspended upon the gracious pleasure and purpose
of God, in the designation of them to their end. Ans. Whatever interest, or
place Faith has, in the New Cov. and in the matter of justification, it has
it from Gods sole appointment and designation, and it is all that, which is now
required of us, in order to our justification, and entering into Covenant with
God: yet unless we change and alter its true nature, and assign another place
and power to it, that God has, the Crown is kept on the head of the
Mediator, and His Righteousness is only owned, received, produced by the
sinner, as it were, in face of Court, and rested upon by faith, in order to
justification. But when faith is said to be imputed for Righteousness; that is,
when our act of believing is made our Righteousness, and said to be so
accounted and esteemed by God; and all this to shoot out the Righteousness of
Christ, and to take away the Imputation thereof to us, as the only ground of
our justification, not only are the native and kindly actings of justifying
faith destroyed; but the very nature and gentus of the New Covenant is altered,
and it is made to be the same, in kind, with the first Covenant, with this
gradual difference, that the first Covenant required full and perfect
obedience; the second one act of obedience only, viz. Faith, as a Peppercorn
(as some speak) in stead of a great rent, and our whole Righteousness: for no
other Righteousness will our adversaries grant to be really imputed to us, save
what they grant of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness only as to Effects,
and thus they make the Lord to repute (for that is the meaning of imputing with
them) that to be a Righteousness, which, at best, is but imperfect, and not
every way conform to the command of God, enjoining it. Whereby thus one
imperfect act of obedience, viz. Faith, is made that, whereupon the wakened
sinner is to rest, and lay his whole weight, and wherein he is to refuge
himself from the wrath of God, and which he is to hold up, as his legal
defense, against all accusations, coming in against him: and all this use is to
be made of faith immediately, in stead of Christ, and His Surety-righteousness.
Whence we see, that it is false to say. (1) That if faith justifies any way,
it must of necessity be by Imputation for righteousness: For it justifies as
the mean appointed of God, to lay hold on an Imputed Righteousness, and to
carry the soul forth thereunto. The reason added is vain, for though it be all
that God requires of men to their justification, it is not that Rightheousness,
which is imputed unto Justification, or the ground thereof; but the Mean or
Instrument of a soul's partaking of that Righteousness of Christ, which is the
only ground, or formal objective reason. (2) It is false to say, That if God
shall not account it to them for righteousness, it shall stand them in no stead
to justification. For it is required, as the mean, whereby the Sinner is
married unto Christ, and partaketh of His Righteousness, in order to
justification; and is as the legal production of the righteousness of the
Surety, in face of court, as the ground of absolution to be pleaded and stood
unto. The reason he here adds is of no force, because faith is assigned of
God to this end and purpose, as the Gospel clears; and only to this end, that
so the Mediator alone may wear the Crown, and bear the weight of sinners; and
nothing in us, or from us may share with Him, in that glory. It is false (3) to
say, or suppose (as his following words intimate) That faith in the New
Covenant has the same place, force and efficacy, which the righteousness of
the law had, in the old Covenant: For then Faith should be Meritorious ex
pacto, and should give ground of glorying before men. It is (4) false to say,
That if faith has not this place, force and efficacy in the New Covenant, the
command for believing, and believing it self shall be vain. Seeing it has
another use designed to it of God; and it is required for another end, as is
said, according to the gracious pleasure and purpose of God.

Lastly Chap. 8. page 93. etc. he argues from Gal. 3: 12. thus, If the
Scriptures do not only no where establish, but in any place absolutely deny a
possibility of the translation or removing of the Righteousness of Christ from
one person to another, then there is no Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.
But the former is emphatically true from this place. Ergo, etc. Ans. This, upon
the matter, is but what Socinus said lib. 3. cap. 3. viz. That one man's deed
can no more be the deed of another, than one man's death, or pain can be the
death or pain of another: and that in deeds of the law, the deed it self is
not simply called for, but the proper deed of every one, who is under the law:
and that nothing can be more ridiculous, than to say, that one man's
righteousness can be the righteousness of another, who is unrighteous in
himself: and that it is against common sense, to say, that one may obey for
another. But howbeit we easily grant, there neither is, nor can be any physical
translation or removing of Righteousness from one to another: yet to deny all
legal translation, is to deny all Suretiship and cautionry; yea and all
Satisfection: and therefore the Socinians, who see the force of this
consequence, do peremptorily deny, that Christ made any Satisfaction to
justice, or paid the debt of the chosen ones, as their Surety: and such, as
deny this legal translation of Christ's Righteousness, would do well to
consider, if they do not hereby weaken the truth, concerning Christ's
Satisfaandion, and His dying in the Room, place and Stead of the Elect. As for
the thing it self, every one, that knows what a Surety is, knows that his
payment of the debt is by law reckoned on the score of the principal debtor,
and so transferred upon him, as he is no more liable to the charge of the
Creditor, or to the execution of the law against him for non-payment, than if
he himself had laid down the full Sum.

He would prove, what he alleigeth, thus, This Scripture does not barely and
simply deny a possibility of translation of the Righteousness of the law from
one person to another; but denies it emphatically. Ans. Howbeit it be a truth,
that no meer-mans righteousness is derivable from him to another: set this Text
proves no such thing; but only tells us the nature (...) of the Covenant of
works, viz. that it required personal and perfect obedience of him, that would
have right to the promised reward. Which speaks nothing against the new
contrivance of the Gospel, wherein the Supreme God and Lawgiver, and the great
Rector of the world did, in Mercy and Love, appoint Jesus Christ to be the
Mediator and Surety for the chosen ones, to pay their debt, and suffer for
them; and did ordain a way, how they should, in due time, come to have an
Interest in, and to partake of that Surety-righteousness of Christ Jesus, that
so they might be justified, and dealt with as Righteous persons, having
Christ's Surety-righteousness imputed to them, and reckoned upon their score,
when by faith they close with Him, and lay hold on it.

He adds for proof, for it denies a possibility of it to be done even by
faith, which was the likeliest hand to have done it, if the nature of the thing
had not resisted the doing of it. Ans. The meaning of these werds, the law is
not of faith, is, only to show, That the way of justification by faith and by
the law, are so far different, that they cannot agree together: but not to
show, that by faith Believers are not made partakers of the Righteousness of
Christ, or have it not imputed unto them and reckoned upon their score; as the
whole scope and circumstances of the place show. That therefore is not true,
which he adds, By which it appears also, that be (i.e. the Apostle) had an
Intent particularly, to make the righteousness of the law, as performed by
Christ himself, incapable of this translation, or Imputation. For though the
law should be against the Imputation of the Righteousness of one man, who is
Naturally and every way under the law, and obliged by his being, to obey the
law, unto another: yet it is not against the Imputation of the Righteousness of
one, who is God; and so under the law only by voluntary Submission, and is
appointed thereunto by the Supreme Lawgiver and Rector, unto all such, as were
committed and given to Him to save that way, in a way condescended upon by
Jehovah, and the Mediator.

He proceeds, The meaning of these words, the law is not of faith, must be
this, that the righteousness of the law does not arise, or come upon any man,
out of his faith, or by his believing: and this is proved because the very doer
shall live in or by them, Ans. It is true, the law-way of justification, or the
way of justification, revealed in and by the law, and hold forth in the old
Covenant, says only, that the man that does these things shall live in them:
and does not prescribe the way of justification through faith. But the Gospel
reveals, how the righteousness of the law, which was part of our debt, being
performed and paid by the Lord Jesus, the Surety, appointed of God, is
transferred and imputed unto those, He did represent.

He adds further, The word law here is put for the Righteousness or
fulfilling of the law. Ans. And why also shall not the word be taken in that
sense in the following verse, where it is said, Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the law; and so the meaning will be, from the curse of the
righteousness or fulfilling of the law? Again, what though the word had that
Import here? can any thing more hence follow, than that personal Righteousness
is not derivable now from one man to another, so as to stand for his personal
righteousness? But how shall this sense of the words make them a proof or
confirmation of what was said in the former verse?

He answers to this, saying, The Apostle in the former verse had delivered it
for a truth, that no man could be justified by the law i.e. by the
righteousness or works of the law; because the Scripture says, the just shall
live by faith. Now because this consequence might seem doubtful, upon this
account, that it might be said, why may not the just live by faith, and by the
works of the law too? may not the righteousness of the law be made over to them
by faith? No, says the Apostle, The law is not of faith, there can be no legal
rigteousness drawn upon men by faith, etc. Ans. This confirmation is manifestly
perverted: for there was no occasion for that question, whether the
righteousness of the law could be made over by faith, whether it be taken in
his sense, viz. Whether the Righteousness of Christ, performed to the law could
be made over and received by faith; as appears from what he had said of the
Gospel-way verse 8, 9. Or whether it be taken in this sense, that the
righteousness of the law, performed by a meer-man, only for himself, according
to his obligation, can be now made over to another by faith; for no man over
dreamed of such a thing. But enough of this froathy trash.

What he talks afterward of the opposition betwixt the law and faith, in the
matter of justification, is utterly impertinent; because quite mistaken, and
misunderstood by him: for he only understands the difference thus; That faith
has nothing to do with the Righteousness of Christ, but must be considered
alone, as our act of obedience; and wherever the law, or the righteousness
thereof is excluded in the matter of justification, there the righteousness of
Christ is as well to be understood, as our own personal acts of obedience. But
how cross this is unto the whole doctrine of the Gospel, is already abundantly
shown; and we may have further occasion to touch upon this matter hereafter.

CHAP. XII.
Some other objections, proposed by John Goodwine, examined.
MR. John Goodwine proceeds, in his forementioned book Chap. 9. and forward,
to propose some Arguments, against the Imputation of Christ's righteousness,
which in order fall under consideration.

Obj. 1. That Righteousness, which will not furnish all Believers with all
points or parts of that righteousness, which the law requires of them, cannot
be imputed to them unto justification. But such is the Obedience, that Christ
performed unto the Moral Law. Therefore etc. Ans. (1.) We plead not only for
the Imputation of Christ's Obedience to the Moral Law; but for the Imputation
of His whole Surety Righteousness, that is, of all He both did and Suffered, as
the designed and appointed Surety. (2.) This Argum, though it be levelled only
against the Imputation of Christ's Obedience; yet it equally wageth war
against the Imputation of His Sufferings: for as to the Satisfaction and
payment of the old Covenant, or His Suffering of death, it may be also said.
The payment of the penalty must be such, as they, for whom it was laid down,
were otherwise lying under, and under a necessity to pay it themselves. But
Christ's death and payment was not such; for He did not suffer the same, as to
duration, nor as to concomitant despair, and other evils, that would
necessarily attend the same in Man, and does attend it in the damned. Which
consideration is enough to render this Argument suspected of falsehood, unto all
such, as are not bred in the School of Socinus.

Let us see, how he confirms this Argum. and particularly the first
proposition thereof. Because (says he) a complete legal righteousness
requires a punctual through-obedience unto all things in the Law, in reference
to each man's place and Calling. Ans. But we may distinguish the proposition
thus. That righteousness, which will not furnish all believers with every
specific and individual act of obedience, which is required of them, in their
places and Stations, i.e. Is not made up of, nor expressly and explicitly
comprehends in it all these particular Acts, specifically and numerically
considered, cannot be imputed unto them in justification; It is false in this
sense. But if it be thus taken. That righteousness, which neither did
comprehend in it, not was made up of every specific and numerical Act,
required of them, nor yet was infinitely transcending and exceeding the
obedience of all men whatsomever, in all their distinct and particular
occasions, Relations, places, and Callings, and brought more glory unto God,
the Lawgiver, and was a fuller proclamation of the holiness of the Law and of
the Lawmakers, and acknowledgment of His Authority; and with which the great
Rector of the world and Lawgiver was fully satisfied in all points, cannot be
imputed; in this sense it may be granted. But then the Minor is palpably false;
and so the Conclusion is null. And as to the first sense, or branch of the
distinction, it is no way touched, let be weakened by the confirmation
mentioned, as every one may see. And so the Argument is null. And as for the
ground and relevancy of the distinction, it is clear from what is said,
touching the Sufferings of Christ; so that it can be denied by none, who are
not professed Socimans.

To confirm the Minor, he tells us of duties of Servants, Masters, husbands
wives, judges etc. Ans. The distinction given makes all this useless, and to
no purpose. Christ obeyed perfectly the same Law, we were lying under, and that
as made under the Law, and as willingly subjecting himself thereunto, in our
room and stead, as Surety and Sponsor; and this obedience of His was full,
perfect end Complete, for He fulfilled all righteousness. Mat. 3: 15. He was,
dureing His life, holy, harmeless, undefiled, and separat from sinners, Heb. 7:
26. He knew no sin 2. Cor. 5: 21. No man could convince Him of sin. Ioh. 8: 46.
Yea the father was well pleased in Him Mat. 3: 17-and 17: 5. And this perfect
and full obedience, which Christ gave unto the Law, which He came to fulfill
Mat. 5: 17. being the obedience of one, who was God, equal with the Father, had
in it a Supereminent excellency, worth and dignity, to the full Satisfaction of
the Law and of the Lawgiver, and to the repairing of that loss, and to the
recovering of that Glory, which was wronged by man's violation of the Law. So
that howbeit He performed not all duties, which were required of every one of
the Chosen ones, in their several Sexes, Ages, Relations, occasions and
Callings, which was Impossible and not needful: Yet He performed that obedience
to the Law of God, which was required of Him, as standing in the room and stead
of the given ones, and that in all points, yea and full obedience, wherewith
the Supreme Lawgiver was fully Satisfied. And, Sure, every unprejudiced person
may easily see and be convinced, that this perfect and complete obedience of
Christ is moreable to furnish believers with all points of Righteousness, which
the Law requires, than the single act of faith, which our Adversaries
Substitute in the place thereof. Shall we think, that God accepts of, in
place of all, and imputes that unto believers for their Righteousness, rather
than the Full and perfect Obedience of Christ? Shall one imperfect Act of
obedience be of more value, than the Full and perfect obedience of Christ?
W^ence we see, that whatever show our Adversary makes with this Argument
against us; yet it is of no weight with himself; for as He uses it against the
Imputed Obedience of Christ, so we may use it, with much more strength of
reason, against the Imputation of our Faith for Righteousness, as is obvius.

We need not take notice of that objection, which He moves against himself
page 101. viz. That love is the fulfilling of the Law; nor of his Replies made
thereunto: for we assert Christ's fulfilling of the Law in another manner, and
upon other grounds: He fulfilled all righteousness, and performed all
particular acts of obedience, required of Him as our Surety, so that the Father
was well pleased with Him: and what more is requisite!

He moves another objection page 103. viz. That it is not necessary, that men
should have all particular Acts of Righteousness, qualified with all
circumstances, imputed to them, it being Sufficient, that such a righteousness
be imputed, which is equivalent; yea and more than equivalent, as bringing more
glory to God, and as much worthy in it self. He answers. 1. The Law will not
know any thing by way of proportion, but must have its jot for jot, title for
title, or else it will curse. Ans. (1.) We are to regard here more what the
Lawgiver and Supreme Rector will know, than what the letter of the Law will
acquiesce in. (2.) This takes away the Satisfaction of Christ, and all His
Sufferings, as Mediator, and destroys that ground of our hope and Salvation:
for the Law, as to its letter, says, the Soul that sins to it shall die;
and has not one jote or title of the Satisfaction and Suffering of a Mediator.
(3.) What shall our Adversary now do with faith? does any jote or title of the
Law countenance the Imputation of faith, for a proportionable Righteousness?
does faith answer every jote, title, point and letter of the Law? He
answers. 2. To impute acts of Righteousness to a Man, which are proper to
another calling, is rather to impute sin, than righteousness, Ans. Christ was a
public person, appointed of the Father to represent all the chosen ones, and
did, in their place and room, fulfill the law, in all points, according as was
required of Him, by the Supreme Lord Rector and Lawgiver; and this perfect and
complete Obedience is made over to all those, who are His; and not one part to
this particular Believer, and another to another, or some acts to this man, and
some other acts to that man: and therefore this reply is groundless.

As to that viz. That God inflicted on Christ, not the circumstantiat curse
threatened, but its equivalency, he says. 1. That in these words, Thoushalt die
the death, there is no necessity to mean precisely and determinatly eternal
death, according to the letter. Ans. If that was not threatened in the Law, no
man shall suffer it, for the breach of the Law; and so there shall be no
eternal death even to such as perish, which yet himself grants. (2.) It was a
spiritual death, and such as includes many circumstances, which Christ neither
could, nor did suffer. He says 2. Gods meaning there was not, to threaten
eternal death in one kind, or other; but to have the word death understood, as
it indifferently signifies that evil of punishment, which was known by that
names for eternity is not of the essence of the punishment, due unto sins. Ans.
The doubt remains concerning other circumstances, and ingredients of that
death, as threatened to man. And whether eternity be of the Essence of the
punishment, threatened for sin, or not; this is sure, that all, for whom Christ
has not suffered, shall perish eternally; and all had perished eternally, if
Christ had not suffered: And when God threatened death to man, he know, that if
that threatening did overtake him, his death would be eternal. He says 3.
Though God should take liberty to vary from the letter of the Curse; yet it
follows not, that the creature, who was bound to obey the precepts of the
Law, might take the like liberty to do one thing, in stead of another; or that
God should accept any such payment for them. Ans. We assert no liberty for man:
but why should not this liberty be allowed to the Supreme God? All the reason
he gives, I find to be this. That God accepts on any man's behalf, as a
perfect legal righteousness, the performance of such things, which are not
required of him, has no correspondence with any of the Covenants. Ans. If God
could accept that, as a perfect Satisfaction, which did not every way answer
to and correspond with that, which Man himself was to suffer; why might He not
accept of that, as a perfect legal righteousness, which did not in all
particulars, answer to, and correspond with that, which every believer was
obliged unto? What reason is, or can be given for the one, which will not hold
for the other? The answer he has given, is no answer unto this. Perfect
obedience was required of all by the first Covenant, and Christ did perform
perfect obedience for all His own; and this being a perfect legal
Righteousness, is sufficient for all; and is not the performance of such
things, as are not required of them.

Obj. 2. Chap. 10. page 107. That Righteousness, which is exactly and precisely
fitted to the person of Him, that is Mediator between God and man, cannot be
imputed unto any other man. But such is the Righteousness of Christ. Ergo. The
Major he thus confirms. He that assumeth this Righteousness of Christ,
represents himself to God, in the glorious attire of him, who makes men
righteous, and may conceue himself as great in holiness, as Jesus Christ
himself etc. Ans. Christ's Righteousness was indeed the Righteousness of a
Mediator and Surety; and therefore was imputable to all, who by faith should be
married to Him, and have union with Him, as their Head, and Husband, and are
become one person in Law with Him, as their Representative and Surety; though
not as it was subjected in Him, but according to the nature of the thing, and
to their necessity. Hereby therefore is no wrong done to Christ, no robbing of
Him of His mediatory glory; but, on the contrary, a more clear and manifest
ascribing of the same unto Him, by acknowledging Him for the only Mediator, and
by resting on Him, and on His Righteousness, as our only Righteousness and
ground of Acceptance. We clear the matter thus. When the payment of a Surety
is imputed to the debtor, and he pleads the same in court, for his own
absolution, he does no injury unto the cautioner; but rather declares himself
unable to pay, and ascribes the honor of the payment unto the Surety: for he
does alleige or produce that payment, as if he would thereby declare, that he
himself; as Surety, had paid the sum for another; but only produces the
payment of a Surety, in reference to himself, as a ground sufficient in Law,
whereupon he should be absolved from the Charge, giuen-in against him by the
creditor. So when the believer applies to himself the Righteousness of Christ,
he does not make himself a Mediator or Surety; but only applies the
Righteousness and payment of his Surety, Head and Husband, for his own use, to
answer the charge given-in against himself, and in reference to his own
particular case and necessity. Hereby the believer does not assume to himself
an equality of Righteousness with God himself; but only assumeth that Mediatory
and Surety-righteousness, which He wrought, who was equal with God, and was
God, so far as their own case and necessity requires. We dream of no such
imputation, as would give ground to us to conceit our selves to have done and
said all that He did and said. This is the fiction of the Adversary, not our
Assertion.

Against the consideration of the Union betwixt Christ, as the Head, and
believers as the Members, which is the ground of this Imputation and
communication, He says page 113. 1. Christ and Believers are a mystical body,
and therefore an universal agreement, in all things, with a natural body,
cannot be thought on; one difference is this, what one member of the body
natural does, the whole may be said to do. But not so in the mystical body; the
body of Christ cannot be said to have wrought miracles etc. Ans. Nor de we
asserte an agreement betwixt this mystical body and a natural body, in all
points: But yet, as Christ accounts Himself a sufferer, when the members of
His body are suffering, as such: So what Christ did, as an Head to His mystical
Body* and Spiritual Kingdom, according to the designation and appointment of
God, who made Him both King and Lord, must redound to their advantage,
according to their necessity; and therefore what He did, as a public Head and
Representative, must be imputed unto them, who are of His Body, and were
undertaken for and represented by Him.

He says, 2. Though the benefit of what the head does, be communicated to the
whole body; yet what the head does, is no ways to be imputed to hand, or to
foot. Ans. The hand or foot needs no imputation of what is done by the head,
but a community, or political body, and every member thereof, needs an
Imputation of what is done for their good, and in their Law-place, by their
Head and public Representative. And in this matter, we look upon Christ, as
such an Head.

Against the Marriage Union betwixt Christ and Believers, mentioned as another
ground to clear this Imputation, he says 1. It is true, the wife by marriage,
comes to be endowed with all that is her husbands, but this endowing is no
ingredient into the marriage it self, but a fruit thereof; so the right, which
a believer has to the Righteousness of Christ, accrueth unto him by and upon
this Spiritual marriage; and therefore it cannot be imputed to him. The
marriage must be first made up, before the right be had unto this
Righteousness. Ans. If the right unto Christ's Righteousness accrue unto
Believers by and upon their Spiritual marriage with Christ, this Righteousness
must be imputed to them, and reckoned upon their score, or made over unto them,
as the dowry is made over to the wife and reckoned hers, upon her marriage. We
grant the marriage is first made up, and that this is done by faith; and yet at
the very act of believing, this Righteousness is imputed. This marriage Union
is first in order of nature, but no time interveeneth betwixt this Union and
the Imputation of Righteousness. He says 2. all that is the husbands is not
every way the wifes, nor for every use and purpose, but only in a way of
expediency and beneficialness; as his clothes are not hers to put on: so the
believer must take heed of assuming the glorious rob of His Righteousness to
himself, otherwise than in the benefit and comfort of it. Ans. All that is
the husband's becomes the wifes by Marriage, for every use and purpose, that
her necessity calls for, and the nature of the thing admits; as his riches
becomes hers to her maintenance, and to the paying of her debt; and his
honor becomes hers, to the exalting of her to a Suitable state of honor; even
so must Christ's Righteousness become the Believers, that his debt may be
paid, and he saved out of the hand of justice, and advanced to a state of
life, and have right to glory.

Obj. 3. Chap. 11. page 118. If God has sufficiently provided otherwise for
the justification of his people, He does not impute this Righteousness of
Christ for that end. But God has provided otherwise for this end. Which he
thus prodeth. He that is completely justified by having his sins forgiven, is
justified without this Imputation. But a believer is sufficiently justified
before God by the forgiveness of sins. Ergo. Ans. Though a person justified is
pardoned, yet justification includes more, than mere pardon of Sins.
Justification is the pronouncing and accepting of a person as Righteous; and
therefore the person so justified and accepted must be righteous: and seeing he
is not inherently righteous, he must be righteous by Imputation. What he said
to this purpose before Chap. 5. of his book (to which he here remitteth us)
has been examined already. What he adds here, shall now be considered,
waving men's Sayings, wherewith I purpose not to meddle here. He cites again to
this purpose Romans 4: 6, 7. to which we spoke above. He supposes, that the
Apostle here did intend a full description of justification; But this he cannot
clearly evince, and he forgets, that the Apostle makes mention of Imputed
Righteousness; and that not as one and the same thing with free Remission, but
as inseparable from it. The Apostles design was not to give here a full
Definition or description of Justification, it being Sufficient to the purpose
he had in hand, to mention so much thereof, as did clearly and irrefragably
confirm the same viz. That the blessed state of justification is not brought
about, or had by the works of the Law: yea, (as is said) that very Imputation
of Righteousness is not only included in the word blessedness, by which this
State of justification is expressed; for a blessed man is one, who not only is
freed from guilt and punishment, but has also a right to the Crown, and to the
rich recompense of reward, which is not had without a Righteousness; but is
plainly also expressed, when he says, Even as David also describes the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes Righteousness without works.
Here is a Righteousness, even a positive Righteousness, mentioned, and a
Righteousness imputed, and a Righteousness without our works of obedience to
the Law. Hence we need not assert any Synecdoche here; or say, that a part is
put fot the whole, which yet is no unusual thing in Scripture; and might be
admitted here, even in this matter, without any absurdity; seeing where one part
of this business is mentioned, the other is necessarily understood, because of
the necessary and inviolable connection, that is betwixt them.

He says further page 130. If forgiveness of sins be but a part, and the
worser half of our justification, then when the Scripture says, we are
justified by His blood (Romans 5: 9.) the sense must be, we are justified by half
through his blood, but the better half of our justification must come another
way; for by his blood we cannot have his active Righteousness imputed to us.
(1.) We use not to make such comparisons betwixt these things (here called
parts) had in justification; as to call the one the better part, and the other
the worser part, both being requisite to make up our state of blessedness, and
necessary thereunto. (2.) When the Scripture says, we are justified by His
blood, the meaning is not, we are justified by the half through His blood: for
half justification is no justification. (3) Nor is the Reason added of any
force: for by blood here, we may as well understand, by a Synecdoche, His
active Righteousness, as all His passive, both being but integral parts of His
Surety-righteousness, and emphatically expressed by His death, or blood, the
most remarkable piece thereof, and expressive of His love and condescension,
and terminating point of Surety-obedience; for He said, it was finished, when
He offered up Himself, and gave up the Ghost.

He adds, So where it is said again Chap. 5. verse 16. that the gift ( viz.
of Righteousness by Christ) is of many offenses unto justification: If the gift
of many offenses, i.e. the forgiveness of Man's Sins, will not amount to a
justification, without the Imputation of a legal Righteousness, we must give a
check to Paul's pen. Ans. This is but vanity: we need give no check unto the
Apostle's pen: for though He said not in this verse expressly, that there was a
gift of Righteousness also imputed; yet he said it expressly verse 17. and 18.
and 1. And shall we think, that in such a continued discourse, as this is,
wherein the Apostle is explaining the whole mystery by its parts, he should
mention all things, in one verse?

He proceeds to prove, that Remission of sins is the whole of justification
page 131. Because the end (says he) for which this Imputed Righteousness of
Christ is thus brought in to the business of justification, viz. to be the
Right to the Inheritance, is supplied in a way more evangelical, and of more
sweetness and dearness to the Children of God, to wit, by the grace of
Adoption, Ans. To this we have said enough above, and will have occasion to
speak again to it, in the next objection.

He adds further 4. That if we thus separat and divide the benefit of
Christ's Active and passive Obedience, in Justification, we take a course to
lose and destroy both. Ans. Not to transcribe his tedious discourse, on this
accout, I only say, That it is wholly founded upon a mistake, as if our showing
the necessity of the Imputation of both, were a separating or dividing of the
benefit of both, whileas the whole Effect flows from the whole cause, both
Christ's Active and His passive obedience making up one complete
Surety-righteousness; and so producing one whole blessedness to believers,
consisting in Remission of Sins, and in a Right to Glory: we say with him, that
neither of them separated or abstracted from the other can profit us; and
therefore we assert the Imputation of both, as one complete
Surety-righteousness, answereing our necessity in all points. His own words
page 132. 133. make clearly for us. I would not have (says he) the active
obedience of Christ separated from the passive, nor again the passive from the
active, in respect of the common and joint effect, justification, arising from
a concurrence of them both; yet would I not have Christ in his mystery tumbled
up together on a heap; for this would be to deface the beauty and excellency of
that wisdom, which shines forth gloriously, in the face thereof. I would have
every thing, that Christ was, did-and suffered, to be distinguished, not only
in themselves; but also in their proper and immediate Effects, respectively
ariseing and flowing from them severally.

Lastly. He tells us, If the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness must be added,
as another part of justification, then must the formal cause of one and the
same Effect be double; yea one and the same formal part of the thing shall be
compounded of two things, of a diverse and opposite consideration. Ans. We make
the Imp^tation of Christ's Righteousness not a part of justification; But the
cause of it; and yet the formal cause of one and the same Effect is not made
double* for as the Cause is one complete Cause, viz. the Surety-righteousness
of Christ, so the Effect is one complete Effect, though both Cause and Effect
may be considered, as consisting of several Integral parts. There is no ground
here to say, That one and the same formal part of a thing is compounded of
diverse or opposite things.

Obj. 4. Chap. 12. Page 136. etc. That which dissolveth and takes away the
necessity and use of that sweet evangelical grace of Adoption, cannot hold a
straight course with the thruth of the Gospel. But this is done by the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. Ergo. The Minor, which is only here to be
denied, he labors to prove, because we say, The Righteousness of Christ must
be imputed in order to our obtaining Right and Title to Life; and that by
Remission of Sins a man is only delivered from death, but receives no Right to
the Kingdom of heaven. But what can he hence infer for confirmation of the
Minor? Now (says he) this being the direct and proper end, use, office,
purpose and intent of Adoption, to invest a believer with a capacity with
heaven; it follows, that whosoever shall attempt to set any thing else upon
this throne, seeks to dissolve Adoption. Ans. The Consequence is null. The
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness will no more take away Adoption, than
justification; for it is the ground and Cause of both. He might as well say,
That because in and by justification, we have Remission of Sins, to assert the
Imputation of Christ's death and Sufferings for this end, is to dissolve
justification. But the truth is clear, as was explained above Mist. 14.

He thinks both cannot stand together, because either of them is a complete and
entire Title within itself; perfect Righteousness is a perfect title alone; so
is Adoption or Sonship. Ans. (1.) This will say as much against the Imputation
of Christ's death and Sufferings, as against justification: for either of these
is a complete Title (according to our Adversary) to Immunity from death:
perfect Satisfaction is a perfect title alone to this Immunity, as well as
perfect Righteousness is a perfect title to the Inheritance: and Justification
or Remission of Sins, (which are one with him) is also a perfect Right to this,
as well as Adoption is a perfect Right to that. (2) But as Justification is
founded upon the Imputed Righteousness of Christ; so is Adoption. As Christ's
death and Satisfaction is not formal pardon, or Right to Impunity, but is,
when Imputed, the ground and cause of justification, wherein the Believer is
solemnly brought into a state of freedom from death: So Christ's Obedience
and Fulfilling of the Law is not a formal Right unto the inheritance, but, when
Imputed and received by faith, the ground and cause of Adoption, whereby the
Believer is, as it were, solemnly infeoffed of the Inheritance. Here then is
nothing in vain; but all things so ordered, as may most commend the riches of
the wisdom and Grace of God; and may most ensure life and all to the ^eleever.
So that his following discourse is mere froath and vanity: for, as God may
appoint more means for the same end, as He pleases; as His promises, oath and
Sacraments to confirm the faith of believers; so there can be no reason given,
why it may not be so here: and yet, to speak properly, Adoption is no mean, or
Cause of the Right and Title to Glory, being the solemn Collation of that
Right to the believer, or the solemn stating of him in that Right; as
justification properly is no Mean to or Cause of pardon and Acceptance of
Sinners, but rather the solemn bringing of them into or placeing of them in
that state of peace, Pardon and Reconciliation, who believe in Jesus and lay
hold on His Righteousness. What he speaks of the opposition betwixt the Law
and the promise, in giving of life from Gal. 3: 21. is most Impertinent; so
also is that, which he says from Gal. 2: 21. for though it be an abrogating
and making void of the ordinances of God, when another thing, that is contrary
and expressly excluded by the Lord from that office and work, is set up with it,
to bring the same end to pass, or to serve in the same place and office: yet
is there not the least color of ground to say, That if our Right and Title to
heaven be by Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, then does God give the grace
of Adoption in vain: for the Righteousness of Christ is the Meritorious
procuring Cause of this Right and Title to heaven; and when this is Imputed and
made over to the believer, he receives the Effect and* Fruit of that purchase
viz. an Actual Right to glory, and is solemnly infeofed (as it were) thereof.
What ignorance and folly would it discover in a man, to say, That the legal
installing of a man by public seasing and Infeofment in the legal Right to and
possession of such a Land, or House, is that which gives the man Right; and
therefore the price he has laid down, to purchase that Land, or house, has no
Interest or Consideration in that purchase, for these two cannot consist, the
one must necessarily render the other useless; if he has made a purchase of
the Land and house by his money, he needs no Charter or Infeofment thereof:
or if his Charter and Infeofment gives him Right to possess the same, the
price laid down is of no use? would not every one smile at such Nonsense? And
yet so reasons this learned Adversary, who will have the Righteousness of
Christ laid by, which is the only price and purchasing Merit of our Right to
Heaven; or the Grace of Adoption, whereby the believer becomes legally (as it
were) infeofed of the Inheritance. It is vain, if he should think to escape by
saying. That he acknowledges the price of Christ's Righteousness; but speaks
of the Imputation of that Righteousness, in order to this Right; For the
Imputation of this Righteousness is but the Interessing of the believer in that
price, as the price of such a purchase, to the end he may receive the legal
infeofment of the Inheritance purchased, in Adoption.

Obj. 5. Chap. 13. page 145. He that has a perfect and complete Righteousness
of the Law imputed to him, stands in need of no Repentance. Ans. This
Consequence is utterly false, as was showed above Chap. 6. Mystery. 13.
Repentance is not prescribed in the Gospel, for any such use or end, for which
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is called for. If Adam (says he) had
kept the Law, he had needed: no Repentance, more than Christ himself needed;
and those that kept the Law in him, as exactly and perfectly as he did, what
more ne^d of Repentance have they, than he had, Ans Adam, it is true, had
needed no Repentance, if he had kept the Law: But the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness and obedience to us, though thereby we come to enjoy the Effects
and purchase thereof, as really as if we had Fulfilled the Law ourselves; yet
it makes us not to have been no sinners; nor does it exeem us from the Law, in
time coming, nor put us out of case of sinning any more; and consequently
prejudgeth not the true and lively exercise of that grace of Repentance.

He adds. He that is as righteous, as Christ is, (which those must needs be,
who are righteous with His righteousness) needs no more Repentance, than He
needed. Ans. We do not love to say, that believers, through this Imputation,
are as Righteous, as Christ was: for that expression might import that thereby
they become as Righteous inherently, as He was; which is false: But that
thereby they are legally accounted Righteous, to all ends and purposes, as if
they themselves, in their own persons, had Fulfilled the Law: And therefore,
though thereby they become, in Law-sense, Righteous; yet they are inherently
ungodly and unrighteous, till sanctifying grace make a change here; and
therefore stand in need of Repentance.

To that That Believers need Repentance for their daily and personal failings,
he says, But they that have an entire and perfect Law-righteousness Imputed to
them, have no such need, in any respect; because in the Imputation of a perfect
Righteousness, there is an universal non-Imputation of sin apparently included.
Besides, if God does Impute a perfect Law-righteousness, it must be supposed,
that the rights and privileges, belonging to such righteousness do accompany
it, in the Imputation -- Now, one maine privilege hereof is to invest with a
full and entire right unto life, out of its own intrinsecal and inherent
dignity and worth, which is a privilege, wholly inconsistent with the least
tincture of sin, in the person that stands possessed of it. Ans. Where there is
an Imputation of a perfect Righteousness, there there is an universal
Non-Imputation of sin, in reference to actual condemnation, or to the
prejudging of the person, partaker of this Imputation, of the reward of life;
but as this Imputation of Righteousness makes not a sinner to have been no
sinner; so neither does it make their future sins to be no sins, or them to
be no sinners, in time coming; because it is imputed for no such end. (2) It is
true, the Rights and privileges, belonging to this Righteousness, do accompany
the Imputation thereof; and that thereby believers become invested with a full
and entire Right to life, because of its intrinsecal and inherent dignity; but
it is utterly false, to say, That this full and entire Right to life is
inconsistent with the least tincture of sin, in the person possessed of it: and
hereby he must say one of these two; either that there is no full Right had to
life, while persons are in this life; or that there is a full and sinless
perfection attainable and had by all believers; so that they sin no more,
Both which are most false.

But what will he say of Faith, which he will have imputed for Righteousness,
seeing this must bring alongs with it the same privileges; and so exclude
Repentance too? To this he says. The meaning is not, as if God either Imputed,
or accepted, or accounted faith for the self same thing, which the
Righteousness of the Law is intrinsecally and formally; or as if God, in this
Imputation, either gave or accounted unto faith any power or privilege to
justify, out of any inherent worth of it. But the meaning only is, that God,
upon Man's faith, will as fully justify him, as if he had perfectly fulfilled
the Law^ He that fulfilled the Law and thereby is justified, is justified out
of the inherent dignity of that, which justifies him; but he that is justified
by faith, is justified by the free and gracious acceptance of it by God; for
that, which is justifying in its own Nature, and by virtue of its inherent
worth and dignity. Ans. What God Imputes and reputeth to be a Righteousness,
in order to justification, must be accounted such, or a man shall be justified,
without all consideration of a Righteousness* and so be pronounced and declared
Righteous, though he be not Righteous upon any account, or in any manner of
way: And if faith be not accounted for the self same thing, or for the
equivalent with the Righteousness of the Law, how shall it be accounted a
Righteousness, in order to the justification of a sinner, who is under the
Curse of the Law, and who, because of the breach of the Law, has no right to
life? wherefore faith must have that inherent worth, that the Righteousness of
the Law should have had, else it cannot be a Righteousness, whereupon a sinner
can be justified before God, who is Just and Righteous, and will not pronounce
such to be Righteous, as are not Righteous. (2) If God, upon a man's faith,
will as fully justify a man, as if he had fulfilled the Law, either that faith
must be a Righteousness, and so accounted, which he here denies; or the man
must be declared Righteous, who has no Righteousness; and so the judgment of
God should not be according to truth; or upon his believing he must be
justified, as being Righteous by an Imputed Righteousness; which is the thing
he peremptorily denies. (3) When one is justified by faith, by God's free and
gracious Acceptance of it, this act of grace must either import, that faith is
accepted as a Righteousness, and so accounted of God; or still the believer
shall be declared and pronounced Righteous, though he has no Righteousness; or
the meaning of this Acceptance must be, that God has graciously condescended
to appoint this mean and way of sinners having an Interest in the Righteousness
of Christ, whereby he may be accounted Righteous and justified, as really, as
is he had performed that Righteousness himself, in his own person: and in this
sense, it is most true, but utterly destructive of his design. (4) If faith be
accepted for that, which is justifying in its own Nature, and by virtue of its
Inherent worth and dignity, it must either be that, which is of such inherent
worth, or it must be accepted for that, which it is not, and so a man must be
judged by God to have that, which he has not.

He concludes thus. Wherefore, the Imputation of faith for righteousness may
well stand with personal sins, in him, to whom this Imputation is made, in
respect of which sins he remains obliged to repent: but the Imputation of a
perfect legal Righteousness makes a man perfectly righteous in the letter and
formality of it. Ans. Then it seems that by the Imputation of faith for
Righteousness, a man stands not invested and possessed of a full and entire
right unto life: for that, he said before, was a privilege wholly inconsistent
with the least tincture of sin. (2) If by a perfect legal Righteousness, he
mean a Righteousness required of the Law and performed by us personally, we
plead not for the Imputation of any such: but if he mean a Righteousness
consisting in full conformity to the Law, performed by Christ and graciously
imputed to us, and received by faith, that is well consistent with inherent and
personal sins. What he means by making a man perfectly righteous in the
letter and formality of it. I know not, till some be pleased to explain it.

Obj. 6. Another argum. he prosecuteth page 149. etc. thus. If men be as
Righteous as Christ himself was, in his life, there was no more necessity of
His death for them, than for himself* then the just should not have died for
the unjust, but for the just. Ans. If we had not transgressed the Law, there
had been no necessity, that either we, or any for us, should have died; but
having transgressed the Law, and thereby fallen under the Curse, and wanting
all right to life, we must have a Surety-righteousness, whereby not only the
Curse shall be taken away, but the blessing of Abraham may come upon us, and we
may have a full right to life: and therefore both the Active and passive
Righteousness of Christ is necessary (2) Christ died for the unjust, because
His death, which was the period and terminating act of His obedience, and
Surety righteousness, which He undertook to perform in our room and Law-place,
was for sinners, lying under the Curse, and void of all right and title to
life. He imagines, that first Christ's Active Righteousness is imputed, and
thereby the person is constituted Righteous; and then infers the non^
necessity of Christ's death: By we say, that Christ's whole
Surety-righteousness, consisting in what He did and suffered, in His state of
Humiliation, in our room, and as Cautioner, is at once imputed, and not in
parts; that so the necessity of sinners may be answered in all points.

He thinks to prove this consequence by these words Gal. 2: 21. If
righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died in vain; rejecting the sense of
the word Law, viz. as importing the works of the Law, as performed by us, in
our own person, and thereby doing violence to the whole Scope of the place, and
to the constant acceptance of the expression; and supposing that the
Consequence will be strong, though the works of the Law, as performed by
Christ, be here understood; and that merely upon this false ground, Because the
Righteousness of Christ's life imputed had been a Sufficient, and every ways a
complete Righteousness for us. Nor need we say, as he says in our name, That
there was a Necessity, that Cbrist should did, that so the righteousness of His
life might be imputed to (...). For the necessity of His death arose from our
transgressing of the Law, and being under the Curse.

Obj. 7. Chap. 14. page 151. He alleigeth, that this Imputation evaniateth
Remission of Sins, saying, for if men be righteous with the same righteousness,
wherewith Christ was righteous, they have no more need of pardon, than He had.
Ans. We spoke to this above. Chap. 6. Mystery 11. and therefore need say no
more here, then that the Consequence is null, and that the probation is
insufficient, for though we be constituted Righteous through the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness; it is but a Surety-righteousness, and not our own
inherently: and the Surety not being of our appointing or fitting and
furnishing, our pardon is a Consequent and Effect of this Imputation. (2) The
consequence is no more valide from the Imputation of the Active Righteousness
of Christ, than from His passive and Satisfaction: and so with Soci^ians, he
must also hereby deny Christ's Satisfaction, that he may establish his free
Remission. But Gospel free forgiveness is rather established, than any way
weakened by our Assertion of the Imputation of Christ's whole
Surety-righteousness.

He adds, Christ has taught us to pray for forgiveness of Sins: now to pray
for that, and yet to conceit ourselves as righteous, as Christ was, is rather
to mock, than to worship. Ans. This expression to conceit ourselves as
righteous as Christ was, is none of ours; and though it may admit of a good
sense as being true, quoad veritatem, though not quoad modum: yet because it is
so ambiguous, and liable to misconstruction, I chose rather to forbear it,
seeing no necessity touse it. And to conceit our selves legally and
juridically righteous with the Imputed Surety-righteousness of Christ, is very
consistent with praying for pardon: for Christ's Surety-righteousness is not,
nor yet said to be, imputed for this end immediately, that all our after actions
should be sinless; but to this end rather, that we may have actual pardon of by
past sins, and of future sins too, after the method of the Gospel; and that
none of our sins should actually procure our Condemnation, or prejudge us of
eternal Felicity; but that notwithstanding thereof, we should not come into
condemnation, but enter into life.

He saw, that what he here objecteth against the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, will militat as much against the Imputation of Faith, which must
derive a righteousness upon the person, as perfect and complete, as the
Righteousness of the Law; and so can leave as little place for Remission, as
what we plead for; and therefore to obviat this, he tells us. That when faith is
imputed, another thing is imputed* then the righteousness of the Law it self,
to wit, faith, by name, in stead of it: Now any other righteousness, or any
other thing imputed for righteousness, besides the righteousness of the Law,
will bear a consistency of sin with it, and of remission. Ans. If by the
righteousness of the Law here, he only means that, which we perform in our
own persons, it is true, that is inconsistent with sin or pardon: but it is
false, if he understand thereby, the righteousness of the Law, performed by
another, Christ our Surety. And sure, if his faith be accounted a
Righteousness, it must be a Righteousness, or God's estimation is not just: and
if it be a Righteousness; it must be accompanied with all the privileges of a
Righteousness (as himself says) and consequently exclude all Sin and
Remission, if these be such concomitans of an Imputed righteousness.

He adds, when a perfect Sanctification is imputed to a man for his
justification* that man can be no more reputed to have sin in him, than to be
obnoxious to death, which is opposite to justification. Ans. And no wonder; for
perfect Sanctification being a perfect inherent holiness, cannot, without a
contradiction, but exclude sin. But who speak of such an Imputation of
Sanctification? We know no such thing; for Sanctification is wrought and
inherent in us, and not imputed to us. If he mean by this perfect
Sanctification, the perfect Obedience and Righteousness of Christ imputed to
us, we say, though that perfect Sanctification or Righteousness could be
consistent with no sin in Christ; yet, when imputed to us, it can consist with
sin inherent in us, and with pardon of sin also; as we have already cleared.

Further says he. But when that, which either is no Sanctification, or at
most, but an imperfect Sanctification, is imputed for Righteousness in a man's
justification, place is left for inherencie of sin, and consequently for the
forgiveness of it. Ans. That which is no Sanctification, or at most, but an
imperfect Sanctification, must either be no Righteousness, or at most, an
imperfect righteousness; and therefore cannot be reputed or accounted a perfect
righteousness; and so cannot be imputed to a person, in order to justification.
Or if we should suppose, that God did make it, and really repute it to be a
righteousness, it must be a complete righteousness; and consequently
inconsistent with pardon, because it shall hereby become a complete inherent
Holiness and Righteousness.

Obj. 8. Chap. 15. page 153. etc. Whoseever is perfectly righteous, or as
righteous as Christ is, in him God can see no sin. But every believer (says
this opinion, which we impugn) is as perfectly and completely righteous, as
Christ himself is. Therefore etc. Ans. How false this consequence is, was
manifested above Chap. 6. Mystery 15. And now, waving that expression of being
as righteous, as Christ himself is. I distinguish the Major thus, Whosoever is
perfectly righteous with an inherent Righteousness (taking perfection here not
for kind, but for degrees) in him God can see no sin, true: but in this sense
the Minor is false. Whosoever is perfectly Righteous with an Imputed
righteousness, in him God can see no sin, or order to actual condemnation, it
is true, but then the Conclusion contains nothing but truth. It is true, God
could see no sin in Christ, because there was no sin existing in Him; yet He
can see sin in believes, in whom sin existeth, notwithstanding they be clothed
with the perfect Righteousness of Christ, which only makes, that God can see
no sin in them, for which He will actually bring them into condemnation; and
this is consonant to Scripture Romans 8: 1.

Obj. 9. Another Reason he proposes Chap. 16. page 154. etc. alleiging; That
by this Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, we confound the two Covenants of
Works and of Grace. But as to this, we have cleared the truth above Chap. 6.
Mystery 16. Nor need we be much troubled at his bold alleigance; for not we,
but he and others with him, by his opinion, in pleading for the sole Imputation
of faith, as our Gospel Righteousness, to which some add other works of
obedience, do turn the Gospel into a new Covenant of Works: for if faith,
properly taken, alone, or conjunct with other works of Righteousness, which we
do, be all our Gospel-righteousness, we are justified by our own personal
obedience and righteousness; and this was the plain tenor of the Covenant of
works: The variation of the obedience, now required from what was of old,
though now it be but as a pepper corn, in comparison of the greater rent
formerly required, does make no alteration in the Nature and Essence of the
Covenant: for justification and life is still by works of righteousness, which
we do, and which are our own. But when the Righteousness of a Surety is
imputed, and we are upon that account accepted, though the righteousness,
wrought by the Surety, be obedience to the same Law, that was in force under
the first Covenant, and which we were obliged unto, and lying under the Curse
of (as it must needs have been, seeing He did substitute himself in our place,
and took our debt upon Him) the Covenant is altered: for the first Covenant
knew no Righteousness, but what was our own and personal; and did not admit of
a Surety. Thus these two Covenants are not confounded by us, but kept
manifestly distinct; and we cannot own their Gospel-way of justification, as
being a way to bring us back again to the old Covenant of works, with a mere
pretext of some ease, as to the Conditions, or Terms.

Yet he would prove, that the two Covenants are made one by us, thus, where the
parties Covenanting are the same; and the things covenanted for are the same;
and the Conditions or agreement the same, there the Covenants are every way the
same. But if the Righteousness of the Law imputed to us be the agreement, or
Condition of the New Covenant, all the three, persons, things, and Conditions
are the same. Ans. (1) It may be questioned, if either the persons Covenanting,
or the things Covenanted for, in both Covenants, be the same every way; but to
speak of this is not our present purpose (2) The Covenants do not agree, as to
their Conditions; for the condition required in the Covenant of works, was a
proper antecedent condition, which is a cause of the thing promised; but the
Condition of the New Covenant is only a consequent condition, denoting nothing
else, than a connection, or order betwixt the thing promised, and the condition
required. (3) The Righteousness of the Law imputed to us, is no condition
required of us, in the New Covenant; but it is required of us, that by faith we
close with Christ, and thereby come to have an Interest in Christ, and in all
His Righteousness, to all ends and purposes; which our case and necessity
calls for. (4) This Righteousness of the Law was called for from us, in our
own persons, in the old Covenant; but in the New Covenant, the righteousness is
Imputed to us, when we believe in Him. And this, as is said, is enough to
distinguish these Covenants.

But he thinks. The Righteousness of the Law imputed from another, and wrought
by ourselves do not much differ, the substance being the same. Ans. Yet this
difference may make a substantial difference in the two Covenants: for when the
Covenant of Works did not admit of the performance of the Conditions by a
Surety, as himself proved by four Arguments page 155. And the Covenant of
Grace holds forth justification only through the Righteousness of another,
imputed to us, and received by faith: Though the Righteousness, mentioned in
both, consist in conformity to the same Law; yet the Covenants cannot but
substantially differ, as is obvious to every one. Beside, that the
righteousness imputed consists in more, than in Obedience to the Law; for it
comprehends his whole Surety-righteousness; and that took in His Sufferings
also. The following objection, which he preoccupieth, is purely his own, and
so I leave it.

Obj. 10. Chap. 17. page 158. etc. That for which Righteousness is imputed to
those that believe, cannot be imputed to them for righteousness. But the
Righteousness of Christ is that, for which righteousness is imputed to those
that believe. Ergo. The Assumption he thinks none will deny, but such as deny
the righteousness to be the Meritorious Cause of that Righteousness or
justification, which is conferred upon men. The Major he thus proves If it be
Impossible, that the thing merited should be the same thing, with that, which
is the Meritorious Cause thereof, then it is not only not true, but impossible,
that the Righteousness of Christ should be the Righteousness of a believer. But
the former is true Ergo etc. Aus. This is nothing but a pure fallacy, founded
upon a palpable mistake viz of confounding righteousness and justification as
if they were one and the same. To discover this, let us put Justification for
Righteousness in the first Argument, thus. That for which believers are
justified, cannot be imputed to them for righteousness, But the Righteousness
of Christ is that for which believers are justified. Therefore etc. Who sees
not now, how false the Major propositions is; and how impertinent and
ridiculous the probation thereof is? justification, which is the Effect, or the
thing merited, is not the same thing with the Righteousness of Christ, the
Meritorious cause thereof.

Obj. 11. page 160. If the Righteousness of Christ be imputed to a believer for
righteousness, in his justification, then the meritorious cause of his
justification is imputed. But that cannot be imputed. Ergo etc. He proves the
Minor, which is denied, thus, Because the Meritorious cause, being a kind of
Efficient can not be either the matter, or the form of that, whereof it is
Efficient -- It is an Inviolable Law amongs the four kinds of causes,
Material, Formal, Final and Efficient, that the two former do only ingredi
composition, or effectum, and are parts rei constitutae; and that the two
latter are always extrinsecal, and stand without. Ans. All which is but vain
argueing, grounded upon this palpable mistake, that justification is a physical
Effect, like the whiteing of a wall; (which is the example, whereby, he
illustrats the matter) and therefore he thinks, that these terms are used,
in this matter, in as proper a sense, as when they are applied to physical
causes and Effects; whileas the matter is quite otherwise; and many of these
terms are here used, but in a metaphorical sense. But to the matter, whether
Imputed Righteousness, be called the Material cause, with some, or the formal
cause, with others, of justification, is no great matter, seeing every one has
liberty to explain, in what sense he uses these terms, in this matter; and I
should rather choose to use the term (if such like terms must be used) of the
formal objective cause, or Reason; This is enough to us, That it is that,
whereby they become juridically righteous; and that, upon the consideration
whereof, now imputed to them, they are pronounced Righteous and justified; and
so is the meritorious cause of their justification, and that Righteousness,
which covers them, and upon the account of which, they are declared and
pronounced Righteous: as the payment of the Surety, is as the meritorious cause
in Law of the absolution of the debtor, and the ground upon which he is
absolved, being accounted his payment, because the debtor and Surety are one
person in Law. As in a juridical sentence of Absolution of an accused debtor,
there is no proper formal, or material cause; so neither in the matter of
justification, which is God's juridical Act and Sentence.

Yet I cannot acquiesce to what he adds, saying That only remission of sins
or absolution from punishment, is as the form applied unto, or put upon the
matter, and the matter or subject it self, where unto this form is applied;
Not only because, according to his own argueing, one thing cannot be both
matter and form of the same thing; but because Remission of sins in hereby
made the whole of justification; whereas to speak properly it is but an Effect
or consequent, or at most a part thereof; and the person justified is properly
absolved from the accusation and declared to be Righteous; and so is legally
constituted or put into a state of Righteousness, or of Righteous persons,
whereupon follows freedom from guilt, or punishment, and a Right to the
reward: and as to this State, whatever we shall conceive as the form thereof,
it must be a Righteousness; and consequently the Righteousness of Christ
imputed; for sinners can have no other.

Obj. 12. If the meritorious cause of our justification be imputed unto us,
thon the Effects themselves of this cause may be imputed to us also; and so we
may be said to have merited both our own justification, and salvation: for if I
may be accounted or reputed to have wrought that Righteousness, which is
meritorious, why may I not be conceived as well to have merited? Nay further,
if I may be conceived to have wrought that Righteousness in Christ, whereby I
am justified my self, I may as well be conceived to have wrought that
Righteousness, by which the whole world is justified. Ans. This is but a mere
sophisme, founded upon a mistake: The consequence is false, and the proof
thereof stands only upon this rotten bottom. That to say, That Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us, is to say, that we are reputed, esteemed, or
accounted to have done or wrought that Righteousness our selves; whileas the
true meaning of Imputation is this. That the Righteousness of Christ is made
over by grace unto Believers, and reckoned upon their score, where by they are
dealt with now, no other ways, than if they had fulfilled all Righteousness,
in their own person. Whence it is clear, that the Effects cannot be said to be
imputed to us; but only that we partake of the Effects thereofs, so far as our
own Necessity requires: As the Ransom paid for the Redemption of so many
captives, is imputed to each of the captives, in order to his own Redemption,
and to none of them as Redemption of others: and without this Imputation, or
reckoning it upon their score, as the price of their Redemption, no man could
have right to the Effects thereof in reference to himself, or could be redeemed
thereby. So that it is manifest, that through the meritorious cause, or the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us, we obtain justification and Salvation;
but do not merit them: our Redeemer and Surety meriteth them for us, and we
enjoy what He merited for our own happiness. It is false then to say, That by
Imputation we are conceived to have wrought that righteousness in Christ,
whereby we are justified: and therefore it cannot but be most false to think,
That we may be conceived to have wrought that righteousness also, by which
others are justified; for it was only our Head, Husband, Surety and Redeemer,
who wrought it, and free grace imputed it to, or reckons it upon the score of
Believers.

Obj, 13. chap. 18. page 165. If the active Righteousness of Christ be in the
letter and formality of it imputed unto me, in my justification, then I am
reputed before God, to have wrought that righteousness in Christ. But this is
false etc. Ans. Neither proposition is true: The Major is denied, unless by
these word, letter and formality, he understand such an Imputation, as we do
not acknowledge, and his words would seem to import this: for (says he, in
confirmation of the Major) to have any thing imputed to a man, in the letter of
it, is to be reputed the doer of what is so imputed to him: And if this be the
only sense of his proposition, the conclusion makes not against us: for we
asserte no such Imputation, as infers such a Reputation, Nay, to say, That
God should repute things so, were to destroy all Imputation, for what God
(whose judgment is according to truth) ^eputeth us to have done, we must have
done it; and if we have really done it, and be reputed to have done it by the
Lord, it cannot be said to be imputed to us, in the sense we take Imputation;
for Imputation with us, is of that, which we have not, or did not, and which
God knows and judges we did not; and yet is by Imputation so made over to
us, and put upon our score, and reckoned upon our account, as that we are as
really made partakers of the Effects thereof, that is, of justification etc. As
if we had done it ourselves, or it had been ours, without and before any
Imputation. Hence the believer is made the righteousness of God in Christ; and
not reputed, or esteemed to have been the righteousness of God, but now,
through the gracious Imputation of God, and through faith made to be so.

Hence we see, that the proof of his Minor goes upon the same Mistake if
(says he) I be reputed before God to have wrought Righteousness, in Christ in
my justification, then is Christ, in His Sufferings, reputed before God to have
sinned in me. Ans. We say neither the one, nor the other. Christ did not sin
in us, nor did the Lord repute Him to have done so. But he was made sin, by
Imputation; the guilt of sin being laid upon Him; or our sins, as to their
guilt, being caused to meet on Him. Whence it came to pass, that He suffered
as really the punishment of sin, as if He had sinned in us, whileas, as to His
own person, He knew no sin, neither was deceit found in His mouth.

Obj. 14. page 166. If the Active obedience of Christ be imputed, then His
Passive is imputed also. Ans. And why not? If the death and Sufferings of
Christ (says he) be imputed unto me; then may I be accounted or reputed to
have died or suffered in Christ. But this cannot be: because in Christ, we are
justified and absolved from punishment; and therefore cannot be said to have
been punished in Him. Ans. This whole Argument is of a piece with the
foregoing: Though therefore it be upon the matter answered already: Yet we
shall add this word further. That though in one sense it is false, to say,
That we are reputed to have died and Suffered in Christ viz physically; yet in
a legal sense, it may be admitted, as a truth, that Believers, who now by faith
are in Christ, and of His Body, are accounted and reputed to have suffered in
Christ, their Head, Surety and Public person; and therefore are now dealt
with, as, such. Hence they are said to be crucified with Christ, to be dead and
buried with Him, and to be risen with Him Romans 6: 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 2: 5, 6. Col.
2: 12. Yet it will not follow hence, that in a legal sense Christ can be said
to have sinned in us; for we were not His Representative or Head. Though the
debtor may be said, in Law sense, to have paid his creditor, in his Suretys
payment; Yet the Surety cannot be said to be contracting debt, in the debtor,
for the debtor's deed cannot affect him, until he voluntarily submit himself
to be Surety, where may be after the debt is already contracted by the debtor.
And to say, in this Law sense, that Believers Suffered in Christ, does not
weaken the ground of our justification, absolution, Acceptance, and Healing,
as is manifested above, unless we turn. Socinians; and then upon this same
ground, we may deny all the Satisfaction of Christ.

Obj. 15. page 168. If the Righteousness of Christ be imputed to us, then are
we justified, at least in part, by the ceremonial Law; because part of that
Righteousness, which Christ wrought, stood in obedience to the ceremonial Law.
But this is not true. Ergo etc. Ans. We are not said to be justified either by
the Moral, or by the Ceremonial Law; But by the righteousness of Christ, which
consisted in yielding perfect obedience to the Law of God, and in answering all
the demands of the Law, in the behalf of His own. And so, though the Law does
not justify us, because we are sinners; yet neither can the Law now condemn
us, because Christ, our Surety, has perfectly fulfilled it, and given full
Satisfaction to the Law given, for our violation thereof. And, in this matter,
the Ceremonial Law is not to be separated from the Moral, it being but a
branch, or an Appendix thereof, and enjoined thereby: for the Moral Law says,
that God must be worshipped only that way, which Himself has prescribed, and
that Ceremonial worship being the then Instituted worship of God, whosoever
knowing this did not worship God after that manner; did violat the Second of
the Moral Law, which became not Him to do, who came to fulfill all
righteousness. And thus the righteousness of obedience, that is Imputed, is
Moral, or righteousness consisting in obedience to the Moral Law. And this is
wholly imputed to all believers, whether of Jews, or of Gentiles, in reference
to their own Redemption, or delivery. The objection, which he frames against
himself. viz. That the Moral Righteousness is Sufficient, and the other needs
not be imputed, is none of ours, as appears by what is said; for we do not
exclude the Ceremonial, But reduce it to the Moral, obedience to that being
enjoined by this.

Obj. 16. Chap. 19. If the Righteousness of Christ be imputed to us, then are
our sins imputed to Christ, the same manner. But this is not so. Ergo. The
Minor he proves thus If the sins of Men be imputed to Christ, then God looks
upon Him, and reputes Him, in His Sufferings, as one that truly and really had
provoked Him, and sinned against Him. Ans. This consequence is denied; for no
such Reputation, or Estimation follows upon the Imputation, which we assert,
as has been already cleared: only this will follow, that Christ being, through
His own willing consent, in our Law-place, as our Surety, and having undertaken
to pay our debt, He was exacted upon, and dealt with by Justice, as if He had
been the true sinner, though He knew no sin; as Believers, having Christ's
righteousness imputed to them, are dealt with, as if they had kept the Law, and
made Satisfaction by themselves. But as God does not look upon them, nor
esteem, nor consider them, nor repute them, as having really fulfilled the Law
in their own Physical persons; so nor does He look upon, esteem, consider or
repute Christ to have been truly and really a Transgressour of the Law, in His
person. Hence we see, that his proof, that God did not look upon Christ so, is
impertinent; for we do not say so, knowing that to look upon Christ, as one
that had truly sinned, were to look upon Him, as deserving in Himself what was
inflicted upon Him; and that God's judgment is always according to truth; and
that Christ knew no sin in Himself, but was made sin, as having the guilt of
our sins imputed to Him, when He put Himself in our room and Law-place; and
so He died and Suffered for us, in our stead, and became a Sacrifice for sin,
having the guilt thereof laid on Him.

Obj. 17. page 173. If the Righteousness of Christ be imputed unto us, in our
justification, then God does look upon us, as worthy of that justification. But
this is an unclean saying. Ergo. The Major he thus proves. If God reputes me
to have kept the Law, as perfectly as Christ did, He must conceive of me, as
worthy of my justification; for as the fulfilling of the Law, and deserving
justification, are the same Romans 4: 4. So the reputing of a man to have done
the one, is the reputing of him to have deserved the other. The Minor he thus
confirms, Because then God should show us no grace or favor in our
justification. (Romans 4: 4. with Romans 11: 6) But if any favor be showed, it is
only in this, that He reputeth us worthy to be justified, or puts a worthiness
upon us for justification; whereas the Scripture expressly affirms, that God
justifies the ungodly, that is the unworthy Romans 4: 5. Ans. Unto all this, I
say (1.) We say not, that God imputes to us the righteousness of Christ, in
justification; But that He does it in order to justification. (2.) Though
Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us; Yet it will not follow; that God
looks upon us, as worthy of our justification, viz in ourselves: and it may
be yielded, that He looks on us, when clothed with Christ's righteousness, a
worthy of justification, viz in Christ our Surety (...) with whose
righteousness we are now covered, when it is imputed unto us. But then the
conclusion will make nothing against us. (3.) If the meaning be, that therefore
God looks upon us, as worthy of justification in our selves, the consequence
is false; and the Reason adduced for confirmation is invalide: for the Text
Romans 4: 4. speaks of him that works, and so has the ground of the merit
in himself: he indeed that fulfilleth the Law in himself deserves to be
justified. And let our Adversaries see to this, who will have no Righteousness
imputed, but our own faith, which is in us, and is our own, and is, in their
account, as good as the fulfilling of the Law, and is accepted for that end:
for Sure, such as have this faith, which is in them, reputed for their
righteousness, upon the account of which they are justified, must have the
reward reckoned to them, not of grace, but of debt; and so must merit and
deserve their justification, in full and proper sense. (4.) It is not to be
admitted, as a truth, without the forementioned distinction, to say, that the
reputing of a man to have done the one, is the reputing of him to have deserved
the other, for to repute a man to have done the one, in his own person, is
indeed a reputing of him to have deserved the other. But we assert no such
Reputation in God; for His judgment is according to truth; But only assert an
Imputation, which takes away this Reputation, these two being inconsistent:
and from this Imputation can no such thing be inferred. (5.) It is true, if we
deserved justification, justification should be no act grace; but we deserve no
such thing, being in our selves, and as to ourselves, indeed ungodly; yet when
justified, we are looked upon as clothed with the Righteousness of Christ,
imputed to us, and received by faith: and so, though our justification be
merited by Christ, and be an Act of justice and truth in God, in reference to
Christ; yet as to us, it is of free grace; and so much the more of free grace,
that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us for that end. And such as
understand not this, are more principled with Socinian abominations, than with
the doctrine of the Gospel of the grace of God.

Obj. 18. page 173. If men be formally just by God's act, imputing Christ's
righteousness, then do men become formally sinful by the like act of God,
imputing Adam's sin. But this is not true: for then an Act of God should be as
the life and soul of that sin, which is in men. Ergo Ans. As this argument
concludes nothing against the truth, now asserted, this conclusion being
different from the question now in hand; so it is but a mere exhaling of
vapores out of the fog of philosophical terms and notions, that thereby the
truth may be more darkened. We are not obliged by any Law of God, to explain
or interpret these mysteries of Salvation, according to these Notions, which
men explain after their own pleasure, knowing no Law, constraining them to
follow either one man or other, in the arbitrary sense, which they put upon
these terms. But as to the present ^rgument, no answer can be given, until it
be known, what is the true meaning of these words formally just. Possibly he
will understand hereby the same, that others mean by Inherently just, and so
indeed do all the Papists: And if so, we can answer by saying, That no
orthodox man thinks or says, that in this sense, we are made formally just
by God's act imputing Christ' righteousness; but by Holiness, wrought in us by
His Spirit. And as to that righteousness, which is imputed, whether it be
called the Formal, or the Material cause of our justification, it is but a
nominal debate, having no ground, or occasion, in the Word of God, by which
alone we should be ruled in our thoughts and expressions, in this matter. Nor
do they, who say, we are formally just by Christ's righteousness, say, we are
formally just by God's Act imputing that righteousness; But by the
righteousness it self imputed by God and received by faith. Nor do they say,
that men become formally sinful by the like act of God, imputing Adam's sin
unto his posterity, but by Adam's sin imputed: though God's Act be the cause of
this effect, it is not the effect it self. Adam's sin imputed does constitute
the posterity sinners, that is guilty and obnoxious to wrath: so Christ's
righteousness imputed does constitute believers Righteous.

Obj. 19. page 175. If justification consists in the Imputation of Christ's
righteousness, partly in Remission of sins, then must there be a double formal
cause of justification, and that made up and compounded of two several natures,
really differing the one from the other. But this is impossible, Ergo. Ans.
(1.) This Argument is founded upon another School-nicety, or notion, viz the
Simplicity and Indivisibility of Natural forms: and this Philosophical Notion
is here adduced to darken the mystery, we are treating of. It were a sufficient
answer then to say, That the Minor, though it be true in natural forms; Yet
will not necessarily hold, in the privileges of Saints, which may be single, or
compounded, as the Lord thinks meet to make them. And can any reason evince,
that the Lord cannot confer and bestow, in the grand privilege of
justification, more particular favoures than one? Can He not both pardon sins,
and accept as, and declare to be Righteous? Can He not both free the believer
from the condemnation of hell, and adjudge him to the life of glory? or cannot
these two be conceived as two things formally distinct, though inseparable?
(2.) But I shall not say, That Imputation of Christ's righteousness is a part
of justification; But rather that it is the ground thereof, and necessarily
presupposed thereunto. Nor shall I say, that Remission of sins is the form, or
formal cause of justification; a pardoned man, as such, not being a justified
man. It is true, pardon of sins does inseparably follow upon, and is a
necessary effect of our justification, and a certain consequent of God's
accepting of us, as righteous in His sight, upon the account of the
righteousness of Christ, imputed to us and received by faith. I grant also that
justification may be so described, or defined, as to take in that Effect,
without making it thereby a formal part thereof, when strickly considered. (3.)
But he will have Remission of sins to be the whole of justification, and
nothing more included therein, or conferred thereby, abusing to this end (as we
heard above) Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. Where the Apostle is citing the words of the
Psalmist and is not giving us a formal definition of justification; nor saying,
that justification is the same with Remission; nor that Remission's the formal
cause of justification: but only is proving, that justification is not by our
works, as the ground thereof, and that by this reason, Because that would
utterly destroy free Remission, which is a necessary Effect and consequent of
Gospel-justification, and cannot be had without it; in order to which
justification, he there asserteth expressly an Imputation of righteousness: Now,
an Imputation of righteousness is not formally one and the same thing with
Remission of sins; nor can Remission of sins be-called a righteousness, or the
Righteousness of God, or of Christ: yet the Man is a blessed man, whose sins
are covered, because that man is necessarily covered with the righteousness of
Christ, whose sins are covered: for Imputation of righteousness and free pardon
do inseparably attend one another. Nor is it to the purpose to say. That pardon
is a passive righteousness, though not an Active righteousness; for all
righteousness, rightly so called, is conformity to the Law, and that is not a
passive or Negative righteousness, which may be in a beast, that transgresses
no Law, and consequenly has no unrighteousness.

Obj. 20. page 176. If such Imputation be necessary, in justification, this
necessity must be found either in respect of the justice of God, or in respect
of His Mercy, or for the salving or advancing of some other attribute. But
there is no necessity in respect of any of these. Ergo. Ans. (1) This same man
tells us, that there is a necessity for the Imputation of faith, as our
Righteousness, not withstanding of all that Christ has done; and why may he
not grant the same necessity for the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ?
will it satisfy him, that we found the necessity of Imputation of Christ's
Righteoufness on the same ground? (2) Though we should not be in case to
assign the real and just ground of this necessity; yet, I judge, it should
satisfy us, that the Lord, in His wisdom and Goodness, has thought fit to
appointe and ordain this method and manner of justification; and so far
should we be from disputing against this Truth, with such Arguments, and from
rejecting of it until we be satisfied, as to the grounds of necessity
requiring this, that we should receive it, close with it, and embrace it with
all thankfulness, as a Mystery of Love, free Grace and wisdom, that Angels may
wonder at. (3) Yet, accrding to the Scriptures, we may say, that the Truth and
Justice of God require this: for His judgment is always according to truth
Romans 2: 2. and it would be an abomination in His eyes to justify one every way
wicked. Therefore, if He pronounce a person righteous, in His sight, which He
does when He justifies a person, that person must be a Righteous person: but
when no man can be justified, or pronounced Righteous, as being inherently
Righteous Psalm. 130: 3. and 143: 2. all, who are justified, must be clothed
with an Imputed Righteousness: for God must be just, even when he justifies
him, which believes in Jesus Romans 3: 26.

In reference to the justice of God, he says, That there is nothing at all
necessary to be done either by God himself, or by man, about justification of a
sinner, by way of Satisfaction to the justice of God, since that one offering
of Christ of himself upon the cross. Ans. We plead not for Imputation, upon any
such account: nor do we see the least ground to think, that this should derogat
any thing from the full and complete Satisfaction of Christ, made to justice,
or from the price, laid down by Him, as if this Imputation were required, to
supply some thing wanting there: Yea our doctrine of Imputation does rather
confirm and establish the same, it being an application of the Sponsor's
Surety-righteousness, or payment and Satisfaction unto the debtors, in order to
their Absolution and freedom from the sentence. Though the Surety has paid
the creditor; yet the Law may require, that when the debtor is charged or
challenged for the debt, the payment of his Surety be instructed and made
manifest unto the judges: And yet it will not hence follow, tha^ the
Satisfaction or payment, made by the Surety, was defective and insufficient.

He further says. That God can as well and as truly pronounce that Man
righteous, that wants a literal or legal Righteousness (especially supposing*
he has another Righteousness, holding any Analogy or proportion thereto) as he
may account any Man's uncircumcision circumcision Romans 2: 26. Ans. That the Lord
may deal with one uncircumcised, that keeps the Law, no less than if he were
circumcised; and so thereby declare, that He valueth not outward circumcision
so much, as the jews were ready to dream, who questieneth? But what is this to
the business in hand? shall we therefore think, that the Lord, whose judgment
is according to truth, shall account any Righteous, who have no righteousness?
Shall we think, that the Righteous judge shall pronounce and declare him to be
Righteous, who is not so? (2.) He may think to ward this of by his
parenthesis; But, I pray, what is that other righteousness, that holds any
analogy or proportion to the righteousness, required by the Law of God? Is that
the single Act of faith? Sure, that must hold a very unproportionable
proportion and a poor analogy unto Obedience to all commands of God! I need not
take notice of that word legal righteousness literally so called; for he has
many such of little other use, than to amuse the Reader, and darken the matter
(3.) If by this proportionable righteousness, he mean the righteousness of
Christ, which may be said to hold an analogy to the righteousness of the Law,
which man was obliged to perform, which possibly he understands by a legal
righteousness literally and properly so called, he speaks truth, and yields
the cause; for that is it, we contend for.

But afterward he seems to tell us, what he means by analogical
righteousness, saying So may God, with as much righteousness and truth,
pronounce, and call or account a man righteous, that is not strickly, properly
or literally, such, if he has any qualification upon him, that any way
answers, or holds proportion, in any point, with such a Righteousness, as
he should do, in case this man had this legal righteousness upon him, in the
absolutest perfection of the letter. Ans. And who may not see the folly of this
Reddition, to infer this from the Lord's calling John Baptist Elias and the
like? Will he make the Lord's pronouncing sentence, in judgment, as a righteous
judge (as He does in the matter of justification) to be such a figurative
speech, as when John Baptist was called Elias, because he had some resemblance
to Elias, when he came in his Spirit and power? Will he be accounted a
righteous judge, upon earth, who in judgment should pronounce that man
righteous, who, in stead of the righteousness he should have had, has only one
poor qualification upon him, that some way or other holds proportion with it,
in any point? If so, it will be a great question, if ever any wicked man can be
condemned, seeing it will be rare to find one, that has never all his days
done some thing, that answers to the Law, in some poor way or measure, as to
same one point or other. Yea, if we might drive this further, it might be made
probable, that hence it would follow, that all the world should be justified
even in the sight of God. But enough of this, which is too too gross. Yet woe
hear not what that qualification is.

He says, when God pronounces a man righteous, it is sufficient to bear out
the justice and truth of God, if his person be under any such relation, and
condition, as belongs to a legal righteousness, or which a legal
righteousness would cast upon him. Ans. What before was called a Qualification,
is here called a Relation, or condition; and these seem not to be one and the
same thing: But what if that Relation, or condition have no foundation, how
shall the Lord, upon that account, pronounce such a person righteous? or,
though it be not founded upon a legal righteousness, performed by the man's self
in his own person, yet may it not be founded upon a Surety-righteousness
imputed?

But what is this? He adds, Now, one special privilege or benefit belonging
to a perfect legal righteousness, is to free the person, in whom it is found,
from death and condemnation, and he that has his sins forgiven him, is
partaker with him in the fullness of this privilege, is as free of condemnation,
as he Ans. But he has not yet proved, that any man is pardoned, without the
Imputed righteousness of Christ: and beside, righteousness brings with it, as
a special privilege or benefit, right to the promised Inheritance of Glory:
But a pardoned man, as such, has not this Right, nor yet can challenge it, as
was shown above. Moreover, if God pronounce a Man righteous, because he is
pardoned, then the man must be pardoned, before he be justified; for in
justification he is declared and pronounced Righteous, and not made such: and
if he be pardoned, before he be justified pardon is not the form of
justification, nor the whole thereof, as he says, but rather something
antecedent thereto.

What in fine he says, is but what we have often heard viz That forgiveness of
sins, is a true and complete righteousness, in the kind, a passive
righteousness, as absolute and perfect in the kind of it, as any Active
righteousnest: And for him that has once sinned, there is no other
righteousness applicable to him, but only this, which for all other ends,
purposes, advantages, privileges what some ever, is as offectual as the active
righteousness it self could be. Ans. (1.) No Scripture calls pardon of sins a
righteousness (2.) A passive righteonsness is no righteonsness, as we lately
made appear. (3.) That another righteousness, even the positive
Surety-righteousness of Christ, is applicable unto a sinner, has been
hithertil evinced. (4.) pardon, as such, can give no Right to the reward,
promised to obedience; and therefore cannot be as effectual, as an active
righteousness, to all Ends, purposes, Apvantages and privileges.

Obj. 21. Chap. 20. That, which having been dhne, in our own person, could not
have been our justification, nor any part of the righteousness, by which we
could have been justified, cannot be made our justification, nor any part of
it, by Imputation from another. But such is the righteousness of the Law,
pretended to be imputed from Christ. Ergo etc. Ans. (1.) We do not call the
righteousness of Christ our justification; nor do we say, that it is made our
justification or any part of it, by Imputation unto us: nor yet do we make it a
part only of the righteousness, by which we are justified; for His
righteousness is the whole of that righteousness: Nor by His
Surety-righteousness imputed to us, do we understand only His Active obedience
to the Law. (2.) He here Supposes that we say, there is nothing imputed to us,
in order to our justification, but Christ's Obedience to the Law, without His
Satisfaction by Suffering: And thus we see, the maine pilla^s of this Argument
are weak, and its whole foundation being sandy, it cannot stand.

He confirms the Major thus. If a personal fulfilling of the Law could have
been no justification, nor part of justification to us, certainly an Imputative
fulfilling of it could not have been either. The Imputation of a thing from
another cannot add any strength to it, above a personal acting, yet the Nature
of Imputation is only to supply the defect of personal performance, and
therefore cannot exceed it. Ans. Though obedience to the Law cannot avail us,
now we are sinners, even though it were perfect (which is in effect a
supposition of what is impossible yea and self contradictary, and therefore can
lay the foundation of no truth, in an Argument) yet it could have availed Adam,
while standing, and us in him. (2.) The Righteousness, which is now imputed, is
not the Righteousness of a sinner; and so cannot be called the same with that
Rightoeusness, which is supposed to be done by us, who are sinners: for the
Righteousness in the supposition had been no righteousness at all, not being
compleet and perfect. Now, who sees not, that the Imputation of a perfect
righteousness has other strength and virtue, then that has which is personal
and Imperfect? (3.) The Imputation of an Obedience, perfect and compleet, can
avail such, as are recocciled by the death of Christ, when personal obedience,
suppose it never so full (if the supposition could be made) cannot avail such,
as are under God's curse because of sin already committed.

He confirms the Minor thus, Man being once fallen and made obnoxious to
condemnation, can never be recovered again by ten thousand observations of
this Law. Ans. Though the observation of the Law, could it now be done by
fallen man, which is impossible, cannot avail unto justification; yet, as is
said, it could have availed man, while standing: and man remaining still under
the obligation, it is his debt: and seeing it is now impossible for him to pay
this debt, his Surety must pay it for him, and the Surety's payment must be
reckoned on his score.

Obj. 22. That which men are not bound by any Law, or command of God, to do, in
their own persons, for their justification, cannot be imputed from another to
any such and. But men are not bound, by any such Law, to observe the Law, for
their justification. Ergo etc. Ans. The Major I distinguish thus* That which
men neither now are, nor never were bound to do, in their own persons for their
justification, by any Law, or command of God, cannot be imputed from another,
to any such end; this is granted: but the assumption speaks only of what men
now are obliged unto; and so the Argument is inconcludent. That which men,
though once obliged unto, in their own persons, in order to justification, yet
now are not obliged unto by the Law of God, cannot be imputed from another, to
any such end: this is false. Let us hear his proof. Because (says he)
Imputation is found out and ordained by God to supply personal defects: But
where there is no Law, there can be no personal defect. Ans. Imputation is not
found out and ordained by God, to supply the want of that, which men are now
obliged unto by the Law of God; but to supply what once they were obliged unto,
and is not yet done: and the reason is, because the Law, being not abrogat by
the breach thereof, continues in force to oblige to perfect and Exact
Obedience; and every violation thereof is a sin before God: and because it must
be satisfied, even as to this, ere any can think to enjoy the reward promised
to perfect obedience; and no man can satisfy the demands of the Law by
himself: therefore every one, who would have the Reward, and partake of Life,
must have a perfect obedience imputed to him to the end, that, without any
infringing of the Law, the sinner may be-justified, and the Law established.

To the Minor I only say, That albeit no Man be under any command of God, now
to observe the Moral Law perfectly, that thereby they may be justified, the
Lord having now provided another way, in the Gospel which all, to whom it is
revealed, are bound to take: Yet all, out of Christ, and who have not yielded
obedience unto the Gospel, are still under the old covenant, being not as yet
brought in into the New: and so, while they abide there, have no other way,
whereby to expect justification, but the old way, hold forth in the old
covenant, viz. Perfect Obedience, which is now become Impassible: for till they
believe in Christ, they are still in Nature, and are not translated into the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, though, as to such as hear the Gospel, there is a
command to believe in Jesus Christ, to the end they may be justified: But as to
such, as either hear not the Gospel, or hearing it would not yield obedience
thereto, they have no other way, whereby they can expect justification, but
doing of the Law Romans 2: 13. and that is also a desperate and Impossible way,
when the Law is already now broken. The meaning of these words Romans 2: 13. The
doers of the Law shall be justified, is not, what he imagines page 184. viz.
That God will accept, justify, and save only such, who out of a sincere and
sound faith to wards Him by His Christ, address themselves to serve and please
Him, in a way of obedience to His Laws: for this sense of the words keeps no
correspondence with the scope of the Apostle there, nor with the Circumstances
of the place.

Obj. 23. If God requires only faith of men to their justification, then He
imputes this faith unto them there-unto. But God requires only faith to
justification. Ergo etc. Ans. (1.) The conclusion is not directly the thing,
that is now in question, but another question, of which hereafter in due time.
(2.) The Minor is false to some of his own party, who join works with faith.
(3.) The Major is denied; for though God require faith of men to their
justification; Yet that faith is not imputed unto them viz. as their
Righteousness. It may be, he means no more by the word Impute here, but to
accept of it, when performed, according as it is prescribed: and indeed his
proof annexed can evince nothing else; because (says he) to impute unto
justification, and to accept unto justification are nothing differing at all,
in sense and signification: Now if God should require faith of Men, and only
faith to their justification, and not accept it thereunto, he should make a
bargain, and not stand to it: for hereby it is manifest, that to Impute faith
unto justification, is but to accept it, in order to justification, in the
place, and for the end, which God has fixed to it, and required it for; that
is, to be a Mean and Instrument, in the business, and to be the way of
Interessing us in the Righteousness of Christ, the sole Righteousness for
which, and ground upon which, we are justified. This then being the meaning of
his Major Proposition, for any thing that yet appears, his whole Argument is
but a mere sophistical evasion. (4*) It is true, God requires of us only
faith, as an Instrument and mean to lay hold upon the Righteousness of Christ,
in order to our justification: but this is so far from proving that therefore
there is no necessity for the Righteousness of Christ, that, on the contrary,
it establishes that truth more firmly: for the faith, that is required unto
justification, is not a bare historical faith, but such a faith, as carries
the believer out of himself, to seek a Righteousness in Christ, and declares
his full Satisfaction therewith, and his resting thereupon, in order to his
Acceptance with God, and being justified and absolved from the sentence of the
Law, under the conviction of which he was lying. (5) The scope and drift of
this Objection is to separat these things, that God has most firmly and
manifestly conjoined, viz. God's Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, and
our Receiving that gift of Righteousness by faith, and the atonement through
faith. But, as was shown above, the Scripture holds forth the necessity of
both, and what God has conjoined, let no man separate.

To this he says. If the Righteousness of Christ be that, which is imputed,
and not the faith, that is required of them, then may this Righteousness be
Imputed to this end, before, yea and without the faith of any man; for this
faith adds no virtue, or value to that Righteousness. Ans. This being God's
free Constitution, His will should serve us for a Law; and in stead of too
curious enquiring, whether this might be, or not be without the other, or
before the other, we should rest satisfied with God's Method; and therein carry
more like Christians, than in making such objections against His express
determinations. What though it were granted, that God might, if it had so
pleased Him, impute the Righteousness of Christ unto sinners, before, or
without their faith; will it therefore follow, that now faith is unnecessary;
or, if faith be asserted to be necessary, that therefore the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness must be denied? Why? what ground can be given for such
fictions? Nay, will not this be as strong against the objecters, if Christ made
full Satisfaction to Justice, what necessity is there for the Imputation of
faith unto Righteousness? Thus we see, the objecter must either turn fully
Socinian, or reject this way of argueing.

But he will not rest satisfied with the good pleasure of God, in this matter;
for he adds page 186. If the will and pleasure of God be to make no
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, but upon the Condition of faith
interveening, then it is evident, that this Righteousness is not imputed unto
justification, to any man, because the Condition of faith must necessarily
interveen, so that if this Righteousness of Christ were imputed unto men, yet
it must be only toward justification, not unto it; for faith has the next and
most immediate connection therewith. Ans. Not to trouble our selves with that
fond and fooli^ distinction betwixt toward and unto, which rather renders the
Adversaries Cause desperate, and himself feign to shelter himself under such fig
leaves, to cover his nakedness, than evidenceth any apparent probability of a
real ground of Scrupling here. We say, That the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, which is God's Act, has as immediate a connection with
justification, as Faith has, which is our Act: for there is no priority or
posteriority here, as to time; for whenever a Man believes, in that same
instant, Righteousness is imputed; and in that same Instant, the believer is
justified; We cannot say, a Man is a believer, and yet has not the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to him, or is not justified; as we cannot say,
a Man has the Righteousness of Christ imputed to him, and yet is not
justified. Nay, the very Argument will conclude as well, that the Imputation of
Righteousness has a more near connection with justification, than faith has;
for we may likewise say, though a man believe, yet without imputation, cannot
be justified. But the truth is, all such argueings are but the Cavils of men,
seeking to darken that, which they cannot destroy; and are mere sophismes,
unbeseeming Christians, in such a concerning business.

Then (says he further) faith does not take hold of the Righteousness of
Christ Imputed; but first takes hold of it, and then the Imputation follows
and then a man may have the Righteousness of Christ upon him by faith, and yet
not be justified by it. Ans. Though faith at first does not take hold of the
Righteousness of Christ, already imputed; but of the Righteousness of Christ
hold forth in the Gospel: yet faith may lean to that Righteousness imputed,
and rest upon it (2) We assert no such Conditions, as this argument would say
are the Conditions understood by our Adversaries, that is, such Conditions, as
are like a price, that may be, for some time, in the buyers hand, before the
bargane be made; and may also be paid down some time before he obtain the
purchase. We own only such consequential conditions here, as are but the means
and Methods appointed of God, for such and such ends, and which have an
immedial connection with the end here intended. And therefore, we neither say,
nor imagine, that a man may have the Righteousness of Christ, or Faith, and yet
not be justified; for in the very moment, as was said, that a Man acts true
Gospel-and so justifying faith, he has the Righteousness of Christ imputed to
him, and is justified: Every priority in order of Nature does not conclude also
a priority, as to time; far less can a man be supposed to have the
Righteousness of Christ, without God's Act of Imputation. But Finally all these
Argueings return upon his own head; for when he says, that faith is Imputed
for Righteousness, meaning by faith our act of believing, he must also say,
that a man may believe, and yet not be justified, until his faith be Imputed
unto Righteousness, by God, whose work alone this is: and his reply to this
will relieve us.

Obj. 24. That which was Imputed to Abraham for Righteousness, in his
justification, is imputed to other believers also. But the faith of Abraham was
imputed to him for Righteousness. Ergo etc. And for proof of all, he refers
us to what he has said Chap. 2. upon Romans 4. Ans. We shall not here anticipat
the consideration of that place, and of this Argument founded there upon; seeing
afterward we will have a fitter occasion to speak hereunto.

Obj. 25. Here is his last argument, which he largely prosecuteth Chap. 21.
page 188. etc. and it would seem, that it is here adduced again (for we had it
once, if not oftener before) that he may take occasion to vent his mind against
the Imputation of Adam's sin to his posterity. Thus he Argues. If the
Righteousness of the Law be not imputable, or derivable, in the letter and
formality of it, from one man's person to another, then cannot the Righteousness
of Christ be imputed to any man, in justification. But the former is true,
therefore* etc. Ans. What may be answered unto this Argum. the Reader may see
in the foregoing Chapter. Object last and I shall not here repeat, but go on to
take notice of what he says to that objection, which he moves against
himself, and proposes thus, If the transgression of the Law be imputable from
one Man's person to another, then may the Righteousness of the Law be imputed
also. But the former is hence evident, because the sin of Adam is imputed to
his posterity.

He first excepteth against the Major, and denies the Consequence thereof, and
gives reasons of his denial. 1. There is (says he) no such Emphatical
restraint of the guilt and punishment to the transgressour, as there is of the
reward to the performer of obedience: for Gal. 3: 12. the very man that has
done them shall live by them; which is no where said of the Transgressour. Ans.
But all this is loose reasoning: for as the Law says, God will visit the
iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth
Generation; so it says, that He will show mercy to thousands of them that love
Him, and keep His Commandments: and here the one is as Emphatick, as the
other. (2) As he reads Gal. 3: 12. that the man that does them, shall live in
them; so we read Ezekiel. 18: 3. the soul that sins, it shall die. and Gal. 3:
10. Deuteronomy. 27: 26. Cursed is every one, that abides not in all things, which
are written in the Law to do them; which words do Import as emphatical a
restraint, as the other. But of that Gal. 3: 12. we have said enough above, we
might also mentione that, which was said to Adam, in the day thou eats, thou
shall die, which seems to have no less an Emphatick Import.

But 2. he mentions this difference. Sin (says he) is ever greater, in
ratione demerity, than obedience is, in ratione meriti: Adam might by his
transgression, merit condemnation to himself and posterity, and yet not have
merited by his obedience Salvation to both; because, if he had kept the Law, he
had only done his duty. Luke 17: 10. and so had been but an unprofitable
servant. Ans. All this says nothing, where a Covenant is made, promising life
to the obeyer, as well, as threatening death to the transgressour. Albeit Adam
could not be said to have merited life, by his obedience, in way of proper and
strick merit; yet in way of merit expacto, he could have been said to have
merited; for the reward would have been reckoned to him, not of grace, but of
debt; and there would have been ground of boasting and glorying. Romans 3: 27.
and 4: 2, 4. How beit he had done but his duty, when he had obeyed to the end;
yet the condescending love of God, promising the reward to perseverance in
obedience to the end, was sufficient to found this. Whether Adam had merited
Salvation to all his posterity, if he had kept the Covenant to the end, or not,
is not our present question to enquire j this we know, that by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. Romans 5: 12. And upon the other hand, this we know, that
Christ was made sin for His, as a public person, and all His promised Seed and
Children are made the Righteousness of God in Him. 1. Cor. 1: 30. 2. Cor. 5:
21. and those are sufficient for our purpose.

3. He says. The Imputableness of the transgression of the Law rather
overthrows the Imputation of the obedience of it, than any ways establishes
it: for the more Imputable, that is, punishable, the transgression is, the less
imputable, that is rewardable, is the obedience of it. Ans. This is very true,
when we speak of the same man, as of Adam, in both: for he could not both be a
Transgressour, and a Final Observer of the Law; and so both obedience and
Transgression could not be imputed to himself, Let be to any other; and the
Imputation of the one did quite evacuat the other. But what makes this mere
shift to his present purpose, which is to show (if he could) that the
Righteousness and obedience of the Second Adam, the Lord from heaven, is not as
imputable to His Spiritual Seed and Issue, as the Sin and Transgression of the
first Adam, who was of the earth earthy. 1. Cor. 15: 47. was imputable to his
Natural Seed.

Next, he comes to the Minor, and denies the Imputation of Adam's sin; and
this seems to be his maine buliness, wherein he complieth with the Socinians,
and others. Let us hear him, first (says he) the Scripture no where affirms
either the Imputation of Adam's sin, or of the Righteousness of Christ. Ans.
The contrary is sufficiently proven above; and all his reasons cannot evince
what he says. He tells us, that neither is the phrase, nor manner of such
speaking any ways agreeable to the language of the Holy Ghost: for still in the
Scriptures, wheresoever the word, imputing, is used, it is only applied unto or
spoken of something of the same persons, to whom the Imputation is said to be
made; and never to or of any thing of another. Ans. Though it be true, that
some things are said to be imputed, in Scripture, unto persons, which are, or
were theirs, before the Imputation: (though that Instance of faiths being
imputed to Abraham Romans 4. which he adduceth, does not belong to this head, as
shall be evinced in due time) whether it be good, or evil, as 2. Sam. 19: 19,
Act. 7: 60. where this Imputation is deprecated. So 2. Chron. 24: 22. Genesis 30:
33. Psalm. 106: 31. Yet it is also true, that we read of an Imputation of
Something, that did not belong to, or was not possessed by the person, before
the Imputation was made; as when Paul desires Philemon, to impute to him what
Onesimue was oweing; and that he would reckon both the debt and the injury,
whereof Onesimus might beguilty, upon his score, and require it of him. Philem.
verse 18. Thus do Sureties take upon themselves what formerly was not theirs;
and so make that imputable to themselves, which formerly was not so, as we seen
Genesis 43: 9. and 44: 32. and the Sureties payment or Satisfaction, according to
what he voluntarily undertook, is according to Law and equity, imputable and to
be imputed unto, or reckoned on the Score of the debtor, to the end he may be
dealt with, by virtue of that imputed payment and Satisfaction, as if he
himself had made the payment, or given the Satisfaction. And this is the very
Nature and End of this Imputation; not that the person, to whom the Imputation
is made, should be accounted one, who had that before the Imputation was made;
but that the thing Imputed may become his, to whom it is imputed, and he
thereupon be dealt with, as now an owner and possessor of that thing by
Imputatio^.

Secondly, he says, When a thing is said simply to be imputed, as sin, folly
or righteousness, the meaning is not to be taken concerning the bare acts of
things; as if to impute sin signified to repute the man to have committed a
sinful act, but to charge the guilt or demerite of sin upon his head, of
purpose to punish him for it. Ans. This is true of such things, as are either
really or falsely by injustice supposed to be in the person, before that
imputation be made. But notwithstanding hereof, there is, as we have seen, and
as all acts of Suretiship do further clear, an imputation of what was not the
persons before, whereby the thing it self, that is imputed, is legally made
over unto them, and reckoned upon their score, and thereupon they are dealt
with, as being now possessed of that, which is imputed; as when a person
voluntarily becomes Surety for another, as Paul for Onesimus, Judah for
Benjamin; first the debt it self is made their and reckoned upon their score,
and then they willingly undergo the consequences thereof, that is, the payment
or punishment.

Thridly page 198. he comes home to the point, saying. The expressions (i.e.
of Christ's Righteousness and of Adam's sin) are unknown to the Holy Ghost in
Scripture. Ans. This is but the old exception of Bellarmin de Iustif. lib. 2.
chap. 7. and of the Socinians; See Volkel do Vera Relig. lib. 5. page 564, 565.
who, upon this same ground, reject several other fundamental points, as the
Trinity and others. But we have already shown Scripture Proof enough of this
matter; and himself in the following words grants, that there are expressions
in Scripture, concerning both the Communication of Adam's sin, and of Christ's
Righteousness, that will fairly enough bear the term of Imputation. So that
all the difference betwixt him and us is about the sense of the word.

Now, we come to the matter. He speaks to Romans 5* 19, giving this for the
only meaning thereof, that the demerite or guilt of Adam's sin, is charged on
his posterity, or that the punishment ran over from his person to them, i a
maine part of which punishment lies in that original defilement, wherein they
are all conceived and borne, and whereby they are made truly and formally
sinners before God. Ans. But, if that sin of Adam be imputed, in its curse and
punishment, the sin it self must be imputed, as to its guilt; else we must say,
that God curses and punishes the posterity, that is no ways guilty, which to
do suiteth not the justice of God, the righteous Governor of the world. We do
not say, (as he supposes, when he sets down our sense of the words) that
that sinful act of eating the forbidden fruit, in the letter and formality of
it (an expression that on all occasions he uses, and whose sense, is not
obvious, but needs explication, and is excogitated merely to darken the
matter) and as it was Adam's own personal sin, is imputed to the posterity: but
it is enough for us, to say, with the Scripture, that by Adam's disobedience,
his posterity became guilty; and that all sinned in him; and therefore death
passed on all, and that guilt was by that one sin to condemnation Romans 5: 12,
15, 16, 18, 19. and so that the posterity sinned legally and originally, though
not formally, because not existing in Adam actually, but legally and
originally; and became thereby obnoxious to the punishment threatened, that is,
death both in body and Soul, here and hereafter: Whence it is manifest, that
punishment being relative to sin, such as are punished because of sin, must be
sinners, and judged to be sinners and so guilty, before they be punished for
sin, Adam being the Head and Root of Mankind, and God entering into Covenant
with him, as such, and therefore with all his posterity in him, when he broke
the Covenant and transgressed, all Mankind descending from him by ordinary
generation, being comprehended with him in the Covenant, became actually
partakers of that guilt, so soon as they did partake of Nature actually; and
being really guilty when existing, they were justly punished. But if this guilt
were not imputed to them, they could not be justly punished for it.

On the contrary, he thinks they might be justly punished for that sin, though
not guilty thereof: and he labors to establish this upon three pillars. 1.
The demerite (says he) and sinfulness of that sin which had so many
aggravations, and in this regard, was beyond the sin of devils, that Adam had
the estates of all his posterity in his hand, and knew, that if he sinned, he
should draw all their souls after him into the same perdition. Ans. But if by
Adam's having the estates of all his posterity in his hand, this truth be not
included, that his sin should become their sin, and they should be looked upon
as guilty thereof, and chargable therewith; how could he know, that by his sin
heshould draw the souls of all his posterity after him into the same
condemnation! And how could they be punished for that same guilt, if it was not
some way theirs, by the just and righteous Judge and Governor of the world?
The posterity can no more be justly punished for the great and heinous sins of
their progenitors, than for their lesser sins, if they have no interest in
these sins, nor partake of the guilt thereof: But as to Original sin, the
Scripture gives the Sin, as the ground of the punishment, and makes the one
to reach all, as well as the other, telling us Romans 5: 12. that by one Man, sin
^ntered in to the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all Men,
for that all have sinned; or, in whom all have sinned. See verse 19.

2. The Narrownese or scantisness of Adam's Person, who could not beat that
fullness of punishment, which God might require for that great sin; and we
cannot think, that God should sit down with loss. Ans. This is his second
pillar. But neither is it sufficient; for God could have punished Adam
condingly for his sin: but when the posterity is punished for that sin also,
that sin must be theirs. Though for great crimes, as Treason and the like, the
Posterity suffe^eth, when the guilty is forfeited I yet the posterity are not
properly punished for that sin; nor can be said to be so; as we are punished
for Original sin, because it is ours, and we sinned in Adam.

3. His 3d. and maine pillar is, the peculir and near relation of the posterity
of Adam to his person; for then they were in it, and, as it were, a part, or
some what of it; so that Adam was us all, and we were all that one Adam, as
Augustine speaks; and the whole generation of mankind is but Adam, or Adam's
person, expounded at large. Ans. This is sufficient for us; for it will hold
forth the Covenant relation, wherein Adam stood, as representing all his
posterity; and so they were as well in him, and a part of him, in his sin, as
in his punishment: which is all we desire, for hence it appears, that all
sinned in that one Adam, as well, as they were all punished in him.

Then he tells us, that all these three are jointly intimat R^^. 5: 12. Where
first there is the demerito, Imported, when death is said to enter; and the
scantiness of Adam's person, when it is said, to have passed upon all men; and
the relation of his posterity to him, in that all are said to have sinned in
him. Ans. But the maine thing, which he denies, is there also imported, when
it is said, that all men sinned in him, or became guilty of his sin: for
thereby it is manifest, that only they had an interest in his person, but that
they had such an Interest in and relation to his person, as so stated, and as
standing in a Covenant Relation to God, that they sinned in him, or became
guilty of his sin, and therefore suffered with him the demerite thereof. Whence
it is evident (howbeit he seems confident of the contrary page 207.) That the
Imputation of Adam's sin, or of his sinful Act as sinful, or as it was a sin;
and not of the act as such (for that himself faith once and again, was
directly and efficiently from God himself, and therefore was good) is the
ground, or cause of punishment, that comes on his posterity.

But he says page 208. If any Imputation be in this case, it is of every man's
own sin, in Adam; for is was Adam alone that sinned, but all sinned in him: It
is not said, that Adam's sin is Imputed to his posterity; but rather that his
posterity themselves sinned in Adam. Ans. If he will stand to this, we need not
contend with him, about the word, Impute; this expression of Scripture
comprehending and plainly holding forth all that we would say. And if he will
grant as much, in reference to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, as is
here said of Adam, who was the type of him that was to come, he must, I judge,
retract all that he has said, against the same.

What follows in that Chapter, being but founded upon what is already
mentioned and examined, needs not here again be repeated or expressed, and
considered.

Thus we have taken notice of all, which this voluminous Adversary has said,
upon this matter, both against the Truth, and for his own Error: and no doubt,
he has scraped together all that he could find, giving any, seeming
contribution unto the Notion, which he hugged; and has labored after his
usual manner, to set of with a more than ordinary measure of confidence, and
with an affected pedantrie of language, supplying, with bombast expressions,
the want of reality of truth and solidity of reasoning. What remains in that
book, concerning the Imputation of faith, in opposition to the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ shall be examined, when we come to the second part
of our Text, and to speak of the matter of justification. And as for other
things, we may take notice of them elsewhere.

CHAP. XIII.
M. Baxter's opinion, Concerning Imputation, examined.
THere being so frequent mention made, in Scripture, of Imputation of
Righteousness; or of Righteousness Imputed; and of Christ's being our
Righteousness; or of our being Righteousness, or Righteous in Him, and the
like, many, that even plead much against the Doctrine of the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, maintained by the orthodox, must yet yield to it, in
some sense or other; at least in such a sense, as may, in their apprehensions,
not cross their other Hypotheses and Dogmes: Yea and sometimes grant this
Imputation in that sense, at least in words, which overthrows or weakeneth
all their Disputations to the contrary. Schlightingius, in defense of Socinus
against Meisnerus page 250. will grant, That Christ's Righteousness may be
called and accounted ours, in so far, as it redoundeth to our good and
righteousness, and is the cause of our justification. And Bellarmin, will also
say ( de just. lib. 2. cap. 10.) That Christ is said to be our Righteousness,
because He satisfied the father for us; and so gives and communicates that
Satisfaction to us, when He justifies us, that it may be said to be our
Satisfaction and Righteousness.

Mr. Baxter, though he seems not satisfied with what is commonly hold by the
Orthodox, anent the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ; yet will not
profess himself an Enemy to all Imputation; but on the contrary, says, he
owneth it in a right sense: And it is true, men have their own liberty, in
expressing their sense and meaning of Truths; and where there seems to be
some considerable difference, as to words and expressions; yet there may be
little, or none upon the matter. And it is not good, I confess, to make real
differences of these, that are but verbal; nor is it good to be so tenacious of
our own expressions, as to exaggerat the expressions of others, whose meaning
may be good, because not complying with our own, in all points,

Let us therefore enquire after Mr. Baxter's sense, and see wherein he really
differs from us, in this matter. In his late Treatise of justifying
Righteousness against D. Tully. The first part (as the Title page shows) is
of Imputed Righteousness, opening and defending the true Sense, and confuting
the false. Here then belike we shall find his meaning, as to this question.

In his preface to this book, he gives us his sense, in these words, That
Righteousness is imputed to us, that is, we are accounted Righteous, because
for the merits of Christ's total fulfulling the conditions of his Mediatorial
Covenant with the Father, by His Habitual Holiness, His Actual perfect
Obedience, and His Sacrifice, or Sati^factory Suffering for our sins, in our
stead, freely without any merit, or conditional act of man's, God has made an
act of oblivion and Deed of Gift, pardoning all sin, justifying and Adopting
and giving Right to the Spirit and Life eternally to every one, that beleevingh
accepts Christ, and the gifts with, and by, and from Him; and when we accept
them, they are all ours by virtue of this purchased Covenant-gift. But this, I
Judge, cannot give satisfaction, for upon the grant of the Act of Oblivion, (as
he calls it) which, in his judgment, is extended to all Mankind, no man in
particular can be called or accounted Righteous, or have Righteousness imputed
to him, more than another; and so upon this account, all are equally Righteous,
and have equally Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, that is, no man has
it. As for these Effects, pardon, justification, Adoption, and Right to the
Spirit and to Life, they cannot be called the Righteousness of Christ; no more
than the Effect can be called the cause: And though they become ours, when we
accept them, or rather when we accept of Christ; yet upon that account merely,
it can not be said, that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us, and no
otherwise: for that is nothing but the Socinian Concession formerly mentioned,
and it cannot Satisfy the orthodox. The questin is about the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, and the Answer given is concerning the Effects thereof
given to us; But these Effects are not the Righteousness of Christ; nor are
they to be called a Righteousness; nor are they in Scripture so called, unless
we say with Ioh. Goodwin, that Righteousness Imputed is nothing but free
justification. Yea these Effects must presuppose a Righteousness in the persons
receiving them, either Inherently, or by way of Impu^ation: for God will
justify no man, or declare no man to be Righteous, who is not Righteous: And
concerning this Righteousness is our question: And Mr. Baxter gives us nothing
here for this, unless it be our believing: and this is that which Servetus,
Socinians and Arminians say.

In opposition to this, which he calls a short and plain explication of
Christianity, he sets down what others say, as necessary to go in to our
Christianity; and so tells us, that according to them, we must say, That Christ
was habitually and actually perfectly Holy and obedient, imputatively in our
particular persons; and thath each one of us did perfectly fulfill that Law,
which requires perfect habites and act: in and by Christ imputatively; and yet
did also in and by him suffer ourselves imputatively for not fulfilling it, and
imputatively did ourselves both satisfy God's justice, and merit heaven; and
that we have ourselves imputatively a Righteousness of Perfect holiness and
obedience, as sinless; and must be justified by the Law of Innocence, or works,
as having ourselves imputatively fulfilled it in Christ. And that this is our
sole-righteousness: and that faith it self is not imputed to us for
Righteousness, no not a mere particular subordinat Righteousness, answering the
conditional part of the new justifying Covenant, as necessary to our
participation of Christ, and His freely given Righteousness. As touching the
latter part of this discourse, about the Imputation of Faith, and its being
called our particular subordinat Righteousness, it is true, Several of the
Orthodox have appeared against it, and we shall also speak our judgment of it
hereafter. But as to the former part (which is only pertinent to our purpose
now in hand) I know not, if ever any Orthodox person uttered his mind, after
this manner: Yea, I wot not, if Antinomians themselves have at any time
expressed themselves, in all points, as is here set down. But be it so, that
they have thus expressed their meaning, and that these expressions, here set
down, are not mere Consequences and Inferences, drawn by Mr. Baxter himself,
from their opinions and assertions: yet Mr. Baxter cannot but know, that the
Orthodox are against them, in these assertions, as well as he: and to me it
appears no fair, to set down these words, as containing that opinion, which
all must hold, who cannot fully embrace Mr. Baxter's own judgment; as if there
were no Medium betwixt the Socinian or Arminian judgment, on the one hand, and
the Antinomian opinion on the other hand; whileas he cannot but know the
contrary. Nether is this a ^^t and sure way to clear up the true sense of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, at least, that sense, which we own.

In the Book page 24. he again sets down his own judgment, or sense of
Imputation, which he takes to be the true healing middle way; Part whereof is
as follows. That as Christ suffered in our stead, that we might not suffer,
and obeyed in our Nature, that perfection of obedience might not be necessary
to our justification; and this in the person of a Mediator and Sponsor, for us
sinners; but not so in our persons, as that we truly, in a moral or civil
sense, did all this in and by him: Even so God reputeth the thing to be, as it
is, and so far Imputes Christ's Righteousness and Merits and Satisfaction to
us, as that it is reputed by Him the true Meritorious Cause of our
justification; and that for it God makes a Covenant of Grace, in which he
freely gives Christ, pardon and life to all that accept the gift, as it is; so
that the Accepters are by this Covenant and Gift, as surely justified and Saved
by Christ's Righteousness, as if they had obeyed and satisfied themselves. Not
that Christ meriteth, that we shall have grace to fulfill the Law ourselves,
and stand before God in a Righteousness of our own, which will answer the Law
of works, and justify us; but that the Conditions of the Gift, in the Covenant
of Grace, being performed by every penitent Believer, that Covenant does pardon
all their sins (as God's Instrument) and gives them a Right to life eternal
for Christ's merits. As to this though it may seem fair and a far
advancement: yet I shall crave leave to say these few things against it.

1. When he says, That Christ suffered in our stead, I would know, in whose
stead it was? Whether it was in the stead of some select persons, or in stead
of all? If in the stead of some select persons only, then these select persons,
must have another Interest, in the death of Christ, than all others; and it
being done in their stead, must needs be accepted in their behalf, as it was
undergone for them, and in their stead and place: and if it be accepted in
their behalf, they must necessarily be freed from Suffering, after God's
Method; and that upon the account of Christ's Suffering in their stead; and if
so, must not that Suffering of Christ, in a Law-sense, be accounted theirs, and
imputed unto them, and they as really and effectually freed from what they were
under, and obnoxious to, and made partakers of was purchased thereby, as if
they had suffered all that, in their own persons? If it be in stead of all,
then all must, upon the account of it, be delivered from Suffering, which
cannot be said; or not one shall be delivered from Suffering, merely upon the
account of it, but upon the account of some other thing Interveening, which he
calls, in the following words, the New Covenant, and the performance of the
Conditions thereof: And if so, all Christ's Sufferings in our stead, will be
but a Suffering for our good, as say the Socinians.

2. When he says, That we might not suffer, is that meaned eventually viz.
That none of us should ever be put to suffer the penalty? or is it only meaned
potentially, that is, that it might be possible, that we should not suffer? If
the former be said, then either all of us shall be saved, or the us must be
restricked to the Elect. If the Latter be said, then this dying in our stead,
is really but a dying for our good, which the Socinians grant.

3. When he says, and obeyed in our Nature, this, in our Nature, must either
be the some with in our stead, which he mentioned before; or some thing
different, if the same, then it seems, when he said, Christ suffered in our
stead, his meaning only was, that Christ suffered in our Nature. And will not
all Socinians grant, that Christ Suffered thus in our stead, that is, in our
Nature? If different, I would know, why he puts such a difference betwixt
Christ's Suffering and His obeying, seeing both belonged to that Law (as he
speaks in the foregoing words) which was His Covenant Conditions; and both
were Satisfactory and Meritorious, though the one more primarily Satisfactory,
and the other more primarily meritorious?

4. When he says, That Christ obeyed in our Nature, that perfection of
obedience might not be necessary to our justification, I would ask, if this end
did, or could flow from, or follow upon Christ's Obedience, merely because it
was performed in our Nature? Had we no other Interest, or ground of Interest in
it, or in Him, but that it was performed in our Nature? or did all the Benefit
and Advantage, that we received, or are to receive thereby, flow from it merely
upon this account, that it was performed in our Nature?

5. As to this end of Christ's obeying viz. that perfection of obedience might
not be necessary to our justification, I suppose his meaning is, that this
perfection of obedience might not be required of us, in order to justification:
but yet he does not say (as he should) that this was our debt; and that Christ
paid this perfect obedience as our debt, in order to life: for if he shall say
this, then it will follow, that this payment must, in Law-sense, be imputed to
those, for whom it was paid. How ever these words do plainly insinuat, that
howbeit Christ obeyed in our Nature: that perfection of obedience might not be
necessary to our justification; yet notwithstanding an Imperfect Obedience
might be accounted necessary to our justification; and thus the New Covenant be
supposed to be of the same kind and Spece with the old; and Christ be supposed
to have obeyed, only that the terms of the Old Covenant might be abated, as to
the rigor of perfection of obedience required.

6. That Christ Obeyed and Suffered in the person of a Mediator and Sponsor,
(as he says) that is, that person God-Man, who was Mediator and Sponsor, did
obey and suffer, is very true; but notwithstanding hereof, yea so much the
rather, he obeyed and suffered, as a Public Person, that is, for others, and
not for Himself personally considered. And therefore those, for whom He thus
Obeyed and Suffered, must, in a just and consequent sense, be accounted as
Obeying and Suffering in Him, that is, there was such a Relation betwixt this
Mediator, or Surety, and those, for whom He was a Mediator and Surety (in the
purpose and design of God appointing Christ hereunto, and in the purpose and
design of Christ undertaking, and actually performing what He undertook) as
gave them fundamentally another Interest in His Obedience and Suffering, then
others had, or could have, to and for whom He was no Mediator and Sponsor.

7. Whence Christ may be said to have Obeyed and Suffered legally, in the
person of, and as representing others; that is, in the construction of the Law
and Lawgiver, not for Himself, but for others, in whose Law-place He did
substitute Himself, undertaking their debt, in order to their Redemption. And
though Believers, who now come to have an actual Interest in Christ, cannot be
said to have done all this in and by Him, that is, as by their delegat and
Servant (as Mr. Baxter else where expresses it) yet they may be said to have
done it in and by Him, Civilly, juridically or legally, as the debtor is by Law
said to have Satisfied the Creditor, in and by the Surety, who yet physically
paid the debt by himself only, but legally in the person of the debtor, the
debtor and Surety being in Law-consideration, but as one person, in so far as,
they concur in, and are both obliged by, one and the same Obligation; just as
the heir succeding in jus defuncti, is eatenus repute and said to be una and
eadem persona with him; whence it is evident, that one payment made by either
must be accounted as made by both, and does in effect dissolve the whole
obligation; and the consequently the debtor is as effectually and justly
absolved from all charge or danger of Law, upon the account of that debt, as if
he had paid the money out of his own purse. But whether the term of Morally,
or Civilly, or Legally, or the like, be most apposite, is of no great weight to
occasion a debate, especially seeing the thing it self is so well known to all,
who know what it is to have a friend paying their debt, or Satisfying the
Creditor for them, and in their behalf; and thereupon bringing them out of
prison. Though I know, the case of pecuniary debts does not in all things
quadrate with our case; yet it is sufficient to explicat what we are now upon.

8. We grant, That God reputeth the thing to be, as it is; and therefore it is
very true, that God reputeth Christ to have obeyed and suffered, as being in
the Law-place of others, and as making Satisfaction for them; and them, for
whom He satisfied, to be in another manner in Him, than any others whatever.

9. He adds, and so far imputes Christ's Righteousness, as that it is
reputed by Him, the true Meritorious cause of our justification. But it was
reputed and estimate so to be, before this Imputation; for it was accepted as
such: therefore Imputation must denote something more, than this Reputation,
even a reckoning of it (as it were) now upon their Scoce, and accounting it
theirs, or them to have a full, special and actual Interest therein, in order
to their justification and absolution from the charge of guilt and death
brought in against them, whereby they are accounted and reckoned to be
Righteous, because of that Imputation, and therefore pronounced such in
justification: so that now it is the objectum formal^, or the ratio formales
objectiva of our justification.

10. When he adds and that for it God makes a Covenant of Grace, if those
words mean, that in this also Christ's Righteousness is said to be imputed,
then, it seems, it is equally imputed unto all Adam's poste^ity: for with
him, all are comprehended within this Covenant. But this were as much as to
say, it is imputed to none in particular. Moreover, it may be thought that this
is explicative of what went immediately before: and so Christ's righteousness
shall be repute the true Meritorius Cause of our justification, in that it was
the Meritorious cause of the Covenant of Grace: now hereby the immediate ground
of justification will be the Gospel-righteousness, he speaks of, that is our
performance of the conditions of the New Covenant of Grace; and Christ's
Merits, Satisfaction and Righteousness shall be only a remote ground. But we
shall show hereafter, how groundless it to say. That Christ procured the New
Covenant by His Merits and Satisfaction.

11. He says, in which (i.e. Covenant of Grace) He freely gives Christ,
pardon and Life, to all that accept the gift, as it is. That all these are
holdforth in the Covenant, and that such as receive Christ, receive pardon and
Life, is true. But what is that, to accept the gift, as it is? and what is
meaned by this gift?

12. He adds, so that the accepters are by this Covenant and Gift as surely
justified and saved by Christ's Righteousness, as if they had obeyed and
Satisfied themselves. But this is not by virtue of any immediate of that
Righteousness unto them, whereby they are looked upon as Righteous in the sight
of God; but by virtue of faith, whereby the gift is accepted, that is offered
in the Covenant, which faith is indeed immediately imputed to them according to
him, and reputed their Gospel-righteousness, and they thereupon are reputed
Righteous, and so justified, as such: for the Righteousness of Christ is only
imputed, in that it is reputed the meritorious cause of the New Covenant.

13. Though Christ has not merited, that we shall have grace to fulfill the
Law ourselves etc. Yet he will say, that Christ has merited, that faith shall
be the Condition of the New Covenant, and consequently, that we may stand
before God, even as the great Law giver, and so before His Law also, in that
Gospel-righteousness (as he calls it) of our own, which will justify us.

14. In end, when he says, the Covenant of grace does pardon and give right to
Life for Christ's Merits, I suppose (because of what is already observed) it
is only upon the account that Christ's Me^ites have purchased this Covenant;
and not because they become our Immediate Righteousness, whereupon we are
justified and have pardon: and he should rather say, conform to what went
before, that this Covenant does Pardon and give Right to Life, for faith, our
Gospel-righteousness, the condition thereof.

These are my Exceptions against this supposed healing middle way; and the
grounds why I cannot acquiesce therein, as the right way. He tells us again
page 45. Note 3. That it is ordinarily agreed by Protestants, that Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us, in the same sense, as our sins are said to be
imputed to Him. And to this I also heartily acquiesce; and hence inferie. That
as Christ was made sin by that Imputation, so we are made righteous by virtue
of this Imputation: as our sins were laid on Him (as the sins of the people
were laid on the escape goat, the type) so His Righteousness is put on us, as He
came in our Law-place, so we come in His: As our sins imputed to Him were the
immediate procuring cause of His stripes and punishment or suffering; so His
Righteousness imputed to us is the Immediate procuring cause of our
justification etc. As Christ was repute legally or juridically, though not
inherently, a sinner, because of this Imputation of our sins to Him, and
therefore dealt with, punished and chastened, as if He had been a real sinner,
because He stood in our Law-place; to His Righteousness being imputed to us, we
are repute legally and juridically, though not inherently; Righteous, and
thereupon are dealt with, justified and accepted etc. as if we had been really
Righreous, because now standing in His Law-place. So that if Mr. Baxter will
stand to this, that ordinarily protestants agree unto, I am fully Satisfied:
and had he done so from the beginning, many of his discourses would have been
forborne: And whether he, or others who own what protestants agree unto, be to
be reckoned among the self conceited wranglers, as he speaks in the following
page, indifferent men may judge: and I conceive, if he would yet stand to this,
he should alter that, which he gave us, in the forementioned words, as the
only healing middle way; For that middle way (as he calls it) gives us a far
other sheme, than can be drawn out of this, wherein protestants are commonly
agreed as is obvious.

He tells us Chap. 2. (where he comes to state the question) page 51. that we
must distinguish of Imputation, and gives us six senses thereof; five whereof
are such, as I know not, if even Antinomians did own them. They are these. 1.
To repute us personally to have been the Agents of Christ't Acts, the Subjects
of His Habites and passion, in a physical sense. I know not, who in their wits
would affirm this: and to me, it is not a fit way to end, or clear
controversies, to raise so much dust needlessly, and imagine senses out of our
own heads, as if they were owned and maintained by some, what is the 2? Or to
repute the same formal relation of Righteousness, which was in Christ's Person,
to be in ours, as the Subject. But this is only a consequent of the foregoing
3. (says he) or to repute us to have been the very Subjects of Christ's
Habites and passion, and the Agents of His Acts, in a Political, or Moral sense
(and not a physical) as a man pays a, debt by a Servant, or attornay,
ordelegate. If this be the only meaning of his Political and Moral sense, I
suppose no man will own it either: for no man will say, That Christ was our
Servant, Attornay, or Delegate. The 4. is but a consequent of this; and
consequently, (says he) to repute a double formal Righteousness to result from
the said habites, acts and passions, one to Christ, as the Natural Subject and
Agent; and another to us, as the Moral, Political or reputed Subject and agent
(and so His formal Righteousnese not to be imputed to us in it self, as ours,
but another to result from the same matter. This is too Philosophical for me to
own, or follow. The 5, is, or else that we are reputed both the agents and
Subjects of the matter of His Righteousness, morally, and also of the formal
Righteousness of Christ himself. All these are but the effuvia of a brain
floteing and swimeing in ill digested Philosophical Notions and School dregs,
and contribute nothing to the clearing of Gospel Truth, which has little or
rather no affinity with aerie Philosophical Notions, but tend manifestly to the
darkening of the same. But now, when all these Philosophical Notions and
Relations are at an end, and we can proceed no further, where is that
Imputation, which is legal, and plain to every ordinary Man viz whereby the
Satisfaction made to a judge and Governor for a crime committed, by the
delinquen'ts friend; or that payment and Satisfaction made to the creditor, for
the debtor, by a friend Interposing, is in Law-sense accounted the delinquent's
and debtor's; and he as really and effectually delivevered out of prison
therefore, as if he had made Satisfaction in his own proper person, or had paid
the sum out if his own Substance? If any Philosopher, after Mr. Baxter's
manner here, should, with such Philosophical Whimseyes, (I call them so, for
they are no other in this case) labor to disprove any such Imputation, and
say, it must be in one of those five senses etc. would not any country man
smille at this*

But now let us see Mr. Baxter's sixth sense, wherein he grants the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness. Or else (says he) by Imputation is meant here, that
Christ being truly reputed to have taken on the Nature of sinful Man, and
become an Head for all true Believers, in that undertaken Nature and office, in
the person of a Mediator, to have fulfilled all the Law imposed upon him, by
perfect Holiness and obedience, and offering himself on the cross a sacrifice
for our sins, voluntarily suffering in our stead, as if He had been a sinner
(guilty of all our sins) as soon as we believe, we are pardoned, Justified,
Adopted, for the sake and Merits of this Holiness, obedience and Penal
Satisfaction of Christ with as full demonstration of divine Justice, at least,
and more full Demonstration of His wisdom and Mercy, than if we had suffered
our selves what our sins deserved (that is, been damned) or had never sinned.
And so Righteousness is imputed to us, that is, we are accounted or reputed
Righteous (not in relation to the Precept, that is, innocent or sinless, but in
relation to the Retribution, that is, such as have right to impunity and Life)
because Christ's foresaid perfect Holiness, Obedience and Satisfaction,
meritedour pardon and Adoption and the Spirit; or merited the New Covenant, by
which, as an Instrument, Pardon, justification and Adoption are given to
Believers, and the Spirit to be given to Sanctify them; and when we believe,
we are justly reputed such, as have right to all these purchased gifts.

As to this I shall only note a few things (1.) Christ's fulfilling of the Law
imposed on Him, does not hinder, but that He paid our debt, and so came in our
Law-place, and substitute Himself in our room, to do what we should have done
and to suffer what we should have suffered according to the Law, in all the
essentials and Substantials of that punishment: for had He not done this, He
could not be said to have suffered in our stead: for he only suffers in the
room and stead of another, who suffers what that other should have suffered.
If one be condemned to suffer death, another that suffers only Imprisonment
for his delivery, cannot be said to suffer in this stead, but only for his
cause and good, as the Socinians say, Christ suffered for us. (2.) Christ not
only suffered in our stead, as if he had been a sinner and guilty, but as
sinner legally and juridically guilty, having sins imputed to Him, though He
was most free of all sin inherently, and knew it not: and the reason is
manifest; for otherwise Divine justice should not have shined forth in His
sufferings, it being no Demonstration of justice to punish one, who neither
inherently, nor Imputatively and legally, is or can be accounted and reputed a
sinner. (3.) We cannot, with right, be reputed Righteous, except we be either
inherently righteous, or righteous by Imputation; and so legally, juridically,
and in Law-sense righteous, by virtue of the Imputation of the
Surety-righteousness of Christ, our Sponsor. (4.) Righteousness must properly
respect the Commands and Prohibitions of the Law, and but secondarily the
Retribution, if not most Improperly; as unrighteousness is in reference to the
Law, as commanding or forbidding, and very improperly attributed to any in
reference to the punishment threatened. And therefore, if we be accounted
Righteousness, it must be in relation to the precept, at least, in the first
place: Nor can we be accounted Righteous, in reference to the Retribution, that
is, have a Right to Impunity and life, in the sight of God, who judges and
reputeth according to equity and right, unless we be first accounted Righteous,
in reference to the precept; for this is the only just and legal foundation of
the other. (5.) Upon this it does not follow that we are Innocent or sinless
inherently, far less, that we never transgressed; but on the contrary, it
clearly says, that we were sinners; but now are legally, or juridically
innocent and sinless by the Imputation of the side jussorie Righteousness of
Christ; and therefore are not obnoxious to the penalty, or to punishment; but
have right to Impunity and life. (6.) When he speaks of what Christ merited,
he expresses himself dubiously, not being positively clear, whether Christ
merited our pardon etc. or the New Covenant: and the disjunctive particle Or,
says He did not merit both, in his judgment: but before, we heard him plainly
affirming, that Christ merited the New Covenant, and consequently He did not
purchase pardon, Adoption and the Spirit to any immediately, but only mediatly,
in purchasing the Covenant, which promises these to such, as perform the
Conditions thereof. (7.) By this way, Believers are repute such, as have right
to all these purchased gifts, not immediately by virtue of Christ's Merits and
righteousness, imputed to them and bestowed upon them, but by virtue of their
being inherently Righteous with that Gospel-righteousness, faith, which is the
potestative Condition of the Covenant, and is now imputed to them, and
accounted their Righteousness, according to his judgment.

Speaking afterward page 55. of Christ, as an Head and Root, he tells us, that
He was no Natural Root or Head; which is undeniable; Yet He was a Supernatural
and Political Head. But he says, He was not actually such an Head to the
Redeemed, when He obeyed and suffered; but as an Head by Aptitude, office,
power and Virtue. Ans. It is true, as to such, as were not then Believers, He
was not a Supernatural Head actually, that is, by communicating actually
Physical and supernatural influences of Spiritual life: Yet He was, as to all
given to Him, actually a Political Head, or an Head in a Political sense, that
is, by God's Appointment, and His own voluntary undertaking, He obeyed and
Suffered for them, and in their stead; paying their debt answering for all that
the justice and the Law did require of them, and so purchasing all Grace and
Glory for them, to be certainly bestowed in due time. In this respect, that
must be denied, which he adds ( n. 12.) Therefore they were not Christ's
members Political, when He obeyed and dyed: for they may as well be said, to
have been then His members Political, as some, not yet within the sold, but
that were to be brought in, and were to hear His voice, were by Himself called
His sheep Ioh. 10: 16. Whence, I pray, come the I^fluences, whereby they are
made to believe, if not from Him, as their Political-head, or Surety-head,
standing engaged for them? But possibly the ambiguous use of the word Political
may occasion his mistake here.

A Natural Head (says he n. 14.) being but a part of a person, what it does,
the Person does. But seeing a contracted Head and all the members of his Body
contracted, or Politic, are every one a distinct person, it follows not,
that each person did really, or reputatively what the head did. Nay, it is a
good consequence, that if he did it, as an head, they did it not (numerically)
as head or members. Ans. Passing the Impropriety of the expression contracted
head, whereby, it is like, he means a Conventional Head. I say, Though a
Conventional Head and all the members of that Body, be every one a distinct
person Physically; Yet considered as such, they are all but one person
Politically and in Law-sense: and so in Law-sense and Politically (as all
lawyers know, and even Men of Common sense can acknowbedge) every distinct
Physical person is supposed to have done what their Political Head and
Representative has done, as such. And though it be a good consequence, that if
the Head did it, as an Head, they in their in their Physical persons did it
not: Yet it were a ridiculous Consequence, to say, They therefore, as Political
Members of that Political conventional body, did it not viz Politically (not
Physically, or numerically.

Christ (says he n. 15.) suffered and obeyed in the Person of the Mediator,
between God and Man, and as a subject to the Law of Mediation. Ans. Though He
suffered in the Physical Person of the Mediator; Yet because Suffering and
obeying as a Mediator and Surety. He Suffered and obeyed, as a Political Head,
and in a Political person. (2.) Though He was Subject to the Law of Mediation;
Yet by virtue of that same Law of Mediation, He was subject to the Law, under
which we were, both as to its Duty and Penalty: for Suffering and obeying, as a
Mediator and Surety, He, in Suffering and obeying, did pay out debt, for He
came into our Law-place.

Christ may be said (says he n. 16.) to suffer, in the person of a sinner, as
it means His own person, reputed and used as a sinner, by His persecutors;
and as He was one, who stood before God, as Undertaker, to suffer for man's
sins. Ans. Seeing He was one, who stood before God, as an Undertaker for
sinners; and not only to suffer for man's sin, did he not suffer as a sinner
(not inherently, but) legally and juridically? and did He not represent and
stand in the room of sinners, as their Political Head and Representative? These
things can not be handsomely, with any show of reason, contradicted, or denied.
Nay, himself adds (n. 17. page 56.) that Christ suffered in the place and
stead of sinners, that they might be d^livered, though in the Person a Sponsor.
Whence we see, that though He suffered in the person of a Sponsor. Physically
taken; Yet He suffered in the person of others, Politically and legally,
because He suffered as a Sponsor, in their stead, that they might certainly
and eventually be delivered, and not possibly only.

But then (n. 18.) he comes to an Accommodation, saying, When we are agreed
that the person of the Sponsor and of every particular sinner are diverse (if
the word Person be here understood in a Physical, or Numerical sense, and the
word sinners be understood of the Elect only, I agree) and that Christ had not
suffered, if we had not sinned: (true) and that he as a Sponser, suffered in
our stead, and so bore the punishment; which not He, but we deserved (add
also, and obeyed, and I agree: If any will here, in stead of a Mediator, or
Sponsor, call Him our Representative, and say, that He suffered even in all our
persons reputatively, not simpliciter, but secundum quid, and in tantum only,
that is, not representing our persons simply and in all respects, and to all
ends, but only so far as to be a Sacrifice for our sins, and suffer in our
place and stead, what He suffered, we take this to be but lis de nomine. And
why is not His obeying also added? But again, if He suffered, as a Mediator
and Sponsor, in our place and stead, He must needs have been our
Political-Representative, according as we use to speak and understand these
terms; and so must have suffered in all our persons reputatively, so far as
was necessary to our Redemption and Salvation, and for more we enquire not. And
seeing this is what the orthodox assert, Mr. Baxter is much to be blamed, for
troubling the church so long by his opposition hereunto, and his own new
Notions.

He proceeds (n. 19.) Christ did not suffer, strictly, simply, absolutely, in
the person of any one Elect sinner, much less in the millions of Persons of
them all in Law-sense, or in God's esteem; God did not esteem Christ to be,
Naturally, or as an absolute Representer, david, Manasseh, Paul, and every such
other sinner, but only a Mediator, that suffered in their stead. Ans. Till we
understand what is meant by these terms, Strickly, Simply and Absolutely, we
cannot know well what to say to this. We grant, He suffered in the person of no
Elect sinner, so as to become David, Manasseh etc. Yet, when He suffered in
their stead, as Mediator and Surety, both in Law-sense, and in God's esteem, He
did represent them; and did and suffered what He did and suffered, as a Surety
for them, and as representing their Persons, in a Law-sense and Politically,
simply and absolutely, to all ends necessary for their Redemption and Salvation.

He adds (n. 20.) God did make Christ to be sin for us, that is, a Sacrifice
for our sins, and one that by man was reputed, and by God and Man was used, as
sinners are and deserve to be. Ans. Christ could not be made a Sacrific for
sin, till He had the guilt of sin laid upon Him by Imputation, as the
Sacrifices of old had typically. His being reputed such, and handled as such by
man, is of no consideration here: And by God He could not be used, as a sinner,
or as sinners are and deserve to be, unless our sins had been first caused to
meet upon Him, and imputed to Him, to the end, He might properly be said to
Suffer and become a Sacrifice for sin. We say with him (n. 23.) that God did
not suppose or repute Christ to have committed all, or any of the sins, which
we all committed; Nor to have had all the wickedness in His Nature which was in
ours; nor to have deserved what we did deserve; nor did in this proper sense
impute our sins to Christ. For indeed this had not been in a prope sense, to
impute our sins to Him, but plainly to confound His Physical person with ours;
and to speak thus, I should account to be horrid blasphemy: Yet it may be and
must be said, that Christ, being made sin for us, and made to suffer for sin,
in the room of sinners, had their sins laid upon Him; and so, was a sinner, not
Inherently but legally by Imputation; that is, had the guilt of our sins, in
order to punishment, imputed to Him, and He put to suffer for that guilt, or
because a sinner by Imputation. And when the Scripture says, that God made
Christ sin for us 2 Cor. 5: 21. and Laid on Him the iniquity of us all, Esai.
55: 6. It is as emphatick (and to me more) as to say, God did impute our sin to
Christ, which he some-way excepteth against (n. 23. page 57.)

He adds (n. 26. page 58.) Though Christ suffered in our stead, and in a
large sense, to certain uses, and in some respects, as the Representer, or in
the persons of Sinners: yet did He not so far represent their persons, in His
habitual Holiness and actual obedience, (no not in the obedience of His
Suffering) as He did in the Suffering it self. He obeyed not in the person of a
sinner, much less of millions of sinners, which were to say, in the person of
sinners, he never sinned. He suffered to save us from suffering; but He obeyed
not to save us from obeying, but to bring us to obedience: yet His perfection
of obedience had this end, that perfect obedience might not be necessary in us
to our justification and Salvation. Ans. Seeing Christ was appointed Mediator
and Sponsor to take on man's debt and come in his Law-place, what reason can be
given, why He should not, as well be said to represent them, in the paying of
the one part of that debt, as in the paying of the other? We were under the Law
and obliged to perform perfect obedience, in order to the obtaining of the
reward promised; and because of sin we were under the Curse. Now when the
Surety come to pay our whole debt, He did as much, and as well represent us, in
paying of and in performing obedience, as in Suffering. And why may we not say,
that He obeyed in the juridical and Law person of a sinner, as well as that He
suffered? Though I should not use such improper and unusual expressions, as Mr.
Baxter here does; yet I must tell him, That Christ's obeying in the person of a
sinner, says no more than that, He being the person representing sinners, His
obeying was and is repute, in Law-sense, their obeying. He Suffered, it is
true, to save us from suffering of the Curse of the Law; But Mr. Baxter will
not say, that He suffered to save us from all Suffering: He obeyed, it is true,
to bring us to obedience, as He died also for that end, that we might have the
Sanctifying Spirit bestowed upon us: yet notwithstanding He obeyed to save us
from obeying viz. after that manner, that we were obliged to obey under the old
Covenant, that is to obey perfectly, or never enjoy the crown, and to obey for
that end, that we might enjoy the crown, as the legal reward of and due debt
for our labor. And seeing Mr. Baxter grants in the following words, that
Christ's perfect obedience had this end, that perfect obedience might not be
necessary in us to our justification; why may he not say, that to certain
uses, and in some respects, Christ obeyed, to save us from obeying? Or why will
he not say, that He obeyed for us, that we, who could not obey of our selves,
might be repute to have obeyed perfectly in Him? This is all we desire.

He says next (n. 27.) It was not we our selves, who did perfectly obey, or
were perfectly holy, or suffered for sin, in the person of Christ, or by Him:
nor did me (naturally, or morally) merit our own Salvation by obeying in
Christ: nor did we satisfy God's justice for our sins, nor purchase pardon or
Salvation to ourselves, by our suffering in and by Christ. Ans. However, Christ
doing all this for us, as our Sponsor and Surety, we are so taken-in in a
Law-sense, that the same is imputed unto us, and we enjoy the fruits thereof,
pardon and Salvation; no less than if we had done and suffered all in our own
physical persons.

As to what he says (n. 29, 30.) it is nothing to the purpose (and therefore I
shall not set down his words) for we are not here speaking of Relations and
Accidents, physically, or metaphysicall rather considered, which cannot pass
from one Subject to another: nor do we speak of Christ, while speaking of the
Imputation of His Righteousness, physically considered, but politically and
legally, as a Sponsor and Surety some way representing us. I assent to him,
that the meaning of this Imputation is not, That we ourselves, in person,
truly had the habites, which Christ had, and did all that Christ did, and
suffered all that he suffered, as by an Instrument, or legal Representer of our
persons, in all this, meaning that we in our physical persons should have done
all this, by Him, as our physical Instrument. But why He adds here, or legal
Representer, unless he mean thereby that which elsewhere he has expressed to
be, as our delegat, or Servant, I know not. And however it seems not to me
appositely here annexed, if ingenuous and plain dealing be designed. But there
is another sense, in which he will yield to Imputation, and he thinks there
cannot be a third. Let us hear what this other sense is.

That Christ's Satisfaction (says he) Righteousness and the Habites, Acts and
Sufferings, in which it lay, are imputed to us, and made ours, not rigidly in
the very thing it self, but in the effects and benefits. Ans. But if he shall
yield to no other Imputation, than this, he shall grant no Imputation: for that
Imputation, as to effects, is no Imputation at all: unless the meritorious
cause be imputed, in order to the receiving of these Effects, there is nothing
imputed; for they Effects are never said to be imputed. There is therefore a
Third sense, wherein neither Christ's Righteousness, that is, His Habites, Acts
and Sufferings are said to be physically translated, and put in us, or upon us;
nor are they said to be Imputed to us merely in their Effects; as Socinians
say; but wherein Christ's Surety-righteousness, consisting in His Obedience and
Suffering, is in a Law-sense, made over to believers, and put upon their score,
and now accounted theirs; and they, because thereof, accounted Righteous,
legally and juridically; and have therefore the Effects bestowed on them. This
being so obvious, I wonder that Mr. Baxter cannot see it. When a debtor is
lying in prison, for debt, and a friend comes and Satisfies the creditor for
him by paying the sum, in his place and stead; the Law does not impute that
payment to the debtor merely in the effects; but imputes the payment it self,
not in its Physical acceptance, as if it judged that he was the man, that in
his own Physical person, told the money with his own hands, and brought it out
of his own purse, as the other did, but) in its legal force, virtue, and
efficary, unto him, and accounted him, in this Legal sense, to be no more a
debtor unto the creditor; and therefore one that has right to his liberty, and
must therefore be set free from prison. So, in our case, the Righteousness of
Christ, in a legal sense, as to its efficary and virtue, is made over to the
Believer, and he thereupon is accounted Righteous, and no more a debtor, and
therefore free of the Penalty. Further, Although he say, that Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us in the Effects; Yet he knows, that that is (in
his judgment) but very remotely; and that really these effects are more
proximely the effects of Faith, which he calls our Gospel-righteousness; and
that the Immediate effect and product of Christ's Righteousness is the New
Covenant; and this New Covenant being made with all Mankind (as he thinks)
Christ's Righteousness is, in this immediate Effect, imputed to all flesh,
Reprobat, as well as Elect. And this is, in part, cleared from the words
Immediately following, when he says, In as much, as we are as really pardoned,
justified, Adopted by them, as the Meritorious Cause by the Instrumentality of
the Covenants Donation, as if we ourselves had done and suffered all that
Christ did. For this Instrumentality of the Covenant includes the performance
of the Condition thereof, i. e. faith; and this Faith is properly imputed for
Righteousness, as he says: And therefore, as the Covenant is the Effect of the
merits of Christ; so pardon and Salvation must be the Effects of Faith; and
the Effects of Christ's Righteousness only, in that he did procure the
Covenant, which conveyeth these to us, upon Condition of our performing of this
faith, which is therefore called, by him, our Gospel-Righteousness.

He gives us next four ways (n. 31. page 60.) wherein the Lord is said to be
our Righteousness (an Expression that does emphatically and more than
sufficiently express the meaning of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness)
1. In that (says he) He is the meritorious cause of the pardon of all our
sins, and our full justification, Adoption and Right to glory: and by His
Satisfaction and Merits only our justification by the Covenant of Grace,
against the Curse of the Law works, is purchased. Ans. He cannot be said, by
him, to be the Meritorious Cause of pardon, etc. But in as far as He is the
Meritorious cause of the Covenant, in which these benefits are promised, upon
Condition of faith, our Gospel-righteousness, which properly and only is our
Imputed Righteousness, according to him; and so Christ is our Righteousness, in
meriting that faith shall be repute our Gospel-righteousness in order to our
obtaining of Pardon and Right to glory. But moreover, where is our
Righteousness? For Pardon is no Righteousness; neither is justification,
Adoption, or Right to Glory properly a Righteousness; But do presuppose a
Righteousness, after which we are enquiring, and cannot find that Christ is
made to be that to us; and consequently, either faith must be it, or there is
none.

The other senses are 2. In that He is the legislator, Testator and donor of
our Pardon and justification by this new Covenant. 3. In that He is the Head of
Influx, King and Intercessour, by whom the Spirit is given to Sanctify us to
God, and cause us sincerely perform the Conditions of the Justifying Covenant.
4. In that He i^ the righteous judge and justifier of Believers by sentence of
judgment. Ans. All these three will make the Father to be our Righteousness, as
well as the Son: for He is legislator; He draws to the Son and sends the
Spirit to Sanctify us, and He judges by the Son and justifies. (2.) But none
of these, nor all of these give us the true Import of that glorious Name,
according to the true scope of the place Ier. 23: 6. of which we have spoken
above.

In like manner (n. 32.) he gives us four senses of these words, we are made
the Righteousness of God in Him. The 1. is, In that, as he was used like a
sinner for us (But not esteemed one by God) so we are used like innocent
persons, so far as to be saved by Him. Ans. As He was used by God like a
sinner, so was He legally accounted a sinner, otherwise God would not have used
Him as a sinner. Therefore if we be used like innocent persons, we must be in
God's esteem, legally and juridically innocent, through Christ's Righteousness
imputed; and so must be saved by Him. The 2. is, In that through His Merits,
and upon our union with Him, when we believe and consent to Hi^ Covenant, we
are pardoned and justified, and so made Righteous really, that is such, as are
not to be condemned, but glorified. Ans As I said, neither pardon, nor
justification makes us Righteous, but suppose us to be Righteous; and
therefore, in justification we are declared and pronounced Righteous, and
thereupon pardoned. Moreover, all our Righteousness, that we have, in order to
justification and pardon, is, according to Mr. Baxter, our Faith, which is, and
is reputed to be, our Gospel Righteousness; and is said to be properly Imputed
to us: and thus Christ suffered in our stead, that our faith might be accounted
our Righteousness. Though pardon will take away condemnation yet (as we have
cleared above) more must be had, in order to Glorification. His 3. and 4. are.
In that the divine Nature and Inherent Righteousness are for His merits. In
that God's justice and holiness, truth, wisdom and mercy are all wonderfully
Demonstrated, in this way of Pardoning and justifying of sinners by Christ.
Ans. This last has no ground, as the sense of the words; And as for the. 3.
Before he make it the sense of the place. 2 Cor. 5: 21. he must say, That
Christ was a sinner inherently (which were blasphemy) for otherwise that
beautiful correspondence, that is betwixt the First and the Last part of the
verse, must be laid a side, contrary to the manifest scope of the place.

He tells us (n. 36. page 61.) It is an error, contrary to the scope of the
Gospel, to say, that the Law of Works, or of Innocence, does justify us, as
performed either by our selves, or by Christ: for that Law condemns and
curses us; and we are not efficiently justified by it, but from, or against
it. Ans. I shall not say, that we are justified by the Law of works
efficiently; yet I hope, Mr. Baxter will not say, that upon the fall, that Law,
or Covenant was quite abolished and annulled; and if it was only disp^nsed
with, in order to the admitting of a Surety, which it did not provide* or give
place to, in its primitive Institution, we may saifly say, That it must be
satisfied both as to the commands, and as to the penalty, ere we can escape
wrath and obtain Life: for this Law said (as himself confesses page 63.) Obey
Perfectly and Live, sin and dye. And though it condemn and curse us sinners;
Yet it has nothing to say against our Surety; nor against any clothed with His
Surety-righteousness, whereby all the demands of this Law and Covenant were
Satisfied.

Hence he infers (n. 37.) Therefore, we have no Righteousness, in Reality,
or Reputation formally ours, which consists in a conformity to the preceptive
part of the Law of Innocence: we are not reputed Innocent; But only a
Righteousness, which consists in Pardon of all sin, and right to Life (with
sincere performance of the condition of the Covenant of Grace, that is, true
faith) Ans. If by formally ours, he mean Inherently ours, I grant what he here
says: but I deny it, if by formally ours, he mean that, by which we may be
denominated formally Righteous: for by Imputation we have a Righteousness,
whereby we are formally righteous, legally and Juridically; and this
Righteousness must needs consist in conformity to the Laws commands. It is
true, we are not repute inherently Innocent; Yet we are repute non-sinners
legally; and hence comes our Pardon and Right to Life, which of it self is no
Righteousness, but the Result of a Righteousness. So that with him Believers
have no Righteousness, in order to justification, but faith, the Gospel
Righteousness, as was said above, and this he says here in effect, and yet
more plainly and fully page 64.

He adds (n. 38. page 62.) our Pardon puts not away our guilt of fact or
fault, but our guilt of and obligation to punishment. God does not repute us
such, as neversinned, or such, as by our Innocence merited heaven; but such as
are not to be damned but to beglorified, because pardoned and Adopted, through
the Satisfaction and merits of Christ. Ans. Though pardon, as pardon, will do
no more, than he here grants; Yet Righteousness and justification
presupposing Righteousness will take away the Reatum culpae; not as if it would
make us such as never sinned, for that is Impossible; but because by
Righteousness imputed, we are now reputed sinless Legally, that is, not guilty
of the fact in order to punishment, and this must be, that we may not only not
be damned, but may be glorifeed, according to the Constitution, that said, Obey
perfectly and live. And though now every pardoned man shall be glorified; Yet
that is not merely and formally upon the account of Pardon; but because no man
is pardoned, till he have the compleet Righteousness of Christ, consisting in
obedience and i^ Suffering, imputed to him, whereby beside pardon, he obtains
a right to glory.

He comes to clear the matter of Imputation of Christ's Righteouss, by the
Imputation of Adam's sin, which is a good Medium, the Apostle going before us
herein Romans 5. And though he says somethings (n. 41. p. 65.) wherewith I am
not Satisfied, yet I pass, because not much to our present purpose, and come
to (n. 42. p. 66.) where he says, As Adam was an head by Nature, and therefore
conveyed guilt by Natural Generation: so Christ is a Head (not by nature, but)
by Sacred contract, and therefore conveyeth right to pardon. Adoption and
Salvation, not by Generation, but by Contract, or Donation. So that what was to
be Naturally in Adam, seminally and virtually, though not personally in
existence; even that it is, in order to our benefit by Him, to be in Christ by
contract, or the New Covenant, virtually, though not in personal existence,
when the Covenant was made. Ans. As Adam was an Head by Nature, so was he by
Covenant; and as Christ is an head by Covenant, so is He an Head by
supernatural Influences, and conveyeth His blessings by Regeneration, as well
as by Covenant; And therefore what was to be Naturally in Adam, seminally and
virtually, though not personally in existence, that is, to be in Christ by
supernatural Regeneration virtually. And as his Effects of Adam's fall are
conveyed by Natural generation, so that we are made partakers thereof actually,
by actual partaking of our Natural being; so the Effects of Christ's
Righteousness are conveyed by Spiritual Regeneration, and we are actually made
partakers thereof, when we partake of this Spiritual being.

He proceeds (n.43.) They therefore that look upon justification, or
Righteousness, as coming to us immediately by Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us, without the Instrumental Intervention, and conveyance or
Collation by this deed of Gift, or Covenant, do confound themselves, by
confounding and overlooking the causes of justification. That which Christ did
by His merits, was to procure the New Covenant. Ans. Though the Instrumental
Intervention of a Covenant be acknowledged; Yet Righteousness must come to us
immediately by Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; For His Righteousness
imputed is our Righteousness, and is only that Righteousness, whereby we become
formally Righteous in order to justification. The difference lies here betwixt
us: Mr. Baxter thinks, tha^ Christ's Righteousness is imputed, in that it
purchased the New Covenant (and consequently is euqlly imputed to all; for the
Covenant, with him, is equally made with all) and in and through the new
Covenant, which conveyeth pardon and life to such, as perform the conditions
thereof, i.e. believe, and so are inherently Righteous, these benefits are
bestowed; and so Christ's Righteousness is not the immediate ground of our
justification and Right to Glory; but our own Personal Righteousness, Faith,
called our Gospel-righteousness: Christ's Righteousness is only the immediate
ground of the Covenant, being the Meritorious cause thereof; and the immediate
ground, whereupon our faith is so far advanced. But our judgment is, that
though Christ convey the blessings purchased covenantwayes, yet the Covenant it
self is not purchased by His Merits; and the way of conveyance is this, that
He first by His Spirit works the soul up to faith in Christ, and then
communicates Christ and His Righteousness unto the believer; and upon that
immediate ground of Christ's Imputed Surety-righteousness, whereupon they become
Righteous, in the sight of God, they are justified, pardoned and receive a
right to the Crown. And though the difference here may appear to be but small,
yet to me it is such, that by Mr. Baxter's way, the whole frame of the Gospel
is changed; and such, as hold it, do in my judgment, not only confound, but
alter the causes of justification. If that, which Christ did by His Merits,
was to procure the New Covenant, what was there in Adam, that can be said to
answer this, or hold correspondence with it? With us, the Parallel runs
smoothly and clearly, thus. As by virtue of first Covenant, whereof Adam was
the head, engaging for all his Natural Posterity, so soon as they partake of
Nature, and thereby become actual members of that Political Body, partake of
Adam's guilt, or breach of the Covenant, which is imputed to them; and there
upon share of the consequences thereof, as immediately resulting therefrom, to
wit, the corruption of the whole Nature, Privative and positive, wrath and the
curse etc. This himself asserteth page 34. So by virtue of the Second Covenant,
whereof Christ, the Second Adam is Head, engaging for all His Spiritual
posterity, they, so soon as they come to partake of His spiritual Nature, and
so become members of His mystical body (which is by a Phisical, supernatural
operation, conveyed morally and Covenant ways, according to the Good pleasure
of His will, and according to His wisdom, who does all things well and wisely)
are made partakers of Christ's Righteousness, which is imputed unto them; and
thereupon do share of the Consequences, which do immediately result theref^om,
viz. of justification, pardon, Adoption and Right to Glory.

He adds (n. 44.) Though the person of the Mediator be not really, or
reputatively, the very person of each sinner (nor so many persons as there are
sinners, or believers) yet it does belong to the person of the Mediator, so far
(limitedly) to bear the person of a sinner, and to stand in the place of the
persons of all sinners, as to bear the punishment they deserved, and to suffer
for their sins. Ans. We do not imagine, that the Physical person of the
Mediator is, either really or reputatively, the Physical person of each sinner.
It is enough for us to say, that the Mediator is an Head, Surety and public
person; and so, that He and Believers are one legally and juridically. And we
judge also, that it belongs to the person of the Mediator, being Surety, to
Satifie for the whole debt of these, for whom He is Surety: and therefore must
not only so far stand in the place of sinners, as to Suffer for their sins, and
bear the punishment they deserved; But also give that perfect obedience, which
they were obliged unto, and were not able to perform, or pay.

He grants (n. 45. page 67.) that Morally it may be said, that Christ's
Righteousness was given to us, in that the thing purchased by it was given to
us, as the money, given for the ransom of the Captive, may besaid morally to
be given to the captive, though Physically it begiven to the Conqueror. But
neither this similitude, not yet the other, of a man's being said to give
another so much money, when he gives him the land, bought therewith, do not
come home to the point in hand: for there is a near and closs union betwixt
Christ and Believers, which union is not supposed in these cases. Next Christ
was in our Law-place, and undertook to do what He did, as our Surety; neither
is this supposed in the cases proposed; and again, the benefit here following
viz. Justification etc. does presuppose us to be Righteous, and consequently we
must have a Righteousness imputed, because we have none of our own; for we may
not admit Faith to that high dignity. We have mentioned more apposite and fit
Similitudes above.

I cannot assent to what he says (n. 47. page 68.] That Christ is less
improperly said to have represented all mankind, as newly fallen in Adam, in a
general sense, for the purchasing of the universal gift of pardon and life,
called the New Covenant, than to have represented, in his perfect holiness and
sufferings, every believer, considered as from his first being to his death.
For of His representing all mankind newly fallen in Adam, I read not in the
Scriptures: nor yet of His purchasing the New Covenant. Whether these be not
additions to the word of God, let Mr. Baxter (who often charge others herewith)
consider. Nor do I know, what Scripture warranteth him to say. page 69. That
Christ, the second Adam, is in a sort, the root of Man, as Man, as He is the
Redeemer of Nature it self from destruction; Nor what truth can be in it,
unless he think to play upon the word, in a sort.

He seems to come nearer us, when he says (n. 48. p. 70.) The sum of all
lies, in applying the distinction of giving Christ's Righteousness, as such in
it self, and as a Cause of our Righteousness, or in the causality of it; as our
sin is not reputed Christ's sin in it self, and in the culpability of it (for
then it must needs make Christ odious to God) but in its causality of
punishment. So Christ's material or formal Righteousness is not by God reputed
to be properly and absolutely our own in it self as such, but the causality of
it, as it produces such and such effects, Ans. How Christ's Righteousness
should be the cause of our Righteousness, if we speak properly, I know not; for
we are here speaking of Righteousness, in order to justification, and in this
case, I know no other Righteousness, but Christ's Surety-righteousness, imputed
to us, and bestowed upon us: and it is improper to say, that Christ's
Righteousness is the cause of it self, as given to us. But it may be, he
means, that it is the cause of our Faith; and this I grant to be true, but I
deny, that this faith is our Righteousnese, whereupon we are justified, or the
ratio formalis objectiva of our justifications. When we mention the Imputing of
Christ's Righteousness, we mean the Righteousness of Christ it self, not
Physically, but legally and juridically, and that is its worth or legal
causality; not as it produces, but in order that it may produce such Effects.
Our sin is reputed Christ's legally, in its demerite of punishment, or in its
reatus culpae, that He might be legally thereby reus culpae and yet He was not
odious to God, because it was not His Inherently, but only legally and by
Imputation.

Mr. Baxter in his following Chap. 3. fearing, that by all that he had said, he
had not made the state of the controversy plain enough to the unexercised
Reader, goes over it again, in a shorter way, that he may make it as plain,
as possibly he can. And yet, I judge, (such is my dullness) that he never made
the matter more obscure, at least, to the Unexercised Reader, nor possibly
could, than he has done here; for if any man, how understanding so ever shall
understand his Expressions, let be the matter by them, that is not very well
versed both in Aristotle's Logicks or Metaphysics, and the terms thereof, and
in justinian's Laws and the terms thereof, I am far deceived. He that would
understand this plain discovery of the Question, must understand what
Relations are; what Reatus culpae and poenae; what poena damni and sensus; what
cessante capacitate Subdut, what pro-legal Righteousness; what quoad valorem
and quoad ordinem conferendi, and rationem comparativam, What is Terminus and
fundamentum in relations; what is Titulus and fundamentum juris; what causa
fundamenti and donationis, and the like: And if all Unexercised Readers shall
be able to understand this, I doubt: And sure I am, many a poor soul, that
understands nothing of these terms, gets grace of God to understand the thing,
better than all this explication (how plain so ever it be called) shall ever
make him do. And if this be the plainest way, that Mr. Baxter can chose to make
us understand this so necessary and fundamental a truth, I shall never choose
him for my Teacher, as to this. It could therefore tend o no edification, at
least unto his Unexperienced Readers, (whose edification, I judge, should be
sought by us all, in handling of this matter) to fall upon any examination of,
or debate with him about what he has here said, seeing it would necessarily end
in a debate about logical and Law terms; which I shall rather leave to others,
who have delight therein. And beside, the matter it self, delivered by him in
more plain and intelligible terms, (as I judge) both to exercised and more
unexercised Readers, is already examined.

Notwithstanding (as we have seen) his opinion be different from what the
orthodox do commonly hold, in this question; yet Chap 4. he stateth the
question, against which he purposes to disput, so as he may be sure, none of
these will oppose him: yea and it may be doubted, if Antinomians themselves
will contradict him; for thus he proposes what he denies. That God did so
impute Christ's Righteousness to us, as to repute, or account us to have been
holy with all that habitual holiness, which was in Christ, or to have done all
that He did, in obedience to His Father, or in fulfilling the Law; or to have
suffered all that He suffered, and to have made Satisfaction for our sins, and
merited our own Salvation and justification in and by Christ; or that He was,
did, suffered and merited all this strickly in the person of every sinner, that
is saved. Or that Christ's very individual Righteousness, material or formal,
is so made ours in a strick sense, as that we are Proprietors, Subjects or
Agents of the very thing it self simply and absolutely, as it is distinct from
the effects; or that Christ's individual formal Righteousness is made our
formal personal Righteousness; or that, as to the Effects, we have any such
Righteousness imputed to us, as formally ours, which consists in perfect
Habitual and Actual conformity to the Law of Innocence; that is, that we are
reputed perfectly holy and sinless, and such as shall be justified by the Law
of Innocence, which says, perfectly obey and live, or sin and dye. And the
more to secure himself from all opposition from the orthodox, (...) proposes
this Law (which is but equitable) to all that will answer him (I suppose he
means the Arguments that there follow) that he must keep to his words, and
not alter the sense by leaving any out. I shall therefore be none of his
Opposites here on these terms, but shall consider what he says elsewhere.

CHAP. XIV.
How Christ is our Surety, and what Mr. Baxter says, as to this, is examined.
OUr Lord Jesus being called a Surety in the Scriptures, may give us much
satisfaction and clear light, anent the Doctrine of the Imputation of His
Righteousness, if prejudice and Love to our own particular hypothesis do not
blind us. The Apostle tells us Heb. 7: 22. that Jesus was made a Surety of a
better Testament (or Covenant, rather) and though the greek word (...),
rendered Surety, be only in this place found in the N. Testam. yet that can
give no colorable ground of Exception against the true and Native import of
the word, and the truth, thereby hold forth, seeing one sentence of divine
Revelation should captivat our faith and judgment, as well as Twenty, otherwise
all divine Revelation, though never sooft reiterated, will hereby at length
come to be questioned. And beside, the word properly signifies a Surety,
Cautioner, Praes, Sponsor, fide jussor: (...), is sponsio, expromissio,
fidejussio: hence (...) sub fide sponsionis trade, as it were, to deliver into
hands, (...) spondeo, (...) fidejussio, Vadimonium, (...) fidejussor, vas,
sponsor: and whether the word come from (...) prope, or from (...) appropinquo,
or from (...) in manibus, the same import and signification is hold forth; and
the conjunction and neerness betwixt the Sponsor, or Surety, and the person for
whom He is sponsor, with the ends, for which he engages himself, who is a
Sponsor, is manifestly hold forth; for the word Imports one, who of his own
accord engages for another, taking upon him, the Cause and Condition of that
other, and promising to do or pay what the other was obliged unto, or to see it
done, and, thus engaging and promising, becomes the just and legal debtor for
what he has engaged, and obliged unto the performance. And this sense is both
obvious and generally received by all men; which should Satisfy us, as to the
acceptance of the word here, until it be demonstrat, that of necessity it
must be taken in a peculiar and distinct sense, in this place; which yet the
scope and circumstances of the place will not admit; but rather confirm the
usual and generally received signification and Import of the word.

This is also confirmed by the Hebrew (...) which has many significations,
all, or most, of which, as some think, may be reduced to two general heads: one
is of mixing things together, or agreeing things or persons together, by
compacts, Merchandice, pledges, or Caution. Hence it signifies to become
Surety Genesis 43: 9. and 44: 22. Prove. 11: 15. and 6. 1. and 17: 18. and 22: 26.
Psalm. 119: 122. as also to oppignorat, or give in pledge Neh. 5: 3. 2. King.
18: 23. Esai. 36.8. Job. 17: 3. Hence (...), arrabon, a pleage Genesis 38: 17:20.
and (...) fidejussion, sponsio, pignus, suretiship, and a pledge. 1. Sam. 17:
18. 2 King. 14: 14. This word then denotes the Conjunction and Mixture, that
is between a Surety, and him for whom he is Surety; for the word signifies to
mix or mingle together, so that they become hereby one person in Law; and an
engaging. Ier. 30: 21. to show, that the Surety stands engaged to perform
what he has promised, and become Surety for, having (...) stricken hands, as
it is rendered Prove. 22: 26. Whence we see that there is a near and closs Union
betwixt Christ and Believers; so as they (to speak so) become one person in
Law; for a Sponsor, as such, stands engaged with and for the debtor, as if
they were both but one; for the Surety makes himself the debtor; and the
Creditor may pursue either of them for payment, and when payment is made by the
one, both are free of the obligation: so that if the Surety pay the debt, the
creditor cannot reach the Principal debtor. These things are clear and
universally known and received. And hereby, we see how Christ, being a Surety,
and Believers become one person, in Law-sense; so that as He did voluntarily
engage for them, and put Himself in their Law place; so His payment and
Satisfaction is accounted theirs, and justice cannot reach them, for that,
which He, as their Surety, has paid.

But Mr. Baxter, in his book ag. Doct. Tully. page 108. in answer to the first
objection, which he there moves, tells us, That when Christ is thus called the
fidejussor of a better Covenant, it seems plain, that it is God's Covenant,
as such; and so God's sponsor, that is meant. And for this he cites Grotius
and D. Hammond, in their Annot. Ans. This is the very same answer, that
Socinians give, with whom both Grotius and Hammand do too well agree: and it is
not much for Mr. Baxter's honor, nor for the credit of his cause, that he
will forsake all the Orthodox, and embrace rather the Socinians, and such, as
join with them, than abandon what he thinks contributive to his Hypothesis.
Whether Christ was at all a Surety, upon God's part, or not, needs not here
be discussed; some Orthodox being of the judgment, that He was, as we see in
Mr. Gillespie's late Piece Chap. 21. others thinking, that He was not, as may
be seen in D. Owen's book of the Doctrine of justification by faith. It is
Sufficient against Mr. Baxter and the Socinians, to prove, that He was a Surety
and Sponsor for man to God; and this is abundantly made good by what both
these forementioned Authors have said, in the books mentioned, that more
needs not be added. But what does Mr. Baxter mean by God's Covenant? He can
mean nothing here, but God's part of the Covenant; and so make Christ only a
Surety for that part. But what ground is there for this in the Text, or
context? The Apostle is proving, that Christ's Priesthood (which respects not
God toward man, but man toward God; for every Priest is ordained for men in
things to God, that he may offer both gifts and Sacrifices for sin Hob. 5: 1.)
is more excellent than the levitica, He being made a Priest by oath, and a
Surety of a better Covenant, (...) and therefore his suretiship and His
Priesthood must both respectmen, and the things of men to God; or the one
should not be a fit Medium to prove the other; nor should there be any
Coherence in the words; Unless, with the Socinians, we should pervert the
Nature of Christ's Priestly office, and make it to be for God, in things
pertaining to Men, contrary to Heb. 5: 1. and all the use of Priests from the
beginning; as they do, when they make Christ's Priesthood to consist, in His
making effectual to us the promises of God; or in his effectual Communicating
to us the good things, promised to us of God; from which Mr. Lawson does not
much differ, when he says (as Mr. Baxter cites his words) That a Priest does
undertake to procure from God both the confirmation and performence of the
Promises to the people; and to that end mediats between both.

He says next, That Calvin seems to Intimate that, which he thinks is the
truth, viz. that Christ is called (...) of God's Covenant, from the Sacerdotal
appropinquation, mentioned verse 19. But no such thing appears in Calvin's
Comment. And that appropinquation, mentioned verse 19. is the people their
privilege now under the New Testam. He tells us further, that Marlorat and
others by Sponsor mean a Mediator. And it is true, that the Sponsor here is a
Mediator: But that the word Sponsor here shall denote nothing else, than what
the word Mediator signifies, I shall not readily believe, without clearer
grounds, than any I see yet adduced; for I cannot think, that the Apostle would
make use of a word, which no where else he uses, and which is no where to be
found in the N. Test. but here, in a sense, that it is never found to have,
neither in Scripture, nor in the common use of men. And how-ever; Yet it must
be granted, that He is such a Mediator, as is a Priest, and so must offer
Sacrifices to God for men, and therefore must as well be a Mediator and Sponser
on man's part, as on God's. He says, that Pareus on the place, calls Christ a
Sponsor of the Covenant, quia novum foedus sanguine and morte sua obsignavit.
But for answer, he may read the same author on Chap. 8: 1. saying, est and
Sponsor foeder is spondens Deo populi nomine fidem and obedientiam, non verbis
modo sed and victimis. And thus he distinguishes a Sponsor from a Mediator.

Mr. Baxter grants ( page 109.) that a Mediator is not of one, but does some
what on the behalf of both parties: but adds. That as Mediator, He is, Has,
Does, Suffers, Meriteth, Satisfies, so as the Representer or Person of such
a Believer, as that every such person is supposed in Law, to have Been, Done,
Suffered, Merited, thus in and by the Mediator, is neither signified by this,
or any other Text. Ans. Though this cannot be said of a Mediator, who is only a
Mediator, strickly so taken, and no more; yet it may be said of him, who not
only is a Mediator, but also a Sponsor and Surety, as we have several times
explained it. He adds 2. They that distinguish of a Natural and Political
Person, do but darken the case, by an ill expressed distinction, which indeed
is not of two sorts of persons, but between Reality and Acceptance, taking
person properly for a Natural person: It is one thing to be such a person; and
another thingh to have the Act, Passion, Merit etc. accepted for that other
person: And this latter signifies either, 1. That it was done by the other
person raediatly, as being a chief cause acting by his Instrument. 2. Or that
it was done for that other Person by another; the first is our denied sense,
and the second our affirmed sense. Ans. And I think (such is the discordance of
Men's apprehensions) that his explication darkeneth what is clear enough by the
distinction given. His Reality and Acceptance, is, in our case, as darkning a
distinction, as the others, if not more, and is against the Common sense of the
Law, and the plain Common sense and understanding of men, when speaking of
Law-matters. Who does not understand how the Suretys payment is really, in the
sense of the Law, the payment of the debtor, and not merely accepted for him?
If the payment were purely accepted, neither could it be said, that the Surety
was anteriourly obliged, nor that the Creditor might not refuse that payment,
neither of which can be affirmed. As for the first sense of his Acceptance, we
own it not, more than he: and the second is true, but not full and plain,
being only general; nor is it, as thus generally expressed, any sense of his
Acceptance: for when two persons are obliged for a sum conjunctly and
severally, and the Creditor may distress either for the whole; when one pays
the whole, he may be said to pay for the other; and yet Common sense will not
Suffer us to say, that his payment was only accepted for the other.

He tells us afterward, that Sponsors and Sureties with us, are of several
Sorts, and that they, who lay all upon the very name of a Surety, as if the
word had but one signification, and all Sureties properly represented the
Person of the Principal obliged person, do deal very deceitfully. Ans. But
there is no remedy against some Men's censures. Some will possibly think, that
his dealing is not fair, to speak, in the Answer, of Sureties representing
the principal debtors, when the Objection, as himself set it down, speaks
only of their being one person in Law sense; and these two are not every way
the same; every one that represents another, is not his Surety, or Sponsor;
nor does the Surety, in every case, represent the Principal debtor; neither is
he said so to do. But, sure, it is plain dealing to take the word Surety, or
Sponsor, in that sense wherein it is always taken by Men that use it, until
he demonstrat, that of necessity it must have a peculiar sense, in this matter,
and in this place; and it is not fair, to object deceitful dealing to us, in
this, until he has first discovered the deceit. He reckons up, three or
four various things, in which persons may become Sureties, as Debt,
Punishment, Duty, and the like; But to what purpose, I know not. Does he think,
that we make Christ such a Surety, as agrees in all things with every Surety,
among men? We know, there never was, nor never will be such a Surety, as our
Lord Jesus is: A Surety, notwithstanding, we acknowledge Him to be; because He
is so called; and in what respects He is a Surety, we know from the Scriptures,
where that is abundantly declared, and not from the simple name of a Surety:
The name tells us, that that must be said of Christ, which agrees to all
Sureties, or is commonly acknowledged to agree unto them; and that is, that
they, in so far as they are obliged, or have obliged themselves, whether before
or after the Principal Debtor stood obliged (for this makes no difference as
to the obligation Instit. fidejus. and ff.eod. l. and II.) are one person in
Law-sense with the principal Debtor; so that their payment and Satisfaction is
acknowledged in Law, as the payment and Satisfaction of the Principal Debtors.
His Novices, that look into Calv. Lex. Iurid. for Fidejussor and Sponsor, will
find nothing contrary to this; Yea they will find, that fidejussor dicitur,
qui pro alio fidem suam obligat, and fide sua, id est, periculo suo esse jubet,
quod alius debet; and that, fidejussor proprie decitur debtor; and that even
fidejussor conditional is nomine debitoris continetur; and fidejussorem proprie
esse debitorem fere omnes tradunt, quia jura eum plerumque appellant debitorem.
The same is to be seen in Spigelius. As for that, which Mr. Baxter adds, that
fide juffor non est conveniendus, nisi prius principali debitore Convento, it
neither alters the case, nor was it universally so, but only in some certain
cases, as he migt have read in the same place. So that it still holds true,
that the Sponsor and the Debtor are one person in Law; and that so, that if
the Debtor pay, the Sponsor is free; and if the Sponsor pay the Debtor is
free. See Instit. lib. 3. Tit. 30. quibus modis tollitur obligatio and l. 13.
si. fide jussor; D. de Acceptil. Where it is said, that the debtor is liberat,
if the Sponsor give only that, which is called, solutio imaginatia.

There must be (says he) some what more than the bare (...), once used of
Christ, as Mediator of Gods Covenant; or the name of a Surety as now used among
men, that must go to prove, that the Mediator and the several sinners are the
same legal Persons in Gods account. Ans. What he means by God's covenant, he
would do well to explain. That the name (...) is used of Christ, as Mediator,
if he take this as reduplicatively, he should prove. When he says, the
Mediator and the several sinners are the same Legal Persons, it is ambiguously
uttered, and no clear Declaration of our mind. But as to the thing, we would
feign know a reason, why we may not take this word, in its common acceptance
among men, seeing there is nothing in Scripture to the contrary? yea, though
this greek word be but here only found; yet, as we saw, we have an hebrew word
of the same Import, several times used in the old Test; and the whole matter,
that we seek after, clearly held forth thereby, if the places be but looked into

To put a close to this, we would call to mind that five fold Law-identity and
sameness, that is betwixt Christ the Surety and Sinners, for whom He satisfied,
mentioned by worthy Mr. Rutherfoord, in his Treatise of the Covenant part 2
page 251. which are these.

1. Though Physically the Surety and the Debtor be two different Men; yet in
Law they are one and the same Person, and one and the same legal party, and the
same object of justice, who so in Law pursues the Surety, does also pursue the
Debtor.

2. The Debt and Sum is one; not two Debts, not two Ransomes, nor two
Punishments; nor two Lives to lose, but one.

3. It is one and the same Solution, and Satisfaction; there cannot in
Law-justice come another Reckoning, Dying, and payment asking, after the Surety
has paid.

4. There is one and the same Acceptance, upon the creditor's Part; if he
accept of Satisfaction in the payment made by the Surety, he cannot but legally
accept of the Debtor, and cannot pursue him in Law, but must look upon him, as
no debtor etc.

5. It is one and the same legal effect. Christ crucified in the Spirit and
risen again 1. Tim. 3: 16. and we in Him, as in the Meritorious Cause, are
legally justified.

Mr. Gillespy in his late piece Chap. 21. has several things, which will both
clear up and confirm what is said; we shall mention only a few, page 373,
374. He tells us, [that 3. Suretiship imports not only a voluntary obligation
for another person, but also union of parties, and Assumption of the Condition
of that person, in the laws sense; so that the Surety and debtor are but one
party in Law: therefore say the Iurists, fidejussor proprie dicitur debtor.
Christ, by His Suretyship did not only take out Natures upon Him, but He took
our condition upon Him. He put His name in our Bond, that the Law migt reach
Him for our debt. 4. It imports a Communion betwixt the debtor and the
Cautioner, whereby as the debt of the Principal debtor, becomes the debt of
the Surety and affects him; so also the Satisfaction and Payment of the
Surety and his Discharge and Relief, becomes the Satisfaction, Discharge and
Relief of the principal Debtor, Christ's Suretiship imports not only an Union
of Parties and Conjunction of interests and Condition with His People; but also
a Communion with Debtful broken Man, resulting from His Bond of Suretiship;
whereby as upon the one part our Debt becomes His entirely, as the jurists say
of all Sureties, Singuli, in solidum tenenter; so upon the other part His
Satisfaction and Discharge become ours 2. Cor. 5. last Gal. 3: 13. 5. It
imports a Commutation, Surrogation, or Substituting of one in the room of
another; and so Christ was substitute in our stead and room, as Judah was in
Benjamin's. 1. Pet. 2: 21. Romans 4. last and 5: 8. Genesis 44: 33.] So page 381.
His Assert. 5. is [Christ the Surety and broken man the Debtor are one in Law,
but not intrinsecally one Esai. 1. They are legally one or in the Laws sense
one; because by a legal Substitution and surrogation, Christ having put His
name in the Believers Bond, by the Law* He is in his place, and the believer is
put in Christ's law-place; so that by a legal act, the Surety (...) the broken
man: therefore Christ, being made Surety, says, I am the broken man, all my
friends debts be upon me, my life for their life, my soul for their souls Gal.
4: 4, 5. Ioh. 1^: 8. Genesis 44: v. 3. Asserts Neither the creditor, nor the Law
can exact Satisfaction from both the Surety and the Debtor; but the Surety
having paid all and Satisfied, the broken debtor can say, I have paid all, I am
free; he may plead, my friend and Surety has done all for me, and that is as
good in fore, in the court of justice, as if I had paid all in mine own Person.
Gal. 3: 13. Romans 4: last, 1. Pet. 2: 24. The debt, that Christ paid, is our
very debt, and the believer can say, when Christ my Surety was judged and
Crucified for my sins, then was I judged; and what would you have more of a
man, than his life? Esai. 53: 6, 7, 8.] So thereafter page 422. he says [Among
men usually, Sureties and Debtors enter into one and the same Bond with the
Creditor; but here Christ's single bond lies for all Psalm. 89: 19. here Christ
our Surety has changed Bonds and obligations with us, and puts out our
name, and puts in His own, in the bloody Bond of the Law, that the Debt,
Satisfaction and Curse may be upon Him alone Gal. 3: 13. Esai. 53: 5. ^ Among
men, the Creditor has it in his choice, which of the two he will seize upon,
the Surety, or the debtor, as he sees it best for his Satisfaction: but it is
not so here, for the Lord, the Creditor has declared, that He will take Him to
Christ for all; and has Determined, that all the Satisfaction shall be made by
Him: and Christ the Surety is content that it shall be so, and that the poor
broken Creature shall go free, and no execution of the bloody Bond of the Law
shall pass against him, he being a bankrupt creature, which has obtained a
liberation, as where there is cessio bonorum Psalm, 89: 19. Heb. 10: 7. Romans 8:
1. Esai. 53: 6. 3. Among men, usually the Principal Debtor is first conveened
for the debt, before the Surety be pursued: But it is not so here, the curse of
the Law, and the execution of the bond thereof does not first strick upon us,
and then afterward upon Christ, to seek from Him what it cannot find in us:
But the Lord, the Creditor, having astricked Himself to the Cautioner, the Law
stricks first upon Him, and can never come to strike against the Believer,
unless it should not find compleet Satisfaction in our Surety, which is
Impossible Esai. 53: 8. Gal. 3: 13. 4. Among men the debtor is the Principal
Bondsman, and his obligation and Bond is the Principal obligation; and the
Sureties obligation is but an accession to it, for strengthening the Security:
but here the Surety is the Principal debtor; and by His Bond of Suretiship, He
has changed the Nature of the Believers Bond and Obligation, and put His own
name in it, so as He is become the Principal Debtor. His Suretiship has
swallowed up the Debtor's Obligation to satisfy justice, the Surety being the
Head and Husband of the poor broken Debtor Romans 7: 4. and having changed the
Bond of Satisfaction. and put out our Name, and put in His own, whereby He has
transferred the debt upon Himself, as Principal Debtor Heb. 10: 7. -- 9. Among
men, usually the broken Debtor's Name stands still in the Bond, even after the
responsal Surety has interveened: But here Jesus, the Surety of the New
Covenant, when He put in His own name, He puts out our names, that the Law
might reach Him, and might not at all reach us. He wrote Himself the sinner
legally, and wrote us Righteous persons. 2 Cor. 5: 21. Ier. 50: 20.]

CHAP. XV.
Mr. Baxter's Answers to some of our Argum. for Imputation, examined.
MR. Baxter, in his book against D. Tully proposes some Objections, that he
may make answer unto them, according to his own Grounds: Though some things,
here repeated in his answers, have been already considered by us; yet we shall
examine briefly his answers, as here given.

His answer to the first Objection has been examined, in the foregoing Chapt.
The 2. is this. Christ is called tht Lord our Righteousness, and He is made
Righteousness to us, and we are made the Righteousness of God in Him. 2 Cor. 5:
21. and by the Obedience of one many are made Righteous. He answers to this
(...). And are we not all agreed of all this? But can His Righteousness be ours
no way, but by the foresaid personating R^presentation. Ans And will not
Socinians; who overturn all the foundations or Christianity, and ought not be
called, or accounted Christians, say the same, as to the Scripture-expressions?
are we therefore agreed with them in judgment? or is there no difference
betwixt us: His not agreement in the words, but in the sense of Scripture, that
makes a true agreement (2.) Christ's Righteousness may be, and is Ours another
way, than by that Personating and Representating, which he stated, as the butt
of his arguments and another way also, than he proposes as his own judgment,
as we saw.

He rels us next, how Christ is our Righteousness, and how His obedience makes
us Righteous, in his judgment, in 8 or 9 particulars. 1. Because the very Law
of Innocence, which we dishonored and broke by sin, is perfectly fulfilled and
honored by Him, as a Mediator, to repair the injury, done by our breaking
it. Ans. The Law, which the Devils dishonored and broke by sin, was perfectly
honored and fulfilled by the Angels, who stood; is therefore their
Righteousness to be called the devils? But he will say; They obeyed not, as
Mediator; True: But then the ground of Christ Righteousness, becomning ours,
must be some other thing, than His honoring that Law by fulfilling it, which
we dishonored by breaking. But he says, Christ repaired the injury, done by
our breaking it True; yet (...) there be no more, that will not make His
Righteousness ours; because, as is obvious, ere this be, we must have an
Interest therein; and this obedience must be performed by Him, a our Mediator
and Surety, undertaking and Satisfying the demands of the Law for us, and in
our stead.

2. In that (says he) He suffered to satisfy justice for our sin. Ans.
Neither is suffering, as such, Righteousness; Nor could He satisfy justice for
our sin, in and by suffering, if He had not done it in our stead, and as one
Person with us in Law. If Titius steal from Sempronius a 1000. Pound; and
Maevius givius Sempronius a 1000. Pound upon some distinct account. Sempronius
receives no satisfaction, for what Titius stole from him, but if he come and
give it for Titius and he be satisfied therewith, then there is a Law Union
and oneness betwixt Titius and Maevius, whereby the Satisfaction given by
Maevius, becomes the satisfaction of Titius.

3. He says, in that hereby He has merited of God the Father all that
Righteousness, which we are truly the Subjects of, whether it be Relative or
qualitative, or Active; that is, our right to Christ in union, to the Spirit,
to Impunity and to glory, 2. the grace of the Spirit by which we are made holy,
and fulfill the conditions of the Law of grace: we are the Subjects of these,
and he is the Meriter; and the Meritorius Cause of out life is well called our
Righteousness, and by many the material Cause (as our own perfect obedience
would have been) because it is the matter of that merit. Ans. That
Righteousness, which he says here Christ has merited, is not that
Righteousness unto justification of life, as the Apostle speaks Romans 5: 18.
And which we have by the Obedience of Christ, made ours by Imputation verse 19.
whereof we are here speaking, and in respect of which Christ is said to be our
Righteousness (2.) Our right to Christ is not our Righteousness, in order to
justification; nor is our Right to Impunity and Glory that Righteousness, but a
consequent thereof (3.) In respect of the Graces of the Spirit, which follow
justification, and do not preceed it, Christ is called our Sanctification: and
Mr. Baxter knows, there is a difference betwixt Righteousness and Holiness.
(4.) The Meritorius Cause of our life is well called our Righteousness. when it
is Imputed to us and put upon our score, as the Ground of our justification and
Absolution; and upon this account only is it by many called the Material Cause.

4. And also (says he) Christ's jntercession with the Father still procures
all this, as the fruit of His Merits. Ans. Of Christ's procuring our holiness
we make no Doubt: but that upon this account, He is called our Righteousness,
is denied: for this is not His Obedience and Righteousness, whereby we become
Righteous unto justification of life.

5. And we are related (says he) as His members (though not parts of His
person, as such) to Him, that thus merited for us. Ans. if we be related to
Him, as members, in order to our partaking of His Righteousness and Merit^s, we
must be parts of His legal Persons though not of His Physical Person^ for by
Members here I suppose, he means Members of His Mystical body or members of
His Ransomed and Redeemed body: And head and Members here make one Political
body, and become one Political Person, or one in Law-sense.

6. And (says he) we have the Spirit from Him, as our Head. Ans, This is but
what what was said before in the 3. place. And this Spirit is given for
holiness: but Christ is our Righteousness, as well as our Sanctification; and
it is of His being Righteousness, that we are speaking.

7. And he is our Advocat (says he) and will justify us, as our judge. Ans.
His being our Advocat, is the same with His Intercession spoken of in the 4.
place. (2.) The Father will judge us, and justify us by Him; therefore God the
Father shall be our Righteousness, as well as Christ; and consequently shall
have merited all for us, by His blood and Sufferings, and that in a more
principal manner, according to this Reason.

8. And all this (says he) is God's Righteousness, designed for us, and thus
far given us by Him. Ans. But all this is not that Righteousness, which God
has designed for us, in and through Christ, in order to our justification; nor
that Righteousness, by which we become formally Righteous in Law-sense; and
thereupon are justified and pronounced Righteous in the sight of God; for this
is Christ's Surety-Righteousness, imputed to us, and none else can be it.

Lastly says he. And the Perfect justice and holiness of God is thus glorified
in us, through Christ. And are not all these set together enough to prove, that
we justly own all asserted by these Texts. Ans. It remains to be cleared,
how the Perfect justice and holiness of God can be said to be glorified in us,
through Christ, if Christ's Righteousness and Satisfaction be not imputed to us
and accounted ours, and Christ and we be not looked upon, as one Person in Law:
for all that is wrought in us, is far from being answerable to the Perfect
justice and holiness of God, because of its Imperfection. And because Mr.
Baxter does not grant the Imputing of Christ's Surety-righteousness (which is
only answerable to the Perfect justice and holiness of God) unto us, in all
that he has here said, he cannot be said to own all, that is asserted by
these Texts.

The 3. object, is. If Christ's Righteousness be ours, then we are righteous by
it, as ours; and so God reputeth it, but as it is. But it is ours 1. by our
Union with him. 2. by his gift, and so consequently by God's Imputation. To
this he answers. 1. That he has told before, in what sense it is ours, and
in what sense not. Shortly here he gives us his mind again, saying. It is
truly Imputed to us, or reputed, reckoned, as ours; but not in their sense,
that claim a strick Propriety in the same Numerical Habites, Acts, Sufferings,
Merits, Satisfaction, which was in Christ, or done by Him, as if they did
become subjects of the same Accidents; or as if they did by an Instrumental
second cause. But it is ours, as being done by a Mediator, in stead of what we
should have done, and as the Meritorious Cause of all our Righteousness and
Bonefites, which are freely given us for the sake thereof. Ans. This is but
what we heard, when he was clearing the state of the question; and there (
Chap. XIII.) we showed, that his sense was not satisfying: for in his judgment,
as we found, there is no Righteousness truly ours, in order to justification,
but our Faith, which he calls our Gospel-righteousness, which by Christ's
Merits is advanced to this dignity of being the potestative Condition of the
New Covenant, wherein pardon and Right to life is promised upon Condition of
Faith; and so faith is our Immediate Righteousness, in order to the obtaining of
these favoures; and Christ's Merits have only procured them remotely, in
procuring this Covenant. But we hear no mention made by him of any such
Imputation, as whereby Christ's fide jussory or Surety-righteousness is really
made over and Imputed to Believers, that they thereby may become formally
Righteous, in the sight of God, and be justified as such, and so pardoned and
have right to life, immediately upon the account of this Surety-righteousness
made theirs. Nor hear we any clear ground laid down by him, whereupon Christ's
Righteousness can be called Ours, and we thereupon be reputed of God legally
Righteous, and dealt with as such. We hear of Benefits bestowed because of His
Merits; But we hear not that Pardon and Right to Glory are made the Immediate
result and effect of Christ's Merits and Righteousness, but only mediat, by
the Interveening of the New Covenant, whereby our Faith, the condition thereof,
called our Gospel, Personal Righteousness, is made the Immediate cause of our
possessing these benefits; whereby he gives occasion, at least, to judge,
that he makes our faith the Immediate procuring and Meritorius Cause of Pardon
and Right to life. However between his way, and that, which he here rejects
(which we also reject, neither asserting, that Christ was our Instrumental
Second cause: nor claiming a strick propriety in the same Numerical Habites
etc. which were in Christ, as if we became Subjects of the same Accidents,
speaking of what Christ did and suffered, in a Physical sense) we know, and
own a Midway, whereby Christ's Obedience and Suffering, considered not
Physically, but legally and juridically, are transferred and communicated unto
us, not as Physical accidents, from one Physical subject to another, but in a
Law and juridical sense. And though this Imputing and communicating of Christ's
Surety-righteousness cannot be explained by, nor appear consistent with Logical
or Metaphysical Notions, applicable only to Physical Entities, and as
considered as such (to which Mr. Baxter in all his Explications of this matter,
does so frequenily labor to restrick us, contrary to all Reason, Yea and to
Common sense) Yet we must own it for a truth, knowing that these fundamental
truths, recorded in Scripture, and held forth to us only by divine Revelation,
stand in no need of Aristotle's learning, in order to their being Savingly
understood and practified: And that Law-termes are more fit, to help us to some
understanding in this matter, which is hold forth in Scripture, as a juridical
act, than Metaphysical terms; and yet we see no ground to say, that this
matter, whereof we treat, must, in all points, keep even a resemblance unto
Iustinian's modes, knowing that it is a divine Mystery, and unparallelable.

He says 2. He that is made Righteousness unto us, i^ also made wisdom,
Sanctification, and Redemption to us, but that sub genere causae Efficientis,
non autem constitutivae; We are not the Subjects of the same Numerical wisdom
and Holiness, which (...) Christ, plainly the Question is, whether Christ or
His Righteousness Holiness, Merits and Satisfaction, be our Righteousness
constitutivly, or only efficiently. The matter and form of Christ's personal
Righteousness is ours, as an efficient cause; but it is neither the nearest
matter, nor the form of that Righteousness, which is Ours, as the subjects of
it, that is, it is not a Constitutive cause, nexly material, or formal of it.
Ans. (1.) It is true, He, who is made Righteousness to us, is also made
Sanctification, etc. and that He is made Sanctification by being an Efficient
cause: but it will not follow, that He must be also the Efficient cause, and no
other of our Righteousness, which is of a far other Nature, and is no Inherent
inwrought thing, as is Sanctification. (2.) It is true, we are not the Subjects
of the same numerical Wisdom and Holiness, which is in Christ, neither can we
be, if they be considered Physically: but yet we can be Subjects of the same
Numerical Righteousness, Legally and juridically considered; and thus we are to
consider it here, and not Physically, however Mr. Baxter, ad nauseam usque
inculcat this; for we consider it, and must consider it, as a
Surety-righteousness; and we know that that same Individuat payment and
Satisfaction, made by the Surety, is in Law-sense the Debtor's, and imputed to
him, as the ground of his liberation from trouble and distress, at the hands of
the Creditor. (3.) Hence we see, that Christ's Surety-righteousness, consisting
in His Obedience and Sufferings, is that whereby we are constituted Righteous
in the sight of God, in a legal sense: and need not enquire, whether it be the
nearest matter, or form or both, of our Righteousness: for these Metaphysical
terms have no place here, though Mr. Baxter can never hold of them. We are
made Righteous in a Law-sense, and not Physically, by Christ's Imputed
Righteousness, and upon this account, it is ours legally: and it is folly, to
enquire for Physical matter, and form or Constitutive causes of Moral or
juridical Beings, or Effects, as Philosophers do, when speaking of Physical, or
of Metaphysical beings.

He says 3. If our Union with Christ were Personal (making us the same person)
then doubtless the accidents of his person would be the accidents of ours: and
so not only Christ' Righteousness, but every Christians, would be each of ours.
But that is not so, nor is it so given us by him. Ans. We acknowledge no Union
with Christ, making us the same person with Him Physically (and it seems Mr.
Baxter will understand it no otherwise) But we acknowledge an Union legal,
Political, and foederal, whereby we become one person juridical, in Law-sense:
and as to this, Mr. Baxter's accidents have no substantial place or
Consideration.

The 4. Object is, you do seem to suppose, that we have none of that kind of
Righteousness at all, which consists in Perfect Obedience and Holiness; but
only a Right to Impunity and Life, with an Imperfect Inherent Righteousness in
our selves. The Papists are forced to confess, that a Righteousness we must
have, which consists in a Conformity to the preceptive part of the Law, and
not only the Retributive part. But they say, it is in our selves, and we say,
It is Christ's Imputed to us. Thus he proposes it, but if I were forming the
objection, I would say, That Mr. Baxter Supposes, we have no Righteousness at
all, in order to justification, beside our Act of Faith: for as for his Right
to Impunity and life, it is no Righteousness: and beside, I hope he will not
say, that that is given before justification; and of a Righteousness preceding
(in order of Nature, at least) justification, we are speaking, and enquireing
after it.

What he answers to this Objection, in the first place, because it only
concerns Papists, and their Misapprehensions, in the matter, I pass. But 2.
he says, If any of them do, as you say, no wonder, if they and you contend: If
one say, we are Innocent, or sinless, in reality; and the other, we are so by
Imputation, when we are so no way at all, but sinners really, and so reputed.
Ans. If by Innocent, or sinless, he mean such, as never sinned, never Man,
Protestant or Papist, dreamed of such a thing. If by these terms, he mean
such, are now not guilty legally, of the charge brought in against them; this
we acknowledge, and must acknowledge, or we know not, how any shall ever be
justified; for God will not pronounce sinners, as such, really and legally to
be righteous, His judgment being according to truth: and therefore because we
have no righteousness within us, whereupon we can be pronounced not guilty, we
must have a Righteousness imputed to us, even the Surety-righteousness of
Christ. But Mr. Baxter, it seems, will not understand, what this legal
non-guiltiness is; and yet in matters among men it is very clear and manifest.
If Paul had fully Satisfied, according as he undertook, Philemon, for the
wrongs and injuries done him by Onesimus; If Onesimus had been convented before
a judge for these same crimes and Injuries, and had produced the Satisfaction
made by his Surety Paul, and accepted by the creditor Philemon, would not the
judge have had ground in Law and equity, to pronounce Onesimus not guilty, and
therefore not to be punished, according as was libelled against him? And yet
though Onesimus had been pronounced Innocent, that is, not-guilty, as to Crimes
and Injuries alleiged against him, in this case, in a legal sense, it would not
follow, that he had never committed these wrongs; nor had the evincing of that
been necessary to his Absolution and justification. His Legal Innocence or
Righteousness, by virtue of the Satisfaction made by his Surety, now judicially
accounted and reputed his, being Sufficient. These things are plain to such,
as will but open their eyes: but all the world cannot make them plain to such,
as will understand nothing, but what is cast into Aristotelian Metaphysical
Mould. Were it not lost labor for any to enquire, what is the Matter and
Form of this legal Righteousness of Onesimus? Whereof is it constitute? How
came Paul's righteousness to be his, and so one accident to go from subject to
subject? whether was Paul's satisfaction the Efficient, or Constitutive cause
of Onesimus his Innocence, or non-guiltiness, and the like?

The 5. Object is, How can God accept him, as just, who is really and reputedly
a sinner? This dishonors His Holiness and Justice. To this he says. Not so:
cannot God pardon sin upon a valuable Merit, and Satisfaction of a Mediator?
and though He judge us not perfect now, and accept us not, as such; Yet. 1. Now
he judges us holy. 2. And the members of a perfect Savior. 3. And will make
us perfect and spotless, and then so judge us, having washed us from our sins,
in the blood of the Lamb. Ans. All this gives no satisfaction to the
objection; for the objection speaks of acceptance in Justification, and
consequently of that acceptance, that preceedeth Sanctification. (2.) It is
true, God can and does pardon sins; but mere pardon of sins is not
justification, the person must be accepted, as righteous; and yet by Mr.
Baxter's way, the man has no righteousness, to ground such a judgment and
acceptance: and God's judgment being always according to truth, the justified
man must be righteous, that he may be accounted and accepted as Righteous, in
Justification. Therefore either Mr. Baxter must grant, that he is Righteous
through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ; or that he is Righteous inherently
by his faith, or by his fulfilling of the Conditions of the New Covenant; for
there is not a third: or that he is prononnced Righteous without a
Righteousness.

The 6. object. Thus you make the Reatus culpae not pardoned at all, but only
the Reatus poenae. To this he says 1. If by Reatus culprae be meaned the
Relation of a sinner, as he is revera peccator, and so to be reus is to be
revera ipse qui peccavit, then we must consider, what you mean by Pardon: for
if you mean the nullifying of such a guilt (or Reality) it is impossible;
because necessitate existentiae, he that has once sinned, will be still the
person that sinned, while he is a person, and the relation of one that sinned
will cleave to him. It will eternally be a true proposition, [Peter and Paul
did sin.] But if by pardon you mean the pardoning of all the penalty, which for
that sin is due (damni vel sensus) so it is pardoned; and this is indeed the
Reatus poenae; not only the penalty, but the dueness of that penalty, or the
obligation to it is remitted and nullified. Ans. The nullifying of the Reatus
culpa physically or metaphysically is indeed Impossible; for it will be always
true, that such and such persons did sin: but this Reatus culpae may and must
be nullified legally and juridically, otherwise never shall man be justified:
for in justification this Reatus culpae is declared to be taken away; for the
man is declared non reus, and accepted as not-guilty, or Righteous; not
physically, or Metaphy^ically, but legally: a man must be legally Righteous
before he be justified, according to equity; and he cannot be legally
Righteous, as long as the Reatus culpae does legally remain; for a man legally
guilty, is not legally Righteous. Now, Mr. Baxter must yield to this, or he
shall destroy his own ground, and take away all pardon, as well as
justification: for as it will be eternally true, that Peter and Paul did sin,
and so were rei culpae; so it will be eternally true, that punishment was due
unto them, that is* they were rei poenae: and therefore, if because it will be
eternally true, that Peter and Paul sinned, therefore the Reatus culpae cannot
be annulled; so because it will be eternally true, that Peter and Paul were
obnoxious and liable to punishment, therefore also the Reatus poenae cannot be
annulled. But the truth lies here, that though neither the Reatus culpae nor
poenae can be annulled physically, or metaphysically, that is, so taken away,
as if they never had been; yet both are taken away legally and juridically, and
a pardoned man is legally and juridically non puniendus, and thus the Reatus
poenae is taken away: and a justified man is legally and juridically,
not-guilty of the offense charged against him, and thus the Reatus culpae is
taken away. As it is inconsistent with pardon, to say, that the person pardoned
does legally remain obnoxious to punishment, though it will be eternally true,
that he is the man, that did contract that dueness and onbnoxiousness: so it is
inconsistent with justification, to say, that the person justified is legally
chargable with the offense, though it will be eternally true, that he is the
man, that did contract that guilt and sin.

He says. 2. Therefore if by Reatus culpae, you mean an obligation to
punishment for that fault, this, being in deed the reatus poenae, is done away.
So that we are, I think, all agreed de re; and de nomine; you may say, that the
Reatus culpae is done away or remitted, or not, in several senses; in se it is
not nullified, nor can be, but as dueness of punishment follows that is
pardoned. Ans. The Reatus culpae is the ground of the obligation to punishment,
and not the same with Reatus poenae; it is a being chargable with such a crime
and offense; and this, as we said, much be as well done away, in a legal sense,
as the obligation to punishment: Nay, in our case, the obligation to punishment
cannot be taken away, until first this chargableness with the sin be removed.
The Lord will not declare that man non-obliged to punishment, who remains
legally and Juridically reus culpae and chargable with the crime. And so long
as we differ herein, we are not agreed de re, nor de nomine. The Reatus culpae,
in se, is as well nullified, in a legal sense, as the Reatus poenae; and
neither the one, nor the other can be otherwise nullified. But I see, Mr.
Baxter is so for pardon, as to destroy all Justification, or he thinks that
Pardon and Justification are all one thing, and by both nothing is taken away,
but the obligation to punishment; and thus the pardoned and justified person is
still chargable with the sin; and the obligation to punishment is taken away,
where the charge of guilt remains: and thus God is supposed to justify a
person, that is not justifiable, except by an iniquous sentence. Yea, hereby we
have the Socinian pardon owned, but not the orthodox pardon: for the
Socinian-Pardon can well consist with this chargableness of guilt, because they
acknowledge no Satisfaction, to remove the Reatus culpae: but the orthodox
pardon does presuppose the removal, in a legal sense, of the guilt or
chargableness of sin, and is a Native consequent thereof: for because of
Satisfaction made by the Surety, Christ, and the same now imputed to the
sinner, and made his, guilt is taken away, and he is no more chargable with
that guilt, but looked upon as Righteous; and therefore all obligation to
punishment is actually removed, and he is no more obnoxious thereto in Law,
being rectus in curia.

Object. 7. You have said, that though we are not personally, but seminally in
Adam, when he sinned, yet when we are persons, we are persons guilty of his
actual sin. And so we must be persons, that are partakers of Christ's actual
Righteousness, and not only of its effects, as soon as we are believers; for
Christ being the second Adam and public person, we have our part in His
Righteousness, as truly, and as much, as in Adam's sin. His answer to this is
long. He says. 1. Our Covenant Union and Interest supposes our Natural Union
and Interest, and it is an adding to God's word and Covenant, to say, that He
Covenanted, that Adam should personat each one of his posterity, in God's
Imputation, or account, any further than they were naturally in him, and so
that his innocence or sin should be reputed theirs, as far, as if they had been
personally the Subjects and Agents. Ans. If the Covenant Union and Interest
supposes the Natural Union and Interest, then there is a Covenant Union and
Interest here to be considered: and therefore it can be no adding to God's word
or Covenant, to say, That Adam did personat each one of his posterity
foederally, as well as Naturally: Yea, to deny this, were a corrupting of
truth, and a denying of all Covenant-Union and Interest. Whence it is manifest,
that in a Federal or legal sense, we must needs say, that Adam's Innocence, or
sin is reputed ours, as far as if we had been personally (not physically, but
legally) the Subjects and Agents. If Mr. Baxter shall prove, that the Foederal
Union and Interest, which he says is superadded to the Natural, will admit of
no other Consideration of the posterity Interessed, than what is physical and
Natural, and follows upon the Natural Union, he shall then lay a ground for
what he would say here, but till then he shall but beat the air; and when he
has done that, he shall destroy what he has granted, viz. all Foederal Union
and Interest: for a Foederal Union and Interest will ground a foederal and
legal Consideration of the persons interessed; as well as a Natural Union and
Interest will ground a Natural and physical Consideration of the same persons.
And Mr. Baxter's not adverting to this, confounds all; for hence it is, that
he will have all things here considered only physically, and according to
Aristotle's notions, with which we have nothing to do, while speaking of a
Foederal Union and Interest, and of what follows thereupon. This being
premitted, we may quickly dispatch the rest.

The person of Peter (says he) never was in reality, or God's reputation, the
person of Adam ( nor Adam's person the person of Peter) but Peter being
virtually and seminally in Adam, when he sinned; his person is derived from
Adam's person; and so Peter's guilt is not numerically the some with Adam's,
but the accident of another Subject, and therefore another accident, derived
with the person from Adam, and from nearer parents. Ans. All this is only true,
in a physical Natural sense; but notwithstanding, if we consider Adam and his
posterity, in a legal and foederal sense, as we must, if there be (as is
granted) a foederal Union and Interest, then all runs in another channel.
The person of Peter is foederally and legally, in the person of Adam; yea God
reputeth them both to be one Federal person: and the person of Peter was thus
actually in the person of Adam, and not virtually and seminally: for these
notions have no place here. And hence Peter's original guilt is numerically the
same with Adam's: and in this sense Peter had as near a Relation to Adam, as
Abel had; for here Adam is considered, as the Head and Center, and all his
posteri^y, as equal members of this Political and Foederal Body, and as Lines
coming equally from the same Center.

He adds. The fundamentum of that Relation ( of guilt) is the Natural
Relation of the person to Adam ( and so it is relatio in relatione fundata) The
fundamentum of that Natural relation is Generation, yea a series of Generations
from Adam to that person. And Adam's Generation being the communication of a
guilty Nature with personality, to his Sons and Daughters, is the fundamentum
next following his personal fault and guilt, charged on him by the law. So that
here is a long series of efficient causes, bringing down from Adam's person and
guilt, a distinct numerical person and guilt of everyone of this later
posterity. Ans. 1. The fundamentum of that relation of guilt is more properly
and proximely, the foederal relation of the person to Adam, than the Natural
relation: and the fundamentum of this foederal relation is not Generation, but
the free Ordination and Constitution of God. (2) What he means by these
words, and Adam's generation being the communication of a guilty nature with
personality to his Sons and Daughters, is the fundamentum, next following his
personal fault and guilt, charged on him by the Law, I do not know: If his
meaning be, that the Communication of a guilty Nature, by the peccatum
originale originatum, is the fundamentum of the following personal fault and
guilt, by reason of the peccatum originale originans; that is, if he say, that
the corrupted Nature is the ground of the Imputation of Adam's transgression,
it is not consonant to truth, nor to what himself said above page 34. against
Placeus. But if he mean, that Adam's Generation being the communication of a
guilty Nature, is the fundamentum, that next follows his personal guilt,
charged on him by Law, I must say, I do not understand what he would be at,
though the words seem to express some such thing. But the truth, that I shall
lay down, is this; That all Adam's posterity, being federally in him, sinned in
him, and fell with him, in his first transgression; by virtue whereof, when
they come physically, by natural Generation, to partake of his Nature, they are
first, in order of Nature guilty of Adam's transgression, and then have a
corrupt Nature communicated, as a punishment and consequent of the other; and
this Corrupt Nature being sin, has its own guilt attending it also. (3) Though
this long series of Efficient causes be requisite to the production of a
distinct numerical person from Adam's person, in a physical and natural sense;
yet every one of these physically distinct numerical persons do immediately
derive from Adam their legal and foederal personalities, that is, these same
persons, considered foederally, are equally and alike near to Adam, their
federal Head and Representative: And therefore the guilt of Adam's sin comes
from him immedratly to each one of them, foederally considered; and is
consequently, the same numerical guilt: and all this is founded upon their
Federal Union with, and Interest in Adam.

He says. 2. And it is not the same sort of guilt, or so plenary, which is in
us, for Adam's act, as was on him; but a guilt Analogical, or of another sort,
that is, he was guilty of being the wilful sinning person, and so are not we;
but only of being persons, whose being is derived by Generation from the wilful
sinning persons ( besides the guilt of our own inherent pravity) that is, the
Relation is such, which our persons have to Adam's person, as makes it just
with God to desert us, and to punish us for that and our pravity together. This
is our guilt of original sin. Ans. (1) Hereby that original sin, whereof we are
speaking here, viz, Adam's breach of Covenant, seems quite to be taken away:
for not only is it said, that original sin, as in us, is another sort of thing,
than what it was in Adam; and so not only not the same numerically (as he
formerly said) but not the same specifically: but moreover it is said to be
only an Analogical guilt: yea in end it is made just nothing; for it is said,
that we are guilty of being persons, whose being is derived from the wilful
sinning persons, and this is no guilt at all; no man's simple being, let it be
by generation from the most prodigiously guilty and wicked persons, that can
be, can be imputed to him for guilt; for his receiving a being is contrary to
no Law. And beside, when he adds by way of Explication, that the Relation is
such, which our persons have to Adam's person, as makes it just with God to
deserte us, he must either make the simple Relation to be the guilt, or the
ground of guilt, and its Imputation. The Simple Relation, without some guilt
following it, and founded upon it, cannot make it just with God to desert us
etc. For sin only can do this, and that Relation is not sin. If he say, That
guilt is Superadded, and upon this account, it is just with God thus to punish.
I would ask, what is this guilt: It is not Adam's sin, but some analogical
thing, which Scripture knows nothing of, and Reason can give us no account,
whence it came. He cannot say, that it came from Adam's sin, for if we be
federally united to and Interessed in Adam (as we are, and as he confessed we
were) and if upon that account we be reputed guilty, the same Individual guilt,
which was on Adam, must be upon us; and if our guilt be of another sort, he
must give us another Adam, from whom that other analogical sort flows. The
Scripture says, that we all sinned in Adam Romans 5: 12. which were not truth,
if his individual sin were not ours, or if ours were of another sort, and only
analogical. But this is the fruit of Mr. Baxter's casting all these things in
Aristotle's mould. But moreover (2) It has a foul aspect toward
Pelagianisme, to make our guilt another, than Adam's, because that Adam was the
wilful sinning person, and so are not we: for this is to confirm the
Pelagians, who say, that that sin was only Adam's, because he was the only
wilfully sinning person, and we had no will therein.

3. He says. And this guilt comes to us by Natural propagation, and
resultancie from our very Nature so propagated. Ans. It is true, we come to be
actually charged with this guilt, and to have it imputed to us, when we partake
of our beings by Natural Generation or propagation; and that because of our
federal Union with and Interest in Adam; and exclusive of this, it cannot be
said to come to us by resultancy from our very Nature so propagated: for the
guilt of all Adam's after-Transgressions should as well be said to come to us,
after this manner, as the guilt of that one Transgression and Disobedience, of
which only the Scripture makes mention Romans 5.

He comes next to consider our contrary Interest in Christ, and tells us 1. Our
persons are not the same as Christ's person (nor Christ's as ours) nor ever so
judged or accounted of God. Ans. Physically this is true; but it is not true
legally: for when he came in the Law-place of the Elect, and become Surety
for-them, they and he became one person in Law. He says 2. Our persons were
not Naturally seminally and virtually in Christ's person (any further than He
is Creator and Cause of all things) as they were in Adam's. Ans. Adam was a
natural Head, our Lord is a Spiritual and Supernatural Head: and as to this, we
willingly grant a difference; but both were Federal Heads and Public Persons,
and their agreement in this satisfies us. He says 3. Therefore we derive not
Righteousness from Him by Generation, but by His voluntary donation and
contract. Ans. We derive it from Him by Regeneration; that is, as we partake of
Adam's guilt, when by Generation we partake of a Natural being; so we partake
of Christ's Righteousness, when by Regeneration we partake of a spiritual being
in Him. And there is no new formal contract made here anent, but what is
suitable to the Nature of this privilege, in order to its conveyance. He says
4. as He became not our Natural parent, so our persons, not being in Christ,
when He obeyed, are not reputed to have been in Him naturally, or to have
obeyed in and by Him. Ans. We say only (and we seek no more) that Christ was
our Federal Head; and our persons Federally (not physically) were in Christ,
when He obeyed: we are reputed to be in Him not Naturally, but Foederally, and
so to have obeyed in and by Him.

He says 5. If Cbrist and we are reputed one person, either He obeyed in our
person, or we in His, or both; if He obeyed, as reputed sinner, in the person
of each sinner, His obedience could not be Meritorious, according to the Law of
Innocence, which required sinless perfection; and He being supposed to have
broken the Law in our person, could not so be supposed to keep it. If we obeyed
in His person, we obeyed as Mediators, or Christ's. Ans. Aristotle's Notions,
to which Mr. Baxter, contrary to all sense and reason, will have this whole
matter restricked, in its explication, are the cause of all this ridiculous
Confusion. But for answer, I say, Christ and we are reputed one person, not
physically, but in Law-sense and federally; and therefore both he obeyed; as
taking on our Law-place, and coming in to our Law-condition: and to say, that
therefore His obedience could not be Meritorious, is ridiculous: as if forsooth
His coming into our Law-place, would make Him to be supposed, to have broken
the Law, in His physical person, as if one would say. The Surety cannot pay the
debtor's debt, because by coming in to his Law-place, he becomes a bankrupt.
Himself says, that Christ suffered in our stead; and this cannot be in our
Physical stead, but in our Law-stead; now will it not as well hence follow,
that He suffered as a sinner* and then, how could He, who suffered, as being
supposed to have broken the Law, make Satisfaction for us; or how could His
death be Meritorious? Thus indeed good service shall be done to the Socinians,
but bad service to the Truth. Finally, we obeyed, as Federally in Him, and yet
were no Mediators, or Christ's, but redeemed Saints; as the debtor satisfied
the Creditor, in Law-sense, when his Surety did it; and yet became no Surety
thereby.

He says 6. But as is often said, Christ our Mediator undertook in a middle
person to reconcile God and Man (not by bringing God to judge erroneously, that
He, or we were, what we were not, or did whas we did not, but) by being, doing
and suffering for us that, in His own person, which should botter answer Gods
Ends and Honor, than if we had done and suffered in our persons, that hereby
he might merit a free gift of pardon and life (with himself) to be given by a
Law of Grace, to believing penitent Accepters. Ans. I doubt there be one word
here said, to which a Socinian will not subscribe. But for answer, I say,
Christ our Mediator so undertook, in a middle physical person, to reconcile God
and man, that He became our Surety, and came in our stead and Law-place, to do
and suffer what we were obliged unto by the Law: and when God judged Him to be,
and to do thus, He judged not erroneously, but truly, according to His own
gracious Appointment, and Ordination, making Him a Public person, representing
all such, as He gave Him to save. We have shown elsewhere, that Christ merited
something else, than a Law of Grace, to Convey a free gift of pardon and life
upon New Conditions, otherwise His death could not be called a Ransom, a
Redemption, or a price; nor could He be said to have died in the stead of any
person, or to have born their Iniquities, or the punishment thereof; far less
to have been made sin for us. But more of this hereafter.

Object 8. As Christ is a sinner, by Imputation of our sin; so we are Righteous
by the Imputation of His Righteousness. But it is our sin it self that is
Imputed to Christ. Therefore it is His Righteousness it self, that is imputed
to us. To this he says. 1. Christ's person was not the subject of our personal
relative guilt, much less of our habites, or acts. 2. God did not judge Him to
have been so. 3. Nay Christ had no guilt of the same kind reckoned to be on
Him, else these unmeet speeches, used rashly by some, would be true, viz. That
Christ was the greatest murderer, Adulterer etc. and consequently more hated of
God, for God must needs hate a sinner, as such. Ans. (1) Mr. Baxter will
understand nothing here, but according to his Philosophical and Metaphysical
Notions: and in this sense, we may grant him all that he says: And yet add,
That Christ was the legal, juridical, and federal subject of our guilt; for our
sins did meet together on Him, and He was made sin (2) and God doing all this,
could not but judge Him to have been so. (3) Christ inherently had no guilt
neither of the same kind, nor of any other: but that our very sins were imputed
to Him, and reckoned upon His score, must be granted, or we must deny, His
dying or satisfying in our stead; and so plainly embrace Socinianisme (4)
Those speeches are but unmeet to such, as mistake them, as Mr. Baxter does
here, who supposes that their meaning is, That He was the greatest sinner
Inherently (which were indeed blasphemy, but far from their thoughts) for he
infers, that consequently he must have been more hated of God; while as
God's hatred (if we take it not for mere punishing of sin) is only against
such, as are inherently sinners. What says he moreover?

To be guilty of sin, as we are, is to be reputed truly the person, that
committed it. But so was not Christ; and therefore not so to be reputed, Christ
was but the Mediator, that undertook to suffer for our sins, that we might be
forgiven, and not for His own sin, really or justly reputed. Ans. No man says,
that Christ was guilty of sin, as we are, that is, Inherently. But if He
undertook to suffer for our sins, unless we turn Socinians, in expounding this
sentence, we must say, that the guilt of our sins was laid upon Him, otherwise
He could not suffer for them, in our place and stead; and we must say, that He,
so suffered for them, as that all they, in whose stead He suffered, should
certainly be forgiven; and not have a bare may be of forgiveness, by a New
Covenant, offering the same upon new terms. What next?

Expositors (says he) commonly say, that to be [made sin for us] is but to be
made a [Sacrifice for sin] so that Christ took upon Him, neither our numerical
guilt of sin it self, nor any of the same species, but only our Reatum poenae,
or debt of punishment, or (left the wranglers make a verbal quarrel of it) our
Reatum culpae, non qua talem, and in se, sed quatenus est fundamentum Reatus
poenae. Ans. Yet some Expositors will say more, and that in full consonancy
with the Scriptures, as Esai. 53: 6. And however, all we say, is hereby
sufficiently confirmed; for if He be made a sacrifice for our sins, our sins
must necessarily be imputed to him, as the sins of the people were typically
laid upon the Sacrifices: and therefore Christ must have taken on Him, not
physically but legally, our very numerical guilt, without which he could not be
accounted reus poenoe, or obnoxious to our punishment. What he means by the
reatus culpae qua talis, and in se, he would do well to explain: If his
meaning be, that Christ was not legally accounted guilty, this is denied; for
then he could not have been a Sacrifice for our sins, to have died in our
stead. Wrangling is not good: Yet Turpe'est Doctori, etc.

He adds, And so His Righteousness is ours not numerically, the same Relation
that he was the subject of, made that Relation to us; nor yet a Righteousness
of the same species as Christ's is given to us at all. Ans. Though Christ's
numerical Righteousness be not ours physically; yet that same is made over to
us legally: as it is one and the same Individual payment, that is made by the
Surety, and made over in Law unto the debtor. And therefore what he adds is
to no purpose. But (says he) His Righteousness is the Meritorious cause and
reason of another Righteousness or justification, (distinct from His) freely
given us by the Father and Himself by His Covenant. Ans. Righteousness and
justification are not one and the same, more than the cause is the same with
the Effect. As Christ's Righteousness is the Meritorious Cause of our
Justification, so it must be legally made ours, in order to our Justification,
otherwise we cannot be accounted Righteous, and legally free of the Charge,
brought in against us. And this is not granted us by a Covenant with new
Conditions, in Mr. Baxter's sense, as has been evinced already. Therefore he
is in a great mistake, when he concludes, that they that will not blaspheme
Christ, by making guilt of sin it self, in its formal relation to be His own;
and so Christ to be formally as great a sinner, as all the Redeemed set
together; and they that will not overthrow the Gospel, by making us formally as
Righteous, as Christ, in kind and measure, must needs be agreed with us, in
this part of the controversy. For we have shown, how far we are from
Blasphemy, and how groundless his Insinuation is, founded only on his Physical
or Metaphysical acceptance of things here, which we understand only legally
and juridically, according to all right and reason. And as for subverting of
the Gospel, it is one of our choice grounds of Reason against his way, because
by it the Gospel is indeed changed, and the true and native Gospel-way of
Salvation is indeed removed, and a Sociniano-Armintan Gospel substitute in its
room, which is daily more and more confirmed, by books coming out, wherein Mr.
Baxter's grounds are owned, and more Socinianisme and Arminianisme vented, than
Mr. Baxter himself has yet had the confidence to express in his own books;
witness Mr. Allens discourse of the two Covenants, ushered in with Mr. Baxter's
preface; and others of that kind much commended, and cried up by Mr. Baxter.

9. Object. When you Infer, that if we are reckoned to have perfectly obeyed
in and by Christ, we cannot be again bound to obey ourselves afterward, nor be
guilty of any sin: you must know, that it is true, that we cannot be bound to
obey to the same ends, as Christ did (which is to redeem us, or to fulfill the
Law of works) but yet we must obey to other ends viz. in gratitude and in love
to God, and to do good, and the like. Though I think the objection is not so
favorably proposed, as it might be, seeing that end to Redeem should not here
be mentioned; for though it was the end of Christ's coming in to our Law-place,
yet it cannot be said to be properly the end of that Obedience, he performed,
while he was in our Law-place, proximely. Let us see how ever, what he says to
it. 1. Hence (says he.) it clearly follows, that Christ obeyed not in each
of our persons legally, but in the person of a Mediator, seeing His due
obedience and ours have so different ends, and a different formal-relation (
His being a conformity proximatly to the Law, given Him, as Mediator) that they
are not so much as of the same species, much less numerically the same. Ans. I
think rather, that hence it clearly follows, that Christ did indeed obey the
Law, as it was the Condition of the Covenant of works, in each of the Elect's
person legally: for though His Obedience and ours now, after faith, have far
different ends; yet His Obedience, as Obedience to the Law of works, had the
same end that our Obedience should have had by that Law, viz. the fulfilling of
the same, in order to the obtaining of a Right to Life; and if not, to lose
all. The Law, given Him as Mediator, taken in its latitude, is not the Law,
whereof the objection speaks; for it speaks of the Law of works, under
which Adam was, and all his posterity in him, and under the breach of which we
lay. And Christ's obeying, in the person of a mediator, does not hinder His
representing His own legally; for He was such a Mediator, as was a Sponsor and
Surety, and came in our Law-place, and undertook our debt. Therefore, though
Christ's Obedience to the special Law, given to Him, as Mediator, was not of
the the same kind, with the obedience, required of us; yet the obedience He
performed to the Moral Law, in our place and stead, and as our Surety and
Sponsor, was the very same debt, we were oweing.

He says 2. Either this Obedience of Gratitude, is a duty, or not; if not, it
is not truly obedience, nor the omission sin: If yea, then that duty was made
a duty by some Law: And if by a Law, we are now bound to obey, in gratitude, (
or for what ends so ever) either we do all that we are so bound to do, or not;
if we do it (or any of it) then to say, that we did it twice, once by Christ
and once by ourselves, is to say, that we were bound to do it twice, and then
Christ did not all, that we were bound to, but half. Ans. We distinguish
betwixt the Law, as the Condition of the Covenant of works; and as a Rule of
Obedience: A duty may be duty now, as required by the Law still in force, as to
its commanding regulating power, and yet not be a part of the Condition of the
Covenant of works, wherein we had failed, which Christ fulfilled, by giving
perfect obedience to that Law, as the Condition of Life, to which we neither
did, nor could give perfect Obedience: and all our Obedience now, though
commanded by the same Law, is no fulfilling in whole, or in part, of the
Condition of the Covenant of works; and therefore can not be said thus to be
done twice, but once, and that by Christ alone. He adds, But what man is he,
that sins not? Therefore, seeing it is certain, that no man does all, that
he is bound to do by the Gospel (in the time and measure of his faith, hope,
love, fruitfulness etc.) it follows that he is a sinner, and that he is not
supposed to have done all that by Christ, which he failed in, both because he
was bound to do it himself, and because he is a sinner for not doing of it.
Ans. As there is a difference betwixt obedience to the Law, and the performing
the Condition of the Covenant of works; so there is difference betwixt sin or
failing in Obedience, and Violation of the Condition of the Covenant of works:
as our Obedience now is not the performance, so our sinning is not the
Violation of the Conditions of the old Covenant. Believers performed the
Conditions of the Covenant only in Christ, which they could not do in
themselves; and therefore their sins now, though transgressions of the Law, are
not counted Violations of the conditions of the Covenant of works, under which
they are not.

He says 3. Yea the Gospel binds us to that, which Christ could not do for
us, as to believe in a Savior, etc. Ans. And what then? were these part of the
Conditions of the Covenant of works? If they were, Christ has performed them,
for He gave perfect Obedience; and thereby has freed us from that obligation.
If they were not, neither can they now be required, as part of that Condition.

He says 4. The truth, which this Objection intimates, we all agree in, viz.
That the Mediator perfectly kept the Law of Innocence, that the keeping of that
Law might not be necessary to our Salvation (and so such Righteousness
necessary in ourselves) but that we might be pardoned for want of perfect
Innocence, and be saved upon our sincere keeping of the Law of Grace, because
the Law of Innocence was kept by our Mediator, and thereby the grace of the New
Covenant merited, and by it, Christ, Pardon, Spirit and Life by Him freely
given to believers, Ans. The truth expressed in the Objection, is very far
different from this Sociniano-Arminian Scheme of the Gospel, which we have had
often times proposed to us by Mr. Baxter, but never yet confirmed; nor do we
expect ever so see it confirmed. We have also, at several occasions, given our
reasons against it, and need not therefore here repeat, or insist upon it.

Last object. The same person may be really a sinner, in himself, and yet
perfectly Innocent in Christ, and by Imputation, How or upon what occasion,
this objection is used, Mr. Baxter does not show, and therefore we cannot
certainly know the true meaning and Import thereof. In one sense it may be
very true, and yet in another sense it cannot be admitted. It is true, in this
sense, The same person may be Inherently a sinner, and yet legally Innocent,
through the Imputation of the Surety-righteousness of Christ. But it cannot be
admitted in this sense, The same person is legally Innocent in Christ by
Imputation; for this were a Contradiction. What says Mr. Baxtor to it?
Remember (says he) that you suppose here the person and Subject to be the same
Man; and then that the two contrary relations, of perfect Innocence or
guiltlesness, and guilt of any ( yea much) sin can be consistent in him, is a
gross contradiction. Ans. There is no contradiction, unless the matter be ad
idem: and here it is not so; for he may be guilty Inherently, as to himself,
and yet innocent legally, as to his Surety. But if both be understood of a
person, legally considered, I grant, it is a Contradiction; for he, that is
legally Innocent, cannot be legally guilty, in so far as he is legally
Innocent, whether the Charge be particular for one sin, that is brought in
against him, or for more, or for all.

He says 2. But if you mean, that God reputeth us to be perfectly Innocent,
when we are not, because that Christ was so, it is to Impute error to God. Ans.
This cannot be their meaning: for they know, that God reputeth no man to be
other-wayes, than he is. But yet it must be said, that God reputeth Believers,
who have the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, Innocent, as to the
Violation of the Covenant of works, I mean, legally Innocent, and so, not
guilty of the charge of sin, and death upon that account, brought in against
them; for they are so, being justified; and therefore there is now no
condemnation to such Rom, 8: 1. and none can lay any thing of that Nature to
their Charge verse 33.

He adds, But He (i. e. God) does indeed first give, and then Impute a
Righteousness evangelical to us, in stead of perfect Innocence, which shall as
certainly bring us to glory. Ans. That God does indeed Impute, that is, give
and put upon our score an Evangelical Righteousness, that is, the
Surety-Righteousness of Jesus Christ, revealed in the Gospel, in stead of our
perfect and personal Innocence, which we neither had, nor could attain to, and
which shall certainly bring us to glory, being the Meritorious Cause thereof.
But Mr. Baxter's sense hereof is a manifest Perversion of the Gospel: for thus
he senseth it. And that is, He gives us both the Renovation of His Spirit (to
Evangelical obedience) and a Right by free gift to pardon and glory, for the
Righteousness of Christ, that merited it, and this thus given us, he reputeth
to be an acceptable Righteousness in us. Ans. Now that this is a clear
perversion of the Gospel is manifest from these particulars (beside several
others else where touched) (1) Hereby the Covenant of Grace is changed into a
Covenant of works, only with a Mitigation of the Conditions. (2) Christ's
Surety-righteousness is not Imputed to us, neither as our legal Righteousness,
nor yet as our Evangelick-righteousness; for at most it is only granted to be
Imputed, as to its Effects. (3. We have no other Righteousness hereby properly
imputed to us, but our own Inherent Righteousness. (4) Christ is hereby made of
God unto us Righteousness, by being made of God Sanctification to us. (5)
Hereby the immediate ground of our Pardon and Right to Glory, is not Christ's
Surety-righteousness, but our own Inherent righteousness. (6) Christ hereby
me^ited neither Pardon, nor Glory to be granted, as the Immediate fruits of His
merits; but He only merited the New Covenant, wherein these favors are
offered upon new Conditions. (7) Thus Christ is made only a far off Mediating
person, procureing new and easier terms (which yet are as Impossible to us,
till we be renewed by grace, as the old) but no Redeemer, or Surety, suffering
and obeying in the room and stead of any. (8) Thus are we justified by our own
works of Evangelical Obedience (9) God is made hereby to repute a Right to
Pardon and Glory, and our Imperfect Evangelical Obedience, to be an acceptable
Righteousness, and the all of our Righteousness: all which are against the
Gospel of the Grace of God, revealed to us in the Scriptures, as has partly
been discovered already, and will further appear by what will hereafter come to
be spoken unto.

CHAP. XVI.
Mr. Baxter's Further opposition to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
examined.
WHat Mr. Baxter's opinion is, about the Imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, in order to our justification, we have hitherto been enquireing; and
though, in his book against D. Tully, while he is giving an historical relation
of the Controversy, he plainly enough declares, that he is of the judgment
(as to the maine) with John Goodwine: yet he there (as we have heard) so
stateth the question, against which he disputes, as the Orthodox will not own
it; wherein he deals not so ingenuously with us, as Mr. Goodwine did. He will
not deny, that there is a midway betwixt the Socinians, Papists and Arminians,
on the one hand, and the Antinomians on the other; though the Middle way, which
he has se^ down in his Confess. page 152 153. etc. seems to me not be the
just and orthodox way, but to incline more unto the Socinians etc. for all the
Imputation, which he seems to own, is nothing else, than what Papists,
Socinians and Arminians, will subscribe unto: for (beside what we have seen and
examined above Chap. XIII. and XIV.) in his book against Mr. Cartwright page
179. he has these words. I have still acknowledged the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, sanosensu. And what found sense is, he tells us in a parenthesis,
that is (says he) 1. per Donationem ejus fructus and 2. per adjudicationem
justitiae nobis inde promeritae, that is to say, by giving us the fruits
thereof and 2. by adjudging to us Righteousness, thereby purchased: which two
seem to me, to be but one, the last being comprehended in the first: and so all
the Imputation by him granted, is only in respect of the fruits thereof, which
are given. And will not Papists, Socinians and Arminians yield unto this
Imputation: Nay does not Bellarmine come a further length, in the words
formerly cited?

Mr. Baxter in his Catholic Theol. part 2. of Moral morks, gives us here and
there, while speaking of other things, without any apparent Connection (choosing
this way rather, than to give us his whole sense of that matter, in one place
together, which might have been some' ease to such, as were desirous to know
the same: but I know, he is at liberty to follow his own ways and methods)
some hints of his mind; and that rather of his dissatisfaction with the
orthodox, and their manner of expressing their Thoughts and Conceptions, in
this matter, than any full and positive declaration of his own Thoughts about
the question. We shall, having seen and examined his own judgment, shortly here
examine what he is pleased to say, in one place or other of that Book, so far
as we can find, and may be done without repetition, against our doctrine.

Only we shall premit some few of his own words, in the Appendix to the
Premonition p. 2. whereby we may see, how small the difference would appear to
be; and how little cause he had to write so much against the Orthodox, as he
does. He there says. [14. No man is saved or justified, but by the Proper
Merit of Christ's perfect obedience; Yea and His habitual holiness and
Satisfactory Sufferings, advanced in dignity by His Divine Perfection: 15. This
Merit, as related to us, supposes that Christ, as a Sponsor, was the Second
Adam, the Root of the justified, the Reconciling Mediator, who obeyed perfectly
with that Intent, that by His obedience, we might be justified; and who
suffered for our sins, in our room and stead; and so was, in tantum our
Vicarius poenae, as some phrase it, or Substitute, and was made a curse for us,
that we might be healed by his stripes; as He was Obedient, that His
Righteousness might be the reason, as a Meritorious Cause, of our
justification, which Supposes the relation of an Undertaking Redeemer in our
Nature, doing this, and in our stead, so far forth, as that therefore, perfect
obedience should not be necessary to be performed by ourselves. And
Righteousness therefore is Imputed to us, that is, we are truly reputed
Righteous, because we, as believing members of Christ, have right to Impunity
and life, as merited by His righteousness, and freely given to all penitent
believers. And Christ's own Righteousness may be said so far to be Imputed to
us, as to be reckoned and reputed the Meritorious cause of our Right and
justification, as aforesaid.] One might think the difference now to be little,
or none; but all this is but Suitable to what is already examined, and what
might here further be animadverted upon, will occur hereafter.

He begins Sect. 8. n. 119. to speak against the Doctrine of Imputation,
taught by the Orthodox. I shall yield to him, that Christ's personal
Righteousness, Divine or Humane, Habitual active, or Passive, is not given to
us, or made ours, truly and properly, in a Physical sense; as if the same were
transfused in and upon us. Yet, the same, being imputed to us, is made ours,
more than in the mere Effects: for according to the Gospel method, believers,
being by Faith interes^ed in Him, have an Interest in His Surety-righteousness,
as to its virtue, force and efficacy, or as the cause, and that morally and
legally; so that Christ and believers are one person in Law. No^ do we hereby
say; That Christ's Merit and Satisfaction are reput^d by God, to be inherent
in us, or done by us, in our own proper persons; or that in a sense Natural we
did all these things ourselves, or that God judges us so to have done, or that
all the Benefits of Christ's Righteousness shall as fully and Immediately be
ours, as if we bad been, and done and Suffered, merited and Satisfied, in and
by Christ. But we say, that Christ being a Surety, and putting himself in our
Law-place, and putting (as it were) His name in our Obligation, being thereunto
Substitute by, and accepted of the Father, His Satisfaction and obedience,
being performed by Him, in our Law-place, as a Surety voluntarily taking on the
obligation, is accounted, in Law and justice, to be ours, who believe in Him,
to all ends and uses, that is, in order to justification, pardon, and Right to
Glory; and that, as effectually, as if we our selves, in our own persons, had
done and Suffered all. When Mr. Baxter confounds and jumbleth these together,
as if they were the same, he neither befriendeth Truth, nor us.

Nor will it follow from our assertion, (as he suppseth n. 123.) that then we
could need no Pardon: for though he, who is reputed to be Innocent, by
fulfilling all the Law, in his own physical person, be reputed never to have
sinned by Omission, or Commission; and consequently to need no pardon: yet he,
who is a transgressour, and consequently has forfeited all right to the
Reward, and is obnoxious to the Penalty, has need of a Remission, through his
Suretie's making Satisfaction; and of a new Title to Glory, through his
Suretie's Obedience. So that the Non-necessity of Pardon will no more follow
from our doctrine of Imputation, than from our doctrine of the Satisfaction of
Christ, whatever Socinians think, who plead as vehemently from free Remission
against this, as Mr. Baxter does, upon the same ground, against Imputation.

But when any say, that Christ's Sacrifice satisfied for all our sins, that
they may be forgiven; and His Righteousness is Impu^ed, that we may also be
accounted just, he thinks, (n. 122.) that this is but either ambiguity; or
the fore-detected gross contradiction. And why so: for (says he) if by
justice, they mean reputed sinlesness, or perfection, then these two cannot
stand together; for he that is supposed a sinner is supposed not sinless, or
perfect; and he that is supposed sinless, cannot be supposed pardonable. Ans.
By justice, or being accounted just we mean Righteous, or rectus in curia, in
order to the Reward promised: and when full obedience is imputed to this end,
we do not say, that God reputeth such sinless, that is, such as, in their own
physical persons, gave perfect obedience; for such indeed need no pardon: but
that now God reputeth them such as are Righteous, and have Right to the Reward,
through the perfect Righteousness of Christ Imputed: and this carries no show
of Repugnancy to pardon of sins, through the Satisfaction of Christ.

But (n. 123.) he tells us, that some think to avoid the Contradiction by
distinguishing only of the moments of Nature, and double respect of the same
Man's Actions, saying, that we are first in order of Nature supposed to be
sinners and pardoned, and then to be such, as moreover need the Reputation of
Innocence, or Righteousness, which is added to pardon. What necessity there is
for this curious distinguishing of Order and Priority, whether in respect of
Nature or of Time, I do not yet see. And whether we say, we are first pardoned,
and then reputed Righteous; or first reputed Righteous, and then pardoned
(which would seem most rational of the two) it is all one to Mr. Baxter, who
equally argues against both. But though I see no necessity of asserting any of
these orders (Save that though the first thing, that a wakened sinner is pardon
and freedom from the Curse; Yet it is more rational to say, the Reatus culpae
first taken away, and not the Reatus poenae) yet I see a necessity of asserting
both the Imputation of Christ's Satisfaction, in order to our pardon; and of
His Obedience, in order to our obtaining Right to the Inheritance (and both
these Mr. Baxter comprehends in justification, as we shall hear) or of both
His Satisfaction and obedience, or of His complete Surety-righteousness, in
order to our obtaining complete justification, and its Effects, or consequents,
Remission of sins and Right to the Crown. But says Mr. Baxter 1. He that is
pardoned of all sins of Omission and Commission, is accounted Innocent and
Righteous, as to any guilt of punishment, either of sense or loss. Ans. True he
is accounted Innocent, or Righteous, as to guilt of punishment of sense; yea or
of loss, in so far as it is a punishment, or belongs to the punishment
threatened. But he is not accounted Innocent, that is, one that has never
sinned; or one that has never lest right to the reward: and therefore beside
this pardon, he must have a Righteousness, in order to the Reward promised. He
says 2, He that is after accounted Innocent and just from his first being to
that hour, is judged never to have needed Pardon. Ans. But by the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness, there is no such account made, as if the man were
reputed, or accounted one, that never sinned, from his first being to that
hour; but that now has as good right to the Reward, as he could have had, if
so be, he had never siuned, not only from his first being to that hour, but
from the first to the last moment of being. We need not then notice what
follows, when he says. And so they make God come with an after act, and
condemn His own foregoing act of error and injury; or at least to contradict
it, and in the first instant to say [I pardon this sinner] and in the second to
say, [I now repute him one, that never sinned, nor needed pardon] for, as we
have seen, the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness has no such Import.

He tells us (n. 125.) of some, that say, that the Law, since the fall, obliges
us both to obey and to suffer, and not to one only; else a sinner, bound to
suffer, should not be bound to obey. Therefore Christ must do both for us. And
this would seem to be a very Innocent assertion, and consonant to truth: yet he
says, This is too gross for any man to utter, that ever know what Law or
Government is. Ans. And I had thought, that it had been too gross for any
Christian to have denied this, who would not outstripe all the Antinowians,
that ever were: for if it be thus, one of two must follow; either that now
after the fall, Adam and all his posterity are loosed from all obligation to
obedience to the Law of God; or that they are not under the curse. Neither of
which, I suppose Mr. Baxter dar say: But, what says he: do they mean, that as
to the same act and time, the Law binds us to obey and suffer; or for diverse
acts and Instants of time? Ans. In regard that, since the fall, nothing can be
done, in perfect conformity to the Law, both may be said. Do they mean (says
he further) that the Law bound man both to perfection, and to suffering for
perfection, or to suffering for sin? Ans. We are speaking of the Laws
obligation now, since the fall: and it is certain, that because the Law is now
broken, we are obliged to suffer; and that, because of that constitution, do
and live, no man can have life, until that Law be perfectly obeyed: but
because this is Impossible for man, therefore it must be done by his Surety. He
querieth again, did the Law bind Adam, to obey and suffer, before he sinned?
Ans. No. Did it bind him (says he again) both to obey and suffer for his new
sin, the next Instant? Ans. What himself adds is a sufficient answer to
this, viz. That it did bind him to suffer for his old sin (add, and also for
his new sin) and yet the obligation to obey for time to come remained. But all
this is beside the purpose; for the maine thing is not yet noticed by Mr.
Baxter viz. That Adam by his sin was obliged to suffer, and that yet there was
no way for him to come to the promised Crown, but by perfect obedience to that
Law: and that therefore neither he, or any of his posterity, can enjoy life,
until their Surety fulfill that Law for them, or undertake to do it: as they
cannot be freed from Suffering, until their Surety suffer the penalty for
them, or undertake to do it. We need not speak so unaptly, as he supposes we
do, that is, say, that the Law commands lapsed man, not to have sin, or
imperfect man, to have been perfect; for we know, that were to bind to an
Impossibility in Nature; for sin existent cannot but be existent. But this we
say, That by virtue of that Law and constitution, there was no way for lapsed
man, to enjoy the Reward-promised, but by yielding perfect obedience unto that
Law; and as this was Impossible in Nature; so was it impossible for lapsed man
to enjoy the Reward, and therefore the Lord provided a Surety, who should yield
perfect obedience unto that Law; and this perfect Obedience is made over unto
the Believer, and put upon his score, as well as the Sureties Sufferings are.
But says he, if Christ's perfect Obedience and holiness be imputed unto them
from their first being, then they are reputed not lapsed, nor sinners from the
beginning, and so not pardonable. Ans. There is no necessity for such a
Reputation; for this is not the end of that Imputation: It is Imputed, in order
to their obtaining a Right to the Reward, which was lost; and by virtue hereof,
they do obtain the Reward, as certainly, as if they had never sinned.

Others (he says n. 126,) would come nearer the matter, and say, that we are
reputed Righteous, as fulfillers of the Law; and yet reputed sinners as
breakers of the Law: and that though there be no medium in Naturals betwixt
light and darkness, life and death; yet there is betwixt a breaker of the Law
and a fulfiller of it, viz. a Non-fulfiller; and between just and unjust, that
is, not just. ^ Ans. I Find Wolls bius in his Compend. Theol. Lib, 1. Cap. 30.
15. full and plain, as to this, who, in order to prove, that in justification,
there is a Remission, or Abjudication of sins, and Imputation or Adjudication
of a perfect Righteousuess: and that though these two benefits be the same, as
to Time and Subjects; yet they are really distinct, both as to their proper
definitions, their proxime Causes, and proper Effects: and in clearing of the
difference, as to their definitions, he tells us, that there is a difference
betwixt not just and just; not just and unjust; not unjust and just: and that
not just and just are contradictory; that unjust and just are partly privative,
and partly contrary; and that not just, and unjust; and unjust and just are
diverse: as also, that unjust and just are not immediately contrary; for there
is Medium betwixt them viz. Innocent, who is such an one, as is neither unjust,
nor yet just: and that though now these two do not differ, as to Subjects; yet
of old they did; for Adam in Paradise, before he fell, was innocent, but was
not just; for he was to obtain this by perfect Obedience. Now. what says Mr.
Baxter to this?

He says, this is mere darkness. As it seems all things are, that agree not
to his Notions. But why? There is (says he) a Medium negative in a person, as
not obliged, but none between positive and private, in one obliged as such, A
stone is neither just, nor privatively unjust, nor a man about a thing never
commanded or for bidden him. But what is this to the matter? God's Law is
presupposed: we talk of nothing, but Moral Acts. The Law forbideddeth omissions
and Commissions; both are sin. Ans. Though there be no medium betwixt positive
and privative, in a person obliged, as to particular acts commanded, or
forbidden; yet there is a Medium, in such a person, in reference to the Reatus
poenae, and meritum praemii. In reference to every moral act, Adam was either
just, or unjust, i. e. either one, that obeyed, or one that transgressed; but
in reference to the punishment threatened and to the Reward promised, before he
fell, he was neither unjust, that is, one that was a Transgressour, and reus
culpae and poenae nor was he just, that is, one that had purchased the Reward;
but was in his way thereunto: and himself says little less (as I judge) in his
premonit p. 19. saying [3. But that Law giving life eternal only to obedience
to the end of his time of trial, he merited not that life by Initial obedience.
This was Initial Imperfect Righteousness, wanting perseverance; but not a
Medium between just and unjust, except as just signifies the merit of life by
persevering Righteousness to the last. And so, I never denied, but in a
disobliged Subject, there is a Medium: Adam was not bound to do a years work
the first hour; and so was neither just, nor privatively unjust, as to the
future years work; but as to what he was presently obliged unto, he was either
Righteous, or a sinner.] Here upon the matter, is almost all I desire, or say.
When a command is given to a person, to run so many miles in an hour, and a
Reward is promised in case he do it, and a punishment threatened, in case he do
it not; while he is running, as to his present acting, he is not disobedient,
but obedient; and so, in so far is just, and not unjust; yet in reference to
the Reward, he cannot be called just, until he has finished the course, in
the time appointed. So Adam, while standing, though he sinned not, yet he had
not merited the Reward. Mr. Baxter replieth 1. He merited what Reward he had,
viz. the Continuance of his blessings first freely given. Ans. That was not all
the Reward, which was promised, whereof we are speaking; for Adam was not yet
in Patria: and howbeit himself was not clear, as to this, when he wrote his
Aphorisms; yet afterward, in his Book against Mr. Cartwright, page 19. he tells
us, he became convinced hereof. 2. He raises dust to darken the air by
saying. That it is yet unresolved, what that was, by which Adam must merit
Immutability and Glory: whether 1. Once obeying or Consent to his full
Covenant. 2. Or once loving God. 3. Or conquering once. 4. Or eating of the
tree of life. 5. Or persevering in perfect obedience to the end, that is, till
God should translate him. But this dust falls to the ground, when he adds.
That this last is most likely. And indeed it were much of his concernment, to
prove, if he could, that all that was required of Adam, by virtue of that
Covenant, was only one single act of obedience: for then his Notions about just
and unjust, as to Adam, would have some ground: but till this be done, all he
has said is to no purpose.

3. He says, That he maintain^th, as well as we, that Christ has not only
satisfied for sin, and merited pardon; but also merited immutable Glory. Ans.
But we say further, that He merited pardon and Immutable glory, not by His
death and sufferings only, but by His whole Surety-righteousness, consisting in
Active and Passive Obedience, whereby He paid our whole debt. But he wills us
to consider. 1. That Adam's not doing that which was to merit glory, was sin
of Omission, and to pardon that Omission is to take him as a Meriter of Glory.
2. Therefore it must be somewhat more, than he forfeited by that Omission and
his Commission, which comes in by Christ's merit above forgiveness. 3. That
Christ merited all this by his active, Passive and habitual Righteousness, by
which he merited pardon. 4. That it was not we, that merited in Him, but He to
give it to us only, in the terms of a Law of Grace. Ans. (I) To pardon that
Omission in Adam, was not to take him, as a Meriter of Glory; but only to take
him, as one that was free of the obligation to punishment for that Omission. It
is false then, to suppose or say, that one pardoned, as such, is taken to be
one that never sinned; for the contrary is manifest; and to take Adam, as a
Meriter of Glory, is to take him for one, that never sinned; yea, and for one,
that fulfilled his course of obedience; which can never be supposed of a
pardoned man, as such. (2) That by Christ's Merits the Elect obtain more,
than what Adam forfeited (to speak so) I shall easily grant; but
notwithstanding thereof we stood in need of more, than of mere forgiveness,
even of a Right to what Adam lost the expectation of; and in order to this, the
Law was to be fulfilled (3) I yield the 3d. (4) Though we need not say, that we
Merited in Him, yet we say, That Christ merited, as a Public Person,
representing His own, and as a Sponsor and Surety, coming in their Law-place,
and taking on their whole debt, both as to punishment deserved, and Duty
required. And I see no warrant to say, that Christ only merited to give it to
us, only on the terms of a Law of Grace: for this would make Him no Sponsor,
or Surety, nor to stand in the room of any (which yet he grants n. 130.) but
only hold Him forth, as a third unconcerned person, no ways related to them;
and like a man buying a Bond or Obligation from a Creditor, whereby he may be
in case to distress the debtor, and call for payment in his own way and time.
Whereby the whole tenor of the Covenant of Redemption, between Jehovah and the
Mediator, is altered; the Mediator's Place and Relation to those, for whom he
died, is changed; His Righteousness of Active and Passive Obedience is made to
have no necessary respect unto the old Covenant and Man's Obligation. He is
supposed to have merited and bought all for Himself immediately: He is supposed
to have died for all: and that the New Covenant, or Caw of Grace is wholly of
Him. To none of all which, I can assent.

He says next (n. 127.) that some come nearer and say, that to punish and not
reward are all one; and so the respect, that sin has to the deserved
punishment needed Pardon and Satisfaction; but our deserving the Reward needed
Christ's perfect obedience to be Imputed. What says he to this? He grants,
that there is some what of truth here; but (says he) there are errors also
that lie in the way; and so he wills us to remember 1. (without a 2. or 3.)
that man can have nothing from God, but what is a mere gift, as to the matter,
though it be a Reward, as to the Order and Ends of Collation. Ans. True; what
then? And in this case (says he) punishment is damni, as well as sensus; and
so the loss of the Reward is the principal part of hell, or punishment, Ans.
That there is poena damni, as well as sensus, I grant; but I am sure, the
punishment, threatened to Adam, was more than the mere want of what was
promised; otherwise we must say, that Adam was punished before he fell;
because even while he stood, he had received the Reward promised; so that poena
damni is some other thing, than the mere want of the Reward; even the want of
that, which man had already in his possession, together with the hopes of what
was promised. The faithful, yet living, are not pof^essed of the Reward of
Glory; yet it may not be said, that they have the principal part of hell, being
delivered there from. So that all this is but loose Sophistry from the word
loss. What more? So that (says he) if Christ's death has pardoned our sins of
Omission, we are reputed to have done all our duty. Ans. Passing the
Impropriety of speech here, we say, that it is manifestly false, as appears
from what is said. And if so (says he again) we are reputed to have merited
the Reward. And. This is also false, as is shown. And if he pardon our sins
(says he more-over) as to all punishment of sense and loss, he pardons them,
as to their forfeiture of heaven, at a gift, if not as a Reward. And. Neither
can this be granted; for there is more required to the taking away of the
forfeiture of heaven, if by this nothing else be meaned, than a giving of a
Right to heaven, whether as a Gift, or as a Reward, than to the taking away of
all punishment, whether of Sense, or of Loss, as such: as for example, when a
King covenanteth with his own Servant, whom he has already advanced to great
honor and dignity, and promises him far greater honor, if he will work one
day to end, in sueh an Employment; and if not, threatens to deprive him of all
he has, and to cast him in prison, until he die: This servant fails and
performs not the condition, and thereby has both forfeited what he was in
hope of, and what he had, and is now obnoxious to perpetual Imprisonment: when
the King's own Son goes to prison for some time, to make Satisfaction, and
thereby deliver the Servant from perpetual Imprisonment, he does not thereby
deliver him from his loss, so as to give him a right to the far greater honor
promised: though he deliver him from the punishment of constant Imprisonment:
Yea it may be a doubt, if he thereby procure his restoration to his former
state: but in order to this, and to the end, the servant may get the Reward
promised, beside his going so long to prison in the servants room and stead,
that he may be delivered from the punishment, he must also, in his room and
stead, perform that days work.

We say that Remission of sin is a consequent, or at most, but a part of
justification; because a man may be for-given, and yet not reputed never to
have broken the Law. To put away guilt, and to make one Righteons, are two
things. This is most clear; yet Mr. Baxter says (n. 128.) Still confusim.
Which is wonderful; where, I pray, must the confusion lie? Is it in this, that
we say, Remission of sin; is, at most, but part of justification? Does not
himself say as much hereafter (n. 208.) when he says, that our first
constitutive justification, is in its (own Nature, a right to Impunity, and to
life, or glory? Now this Right to Impunity, is the same with Remission; but a
Right to life, or glory is something more. Is it in this, that we say, a man
may be forgiven, and yet not reputed one, who never broke the Law? That, I am
sure, can be no confusion and contradiction: for it is a contradiction to say,
that a man is pardoned, and yet reputed one, that never broke the Law; for
pardon is of a breach of the Law. What says he, to make out this alleiged
Confusion? Guilt (says he) is either of the fault, as such, or of the
punishment, and of the fault only as the cause of punishment: If all guilt,
both culpae and poenae, were done away, that person were reputed positively
righteous, that is, never to have omitted a duty, or committed a sin.] Ans. But
do we say, That pardon takes away the Reatus culpae, in it self? His own
following words, may partly be our answer. But indeed (says he) when only the
Reatus poenae (and culpae quoad poenam) is done away, the Reatus culpae in se
remains. And this Christ himself never takes away, no, not in heaven, where
for ever we shall be judged, once to have sinned, and not to be such, as never
sinned. Where is now the Confusion Mr. Baxter spoke of? But yet, I suppose, he
is in a mistake, when he says, that the Reatus culpae cannot be taken away;
for it must be taken away, legally, or there shall be no justification, though
it can never be taken away Metaphysically; and the same may be said of the
Reatus culpae it self, seeing it will always be true, that they did once
deserve punishment, and are not such, as never deserved punishment.

He adds (n. 129.) that, which to him, is the Core of our error, [That we
^hink, we must be justified in Christ, by the Law of Innocence, which justified
Christ Himself: and that we are quite, or washed simply from all guilt of fault
as well as Obligation to Punishment.] But neither of these do we say, as has
been frequently shown. We are justified by the Law of Grace, and by faith; yet
we say with Paul, that the Law is not made void by faith, but established: the
Law of Innocence must be fulfilled, but it is not fulfilled by us, but by
Christ; and His Righteousness is Imputed to us, and received by faith; and we
thereupon are justified, and receive Remission, and Right to Glory. We do not
say. That Adam's Law meant, do this by thyself, or by Christ, and thou shall
live: yet we say, that that Constitution of God, do this and live, must as well
be established, as this; Cursed is every one, that continues not in all things
written in the Law etc; and that, as by virtue of this Christ our Surety was to
die the cursed death; so by virtue of that, He was to fulfill all Righteousness.

He (...) next (n. 130.) that the truth, which we grope after, and must
reconcile us all, is as follows.] As if all the Reformed divines almost had
been hither to but groping after the truth, like blind men groping for the
wall; and he and possibly two or three more, had their eyes opened to see the
truth. His discourse here is too long to be rehearsed, that it may be examined;
a few observes upon it may suffice. (1) He says, Christ, in His sufferings did
stand in the room of sinners, as their Sponsor. Ans. Then His Satisfaction to
justice must, in due time, be reckoned on the score of such, in whose room He
suffered. Why will he not say this also of Christ's Obedience; seeing both were
performed by Him, in His estate of Humiliation, and as the Surety of the
Covenant? Was He not made under the Law, as well as under the Curse? And was He
not made of a woman, given and born to us? But neither can we say, That Christ
stood in the room of all sinners, as he supposes. (2) We says. That Christ
acquired a Right first to Himself of giving out the purchased benefits, to
sinners, by a new Law, viz. by what He suffered and did. Ans. This is denied,
as not yet being confirmed; and it destroys His being a Sponsor and Surety,
and says, He was not born to us, nor died for us; but to and for Himself, And
yet I deny not, that Christ has got all power, and is the General dispensator
of the blessings of the Covenant purchased. (3) He says, Had Christ
antecedently done all, that He did in our person, and we in Him, in Law sense,
the thing its self, with its inseparable consequents and effects, had been all
ours, ipso facto. Ans. There is no necessity for this; seeing Christ was not
thereunto appointed by us, or conjunctly obliged with us, in the first
Covenant; but after we were broken, did, of His own accord, put His Name in our
Obligation, and came in our Law-place, and so was made sin for us, that we
might be made the Righteousness of God in Him. (4) He speaks of these
benefits being given us, upon terms and Conditions. But we show before, and
here-after will have occasion to do it more fully, of what Nature, these terms
and Conditions were; and that they are not such, as He means. (5) He says.
What is given by the New Covenant, we have title to upon this account, because
it was purchased by the perfect merit and sacrifice of Christ; and so given us
by Him, and by the Father. Ans. According to Him, the Right, that is had thus,
is but remote and common to all, even to such as perish; and therefore can
hardly be called a Right; but the only Right is had, is by our performance of
the terms and Conditions: for he says (n. 137.) that Glory is given as a
Reward for our believing, and performing the Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace. (6) He says, we deserved punishment and Christ was punished in our
stead, that we might be forgiven: we had forfeited life by sin, and Christ
merited life for us by His perfection. Ans. And why will he not say, that
Christ did this last, as well as the first, in our stead, seeing hereby the
freedom of the Gift can no more be weakened, than pardon by the other. What
follows has been spoken to already.

He grants (n. 132.) That not to punish, and to reward are different: yet he
says, not to have the Gift is to be punished; and so, non-donari here is
puniri materially: and that it is the same Righteousness of Christ, which
meriteth our Impunity, quoad damnum and sensum, and which Meriteth our Right to
the Gift of life, both sub ratione doni, as a Gift, and sub ratione
Condonations, as a forgiveness of the forfeiture, and of the poena damni: And
then adds, That so there is here no room for the conceit, that Christ's
Death was only to purchase pardon, and His Righteousness: to merit life] Ans.
We have said before, that we need not be so curious here in distinguishing, if
both be granted to make up a Complete Righteousness, to purchase both, we have
all we desire: and from what has been said formerly, it is manifest, that both
are requisite; and Mr. Baxtor granted as much before, as we see in the
foregoing paragraph Note 6. Nor says Mr. Baxter any thing here, to invalidate
what we have said. Sure, not to have this Gift was no punishment to Adam,
before he sinned, whatever it might be said to be after his sin. Nor is
forfeiture of that properly, which a Man never had, neither in Right, nor in
possession: And therefore Adam could not be said properly (nor we in him) to
have forfeited glory; but only that blessedness and felicity, wherein he was
created, and that Righteousness, that was concreated: So that beside the taking
away of this forfeiture, there will be a Righteousness of Obedience requisite,
according to that Constitution, do this and live, in order to the obtaining of
a Right for us unto the life of Glory. And to this he assenteth in end, when he
says, That the same Merits of Christ's Active and Passive and Habitual
Righteousness, do causo our Glory. For we do not separat them: Nor need we
curiously enquire, whether Christ's Suffering were first Satisfactory, and then
Meritorious; and His Obedience first Meritorious, and then Satisfactory, as he
speaks: it being sufficient to us, that both made up a complete Righteousness
performed for us, by Him, as our Surety, coming in our Law-place, whereby
justice was satisfied, and life merited. Nor need I say (as he supposes n.
135. too many hold) That heaven is our Reward, for our perfection of Holiness
and Obedience in and Christ; more than that pardon is our Reward for our
Satisfaction in and by Christ. Yet as Christ satisfied as a Sponsor, in the
stead and room of sinners, as he confessed; so it may be said, that Christ
obeyed, as a Sponsor, in their room and stead: and that as the one was
requisite for purchase of pardon; so the other was requisite for purchase of
Glory: and that as we must be Interessed in the one, imputed to us and received
by faith, to the end we may be pardoned; so we must be Interessed in the other
imputed to us, and received by faith (both being Integral parts of one complete
Surety-righteousness) to the end, we may have a Right to Glory. Nor can I say
with him ( Ibid.) That eternal life is ours, by Christ's free Gift as a Reward
to Christ, for His own Merits: for then, we could not say, that Christ
suffered properly in the room of any, as their Sponsor; and this would take
away that fundamental relation betwixt Christ and the Chosen ones, that were
given to Him of the Father; and for whose sake He sanctified Himself and was
made a Curse, and made under the Law, and became the Father's Servant, and was
made a Surety Blessings came through Christ, as the appointed Mediator, not
from Him, as the principal Donor (speaking of Him, as Mediator) The blessing of
Abraham comes on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ Gal. 3: 14. The God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, blesses us with all spiritual blessings, in
Christ, according as He has chosen us in Him; and has predestinat us unto the
Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ; and has made us accepted in the Beloved
Ephesians. 1: 3, 4, 5, 6. It is God, who saves us according to His mercy, by the
washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which He shed on
us abundantly, through Jesus Christ, our Savior, that being justified by His
grace, we should be made heirs, according to the hop of eternal life Tit. 3: 5,
6, 7. Christ is the way to the Father Ioh. 14: 6. God was in Christ reconciling
the world to Himself 2 Cor. 5: 19. Yet it is true, that Christ is now exalted
as King and Prince, and gives the Crown of life, Revel. 2: 10. as the great
Administrator and Executor of His own Testament; yet not as if He had purchased
all these things firstly, or primarily to Himself, and were now become the Sole
or Principal Donor: for this does overturn the tenor and form of the Covenant
of Redemption.

He tells us (n. 141.) That Christ's Righteousness is made ours, as our sins
were made his. Which is all that we desire. We grant that Christ never had the
Reatum culpae, in it self: and he says, that sin was Imputed to Him, as to the
punishment deserved, that is, He assumed the Reatum poenae. But sure, the
Reatus poenae, being a dueness of punishment, because of sin, He could not come
under this Obligation, unless the Reatus culpae had been Imputed to Him, not in
it self physically, but juridically, in ordine ad poenam. And accordingly we
must have the Righteousness of Christ, in order to its Effects; and this is
more, than to have the mere Effects themselves, as he says: and we shall grant
to him, that we have it not, in the relation of a Meritorious cause to all
uses; if he will grant to us, that we have it, in the relation of a meritorious
Cause, to those uses, which God accepted it for; and has assigned to it in the
Gospel; as he seems to grant ibid.

Though we do not assert such an Imputation, as he calls the rigide sense
thereof (n. 142.) whereby God is supposed to repute us to have done that in and
by Christ, which we never did by Him: yet we see no reason, why we may not say,
that God judged Christ, to be the public legal person: yea himself in the
appendix to his Premonition, yields that Christ may be called, our Vicarius
poenae, or Substitute; And when we say, He is a Public legal person, we say
not, that He is as many persons, as there be redeemed sinners in the world, as
Mr. Baxter speaks; but that He was such a public legal person, as did
represent in Law all that were given to Him, as their public Head and Surety.
And what he says (n. 143.) of the various sorts of Sureties (some of which are
very Impertinent, as the 3^ for no man calls an Agent a Surety; and the 5.
for no man calls a play master, who is the debtors Instrument, servant, or
delegat, a Surety) does not much help him, seeing there are no such Sureties
among Men, nor no manner of Suretyship, that can quadrat with Christ's
Suretiship, in all things: and therefore it is to no purpose to say, Christ is
not such a Surety, as is among men, in this, or that, or in the other respect,
therefore He is no Surety at all. He is such a Surety, as is not in all things
like Sureties among men; and yet in some things, every sort of Surety among
men, may carry some resemblance to Him. See for this Mr. Gillespie's late piece
on the Covenant of Redemption; where the Reader will find much Satisfaction in
this matter.

I find no more spoken to the Doctrine of Imputation, in this place, by M.
Baxter, that calls for any particular Notice: for we say not, as He hinteth
ibid. that Christ was our Instrument, or Delegate: yet we may say, He was our
Surety, that did all in our legal person: for He did substitute Himself in our
Law-place, and in so far suffered, in the Law-person of believers, as well as
in their Nature.

We come next to Sect. 9. page 73. Where Mr. Baxter proposes an objection,
that those of his mind do use viz. If we had fulfilled all the Law
reputatively by Christ, as our legal person, we could not be bound to further
Obedience to it. This is founded (if it be directed against the Orthodox, and
not merely against the Antinomians) upon the mistake of the true meaning of
these words, as our legal person and Reputatively. When we speak of Christ's
being our legal person, we mean His becoming our Surety, and putting His name
in our Bond, and satisfying the Law, as our Surety, in our room and stead: and
that therefore, all His own, being now united to Him by faith, are dealt with,
as if they had fulfilled the Law themselves; Christ's fulfilling of it, being
now imputed to them, and received by faith, unto the ends, for which it was
ordained; that is, to be accounted theirs, and reckoned on the^ score, in order
to the obtaining of the Reward promised to Adam, on Condition of perfect
obedience. This being so, it is manifest, that hence it will not follow, that
believers are not now bound to obedience to the Law.

What says he we answer hereunto? That we are not bound to obey to the same
ends, as Christ; that is, for Righteousness, or justification, or Merit: but
in gratitude. It is true, Believers are not now bound to obey the Law, for that
end, that Adam was obliged to, that not being now possible, and the Lord not
requiring it, for that end and purpose, that we should purchase the reward of
life to ourselves thereby, and have a Righteousness, whereby we may be
justified, by the Righteous judge, and purchase or merit to ourselves the
Reward: but, among other ends, to declare our Thankfulness unto God, and to set
forth His Glory. What says he to this answer?

He judges it to be a yielding of the Cause, and ignorantly to destroy our
own, for 7 or 8 reasons. 1. This is to say, that when a Man is reputed to have
fulfilled all the Law; yet it is to be reputed unfulfilled, as to certain ends;
as if he fulfilled all the Law, that fulfilled it not to all due ends. Ans.
This is, as if one should reason from our saying, that Christ bore the whole
Curse, and yet believers are not freed from Fatherly chastisements; that this
is to say, That he bore all the Curse, that did not bear it under all
Considerations, and as to all effects, that might pass under other
Considerations, and accordingly be endured for other ends and Advantages. (2)
Believers are reputed in Christ to have fulfilled the Law, in order to the
obtaining of the Crown; and in reference to that, to have fulfilled the Law to
all due ends, but not to have done it in themselves, or in their own Natural
persons. Nor is the fulfilling of it by their Surety imputed to them, to exeem
them from under the Authority of God and of His Law; far less particularly to
exeem them, from testifying their Love and Gratitude, by endeavoring after
Obedience to the Law, upon Gospel-Principles, and Grounds, and upon
Gospel-motives, and for Gospel-ends.

2. Or (says he) as if the Law obliged one man to fulfill it twice over, for
the same lefes time; once simply, and in all its obligations, and another time
for other ends. Ans. This is denied; neither follows it from what we say.
Because we cannot fulfill the Law once, to which we were obliged; there-for
must Christ fulfill it for us, to the end we may enjoy the promised Reward: And
His fulfilling of it for this end, does not make us Law-less, far less exeem us
from Obedience for other Gospel ends, to which Adam in Innocence was not
obliged. Or 3 (says he) as if the Law required any more than absolute
perfection, Ans. We do not say, that it does: But all our Obedience, with all
the superaddition of new ends, is most Imperfect. 4. Or (says he) that
absolute perfection had not been in Christ's holy Obedience. Ans. Neither does
this follow-from what we say, more than from what himself says; Yea not so
much: for he makes our Gospel-Obedience, a perfect Righteousness, which we may
lean to, and plead for our justification and Salvation upon.

Or 5. (says he) as if there were any Obedience, whose end is not
Righteousness and justification, against the charge of the contrary
disobedience. Ans. This is but vanity, for neither is it denied, nor is it any
thing to the point; because the Righteousness spoken of is a perfect
Righteousness, answerable to the Covenant of works, as the condition of life:
And who ever perform Obedience, with such an eye and design, and for such an
end, shall in end meet with a sad disappointment, be their diligence and
seize what they will. 6. (says he) And is not gratitude an end, and a
thing commanded by the Law? If we obeyed perfectly in Christ, we were perfectly
thankful in Christ. Ans. It will only follow, that we were perfectly thankful
in Christ, in order to the obtaining of the reward; but not so, as if we in our
own persons, were no more obliged to endeavoure thankfulness.

7. (says he) But if they say, That Christ fulfilled the Law only made to Adam
for us, and not his own Law of Grace, and therefore, that he obeyed for us only
to the ends of that Law. Sure this is the thing that himself will say, or he
must say, that Christ fulfilled no Law for us, in our stead. But what answers
he? If the ends (says he) and matter of that Law be fulfilled by us in Him,
our Obedience to any other must be needless; for he that is supposed never to
have sinned, needs not use any means for pardon or remedy. Ans. We say not,
That the Law was fulfilled by us, in Him; but that He fulfilled the Law, as a
Surety, willingly putting His Name in our obligation, and undertaking our debt:
And from the Imputation of this to us, it will never follow, that we are
thereby, or can be, supposed never to have sinned. What next? By this rule
(says he) Christ only fulfilled the Law for Adam and Eve; and for us only as
we were in them, which is only virtually, and not actually at all, but not at
all for us, according to any obligation, that ever fell upon our persons. How
proves he this? For 1. (says he) we were never personally bound to perfect,
personal, perpetual Obedience, as the Condition of life for that Covenant, as
to the promise and condition, ceased before any man was born. Ans. That
Covenant, I grant, ceased to be the way to life, as it was to Adam at first;
because it became a thing impossible; yet, as Adam fell under the Curse of that
broken Covenant, so did all his posterity fall with him and in him: hence when
his posterity come to be existent persons, they are Children of wrath, and are
under the Curse of that Covenant; and all their Actions, afterward committed,
are further sins and violations of that Covenant: for we may not think, that
Adam, after his first sin, was not in case to violat that Covenant any more:
And though before any man was born, the new Covenant, or Gospel was promulgat;
yet, notwithstanding thereof, all men were born under the Curse of the first
Covenant, and were never delivered from under that, until they closed with the
terms of the second Covenant, or Covenant of Grace. But he says 2. All the
duty in the world, which we are bound unto, is to be done for Euangelical ends,
for recovery, grace and unto gratitude. Ans. And was not Adam before the fall
also bound unto gratitude? But he possibly means gratitude for Redemption,
yet he has proved, that all the world, Heathens, I mean, and such as never
heard of the Gospel, are obliged to Gratitude, upon the account of Redemption:
or that all, that is required of them, is to be done for Gospel ends. But in
all this, I am little concerned, who see no necessity of restricking Christ's
obedience so.

8. He says. That we see not, that our own answer implies the truth, of what
he and others assert; and is the same which they give but our cause is
incapable of. What then says he and his? We say (says he) that Christ did
indeed most perfectly obey the Law of Innocence, so far for us, and in our
stead (though not in our persons) as doing that, which we should have done and
did not; and has merited for us a better Covenant, which obliges us not at
all to obey for the ends of the first Covenant viz. that our perfection might
be our Righteousness, or the Condition of life; but only to obey for the ends
of the New Covenant, for the obtaining and improving of recovering grace and
Salvation by Christ freely given us, which we ourselves must do, or perish.
Ans. (1) If Christ obeyed for us, and in our stead, I see not, why he may not
be said to do it, as our Surety, and so in our Law-person, seeing, according to
our Common discourse, the Surety and Principal debtor are one person in Law.
But about ambiguous terms, we need not debate. It is of greater moment to
differ, as to this, that he thinks the us compr^hendeth all persons, Elect
and Reprobat. (2) That Christ did merit the New Covenant, is no where said in
Scripture; and yet this is all, that Mr. Baxter here mentions, as merited by
Him. (3) I think, he is as much concerned, as we are, to loose his own
difficulties, formerly proposed: for. 1. How can He be said, to have fulfilled
all the Law for us, that did not fulfill it to all due ends? 2. Can the Law
require more than absolute perfection? 3. Was not absolute perfection in
Christ's holy Obedience? 4. Is not gratitude an end required in the Law of
Innocence? 5. If Christ fulfilled only the Law of Innocence, did he not fulfill
the Law for Adam and Eve only, or for us, as in them etc. Let him answer these
himself, and he shall help us.

Next (n. 190.) he brings some in saying. That we may as well say, that man
must not die, because Christ died for us; as not obey because Christ obeyed for
us, and then tells us, that we strangely use their reason against ourselves, and
know it not. But what if this be his mistake? Let us hear his reason. For we
say (says he) that we must die, because we did not perfectly either obey the
Law, or suffer all its penalty, by Christ, as our legal person; but he suffered
only to satisfy justico in tantum, to this end, that man himself suffering
death and temporal afflictions, and obeying the Law of grace, might be saved
from all the rest of the punishment. But if we had so fulfilled the Law, as
before said, by doing or suffering, we could not have died, or suffered the
least affliction, as a penalty; for all punishment, in the essence of the
relation is for sin. Ans. Though I had rather say, That Christ Suffered and
Obeyed for His own, and in their stead, as their Surety, willingly undertaking
the debt, that they were under, than that we Suffered and Obeyed in Him: yet it
may be, they who speak so, are far from that meaning, that Mr. Baxter puts
on their words: and when they call Christ our legal person, they mean no more,
than that he was a Surety, or a public Person. (2) Though he suffered not to
deliver His own from temporal death; yeth he did bear the Curse, and satisfied
Vindictive justice, and left nothing of that for them to suffer: and what
chastisements they meet with, yea and death it self is made to work together
for their good.

He brings them in again (n. 190.) saying. It is more Inconvenient to say,
that Christ was perfect in our person, than that He satisfied in our person,
and we by Him] And here possibly the same mistake is but continued. But, as he
takes it up, he thinks that hereby the Gospel is subverted. Ans. The whole
depends upon the Explication of these words, in our person. Mr. Baxter
thinks that these words, in our person in a Law sense, import, that we paid
all in Christ, as a man pays a Sum of Money by his servant, whom he sends
to carry it; or some such thing. And if this be not their meaning, who use this
expression; all this outcry is to no purpose; and is only a fighting against
his own imagination, and a mere striving about words: yet he grants, that we
may fitly say, that Christ suffered in the person of a sinner; but he bids us
mark the sense, saying 1. Suffering as penal belongs to a sinner as such; but
Satisfaction is an effect of Christ's Suffering, which resulteth not from the
mere suffering, nor from the person of a sinner; but from the will and Covenant
of God, made to that excellent person, who was God and perfect man, Well, what
next? 2. Note 2. (says he) that it is not any other man's person, that we mean,
that Christ suffered in, but His own. Ans. And no man ever dreamed, that He
either did, or could suffer, in any other man's physical person. But seeing He
was made sin for us, and so died in our room and stead, why may He not be said
to have died in our Law-person? If a pledge, or hostage, suffer for those he
stands for, may not he be said to suffer in their Law-person? If a Surety be
put in prison for the debtor, may he not be said to suffer in the debtor's
Law-place, and in his person in Law-sense? He adds. And we mean that He took
upon Him the person of a sinner; in as much as He consented to suffer for sin.
Ans. This is good, and we accept of it cheerfully in tantum, for it explaineth
to us, in part, the meaning of these words, He made Him sin for us* And so (he
adds) personating here is not meant beco^ing any other man's person in
Law-seuse; so as that other legally suffered what he did; but it is only his
own persons becoming a sufferer, in the stead of sinners, for their sins. As
the Apostle says. He was made sin for us; that is, so far by Imputation, as
that he undertook to suffer what sinners suffer, and for their sins. Ans. But
when Christ came in the Law-place of sinners, and did substitute Himself, in
their room, and suffered what they were obliged to suffer; sure, He took on
their person, in a Lawsense, and they, for whom He suffered, can be said, in
His, and in His Fathers design, so far legally to have suffered, what He
suffered, as never to be made to suffer the same themselves.

But he sees, that this is but a wordy Controversy; and therefore to free the
matter of ambiguity of words, he ( page 77.) adds several things, as 1. That
as we hold, that Adam was the Natural Root or parent of Mankind; so also that
Christ was the foederal root of all the saved, and in several respects (though
not all) a second Adam. Ans. We hold, that Adam was not only the Natural Root,
but he was also the federal Root of all mankind: for the Covenant was made
with him, and with all his posterity in him: and hence it was, that all sinned
in him, and fell with him, in his first transgression. Romans 5: 12. 1. Cor. 15:
20, 21.

He adds. 2. Adam was but one single Natural person, nor did God (by err^ur,
or arbitrary reputation) esteem or account Him to be any other, than he was.
None of our persons were distinct persons in Adam, nor those persons, that now
they are. Therefore we were not so personally in him, at his fall. But all our
persons are in time and mediatly by our progenitors derived lineally from him,
not as having been persons existent in him, but being persons caused remotely
by him. Ans. Adam, it is true, was but one single Natural person, in a physical
sense; yet in a Law-sense, as he was constitute the federal Head and Root, we
were all that one Adam, or he was us all, representing all; and so did God
esteem, or account him, not by error, but by a Right Reputation, founded on
His own Constitution. (2) None of our physical persons were distinct persons in
him, yet our legal persons were in him, when he represented us all, as a
federal Head. (3) We know, that our physical persons were only seminally, or
virtually in him; and we grant also, that to be only virtually in Adam is
terminus diminuens, as to personal inexistence; but I know not, how we could be
personally in-existent in him, even when existent in a physical sense. But all
this takes not away that federal inexistence, whereby, in a Law-sense, we were
in him, as our federal Head and Root. But, it seems, Mr. Baxter does not
acknowledge this, because he makes our Natural relation to Adam to be the only
reason of out partaking of his sin. We do not deny our Natural Interest in
Adam, but we superadde to it this federal Interest. He says. It is our Natural
relation to Adam, supposed in God's Law, which is the reason of our
participation in his sin and not any will or judgment of God, without or beyond
our Natural Interest; for else it should be God, most properly, who by His
arbitrary Imputation, should either make us sinners, or repute us such, when we
are none. Ans. I have granted, that we have a Natural relation to Adam, but I
add, that that is not the sole ground or reason of our participation in his
sin; but the federal relation, with the Natural relation. And hence it does no
way follow, that God does properly make us sinners, or repute us such, when we
are not, by His arbitrary Imputation: for this Imputation, being founded upon
this double preconstituted relation, cannot be called merely arbitrary; nay,
nor could it be so called, though it were said to be solely founded upon this
federal relation, more than when it is said to be grounded upon the Natural
relation. Though in another sense, it might be so called as well, when said to
be founded on the Natural, as when said to be founded on the federal Relation,
God being the free Author and Constitutor of both.

3. He adds. So Christ is, though not the Natural, yet the federal Adam and
Root of Believers: When he satisfied and merited, we were not in Him, either as
in Adam seminally, as in a Natural Generator, nor as existent persons; nor did
God falsely so repute us to be. But He was then the Cause (materially) or had
that virtus effectiva, which would justify and Sanctify and Glorify us in
due time. Ans. Christ, it is true, is no Natural; but a federal Root; and so
keeps Correspondence with the first Adam, a federal Root. (2) It is true
also, we were not in Christ, when He satisfied, as in Adam, seminally, as in a
Natural Generator: but yet the Elect were in Him, in a more noble and
supernatural manner, as given of God to Him, and as undertaken for by Him, when
He did substitute Himself in their Law-place, and became their Surety. (3) If
Christ had only been the material cause, as having that virtus effectiva, how
could He be called their federal Head? or how could they be said to be chosen
in Him, before the foundation of the world? It was the nature of sinners (says
he) though not a sinful Nature, which He assumed: But that Nature, which He
undertook, was existent in His Individual person, and no other individual
person was existent in His existent personal Nature. What then? So that (he
adds) when we say it was the common Nature of Man, we mean only specifice*
that Nature which is of the same species with all other men's, but not that
which existed individually, in any, but himself. Ans. Notwithstanding of all
this, Christ was a federal Head, and a Public Person, undertaking for, and
therein representing all those, that were given to Him to save; and this his
following words confirm, when he says. But it was individual persons, in
whose stead, or place Christ suffered, and whom He undertook to justify,
sanctify and save, and gather into an holy Society to that end; and to that
end, He undertook and performed His office, and merited all this by His perfect
Righteousness; so that hereby He made Himself a federal Head and Root of an
holy society (His Church) and when ever any person does believe, and is united
federally to Him, he then receives the effects of that, which was before in
Christ, as a virtus effectiva. Ans. But Christ, being a federal Head to His
own, whom in due time, He was to bring in to an holy Society, believers receive
the effects of that, which was in Christ, as such a federal Head; which is
more, than as a virtus effectiva, and Imports His Obligation, as a Surety, to
work these effects, and speaks out His representing of them, as a public
Person, and paying their debt, according to His Undertaking, in the Covenant of
Redemption.

Thereafter ( page 78.) from this, That the Law made to Adam did not assign
Christ to this office, nor oblige Him to suffer for sinners, according to it,
and that therefore He suffered not by that obligation, which bound us to
suffer, but by the obligation of His own consent, he infers, that the Law of
works took not Christ for the Civil, or legal person of Believers, more than it
made Him such. Ans. But this consequence is denied; for when a debtor is lying
in prison, a friend, who was not formerly obliged, undertaking to satisfy the
Creditor and making satisfaction, is by Law taken for the legal person of the
debtor, who is accordingly dealt with, as if he himself had satisfied the
Creditor.

In the 4, 5. and 6. places, he tells us, That believers, receiving Christ
Himself, receive title to His Grace, Spirit and Glory, and are personally and
actually His Subjects etc, and have a right to all His conferred benefits;
which right follows not Immediately to them from what Christ did, or suffered,
but from the Covenant of grace; and therefore they have no right before the
time, nor any, but on the Conditions specified in the Covenant. Ans. (1) Though
they have no full, complete, actual right, until such time, as is condescended
upon; yet by virtue of the compact betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator, wherein
the Mediator undertook particularly, for those given unto Him, these may be
said to have a real fundamental right, though that right be not subjected in
them, nor pleadable by them, before the time appointed; yet a Right, or
something equivalent (for I will not strive about words) must necessarily flow
from Christ's Satisfying for them, and paying their debt, according to His
Undertaking. As, when it is contracted, that the Eldest daughter of the
marriage shall have such a sum of money, when she comes to be married, or to
be of such an age, that daughter has another right unto that sum, than any
other daughter has, and that fundamentally from the contract and Agreement,
though before the time designed, her right be not such, as she can plead it in
Law, in order to the possessing of the sum (2.) Therefore the right, that
Believers have, flows from the Compact, and Christ's Suffering according to
compact, though it be conveyed by the Covenant of Grace, and their possession
of the Benefits be immediately therefrom; as that daughters right to the sum
is properly from the contract, though her actual possession according to the
contract, be from her Marriage, or coming to that age. Though believers right
to the actual possession of the benefits be so conveyed; and as to the
conveyance, some be granted absolutely, as faith (as himself will confess) some
upon condition of faith, that is, in that order, and according to that Method,
that faith shall preceed: Yet, in respect of God, their right to all is
absolutely purchased by Christ; and so in a sense theirs, though not subjected
in them, nor pleadable by them, till the time appointed come. This whole scheme
of Mr. Baxter's seems to me to be founded upon, and to flow from his Notion
of Universal Redemption, whereby he will have Christ to have died in the room
and stead of all; which (to me) is in the room and place of none; and to have
purchased the New Covenant, a Common good to all, whereby all that would
perform the New Conditions, should have right to the benefits, as having
obtained the same, by their performance of these proper Conditions; anteriour
to which, there was no difference at all betwixt them and others; but this
Scheme and the ground thereof I cannot own.

7. He tells us, that as none, till he was a person, could be a person guilty of
Adam's sin, nor when he was a person any sooner, than he was also guilty of his
own inherent pravity, and none that had the use of reason was guilty of either,
or both these only, without the guilt of his own actual sin. So none till he be
a believer is related, as a member of a perfectly Righteous Savior; and that
is done no sooner (in time) then he has the inherent righteousness of his
personal faith and federal consent, and that obliges him to the further active
Righteousness of a holy life. Ans. The Protas^s and Apodos^s seem not to agree,
for as upon our personal existence, we become persons guilty of Adam's sin, and
that before (as to nature, though not as to time) we have inherent pravity;
because this is an Effect, Consequent and Punishment of the former: so upon our
faith, which is our personal existing grace, corresponding to our personal
existing in Nature, by our Natural being, should follow, as answering to this
Imputation of Adam's guilt, the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: but in
stead of this, he mentions nothing, but a Relation as a member of a righteous
Savior; which (according to the comparison) should correspond to our relation
to Adam, which is, in nature, before our partaking of his sin. (2) As answering
to our inherent pravity, he should have named our justification, Adoption etc.
as the effects of the Imputation of Christ's Righteous^ess; in stead of this,
he names the Inherent righteousness of our personal faith and federal consent;
thereby Importing that this federal consent is posteriour to our Relation;
while as I suppose, he will say, that our Relation is upon the condition of our
federal consent: Not to mention here his error (hereafter discovered) of
making faith to be considered here, as our personal Inherent Righteousness.
Then he tells us. That all these three conjunct (though not coordinat) make up
the total Righteousness of a Saint. viz. 1. our Relation to Christ, in Union,
as to a perfectly Righteous Head, who fulfilled all Righteousness for us, to
merit our justification (which is called Christ's Righteousness imputed to us,
as being thus far reputed ours) 2. our penitent believing consent to his
Covenant, which is the condition of the foresaid relation to Christ. 3. And our
Sanctification. Ans. (1) Here we see, that Righteousness made the second
Righteousness, which yet is the condition of the first; as if our Inherent
pravity were the condition of the Imputation of Adam's sin to us (2) our
Relation to Christ is not one and the same with the Imputation of Righteousness
to us; no more than our relation to Adam is the same thing with the Imputation
of his sin to us. (3) Thus we see, by asserting the cause, viz. our relation to
Christ, he takes away the effect viz. the Imputation of His Righteousness, as
being no distinct thing: as if one should say, we are related to Adam, a sinful
Head, who broke the Law for us; and this is called Adam's sin imputed to us, as
being thus far reputed ours. But yet Christ's fulfilling all Righteousness for
us (if that for us, were understood in the Scripture sense, and not according
to the Socinian, or Arminian gloss) would abundantly ground the Imputation, we
plead for, and that as a fruit of our Relation to Christ. Passing what he says
8, as not worth the noticeing.

We come to see, what he says 9. and lastly. Proposing this objection to
himself, if Christ's person be given us, then His personal Righteousness is
given us with it. He replieth thus. Yes, as His person is; He is not given us
as proprietors and Lords, to become our own, at our dispose; nor is his person
made one Person with each, or any of us. His person is not turned into ours,
nor ours into his. Ans. This is all to no purpose; for no man, in his wits,
either said so, or dreamed so, at any time. As the husband (says he) is not
the person of the wife, nor the King of each Subject: but as one, that has a
Great, wise, learned, Bountiful, Holy King or Husband, has also his Greatness
etc. as they have him, that is, as his perfections for their good, as far as
his relation binds him; but not as if his enduements were removed from him to
them, or falsely reputed to be in them, or his person to be their persons: so
here as we have a Christ, so we have a perfect Righteous Christ given us to be
our federal head, when we believe; and the Righteousness, which is not in us,
but in Him, is ours so far as to be for our good, as far as His office and
Covenant do oblige Him. Ans. This savoureth of making Christ's dying for us, to
be nothing else than His dying for our good, as Socinians say: and if it import
more, (as it does in truth) he cannot but see, that his simile here, has
nothing of a similitude in it; for the objection speaks of Christ's person
given to us, not as a great, wise etc. King is given to his Subjects; but as
the Surety is given to the debtor, i.e. as one, whose payment of the debt, must
be reckoned on the score of the debtor, in order to his liberation out of
prison. He adds. So that a Righteous Christ and therefore the Righteousness
of Christ, are ours, relatively themselves, quoad jus beneficii; so as that we
have right to these benefits by them, which we shall possess: and for the
merits of His Righteousness, we are conditionally justified and saved, before
we believe, and actually after. Ans. All this jus beneficii is but remote; for
in the foregoing page he told us, as we heard, that this right does not flow
immediately from what Christ did and suffered, but from his Covenant of Grace:
and I think, he should have said rather from their performance of the
condition: for the Covenant conveyeth no title, but conditionally, he knows,
and therefore can give no title or Right, until the condition be performed;
upon the performance of which, the conditional Title becomes actual. And
further, there is no more here said than what a Socinian will say; and
particularly Sclightingius pro Socino. cont. Meisnerum page 250. whose words we
cited above toward the beginning of our XIII. Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
Reasons enforcing the practice of the Truth, hithertill Vindicated.
WE have now, at some length, as the Lord was pleased to help, essayed to
vindicat this noble and fundamental Truth, of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, in order to the obtaining of this life of justification; and ere
we proceed, I judge, it will not be amiss to press the practice of this Truth,
and the hearty and practical embracing thereof, by several Arguments and
Considerations: for it will not be enough for us, to know the Theory, and to be
orthodox in our judgments, as to these Necessary and soul-concerning truths;
but we must also practice them, that it may appear, we do beleev them in very
deed, and that we believe them with the heart; and this will be the best way to
be kept orthodox, and steadfast in the truth.

I shall therefore propose a few Considerations, moving to the practice of this
so necessary and concerning a Truth. As

1. This way of justification through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, the
Mediator and Surety, is a way, thath has the testimony of both Law and
Prophets, confirming it; and is now more clearly revealed and manifest under
the Gospel dispensation, than it was formerly. Romans 3: 21, 22. But now the
Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets, even the Righteousness of God, which is by faith of Christ,
unto all, and upon all them that believe. And the same Apostle tells us Romans 1:
16, 17. That he was not ashamed of the Gospel* for it is the Power of God unto
Salvation to every one that believes etc. And what is the ground and reason of
this: for therein (says he) is the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to
faith, as it is written, the just shall live by ^aith. This then must be a very
sure and saife way, being thus attested and witnessed by all, that are worthy
of credit, in this matter and a way, that is one and the same, as to its
substance, both before the Law, under the Law, and now under the Gospel, though
it be now more clearly unfolded and explained, since the coming and exaltation
of the blessed Mediator, than it was before His coming; when it was darkly
revealed and shadowed under the Mosaical Ceremonies and Observances. None need
to fear a Miscarrying, or a disappointment, in following of this way, which
even the Law it self, or the Mosaical observances did point forth, in the daily
and yearly Sacrifices, pointing forth the Lamb of God, that takes away the
sins of the world, and on which the offerers were to lay their hands, before
they were to be offered up, in token of their devolving and laying their sin
and guilt upon the same, as the the type of that one and only acceptable
Sacrifice, that was to come in the fuluess of time, and was to satisfy justice
for their sins; and to show forth, and declare their faith, relying thereon,
and expecting acceptance there through, as we see Levit. 1: 4 and 3: 2. and 16:
21. And a way, which also the Prophets, or the Spirit of Christ, which was in
them, did testify, and bear witness to, when it testified before hand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow. 1 Pet. 1: 10. etc. So
Peter, in his Sermon to Cornelius, told him Act. 10: 43. that to Him, (i.e. to
Christ) gave all Prophets witness, that through His Name, whosoever ever believes
in Him, shall receive Remission of sins.

2. It is the way, which all the Ancients took, and found to be a saife and
sure way; and therefore it should be to us a way, worthy of all acceptance.
Abraham believed God, preaching to him the Gospel; and the object of his faith,
or the sum and substance of the Gospel, that is, the Righteousness of Christ,
was imputed to him; and thereby he was justified: so does Paul clear the matter
to us Romans 4: 1, 2, 3. What shall we say then, that Abraham our father, as
pertaining to the flesh, has found etc. for if Abraham were justified by
works, he has to glory, but not before God: for what says the Scripture?
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. And if we
enquire, what this was, which Abraham did believe? or where in was it, that he
believed God? Paul tells us Gal. 3: 8. That it was the Gospel. And the Scripture
foreseeing, that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all Nations be blessed. Now,
though these words, in thee shall all Nations be blessed, be not expressly
repeated Genesis 15. where it is said, that Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness: Yet this was the chief and principal part of
that promise of multiplying of his seed; and was therefore both before this
time mentioned together with that promise Genesis 12: 2, 3. and twice there-after
to wit. Genesis 18: 18. and 22; 17, 18. And further, this is called the Covenant,
which God made with the fathers Act. 3: 25. and therefore it must have been the
chief thing, which Abraham's faith did fix upon, who is therefore called the
Father of the faithful, as being the Father of many nations, Romans 4: 16, 17.
And this is the sure promise, that is made sure to all the seed, and must be
laid hold on by faith. Romans 4: 16. And upon this account, Abraham is said to
have seen the day of Christ, and to have been glad Ioh. 8: 56. And as Abraham
took this way; so did others take it, before him: such as Abel, who by faith
offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice, than Cain; by which he obtained
witness, that he was righteous. Heb. 11: 4. And Enoch, who pleased God by
Faith: and Noah, who became heir of the Righteousness which is by faith. Heb.
11: 5, 6, 7. So David under the Law, describes the blessedness of the man,
unto whom God imputes Righteousness, without works etc. Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
32: 1, 2. This then being such a paved way, we must close with it, and seek
after no other.

3. This way is by getting or putting on a Righteousness, with which God will
be well pleased, and with which alone, he is and will be satisfied; for it is
called the Righteousness of God Romans 3: 21, 22. And the Righteousness, which is
of God by faith Phil. 3: 9. as being not only a Righteousness, which God has
found out, who knew best, how to bring about the Salvation of his chosen ones,
to his own glory, and which alone will be acceptable to Him; but, as being also
the Righteousness of one, who is God, even of Jesus Christ, God-man, the
Savior and Cautioner, and this is made over to believers, and imputed to them,
and they receive it by faith, that it may become theirs, and they may stand
before justice clothed with it, and thereby answer all that Law, and justice
can say against them, or lay to their charge. Can sinners find out and fall
upon a Righteousness, more excellent in it self, or more pleasing or satisfying
unto God, and whereupon a distressed soul pursued by justice and the ^errours
of the Lord can with more confidence rest and rely, then this is, which is the
Righteousness of God; the Righteouness wrought by him, who was and is the
Fathers equal, God over all, blessed for ever, and is Lord, our Righteousness
Ier. 23: 5. and is made of God to us Righteousness 1 Cor. 1: 30? What can
sinners invent, that can once be compared here-with? Can any thing; which they
themselves can do, yield more ground of Peace and Confidence? No certainly.

4. This way demonstrateth both the Justice and Mercy of God, and so a way
wherein the Lord has given a great demonstration of his wonderful Grace and
Mercy: and a way also, wherewith justice is fully satisfied. This the Apostle
does fully declare Romans 3: 24, 25, 26. being justified freely by his grace,
through she redemption, that is in Jesus Christ. Whom God has set forth to be
a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness to
declare I say, at this time his Righteousness, that he might be just, etc. And
this should commend it higly unto us, that when neither Angel's, nor men, could
have found out a way, how Mercy and Grace might have shined forth, in the
Salvation of poor sinners; and with all how Justice should have had
satisfaction, the Infinite Wisdom of God, has found out this way, whereby
Justice and Mercy are no more, as it were, at odds, but concurring to the
justification of a poor sinner. Whatever way else we take, should we with these
Micah. 6: 7. come before the Lord, and bow ourselves before the high God,
should we come before him with brunt Offerings, with calves of a year old. It
were all in vain: He would not be pleased with thousands of rams nor with ten
thousands of rivers of oil. Should we give our first born for our transgression
and the fruit of our body, for the sin of our Soul: What would that avail? It
could be no Satisfaction to Justice: the Lord would not be just, in justifying
such sinners.

5. The sad disappointment, that such, as took another course to the end they
might be justified and Accepted, have met with, should be as an hand upon the
margin to us, to beware of tradeing in the footsteps of their folly, lest we
fall into the same pit of ruin. We read Romans 9: 31, 32. that Israel, which
followed after the Law of righteousness, did not attain to the Law of
righteo^sness; Wherefore? because they sought it not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling stone. They were
at much pains to follow after the Law of Righteousness, thinking thereby to
attain unto Righteousness, and so to be justified; but after all their pains
and travail, they did miss their mark, and came short of what they projected:
They would not take the way of Faith, they would not by faith lay hold on
Christ, and put on His Righteousness, but they stumbled at that stumbling
stone; they sought after a Righteousness, by their own works, which they
supposed were the works of the Law, but were not so indeed; for they sought
after the Law of Righteousness, but as it were by the works of the Law: And
therefore they could not reach their intended end, how confident so ever they
were in their way. So again Romans 10: 3, 4. it is said of them for they being
ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God; for
Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes.
They would not follow God's way, nor submit to that Righteousness, which is
twice here called the Righteousness of God; but in the pride of their heart,
would set up and establish their own Righteousness, and make it stand on its
feet, and therefore would not be beholden to Christ, and to his Righteousness,
nor look to him by faith, who was the end of the Law for righteousness, to
every one that believes: and so they lost all. This sad example should cause
all look about them, and beware of intertaining a prejudice at the Gospel-way
of Justification.

6. From this Instance, we may also take notice of another Consideration, to
wit, That to refuse this Gospel-way of Justification argues intolerable pride
of heart, and haughtiness of mind: It is observed of the Jews here, that they
would not submit themselves unto the Righteousness of God; they would not bow
so low, nor humble themselves so far, as to deny their own Righteousness, and
condescend to take on Christ; but in their pride and stoutness of heart, they
thought, though the bricks were fallen, they should build all up again with
their own hewn stones, and so they went about to underprop and set up their own
Righteousness, that it might stand. And what an intolerable thing is this, for
beggars and dyvours to be so proud of nothing, and to refuse to accept of and
be satisfied with the payment of a Cautioner? As then we would not have this
guilt of contemning in the pride of our hearts, the way that the Wisdom of God
has found out, and the Righteousness of God, let us not refuise our own
Salvation, and stand out against this established, sure and approven way of
taking on Christ's Righteousness.

7. We may take notice of another Consideration here, to move us to close with
this only way, to wit, That the refuising of this way, as it argues ignorance
both of the worth, and of the excellency and of the necessity of this way of
Justification, through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ; so it argues a
rooted prejudice against Christ, and the way of justification through him, and
a judicial stroke of wrath from the Lord upon such, as wilfully and
pertinaciously refuise this Gospel way: for it is said of the jews here, Romans
10: 3. that they were ignorant of God's Righteousness: And Chap. 9: 32. that
they stumbled at that stumbled stone, they brake their necks on that, which was
the only mean of saving them, and that in the righteous judgment of God,
according to what was foretold Esai. 8: 14, 15. where it is said, that the Lord
of hosts, who would be for a Sanctuary to his own, should be for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offense; for a gin and for a snare and many among
them shall stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared and be taken. And
this is further confirmed by that which Peter says 1. Pet. 2: 7, 8. but unto
them, which be disobedient, the stone, which the builders disallowed, the same
is made the head of the corner. And a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense,
to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were
appointed. The consideration of this should cause all look about them.

8. It is also considerable, that such as will not submit themselves unto this
Righteousness of God, have no way to betake themselves unto; no course that
they can follow, in order to their Justification, but that, which is
peremtorily rejected of the Lord, and condemned in his word; that is, the way
of their Own Works. These Jews, who would not submit themselves unto the
Righteousness of God, could fall upon no other course, but the establishing of
their own Righteousness: And there is no other way mentioned in Scripture but
these two, either by Works, or by Faith; that is, either by the Righteousness
of Christ, or by our own Righteousness; hence the Apostle does always oppose
these two to other, and by disputing against the Law, our Works, or our
Righteousness according to the Law, he establishes and confirms the true and
only way, through the Righteousness of Christ; and by pleading for this, he
destroys the other, and as there are no third way distinct from both, so
there is no commixture of both, to make up a third, in apart agreeing with
both: for grace and works cannot agree to gether to make one composition. Romans
11: 6. So that what ever different Ways, and Modes or Methodes, men excogitate
in this matter, if they step aside from the pure way of grace, the way of
Justification through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, they must of
necessity close with that way, which is through Works, and against which Paul
has disputed so much, in his Epistles. Now what madness is it, to embrace such
a way, in whole, or in part (and if in part, it must also be in whole, for as
is said, grace and works will not mix) against which the Apostle has argued
so much, both in his Epistle to the Romans, and to the Galatians?

9. This way of Justification through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ is
the only way to Peace and Reconciliation with God; as the Apostle concludes
Romans 5: 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Peace with God stands only upon this foundation, to
wit, Justification by Faith; that is, Justification through the Righteousness
of Christ imputed to us by God, and received by faith. People may dream of
obtaining Peace and Reconciliation another way; but they will be miserably
disappointed, for, as we said above, justice can be no other way satisfied and
till justice be satisfied, there is no Reconciliation, no Peace. What a
miserable case then are persons in, who will not submit unto this way? They may
frame a way to themselves, and be very Zealous in it, as the Jews had a Zeal
of God Romans 10: 2. and be at much expense of duties and toil therein, as the
Pharisee, who fasted twice a week, and yet attain to no Peace or
Reconciliation with God. All then, who are desireous of this blessed Peace,
must choose this way, and close with it heartily, and this should be a strong
enducement unto them thereunto. We should remember what Paul said 2 Cor. 5: 18,
19, 21. God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ and that God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, but how was this: See verse. 21. for
he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. This, even this only, is the way to Peace and
Reconciliation with God, and who ever take a way, different from this, or will
not cordially close herewith, must resolve to abide in that estate of enmity,
whereinto they are by Nature.

10. This way of Justification, as it is the only way of Peace and
Reconciliation with God, so it lays the ground of solid Joy and Rejoyceing
in hope of the glory of God and of Glorying in tribulation also, as Paul
informs us. Romans 5: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Being justified by faith, through Jesus
Christ, we have through him, access by faith, in to this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and not only so, but we glory
in tribulations also, knowing that tribulation works patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts etc. Men may, I know, promise to themselves
much Peace, Joy and Consolation, in their own false way, and may also deceive
themselves, as the Pha^isee did, when he thanked God, he was not like the
publican: but how had will the discovery of the deceit and cheatry prove in
end? God's way is the only way, that will yield all these desirable things, in
truth and reality: and therefore we would do well, to follow this way alone.

11. Moreover this way of Justification will only lay the sure and unfailing
foundation of true Holiness and Sanctification, and hence are the most
spiritual, convincing and moving Arguments unto the study of holiness, only to
be taken; as we see the Apostle clearing it in his Epistle to the Romans Chap
6. and 7. and 8. having laid down, in the preceding Chapters, as a sure ba.
sis thereunto, the only Gospel-way of Justification. Men may think, that the
pressing of Justification by our own works should prove the most effectual
Mean and Persuasive unto the real study of holiness, and a most infallible
Argument to set people awork to follow holiness with all their might: But
experience sufficiently proves that all such, who by their doctrine lay more
or less of their weight upon their own works, in their Justification, are so
far from outstriping others in the spiritual exercise of true holiness, that
for the most part the very contrary is too too manifest: and howbeit
Adversaries to Gospel-Justification, through the Imputed Righteousness of
Christ, object to the Asserters thereof, that thereby they are Enemies to the
study of holiness, and give way to laziness and negligence* in that exercise;
yet, not only is their alleigance groundless, seeing we press holiness upon the
same grounds, that the Apostle does, who often times meets with this objection,
in his way of declaring and pressing the Gospel-way of justification: but also
experience shows, that such as have fled to Christ, for Righteousness, have
another way of Communion with God, in all holy conversation; and their walkeing
in all the ways of God; has a spiritual luster and heavenly beauty, being
compared with the walk of others, strangers in practice, and in opinion, to the
Gospel-way of being Justified through Faith in Christ.

12. Whosoever ever reject this truth, and do not accept of this way of
justification, through the Imputed Righteousness of Christ, received and leaned
to by faith, do interpretativly say as much, as that Christ is dead in vain:
for the Apostle tells us Gal. 2: 21. that he did not frustrat the grace of God;
for if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. thereby
teaching us, that the crying up of the Law, and the Righteousness thereof, and
urging people to seek after a Righteousness, by which they may be justified, in
their Obedience to the Law, is a real frustrating of the grace of God, and a
declaring that Christ is dead in vain: and consequently, whoever seek after a
Righteousness, consisting in their personal obedience to the Law, and will not
accept of, nor heartily and practically close with the Gospel-way of
justification, through faith in Christ, do really frustrate, so far as in them
lies, all the grace of God, manifested in, and brought to light by the Gospel,
where this noble way of recovering sinners is revealed, and more clearly and
fully explained, than it was formerly. And it is a saying upon the matter, that
Christ has died in vain: for if he died not to satisfy for sinners, after he
had finished his course of Obedience, and so to make up a complete
Righteousness, which might answer all the necessities of sinners, lying under
the sentence of a broken Law; and having no way, without Christ, to obtain the
Crown of life, but by perfect and personal Obedience to the whole Law, which
was and is to them utterly impossible: If, I say, Christ died not for this end,
he died in vain; and all such, as will not heartily embrace this way, do on
the matter say, he died not for this end; and so, as far as they can, they make
him to have died in vain.

13. This Consideration might also have force with us, that what Paul taught,
as to this matter, he did also practice, and sweetly complye with; thereby
casting us a copy, in his own practice: for thus he speaks Phil. 3: 8, 9.
Yea doubtless and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in him,
not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness, which is of God by faith. So
Gal. 2: 16. knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ; even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might
be justified by the faith of Christ etc. If therefore, we would be sure in this
matter, we must take this course, which is so corresponding in all points, with
the Gospel-doctrine, in this matter. Therefore who ever would expect to have it
going well with them for evermore, must resolve upon this course, to be clothed
with the Righteousness of Christ, and get on that rob of Righteousness, which
is had through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness, which is of God by faith.

CHAP. XVIII.
Some of the duties of such, as live the life of Justification, proposed.
IN the last place, we shall mentione this Use of the Truth, formerly cleared
and confirmed, in reference to such as have attained unto this life of
justification, through faith, which every one may readily see, That it is the
duty of such, as are made partakers of this life, to beware of such things, as
may and will provoke the Lord to anger; and will be unsuitable for them, who are
thus graciously advanced to such an high State and Privilege of grace; and to
mind such duties, as do most suite such, as are so highly advanced, and so
greatly obliged to him, that has thus called them effectually, by his grace,
and has wrought up their hearts unto a full compliance with the
Gospel-contrivance of free grace. Many such particular duties might here be
mentioned: but I shall only point at a few, to which others may be reduced.

1. Such, as live this life of Gospel Justification, should beware of
intertaining thoughts of pride, or of boasting of any thing, they have freely
and graciously received* and particularly, they should guard against boasting
in this matter, that they are preferred to others, and brought out of a state
of death, when others are left yet to lie thereinto. This whole matter is so
contrived, and so wisely framed, that no ground of boasting, either before God,
or man, may be left unto Man; but that every one may celebrate the praise of
Free Grace. Therefore Justification is not by works, or by our obedience to the
Law; for then the justified man, being justified upon the account of his own
works, or of the works of righteousness, which he has done, should have ground
of glorying, though not before God, yet before Men; as having by his own
sweating, working and doing, obtained that, which others by their laziness,
negligence and not doing, have come short of. Paul tells us this expressly. Romans
4: 2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has to glory, but not before God:
and this is further confirmed verse. 4. Now to him, that works, is the reward
not reckoned of grace, but of debt. So that if Justification were by works,
Justification it self, and all the Consequences thereof should be due debt unto
the worker, and his reward: and so, as the hireling may boast of his labor,
when he gets his hire and reward; so the justified man, if justification were
by the works of the Law, might boast of his own pains and diligence, as having
received but his reward, and that which was due to him of debt, and not of
grace. But now, that all mouths may be stopped, and no flesh might glory, or
have ground of boasting, in themselves, and before others, the Lord has
contrived a far other way of justification, to wit, by Faith alone, whereby the
Man goes out of himself, renunceth all his own Righteousness, prosesseth
himself poor, naked and miserable, and a plain dyvour, and utterly
non-solvendo, and lays hold on a compleet and alsufficient Righteousness, in
Jesus Christ; and so has no ground of boasting or glorying even before men:
for it is nothing that is in him; or that he does, that is that Righteousness,
upon the account of which he is Justified; but only the Righteousness of Christ
without him. It is not his faith, not his works, nor his Righteousness; but
Christ's Righteousness is equally imputed to all believers, to the weakest
believer, as well as to the strongest; and so the strongest believer has no
ground of boasting before the weakest. Where is boasting-then? (says the
Apostle Romans 3: 27.) It is excluded by what Law? Of works? nay; but by the Law
of faith.

2. Upon the other hand, let all such glory in the Lord, and in his free grace
and gracious workings; Let them say, when they reflect on this matter, not unto
us Lord, not unto us, but unto thee be glory, seeing the matter is so contrived,
as that all the justified may see, that God may only have the glory of all, and
that none ought to share with him; that he alone should wear the crown; and
all his glorified ones should most cheerfully cast their crowns down at his
feet. But of him (says the Apostle 1 Cor. 1: 30, 31.) are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sanctification and
Redemption: that, according as it is written, he that glories, Let him glory
in the Lord. Christ is made all things unto and for his people, and they have
all of God through him, that no flesh should glory in his presence, as it is
said verse. 29. Let all such therefore, as are made partaker of this rich and
honorable Privilege, comply sweetly and cheerfully with this design of God,
to have God alone exalted, and the mouth of all flesh stopped, that he who
glories, may alone glory in the Lord.

3. Let such as are thus advanced, mind the great duty of holiness, and of
growing in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ; The way of faith is not
to make void the Law, but it does establish it Romans 3: 31. as Christ is made of
God unto is Righteousness, so is he made Sanctification. As he is Priest to
reconcile us to God, and become Righteousness to us, so is he a King to cause
us walk in the Lord, and to subdue our spiritual enemies, and so become
Sanctification to us. It is the language of the flesh and of corruption, to
argue from this Change and advancement unto a liberty to sin. Shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound? will the flesh object. But the Apostle
answers. Romans 6: 2. etc. God forbid, how shall we, that are dead to sin, live
any longer therein? It is repugnant to the nature of that state, whereinto now
they are bro^ght, to give way to sin: Therefore the justified should mind what
they are called to, and what new grounds, new advantages, new helps, new
encouragements they have unto holiness, that they had not before, all plainly
and fully set down by Paul Romans 6. and eise where.

4. How should they commend and cry up the free grace of God, and that love
that visited them, when they were lying in their blood, and no eye pityed them.
They were ungodly and without strength, yet Christ died for them Romans 5: 6. and
the Lord did justify the ungodly, even them, who had no righteousness of their
own, nor nothing to commend them unto him, Romans 4: 5. Yea where sin abounded,
grace did much more abound Romans 5: 20. Not only had they nothing more then
others to commend them unto God, but even they had less, and ^et God through
free grace set his Love upon the less worthy; for, says Paul (1 Cor. 1: 26,
27, 28.) ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble: but God has chosen the foolish things
of the world, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the
world, and things which are despised has God chosen, and things which are not,
to bring to naught things which are. That no flesh should glory in his
presence. Should not the thoughts of this raise their wondering, and cause them
speak to the commendation of the rich and free grace of God?

5. Let such as are brought into this state of life, wherein they have peace
with God, and are reconciled to Him, through Jesus Christ, carry as persons no
more strangers unto him, and as forraigners, but as now madenigh by the blood
of Jesus; and therefore let such remember, that through him, they have an
access by one Spirit unto the Farher, being now fellow-citisens with the
Saints, and of the household of God Ephesians. 2: 13, 14, 18, 19. Romans 5: 2.
Therefore should improve this advantage, both for their own good and for the
good of others; and should exercise communion and fellowshipe with the Father
and with his Son Jesus Christ and so walk with him. as agreed with Him, and
have their conversation in heaven. Has the Lord brought them into his
household, yea and admitted them to his presence, that they may kiss his hand,
and stand before his face continually, in the lower chamber of presence; and
should they carry as yet estranged from him? Is He at peace with them, and
should they have jealous thoughts of him? Is He reconciled unto them, and
should they carry, as keeping up some grudge against Him?

6. Such should account this state, whereinto now they are brought, their only
blessedness here below. Even as David (says Paul Romans 4: 6, 7, 8.) also
describes the blessedness of the Man, unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works; saying, blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered: blessed is the man unto whom the Lord will not impute
sin. Here is the poor self-condemned sinners blessedness, that he has a
righteousness imputed to him, who had none of his own, and who thereupon has
his iniquities forgiven, covered, and not imputed. And such as are made
partakers of this blessedness, should account it their happiness, that how ever
it be with them, as to outward things in the world, yet they are now brought
within the Covenant, and are covered with the mantle of Christ's Righteousness
and have all their iniquities covered, cast into the midst of the sea, so that
they shall never be reckoned upon their score.

7. This should be aground for them of glorying in the Lord, in the hardest
condition, they can be into in the world; being thus justified, they should
glory in tribulations knowing that they can suffer no loss o^ disadvantage
thereby, but on the contrary reap much good and advantage; for tribulation
works in such as are thus justified, and at peace with God, patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because
the love of God is shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost. Ought they
not then to carry under all oppressions, persecutions, hard usages of men, upon
the account of owning Christ and his Interest, as persons that are upon the
gaining hand, and reaping much spiritual advantage, being now brought through
grace into such a state of life? And how would they hereby glorify God in the
world?

8. The consideration of their present state of life, should cause them
triumph, in the midst of all difficulties and temptations, that they shall
meetwith in their way, as knowing, that the life of justification, whereof now
they are made partakers, shall continue: and that it shall end in the life of
glory; for whom the Lord justifies, them he also glorifieth. Romans 8: 30. Who
shall then lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God that
justifies: who is he that condemns? Who shall then separat such from the
love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or persecution, or distress, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay in all these things they are more then
conquerours, through him that loved them: Romans 8: 33, 34, 35, 37. Hear how Paul
concludes that matter for himself and others verse. 38, 32. for I am persuaded,
that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God: which is in Christ
Jesus, our Lord. Should not therefore such carry, as persons that cannot be
made miserable? How much does the Apostle insist on this, and clear it from
this ground Romans 5: 9, 10. saying, much more then being now justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him, for if when we were enemies,
we were reconciled unto God, by the death of his Son; much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. And again verse. 21. That as sin
has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life, by Jesus Christ, our Lord. There being then a sure ground of
confidence and assurance of life and of compleet salvation, laid in
justification, all such are called to rejoice in hope of the glory of God Rom,
5: 2. And to have confidence in the Lord, that he will perfect what he has
begun and to rest assured, that all they, which receive abundance of grace, and
of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. Romans 5:
17.

9. Yea particularly, the consideration of their many sins should not
discourage them, or cause them despond: for being now justified, all their
bygone sins are pardoned, and shall not be by the Lord laid to their charge
again, however the memory of them may humble them, and cause them run to the
fountain of the blood of Jesus; and all their future sins shall be pardoned,
according the Gospel grounds, and after the Gospel-methode, so that they shall
not prejudge them of their promised possession of glory and life everlasting.
Now the free gift is of many offenses, unto justification Romans 5: 16. There is
a sure way laid down, in the Gospel, whereby all their sins shall be taken
away, and the very body of death shall be killed more and more daily, so that
they shall not finally perish, what ever Satan, and body of death within shall
do, to prejudge them of the promised inheritance. Hence the Apostle infers
from his foregoing discourse Romans 8: 1. There is therefore now no condemnation
to then, which are in Christ Jesus.

10. Such as are thus justified, should follow the example of Paul Phil. 3: 7,
8, 9. and so account such things less for Christ, which formerly were gain yea
and count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ,
Jesus, their Lord, yea and account them but dung, that they may win Christ, and
be found in him; Here should their heart and delight be: about this should
their whole occupation be, to win and gain Christ more, to know him and the
power of his Resurrection and the followshipe of his sufferings, and to be made
conformable unto his death verse. 10. that hereby Christ may be their gain,
their glory, and their all. How jealous should they be of their deceitful
hearts, that nothing be admitted, to share of the glory due to Christ, or to
possess any of that room in the heart, that is due to him? He should have the
throne, for He is well worthy of it: And whatever comes in competition with
him, be it within us, or without us, should be rejected that He alone may be
exalted in our souls.

11. Such as have been made partaker of this royal life of justification,
through a Crucified Christ, laid hold on by faith, should labor to keep this
doctrine pure both by word and deed, so far as they can, that (...) grace of
God, that so eminently shines forth therein, may not be darkened by men's
erroneous apprehensions; and that so much the rather, that Satan without and
corruption within many, are so far at enmity with this doctrine of the grace of
God, that they labor by all means, either more directly, or more indirectly
to perver^tit, and to press for a mixture of works upon one consideration, or
other, in this matter, which it will not admit: and that because, it is so
cross and contrary to the corrupt inclinations of Man, who is so proud of
nothing, that he will not be beholden to Christ for less and for more, and for
all. We see Paul was most jealous in this matter, and most zealous for the
truth, and therefore on all occasions did assert and vindicate it, as we may
see especially in his Epistle to the Galatians, where he did so zealously
withstand Peter Chap. 2: 14. and immediately did state the question, verse. 16.
saying, knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the
faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ and not by the works of the Law etc. adding
verse. 18. that he for his part, would not build again the things, which he had
destroyed, and so make himself a transgressour. Nor would he verse. 21.
frustrate the Grace of God.

12. Finally all such, as have by faith laid hold on Christ, and his
righteousness, and are by faith justified, and so made partaker of this life
through faith in Christ, must resolve to abide in Christ by faith, that life
may be preserved, and by new acts of faith daily on Christ, get as it were new
breath, that their life may be continued, and thus live continually the life of
justification by faith, and by faith take their new sins to Christ, that they
may be done away in his blood; for the Righteousness of God is revealed from
faith to faith; as it is written, the just shall live by Faith; But of this we
are to speak more hereafter.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Life of Justification, as to its continuance.
WHen it is said, that the just shall live by faith, there is a State pointed
forth, and a Condition intimated, that is not momentany, and of short
continuance, but such a condition, or change of state is hold forth, as is of a
lasting Nature; not only because Life does connote some permanency, for a
longer, or for a shorter time; but chiefly because this Scriptural axiom
says, especially as else where applied by the Spirit of the Lord, that the
just* or justified man, has through faith a life, in the worst of times, and
that he is made partaker of that privilege of life, which shall prove lasting
and continueing, to the end, a life, that is keeptin, fed and nourished by
Faith. Having spoken therefore of this life of Justifi on, as begun; that we
may more fully explain the nature of it, we must speak a little of it also, as
continued.

But first, we must premit some things to show, what that Justification is, of
the continuance of which we here speak; and what we do not hereby understand,
when we speak of the continuance of the Life of Justification.

1. We do not speak here of Justification, which Antinomians tell us, is from
Eternity; for that can be nothing, but God's eternal Purpose to justify; and
which cannot more be called Justification, than his eternal purpose to Condemn
the Reprobate, and to save the Elect, can be called condemnation and Salvation:
and we can no more say, That there was a Justification of any man from
Eternity, than that there was a Condemnation, or Salvation of men from
eternity; we must distinguish betwixt God's Purposes, and the Effects, which he
has purposed: His purposes are indeed eternal: but the Effects or Events
purposed, have their being in time, according to the Season, mean and Method,
when and whereby God has purposed to effectuate them. And sure we are, that
Justification, whereof the Scripture speaks, is a relative change wrought in
Man, in time, when and not before, he laith hold on Christ by Faith, according
to the tenor of the Gospel.

2. Nor do we mean here, that Justification, which the same Antinomians, call
only declarative in this life: for the true Gospel Justification is a real
Relative Change, whereby the believer is brought out of a State of Wrath and
Judgment: where they were lying under the Curse of the Law, and the sentence
thereof, unreconciled to God, and enemies to him, having their sins lying
upon then, according to the sentence of the Law, and therefore strangers to
God's favor and countenance, and so without God and without Christ; and
brought into a new State of Peace, Pardon, Reconciliation and Friendshipe with
God, of which we spoke above Chap. V. We cannot then look upon the
Justification, mentioned and explained in the Scriptures, and of which we have
hitherto spoken, as a mere Declaration to the believers Conscience of what God
did from Eternity; as if the admittance into favor, and Pardoning of sins,
were nothing but his Declaration to their consciences, that they were accepted
from eternity, and had pardon from eternity: a notion, sure, that has no
feeting or foundation in the Scriptures.

3. We do not here speak of that, which some call Baptismal Justification, and
whereby they say, all Infants baptized are justified; and which they must yield
to be such as can and does meeth with a final and total intercision, yea and
amission, as to many; and so be quite of another nature, from that which adult
believers partake of, from which there is no final or total Apostasy to be
granted, according to the Scriptures. But we own no such Justification of all
baptized Infants.

4. Nor yet do we here speak of that, which others, being more wary, must own,
as consequentially following upon their opinion of Baptismal Regeneration of
all baptized elect infants, to wit, a Baptismal Justification of all baptized
elect infants, it being certain, that there can be no Regeneration, without a
corresponding Justification: for as such a Regeneration is not clearly revealed
in the Scriptures, so, were it granted, no Actual Justification, but only a
Seminal and Potential Justification could be hence inferred; because such as
the Regeneration is said to be, by such as maintain this opinion, such must
the Justification be; but this Regeneration, which is thus owned, is only said
to be Initial, Seminal, or Potential, and is distinguished from Actual
Regeneration (See D. Burges of Baptismal Regeneration. page 14, 15*) As
concerning the justification of Infants, though we cannot say, that there is no
such thing, yet, as the knowledge of the way of the Lords effectuating it, does
not much concern us; so the Scriptures are spareing in speaking of that
Subject; Sure, the Lord has a way of uniteing their hearts to Christ, and of
justifying Regenerating and Saving such of them, as die in their Infancy, and
belong to the Election of Grace; though we cannot distinctly understand, and
determinatly explain the manner how. It is more of our concernment to enquire
after and know the way, how adult persons come to partake of these Privileges.

5. We do not here speak of that Justification, which some call a Justification
of the cause, and distinguish from that, which they call, a justification of
the person: for that is but the justification of a person falsely accused, as to
some particular, as David was frequently accused of many things, by his
Adversaries, of which he was Innocent, laying to his charge crimes, he knew
not, about which he was in case (as we find he did several times in his
Psalms) to appeal unto God, the righteous Judge, being conscious to himself of
no guilt in the particulars alleged, and knowing his own innocence, in the
sight of God, who knew all things: Such was the matter of that question,
concerning Job's sincerity so much agitated betwixt him, and his friends, in
the book of Job, and at length decided in Job's favors, by God himself; for
though this was not, concerning one or a few particular acts, but concerning
his whole deportment, and concerning his State before God, upon the account of
his deportment, and the Lord's dispensations with him; yet it was a
justification of his Cause, rather than of his Person; for in the justification
of our Persons, we have to do immediately with God, and not with man; and the
question was properly about a matter of fact, to wit, whether he had been a
real believer, or an hypocrite, though such a matter of fact, as merely
concerned his whole State.

6. Nor do we here speak of that justification, even as to our state, which is
before men, or in the judgment of men, which often proceeds upon mistakes and
unsure grounds; as the now-mentioned instance of Job's friends evidenceth: and
so varieth, according to the various judgments and apprehensions of men, yea
and of the same Man, at several times, according as the grounds, whereupon he
judges, are to him clear, or dark: Neither is this sentence or judgment of
men, who are but fallible, and judge by outward appearance, not being able to
see into the heart, and judge how matters are there, always according to
truth; even though according to that judgment of Charity, which the Law of God
requires: Nor is it Constant and equable.

7. Nor do we speak of that Justification, whereof the Apostle James speaks
Chap. 2. which is not the justification before God, whereof the Apostle Paul
speaks, in his Epistles; but the evidencing, proving and demonstrating
thereof, by effects and works obvious to the eyes of others and demonstrative
of the cause; Those I grant will often admit of an intercision, through
Temptation, and the prevalency of Corruption, and so the cause or true
justification may, as to this manifestation, he eclipsed, though not in it self.

8. Far less do we here speak, of a groundless, fancied and supposed
justification, whether in the apprehension of deluded persons themselves, or of
others: for this is no true Justification, but a mere delusion, as to
themselves, and a conjecture, as to others: and the sooner this be quite cast
away and renunced, the better.

9. Nor do we here speak of that Justification, which is in the court of man's
own conscience, or as it is there, and opposed to that Justification, which is
in God's court; for it is certaing, this Justification, which is said to be in
the court of conscience, is but a manifestation of the other unto the man's
conscience, and is some times had, and sometimes missed; sometimes it is more
clear, some times more dark, and therefore can be often repeated and reiterated,
and intended and remitted; yea and some may for a long time if not their whole
life time be wholly without it, Walking in darkness without all light, as to
this; some may once get a clear sight thereof, and never see more of it, till
nigh the landing in eternity, and yet all this while, the Justification, which
is in the court of God, remain fixed, invariable, and without any interuption.

10. By Justification here, we mean not that, which some call a Particular
justification, and do distinguish it from an Universal Justification: by this
understanding an universal pardon of all sins past and committed, and by the
other understanding a particular pardon of this or that sin, that is committed,
after the man has been universally pardoned and accepted of God; and now
pardoned after a new act of faith in Christ: Though it be needless to debate,
whether this Particular Pardon can be called a Justification, or not; yet it is
certain, it is not that Justification, whereof Paul speaks so much, and
explaineth, in all its causes, in his Epistles; nor that Justification, which
connoteth a change of State before God, and the translation of a person out of
an estate of Enmity into an estate of Favor and Friedshipe, in reference to
which there must be a juridical sentence, passed in the favors of the man,
through the impured Righteousness of Christ, received by Faith: while as this
posterior act of pardon of a particular transgression, is rather a Fatherly act
pardoning the failing of his Son and receiving him again into his Fatherly
embracements.

11. Nor finally, do we here speak of that sentence of Absolution, that shall
be pronunced, at the last day; for, howbeit that may be called a Justification;
yet it is not that Justification, whereof we are now speaking, and it does not
make such a change in the state of such, as are thereby absolved, as this does;
and therefore, in respect of this, it is rather a public Declaration and
Manifestation, before Angels and Men, of their Justification, or being in a
Justified state, who shall be adjudged unto eternal life; than any
Justification connoteing a change of state, seeing none in that day will be
justified but such as have been here partakers of this Justification, whereof
we speak, they who have been in heaven will need none, and such as have been in
hell will expect none; and none of the living, who have not by faith laid hold
on Christ, will hear any other sentence, then, depart from me, ye cursed.

12. The justification then, whereof we here speak, is That change of state
before God, which such are made partakers of, as lay hold on Christ by faith,
through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, whereby they are brought
into an estate of Favor and Reconciliation with God, who were before under his
Wrath and Curse; and upon which they have all their iniquities, whereof they
are guilty, actually pardoned; are accepted of, as Righteous, and pronunced
such through the Surety-Righteousness of Christ imputed to them; and freed from
the sentence and Curse of the Law, under which they were lying.

That we may clear the nature of this life of Justification, as to its
continuance, we shall lay down these few Propositions.

Propos. 1. Justification denotes a State, wherein the believer is brought, a
real change, as to state: as a man accused of some crime, and kept in prison
till he be tried, and examined by an assise, is really changed, as to his Law
state, when cleared by an assise, and pronunced not guilty, and so absolved as
to that, whereof he was accused, and set at liberty, he is now a free man, in
Law: much more is there a great change in a man's Law-state, when before he was
guilty of death, lying bound in fetters, kept unto the day of execution, and
now gets a free Remission of all, when of a Man of death he is made a free
liege, as there is a change in a man's state, and Relation, when he is made an
Adopted son, so is there a new state, wherein the sinner is brought, when he is
absolved from the sentence of the Law, and declared a Righteous man.
Sanctification, Regeneration and Glorification, do all of them hold forth a new
real State, whereinto he is brought, who is made partaker thereof; so
Justification with Adoption held forth a new relative state, which is also real
as real, is opposed to what is false, or imaginary. Hence is it, that a
believer is justified even while he is sleeping and not acting faith; as a
person remains in a married state, though not actually consenting unto the
match, the consent once granted enstateth the person in that new Relation.

Propos. 2. This new state of Justification is continueing and permanent; not
in this sense, that God renews and frequently reiterateth the enstating of
them into this new relative state; but in this sense, that once justified
always justified; they are fixed and preserved in that state: as Adoption is a
permanent state, because once adopted always a child of God. Hence it is
called a grace, wherein me stand Romans 5: 2. It is a state of Reconciliation and
Peace wherein we stand. It is no fluctuating state, wherein one may be to day
and be out of it to morrow, and again brought into it. The ground of this
sentence is fixed, lasting and permanent, to wit, the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ: once clothed therewith, never naked or spoiled thereof
again; the gifts and calling of God being with out Repentance Romans 11: 29. The
foul's union with Christ through faith, is lasting and abiding: once in Him,
always in Him, once a member of his mystical body, and married to him, as his
spouse, and always so, for he must finally present all such holy and without
spot^, or wrinkle, or any such thing Ephesians. 5: 27. Faith whereby the knot is
made, and the marriage consent is given, remains, as to its root and habit,
Christ prays, that it fail not. Luke 22: 32. They are kept by the power of
God through faith unto Salvation. 1. Pet. 1: 5. All the arguments proving
Perseverance of the Saints, which we cannot here summe-up, do confirm this.

Propos. 3. Hence Justification is a State, that is not Interrupted and broken
off, and renewed and reiterated again: as it cannot be quite taken away and
annulled: so neither can it be broken off for a time, so as for that time, they
should be in a non-justified state: the marriage once made is not broken; the
sentence once pronunced is not recalled; sins once pardoned by God, are not
laid again to his charge. The Spirit that once spoke peace and said, Son be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, will not be again, a Spirit of
bondage unto fear Romans 8: 15. If Justification could at any time be th^s
interrupted, Adoption behoved to be interrupted with it, and so a child of God
behoved to be for that time a child of the devil. The Scripture speaks not
of any such relapse into the state of Nature and Sin. And such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God 1. Cor. 6: 11. once brought
out of Nature never reduced into that state again: No more new Justification,
than new Adoption; once quickened, never again brought into a state of death
in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2: 1, 5. for such are then brought into a saife
state, being quickened together with Christ; as Christ being raised from the
death, dies no more, death has no more dominion over him Romans 6: 9. so they,
who are planted with him, in the likeness of his Death and Resurrection, may
always reckon themselves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God, through
Jesus Christ verse. 4, 5, 11. Hence there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus Romans 8: 1. They are not under the Law, but under grace Romans 6: 14.
And this holds true, notwithstanding of after-sins; for if after-sins, and
remanent sins and corruption, could break of this relation, and make an
alteration in this state, no man should be said to be one day in a justified
state: for the best of men falls seven times a day in sin, and no man can
say, that he is free of sin: there being no perfection here, there could be no
state of Justification, and consequently no state of Adoption, and
Reconciliation: if after-sins could break of this Relation, or Relative State,
a believer could not be said to be partaker of any of the privileges attending
this state, for one day to end. New sins indeed call for new Remissions, but
these new Remissions are fatherly pardons, and not such a sentence of
absolution, as the person had at first, when translated out of the Rate of
Death into Life, for then the person was not a reconciled Son: but now he
stands in a state of Reconciliation and Sonshipe, and his new pardons are the
pardons of a Father, granted to a Son; as we see Psalm. 89: 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments; if they break my
statutes, and keep not my commendements; then will I visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes: never the less my loving
kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my fatihfulness to fail:
my Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing, that is gone of my lips. So
1 Ioh. 1: 8, 9. If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and 2: 1, 2. My little children, these things write I unto you,
that ye sin not and if any man sin, we have an Advocat with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous* And he is the Propitiation for our sins. Psalm. 103: 3, 8,
9, 12, 13. Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities. The Lord is merciful and
gracious, slow to anger and plenteous in mercy: he will not always chide,
neither will he keep his anger for ever, as far as the east is from the West,
so far has heremoved our transgressions from us: like as a Father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. So this state remains firm
and unbroken, notwithstanding of the various changes, which are in their
apprehensions concerning it; these may alter many a time in one day, But the
Lords thoughts are not as our thoughts: nor are his ways as our ways, Esai.
55: 8, 9. His sentence and judgment remains the same, how alterable so ever
ours be. He is in one mind, though we be in many.

Propos. 4. Hence also it is manifest, that Justification is an Instantaneous
act; that is, it is not a work, that is carried on by degrees; but a sentence
pronunced by the Lord, the Righteous Judge, once for all: Though hereafter they
still need renewed pardons, and so, may have more sins actually pardoned this
year, than they had the last year; yet Justification, as relating to their
state, is no progressive work: We hear not of a grouth in Justification, as we
hear of a growth in Sanctification; for as for that word Revel. 22: 11, he that
is Righteous, let him be Righteous still, or, let him be justified still (...)
will not import a growth or progress in Justification, but a continuance in
that state: beside that others read (...): So Ar. Mont. The complut edition, as
also the Syriack and Arabic Versions. This relative change, that is made in
Justification, is like the relative change, that is made in Adoption; now the
act of Adoption is an Insantaneous act, and not a work, that is carried on by
degrees, nor does it admit of a grouth, so that an adopted child of God can
not be more the adopted child of God this year, than they were the last year;
though the sense and clear Perception of the one and of the other may and does
admit of degrees, and is not so full and clear always at the first, as it may
be afterward.

Propos. 5. Hence it follows, That justification is equal in all; that is,
that all who are justified, are alike justified; none more than others; as none
are more Adopted than others, speaking of these, who are made partaker of the
privilege: None can be said to be more a son, than another; so none can be said
to be more justified, than another, who is also justified; the Lord's sentence
absolveth all equally from all their sins, who believe; and admits them all
equally into a State of Favor and Reconciliation; They equally pass from
death unto life, they have equally peace with God, they have all an equal
imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, or a share therein, none more or
less then others, though the faith, which laith hold on the Righteousness of
Christ, be not a like strong, in all; for it is faith in the same kind in all,
and the promise is to the kind, and not to the measure or degree of faith. It
is no where said, that we are justified by a faith of such a measure or degree;
but by faith; importing that how weak so ever says be, if it be faith of the
right kind, it inte^esseth a soul in Christ, and in his Righteousness,
whereupon he is justified. It is true, one may have many more sins pardoned,
than another. Yet both being Pardoned and Justified, they are equally absolved
from all, that could be laid to their charge; he that was the greater sinner,
is not more liable to the Law, then he who was the least offender; for the
sentence of Pardon or Absolution does equally free both from all hazard of
Condemnation; as when two persons are pardoned, the one whereof has committed
many crimes worthy of death, the other but one, they are both equally
pardoned, freed from prison, and from the sentence, and set at liberty: So also
when two persons are pardoned, the one whereof has a greater debt remitted,
the other a lesser, they are equally pardoned, the one is not more discharged,
though discharged of more, than the other, but both are alike discharged of all
their debt, and freed from all trouble of Law upon the account of their debt.
So in Justification, all who are justified, how great so ever the difference be
among them, as to the sins, whereof they were guilty, are alike justified,
because alike freed from the accusation and curse of the Law; and alike made
partakers of the Privileges of Persons pardoned; have alike interest in the
Favor of God, and Right to glory. As to what difficulty may arise from the
consideration of after sins, we shall speak to that afterward.

Propos. 6. The State of Justification is perfect at the first, or
Justification is perfect and compleet to all ends and uses; This is clear from
what is already said: for if Justification be not an act and privilege, that
admits of degrees, or of increase; and does not grow more and more daily, it
must be perfect at first, or adequate to all ends and purposes, for which it is
appointed, or have that perfection that is competent to it. It is true, it is
not so perfect, as that it can never be out of sight; or as if the sense and
feeling of it might not grow or become greater; nor yet is it so perfect and
compleet, as it thereby the justified person were freed from all sin, or all
the consequences of sin in this life, for it is not hereunto appointed, nor
granted for these ends. But in these respects, and for these ends, it is may be
said to be perfect. (I) That all their former sins are pardoned, how many and
how heinous so ever they have been, for then all their sins are cast into the
depths of the sea, Micah. 7: 19. and are not found. Ier. 50: 20. In those
days, and in that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of judah, and they shall not
be found, for I will pardon them whom I reserve. He takes away all iniquity
Hos. 14: 2. Then he imputes no iniqui^y Psalm. 32: 2. but covers and
forgiveth sins, without exception. Romans 4: 7, 8. Thus he redeemeth Israel from
all his iniquities Psalm. 130: 8. He forgiveth their iniquity, and remembereth
their sin no more Ier. 31: 34. Heb. 8: 12. and 10: 17. He cast: all their sins
behind his back. Esai. 38: 17. Hereby is remission of sins, without any
exception. Romans 3: 25. Mat. 26: 28. Mark. 1: 4. Luke 3: 3. Act. 2: 33. and 5:
31. and 10: 43. and 26; 18. Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14. He forgiveth all trespasses
Colos. 2: 13. and forgiveth all iniquity Psalm. 103: 3. (2) These sins once
pardoned and blotted out, and cast behind God's back, are not again laid to
the charge of the justified persons: once forgiven always forgiven: It is
true, Satan may renew the charge, and use false summonds against the Believer;
and it is also true, that aftersins may waken fears, and bring old sins again
to remembrance, and the Lord may let them see their former debt, not to charge
it upon them, but to bring them on their knees, to humble them the more, and to
cause them cry for, and seek out new extracts of the Pardon received: yet the
sins that God once pardons, he never writteth down again upon the score of
Believers, as if he had recalled the former pardon granted, for he remembereth
their sin no more Ier. 31: 34. Heb. 8: 12. and 10: 17. And for future sins by
virtue of their State, they have access to seek for pardon and have ground. (3)
The Righteousness of Christ, which is a perfect Righteousness, is fully and
perfectly communicated and imputed; so as thereby they become the Righteousness
of God in Christ 2. Cor. 5. last. He is their whole Righteousness, in order to
Justification, and wholly their Righteousness, as made of God Righteousness
unto them. Ier. 23: 6, 1. Cor. 1: 30. And with this Righteousness, they are
wholly and perfectly covered, to expect it as found and hid there Phil. 3: 9.
and are made Righteous Romans 5: 19. and 10: 4. (4) They are now wholly
Reconciled unto God, and have Peace with Him; and not by halfes, or in some
certain respects only, as if in other respects they were still Enemies, or in a
state of Enmity: Being justified by faith, they have Peace with God Romans 5: 1.
once they were enemies but now they are reconciled verse. 10. by Christ they
have now received the Atonement verse. 11. once alienated and enemies in their
minds by wicked works, but now reconciled Col. 1: 21. once a far off but now
made near Ephesians. 2: 13. the enmity being stain. verse. 16. No more strangers or
foreigners now, but fellow citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God verse. 19. Then is the Lord pacified toward them, for all that they have
done Ezekiel. 16: 63. (5) They are compleetly translated, into a new Covenant
state, not half the children of Saran, and half the children of God; not half
in Nature and half in the state of Grace, not half translated and half not
Ephesians. 2: 13, 19. Col. 1: 21. not half quickened with Christ, and half not
Ephesians. 2: 5. They are not now half without Christ, or aliens from the common
wealth of Israel, or strangers from the Covenants of promise, etc. Ephesians. 2:
12. There is a perfect change, as to their state 1. Cor. 6: 11. (6) They are
secured as to final Condemnation, There is no condemnation for them Romans 8: 1.
being believers, they shall not perish, but have eternal life Ioh. 3: 15, 16.
He that believes is not condemned verse. 18. See also Ioh. 3: 36. and 6: 47.
They are passed from death unto life Ioh. 5: 24. 1. Ioh. 3: 14. being
discharged of all guilt of eternal punishment, which formerly they deserved by
their sins. And all this holds good, notwithstanding of their after sins;
which (as we shall show) do not annull, or make any such breach upon their
state of Justification; It is true, these sins must also be Pardoned, and will
be Pardoned; but yet when they are pardoned, their Justification, as to their
state, is not hereby more perfected, as to these respects formerly mentioned:
It holds good also, notwithstanding of what shall be at the great day; for
that will put no man in a new Justified state, who was not Reconciled to God
before. It is true, there will be many additions, as to the Solemnity,
Declaration, Consequences and Effects thereof, in that day, but not
withstanding hereof the state of Justification here as to what respects its
grounds and the essential change it makes, together with the Right, that
believers have thereby unto all, that in that day they shall be put in
possession of, is perfect, and may be said so to be.

Propos. 7 By what is said, it is manifest, how and in what respects this life
of Justification differs from the life of Sanctification. (1) Sanctification
makes a real Physical change: Justification makes a Relative change. And
thereby they come to have a new State or Relation, unto the Law, and unto God
the judge. (2) Sanctification is continueing work, wherein believers are more
and more built up daily. Justification is an act of God, or a juridcial
sentence, Absolving a sinner, and pronunceing him free of the charge, brought
in against him, and not liable to the penalty. (3) Sanctification is a gro^wing
and increasing work, and admits of many degrees; and is usually weak, and
small at the beginning: Justification does not grow, neither does it admit of
degrees; but is full and compleet and adequate unto all ends here. (4)
Sanctification is ever growing here, and never comes to full Perfection before
death: Justification is perfect and adequate unto all ends; as we showed. (5)
Sanctification is not alike in all; but some are more, some are less
sanctified: But Justification is equal in all; none being more justified, then
others. (6) Some measures and degrees of Sanctification, which have been
attained, may be lost again: But nothing of Justification can really be lost;
for we are not here speaking of the sense and feeling of Justification, which
frequently may be lost; but of Justification it self (7) Sanctification is a
progressive work; Justification is instantaneous, as was shown. (8.)
Sanctification respects the Being, Power and Dominion of ^in, in the
believer, and kills, subdueth and mortifieth it: Justification respects its
guilt and demerite, and takes away guilt and the obligation to punishment, or
obnoxiousness to the paying of the penalty. (9) In justification, a man is
accepted upon the account of the Righteousness of Christ, imputed to him; and
received by Faith: But in Sanctification, grace is infused, and the Spirit
given to perfect holiness in the fear of God. (10) In Justification, there is
a right had unto life, and unto the rich recompense of reward, upon the account
of the Righteousness of Christ imputed, whence they are said to have passed
from death to life: But in Sanctification they are made meet to be partakers of
the Inheritance of the Saints in light. (11) Unto Justification nothing is
required but faith in Christ, whereby the soul may become united to Him, and
have a right to his benefits: But unto Sanctification, all the graces of the
Spirit are requisite, and all the exercises of the same; all diligence is
required, and an adding of Virtue to Faith, of Knowledge to Virtue, of
Temperance to Knowledge, of Patience to Temperance, of Godliness to Patience,
of Brotherly kindness to Godliness, and of Charity to Brotherly kindness, 2
Pet. 1: 5, 6, 7.

Propos. 8 Hence it follows also, thar there is no ground to assert a first
and a second Justification, as Papists do, meaning by the first an Infusion of
an inward Principle or Habit of Grace, which is no Justification, nor part
thereof, but the beginning of Sanctification: and by the Second, another
Justification, which with them is an Effect or Consequent of the former, having
good work, which flow from the foresaid infused principle of grace and love,
for its proper and formal cause. This Justification, they say, is by works,
where as the former is by faith; and yet this second, they make to be an
Incrementum, an increase of the first; and for this they say, the church
prays, when she says, Lord increase our says, hope and charity. Council,
Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 10. whereby we see, this Justification, whereof they say
James speaks, Chap. 2. is manifestly nothing else, but the very grouth of
Sanctification: and so they know no Justification at all, distinct from
Sanctification: wherefore we need say no more against the same, it being
Justification, formerly explained, which we treat of, and not of
Sanctification, whereof they seem only to speak, when they mentione
Justification; and indeed this their Justification, which is true
Sanctification, admits of various and different degrees; and of this, they
may imagine not only a first and a second, but according to the various degrees
thereof a third and a fourth yea a Tenth and Twentieth, if they please. The
Scripture, it is true, makes mention of twosold Justification, one by the
Works of the Law, and another by Faith: but it asserteth with all, that these
are inconsistent, and that no man living can be justified the first way, by the
works of the Law. Mr. Baxter, beside the difference he makes, betwixt
Justification as Begun, and as Continued, in reference to the different
conditions, required to the one, and to the other, imagines a twosold
Iustifieation, or two Iustifications, or (as he says against D. Tullie page
167.) rather two parts of one, yet in his last Reply to Mr. Cartwright page 46.
he makes them as distinct, as are the two laws he speaks of, and the first,
he says, is by God the Creator, the second by Christ the Redeemer and in
order to the vindication and clearing of this, he speaks much of a twosold
Righteousness In his writtings against Mr. Cartwright page 70. giving us
several (to the number of thirteen) differences, betwixt them; making the one
to consist in out Non-obligation to punishment by the Law of works, because of
its dissolution upon Satisfaction made by Christ: to be without us, in the
merit and satisfaction of Christ; to be in substance the same with Pardon; to
be opposite to that guilt, which sin in general procures; to be but the
tantundem of what the Law required, to justify us from a true Accusation, that
we by sin deserve death etc. And the other to consist in our Non-obligation to
the far greater punishment; to be within us and done by us, to consist in
innocence or notguiltiness; to be opposite to that guilt, which one particular
sin procures; to be the idem required in the new Law; to justify us from a
false Accusation, that we have not performed the Conditions of the new Covenant
etc. all which to examine is not my present purpose: only I shall say, as to
this two sold Justification, that it is an explication of the matter, which we
have not in Scripture, which, I judge, should only regulat both our Conceptions
and Expressions, in this affair: and what ever pleasure men may take, to give
way to their Luxuriant phancies; yet it will be safest for us to follow the
thread of the Word, and to speak of this mystery, according to Revelation, and
not according to our Apprehensions: And of all men, I judge, Mr. Baxter should
be most averse from creating new Terms, Words and Expressions, in these divine
things, who expresses himself so angry-like (especially in his later
writtings) in words, which to some may seem to favor little of sob^iety or of
modesty, against such as contend about words; when it may be, they are but
defending the received orthodox doctrine from his new Notions and Expressions,
as being Censorious, dividers, Word-souldiers, and I know not what. But, as to
the matter in hand; and in particular, as to this second Iustifica^ion, or
rather first (for it is supposed to be first in order of nature, if not in time
also) which is founded upon our Innocence, or performance of the Conditions of
the new Covenant, Faith, Repentance and New Obedience and so is a declaring of
us Righteous because of our inherent Righteousness, I shall only say these few
things. 1. That I find not this new Justification explained, expressed, nor so
much as hinted by the Apostle, in all his discourses and disputes about this
subject, though he has spoken very much of Justification, and on all occasions
did vindicate and clear up the gospel truth thereanent. If it be said, That all
this is sufficiently hinted, and more then hinted by the Apostle, when he tells
that Faith is imputed unto Righteousness. I answer. What the proper meaning of
this Expression is, shall be shown hereafter, where it shall also be
manifested, that the Faith here said to be imputed, is not our act of Faith,
but Christ, and his Righteousness laid hold on by faith, or the object of Faith
held forth in the Gospel, and received by Faith. And for answer to this, I
judge it sufficient to say, That the Apostle is manifestly there speaking of
that other Justification, which we own, for the only Justification, hold forth
in the Gospel, whereby Remission of sins is had, and Peace with God, through a
Righteousness without, and of that Justification, which takes away all
glorying, both before God and man, and wherein God is hold forth to be and laid
hold on by Faith as one, that justifies the ungodly, and of that
Justification, which is from the Accusation of the Law; by all which and many
other Particulars, observable in the Apostles discourse there, it is
undeniable, that he is speaking of that other Justification, which we asserte.
If it be said, That all this is sufficiently imported, when Faith is made the
Condition of Justification, and we are said to be justified by faith I answer.
What way Faith is the Condition of Justification, and is so to be called, shall
be seen afterward: only I say, that what the Scripture speaks of this, can
give no ground for a new and distinct Justification, because this new
Justification is rather a Justification of Faith, or of the Believer because of
his faith, and purely upon the account of his Faith; for it is a sentence of
judgment, pronunceing the man to be a Believer, because he is so; and his faith
to be right Faith, because it is so; than any Justification of him by faith.
Not to mentione this, that together with faith, as the Condition, Repentance
and New Obedience is joined; and then there must be a Justification of works,
or of the man by, yea and because of works, which cannot be imported by being
Justified by faith, because that is always opposed to Justification by works.
Beside, that even in men's courts there are not two distinct sentences of the
judge, required in deciding of a Controversy, depending upon the clearing of a
Condition; one anent the truth, of the Condition, and the other anent the thing
depending upon that Condition; but the Condition being instructed to be
performed, the one sentence is given out; much less is this requisito here,
where we have to do with God, who knows whether the Condition be performed,
or not; and needs not, that we instruct the same against the Accusations of
Satan, or of the world in order to his information. Moreover, there is but one
Accusation here brought in against the man, from the Law, and from the
Righteous Judge, to wit. That he is a sinner, and therefore a son of death: and
therefore there is but one sentence requisite: for as for that Accusation, that
the person has not performed the Condition of the new Covenant, neither will
the Lawgiver, or judge, nor can the Law bring it in against a Believer: and
what Satan, the accuser of the Brethren, or what a blind or prejudged World,
or what a man's own blind and deceitful heart shall or can herein do, is of no
consideration, in reference to a Justification, which is before God, and in his
sight. But 2. Against this twofold Justification. I would say, that all that is
mentioned, concerning Gospel Justification, in Scripture, agrees but to one,
and the very contrary thereof must be attributed to the other new-coyned
Justification, according to his own explication thereof: the one is by faith,
the other is for faith; the one is by faith alone, withour works, the other is
because of Faith and Works too; the one is an act of God's free Grace, the
other is an act of pure Justice; the one is of a sinner, and of an ungodly
person, the other is of a Righteous man, as such, and because such; the one
takes away all boasting and all gloriation even before men; the other not; the
one makes the reward of free grace, the other of due debt; the one is because
of a Righteousness without us, the other because of a personal inherent
Righteousness; The publicans language, God be merciful to me a sinner suiteth
the one best; The Pharisees language, or some thing like it, God, I thank thee,
I am a believer etc. suiteth the other best; In the one the one the man can
plead no innocence, in the other he can and must plead himself not guilty, in
the one, the sinner must say with David Psalm. 143: 2. enter not into judgment
with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified; in the
other, he may and must say, enter into judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight, I shall be justified. Other things or this Nature might be mentioned,
but these are sufficient. 3. This New Justification must of necessity be a
justification of conscience, or in it, or terminated in it; because it is not
before God, or in his sight, where the world, or the deceived heart the chief
accusers here, do not compear to accuse, and Satan's accusing them before God
can cause no trouble to them, until he come, as an Accuser, before conscience,
and give in false summonds there. And therefore it is not the Justification by
Faith, treated of in Scripture: as himself proves in his Confession Chap. 8.
page 189. etc. 4. This will make way for more Iustifications, than two; for as
faith must be justified so must Repentance, so must also Works, and
Perseverance in them to the end: If it be said, that all these make but one
compleet Condition, and therefore give ground but to one sentence. I answer:
Then no man can have this sentence pronounced upon him, to wit, to be one, that
has performed the Condition, until he has persevered unto the end, and
finished his course, and this being the first Justification, at least in order
of Nature before the other, a man must be dead before he be justified from the
Law, yea or with this Justification: and yet we hear of Justification in this
life. Further, this will make way for more Justifications, upon this account,
that it is a declaration of the man to be what he is indeed, and to have what
he has indeed; and so, as hereby tho man who has true saving faith, must be
justified upon that account, so the man, that has but an historical faith,
must be justified in so far, in comparison of him, that is a mere infidel, and
may plead his own cause, so far, even before God's tribunal; so may the man,
that has but a legal Repentance, in respect of him, that has none at all; and
the man, that performs Works materially good, though not in a right manner,
in comparison of him, that does not so much, and himself tells us page 8, ag.
Cartwright of a, 3 sold Accusation, 1. that we are not believers. 2. That we
are not true believers, 3. that we are ^^lifidians; and that accordingly, there
must be several ways of justification, 5, This will lay the ground for God's
multiplying, or frequently reiterating of one and the same Justification; for
Justification presupposes always an Accusation, and seeing neither God, nor
the Law, will ever accuse a Believer of being no Believer, only Satan, and the
world, and his own Misguided Conscience it; now, if the Accusation of these or
of Satan alone (as he seems to insinuat p. 81. and else where, against Mr.
Cartwright) be enough to lay the foundation of such a Justification, then as
often, as this Accusation is renewed, (and how often that may be, who can tell?)
must the Lord reiterat his sentence of Justification, and pronunce the man a
true Believer: and it will not be sufficient to say, that it will suffice if
the Lord manifest to the Mansconscience, that he a believer; for why shall that
be sufficient now, more than at the first? and if this take away the necessity
of reiterating the sentence, it will also say, that there was no necessity for
pronuncing the sentence of his being a believer at the first. None need to say,
that this same may be alleged against our Justification before God; for the
Justification, we only own, is in reference to the Accusation of the Law, and
of Justice and of God the Righteous Judge, under whose Curse the sinner lies,
until he be justified, and when he is once justified through faith in Christ,
he is no more troubled with their Accusations; for neither God, nor Law, nor
Gospel accuse a Believer of being an Unbeleever and under the Curse again,
whatever Satan, and his own misguided conscience, or others may do. 6. He
groundeth his twosold Justification p. 93. and 94. upon a twosold Covenant with
distinct conditions and a twosold Accusation for nonperformance of the one,
and of the other. But thus, as he shall make us to be justified by the old
Covenant of works, and that by the principal justification, an absurdity, that
he frequently loadeth our opinion with; so he makes all the justification
which is according to the New Covenant to be upon and because of our own
personal Righteousness; which is also repugnant to the whole Gospel. We do not
perform the conditions of the first Covenant, and all the liberation from the
Curse of that Covenant, under which we are by Nature, is through the
Surety-Righteousness of Christ, imputed to us, and received by faith: and the
Gospel or New Covenant reveals no other way of Justification to us. As for
the distinct accusations, we have said enough already. Neither the Lord, nor
his Law do ever accuse a Believer of not being a believer, and as for Satan's or
others accusations of this kind, a well informed conscience from the light of
the word; and of the Spirit, clearing up the work of faith, in the soul, and
the true and real works of a lively faith, will be sufficient to quiet the
believer, and stop the mouth of all these Accusers; without the fiction of a
new and distinct Justification, whereof the Scripture is silent.

But Mr. Baxter in his last reply to Mr. Cartwright explaineth, the matter far
otherwise, telling us page 46. and forward. That the first justification is by
God, as Rector, only by the pure Law of works, as Creator: the other by God in
Christ, as Redeemer and Rector of the Redeemed world. The first is
conditionally past upon the whole condemned world and that without any
condition in man, whether faith or works: and so it is both absolute and
conditional. In the first the Father first condemned his Son, as it were (see
page 52.) and after satisfaction given justified first him, as Sponsor, and
then the world for his sake: thus God forgave those all the debt, who yet
perish by taking their fellow servant by the throat. Here is a justification
both absolute and conditional; Here is pardon and no pardon: Here is a
justification of all the Reprobat: Here is a justification of persons not in
being and prior to and without all faith. This therefore is not the
justification, whereof the Scriptures speak, as himself proves, in his
Confession.

CHAP. XX.
The state of justification remains, notwithstanding of after sins, and
punishments.
FOr further clearing up of this life of Justification, as to its Continuance,
we shall remove two objections, that may seem to stand in the way of the truth,
hitherto cleared. For it would seem, that Justification is not such a
continueing uninterruptible state, as it was said to be, upon this double
account, first. That the sins, which Believers, who are justified, do commit,
especially such as are of a more heinous and crying Nature, do break off this
state of favor and reconciliation, seeing they deserve, even the least of
them, God's wrath and curse, and so expose the sinner unto the just revenges of
God; which seems not to be consistent with a state of Justification. And then
secondly as their sins deserve God's curse and wrath, so the many sharp and
sore afflictions, which they are made to lie under, both are effects of the
wrath of God, and fruits of the Curse, and also would say, that that state is
such, as can be broken off, or at least, is not perfect, as it was said to be.

Now for clearing of the truth, formerly asserted, and vindicating of the same,
from these two Objections, to which all others may be reduced, we shall propose
some few things to consideration.

1. None will say, that every sin of infirmity and weakness, which believers
commit, does or can cut them off from the state of justification; for then they
should never remain one day to end in that state; for no man lives, that
sins not, and the Righteous fall seven times a day; if the Lord should
stricklymark iniquity, no man should stand; even the best of their actions are
defiled with sin, and they cannot answer for one of a thousand. So that either
it must be said, there is no state of justification, or that it is consistent
with sin in the justified: Justification, though it take away all the guilt of
by paft sins, and free the believer from that obnoxiousness to the wrath and
curse of God which they were formerly under; yet it preventeth not all future
sins, not does it put the believer into a perfect sinless state; nay nor does
it kill any one sin, as to its being, but only takes away the guilt,
offensiveness and the obligation to punishment, or the reatus poenae, whereby
the sinner is bound over unto the Penalty.

2. As for such sins, as we may suppose, if committed, would ipso facto, as
they say, forfeit the transgressour of the state of Justification, and destroy
all interest in Christ, in the Covenant of grace, and so transfer them into
their former state of Nature, while they were under the Curse; as being sins,
inconsistent with a state of Grace and Reconciliation with God; such as the sin
against the Holy Ghost, or of full and final Apolstasie: as for such sins, I
say, the faithfulness of God, Mediation of Christ, and the Operation of the
Spirit of Grace, are, as it were, engadged, to keep the Justified from falling
into them; as all the Arguments, proving the perseverance of the Saints, do
abundantly evince.

3. Though every sin, being a transgression of the Law of God, which still
remains in force to oblige the believer, as all others, unto obedience in all
points, does, in its own nature, deserve God's wrath and curse, according to
the threatening and penalty of the Law: yet these sins do not annul the state of
justification, nor interupt it (1) because notwithstanding thereof, all their
former sins, of which they were pardoned, remain pardoned, and do not bring
them again under the curse, and their Right to the Inheritance remains
fi^me, through Jesus Christ. (2) Because all these after sins were virtually
pardoned, and their obligation to the suffering of the penalty upon the account
of these, virtually removed, in their Justification; for therein was there a
legal security laid down and given, that all future sins should not actually
bring them under the curse, or into the state of condemnation: and this is much
more, than what was before their actual closing with Christ, and being thereby
brought into an estate of justification, for though it may be said, there was
sufficient security laid-in in the Covenant of Redemption betwixt Jehovah and
the Mediator, concerning the Non-perishing of the Elect; Yet this security was
hid and under ground, lying in the unchangable purposes of God; in the Fathers
Election of them, and giving of them to the Son to be redeemed; in the Son's
undertaking for them, and in due time becoming sin and a curse for them, and so
taking on their debt, and making full and compleet satisfaction therefore; And
this fundamental and remote Right, (as it may be called) could not be pleaded
by themselves. But after they have closed with Christ, and are brought into a
state of justification, their Right appears above ground, and the security is
laid open in the Covenant of Grace, whereby they are in case to plead their
virtual pardon, to be made actual, and the promises to be made good, according
to the Gospel terms, and after the Gospel-method. And thus. 3. Not only does
the law's threatenings speak to them, as showing what de jure only they may look
upon us due unto them, and not declaring what shall eventually befall them, or
that eventually they shall fall under the eternal curse; for in a sense, that
is true even of all the elect not yet justified, as was said; but they have a
legal ground and Right in the Covenant of Grace, securing them from
Condemnation, and they have accless and ground in Law to plead this Right and
so to plead for actual Pardon in the terms, and according to the method of
the Gospel: I do not say, that the justified while lying in sin, without making
application to Jesus Christ, and acting faith on him, in order to pardon, have
ground to plead for actual pardon, for that is repugnant to the Method of the
Gospel, requireing new acts of faith, in order to new acts of Pardon, I mean
the implicit acts if faith (to speak so) in reference to daily infirmities and
unseen sins, and the more explicit acts of faith, in reference to grosser sins,
seen and lamented: But they have ground to plead for grace to discover their
sins, to humble them for their sins, and to excite their soul to renewed acts
of faith in Christ, and thereupon to expect, according to the Gospel method,
Remission; and to plead for it, in the merits of Christ, unto which they have
a sure Right. Therefore 4. New sins cannor annul the state of justification;
because not only are believers secured that de eventu, they shall not come into
Condemnation for these sins; but even as to any legal dueness of punishment,
that new sins may bring them under, there is a sure and saife remedy at hand,
the blood of Christ that takes away all sin, to which they are called to go
that they may wash their souls there by faith, and be clean, and be delivered
from guilt.

4. For further clearing of this, we could consider, that there is a difference
to be put betwixt Sin, in order to its direful effects, considered in it self,
and considered, as it is in the Justified. Though sin, in it self is always
mortiferous, and exposes to the curse and wrath of God, having a malignant
demerite constantly attending it: Yet it is not so, being considered, as it is
in the justified: for as poison, is always deadly in it self, and working
toward death; yet it is not so, as in a person, who has received a sufficient
antidot. Though every act of felony in it self make obnoxious unto death,
according to the Law; yet some acts, as committed by one, who can read, will
not have that effect: so the believer is antidoted by the Covenant of Grace,
that howbeit sin remain still deadly, in its own nature; yet as to him, it
cannot produce these effects.

5. Though after sins, in a justified person, may have, before they be
pardoned, very sad effects, in reference to Comfort, or comfortable Improvement
of their Privileges and Advantages: yet they cannot disinherite them, or put
them from their Right: Though leprosy did deprive the leper of the comfortable
enjoyment and use of his own house; yet it did not destroy his right: though
the miscarriages of the prodigal son did incapacitate him for any present
enjoyment of his interest in his Fathers affection; yet they did not destroy
his Sonshipe Luke 15: 17. So though sins, not yet washed away, in such as have
been justified, may and will certainly prejudge them of many comfortable
Advantages, which they might otherwise have; yet they do not take away their
Sonshipe, nor their Right to the Inheritance of sons.

6. Though after sins, not yet pardoned through faith, do and will stir up
Fatherly Anger and Displeasure against them, who are justified, and become his
Adopted children; Esai. 54: 7, 8. Yet they bring not justified man under pure
judicial wrath, and under the Curse and Law-anger, so as God is no more their
Father, but has cast them out of his family, and fatherly favor. It is one
thing to be under the frowns and gloomes of an angry Father: and another thing
to be under the severe aspect of an angry judge.

7. It is considerable also. That through grace, and the Lord's great love and
wisdom, after-sins are so far from destroying their State and Right to the
inheritance, that upon the contrare, they are ordered to the Justified man's
good, and further establishment in grace; not that sin it self has any such
natural tendency; but it is by accident to sin, which is so ordered by the wise
disposal of a loveing Father, making all things work togerher for good, and
thus counter-working Satan without, and Corruption within, making that, which
Satan had designed to their ruin and destruction, contributo to their good and
advantage, by giving them fresh occasion, of exercising Humility and
Repentance, and of Renewing their gripping of Christ by Faith, and of Watching
more with Diligence here-after; as also hereby they are put to search and
examine themselves, to try their Rights and Securities, and thus to make their
calling and election sure, to their further establishment and comfort in the
Holy Ghost.

8. Thus we see whatever present alteration after sins, not yet taken to
Christ, to the end they may be pardoned through his blood, do, or can make, as
to the present Condition of the justified; yet their State remains firm, and
unshaken; for thereby they fall not again under the old Covenant; nor under
the sentence thereof, nor under pure Law wrath, pure Justice and the Curse of a
broken Covenant; but being under Grace, and not under the Law, they are secured
as to Condemnation Romans 8: 1. and as to the loss of the favor and friendship
of God Romans 8: 35, 39. for not only is the guilt of Original sin, and of all
their preceding Actual sins taken away, through faith in Christ, when they
were justified, but there is a sure way condescended upon betwixt Jehovah and
the Mediator, how their after-sins shall be Pardoned, and taken out of the way,
and the same method and way is declared in the Gospel, and made sure by the
Covenant of Grace: and by their being in the Covenat, they have a right unto
the promises thereof, and ground to press for the performance; and so for
Remission, and for all things requisite thereunto, or following thereupon; yea
they have a sure pledge of Remission already, to wit, the actual Pardon of what
is past, and their past Justification; that is a comforting and strenthening
word Romans 5: 9, 10. much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him; for if when we are enemies, we were reconcile
^ to God, by the death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be
saved by his life and so is that Romans 8: 32. He that spared not his own son,
but delivered him up for us all: how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things?

9. We may add, That if sins, afterward committed, could take away
Justification, then they should also take away Adoption, and Regeneration; and
so the justified man, should by after sins, not only become an unjustified man;
but also the child of God should become again the child of the devil, and the
Relation should be quite broken off, and he, who was borne again, should
return unto his former state of black Nature: and thus there should be a
second, and a third, yea and multiplied Regeneration; whereof the Scripture is
silent, nay it clearly depones the contrary.

10. And if it be enquired, how it comes to pass, that after sins may not, at
least, gradually impair the State of Justification, as sins do impair and
weaken Sanctification? I answer (and this may further help to clear the
business under hand) The reason is manifest, from the difference, that is
betwixt these two blessing and benefits; Justification is an act of God,
changing the Relative-state of a man, and so is done and perfected in a moment:
Sanctification is a progressive work of God, making a real physical change, in
the man; whence sin may tetard this or put it back, but cannot do so, with the
other, which is but one single act, once done, and never recalled, the gifts
and calling of God being without repentance Romans 11: 29. In justification we
are merely passive, it being a sentence of God pronunced in our Favors; in
Sanctification, as we are in some respect patients, so are we also Agents, and
Actors, and thus sin may retard us in our motion, and as it evidenceth our
weakness for acting, so it produces more weakness. Moreover Sin and Holiness
are opposite to other, as light and darkness, and therefore, as the one
prevails, the other must go under, and as the one increases, the other must
decress. But there is no such Opposition betwixt sin, and pardon, which is
granted in Justification. And whereas it may be said, that sin expels also
grace Meritoriously: yet that prejudgeth not the truth in hand, for it can
expel grace meritoriously no further, than the free constitution of God has
limited: and so though it can and often does expel many degrees of
Sanctification; yet it cannot expel and make null the grace of Regeneration;
or the Seed of God, so no more can it expel or annul Justification; because
the good pleasure of God, has secured the one and the other and made them both
unalterable.

By these particulars, we see how the first doubt is removed out of the way; we
shall next speak to the Second, which is concerning afflictions, and
Punishments, which are the fruits and deserts of sin, and seem to be part of
the curse or penalty threatened in the first Covenant: To which we need not say
much to show, that notwithstanding hereof, the State of Justification remains
firm, and unaltered. These few things will suffice to clear the truth.

1. Though all affliction, and suffering be the fruit and consequent of the
breach of the Covenant by Adam, the head of mankind; for if he had stood, and
the Covenant had not been violated, there had been no Misery, affliction, Death
or Suffering: and though in all, who are afflicted in this world, there is sin
to be found; And though it cannot be instanced, that God ever brought an
afflicting or destroying stroke upon a Land or Nation, but for the provocations
of the People, yet the Lord may some rimes afflict outwardly or inwardly, or
both, a particular Person, in some particular manner, though not as provoled
thereunto by that persons sin, or without a special reference to their sin, as
the procuring Cause thereof; as we see in Job: and as Christ's answer,
concerning the blind man Ioh. 9: 3. Neither has this man sinned, nor his
parents (that he was born blind;) but that the works of God should be made
manifest in him, gives ground to think.

2. Though it does oftener fall out, that God does afflict, Punish and Ch^sten
his people even because of their sins, as well as other wicked persons; yet
the difference betwixt the two is great, though the outward Camitie may be
materially the same: To the godly, they flow from Love, are designed for good,
are sanctified, and made to do good, they are covenanted mercies; but nothing
so to the wicked. They are mercies to the one, but curses to the other; They
speak out love to the one, but hatred to the other; They are blessed to the
one, but blasted and cursed to the other; They work together for good to the
one, but for evil to the other: and all this notwithstanding, that the outward
affliction and calamity that is on the godly, may be double or treeble to that,
which is upon the wicked: Yea there is mercy and love in the afflictions of the
Godly, when the prosperity of the wicked is cursed. Whence we see, that all
these afflictions cannot endanger or damage their Justified state.

3. Though the Lord may be wroth and smite in anger his own people, chasten and
punish them in displeasure; yet, this wrath and anger, is but the wrath and
anger of a Father, and is consistent with fatherly Affection in God, and
therefore cannot be repugnant to a state of Sonshipe in them. Prove. 3: 11, 12.
Heb. 12: 5-8. Psalm. 89: 30 33, 34. Revel. 3: 19.

4. In all these afflictions, that seem to smell most of the Curse, and of the
death threatened, and are most inevitable, such as death, etc. there is nothing
of pure vin^ictive justice to be found in them, when Justified persons are
exercised with them: for Christ did bear all that, being made a curse for them,
and as to this, the Lord caused all their iniquities to meet together upon him:
He drunk out the cup of Vindictive anger, and left not one drop of the liquor
of the Curse of the Law, for any of his own to drink: He alone did bear the
weight of revenging justice; and there is nothing of this, in all that does
come upon believers; So that the very sting of death is taken away, and the
sting of all these Afflictions is sucked out, and now they are changed into
Mercies and Blessings. 1 Cor. 3: 21, 22. Therefore we must not think that they
contribute the least mite unto that Satisfaction, which justice required for
sins, and Christ paid down to the full; and justice was fully satisfied with
what he paid down: nor must we think, that God will exact a new satisfaction
for sins, or any part thereof, of the hands of believers, after he has
received a full satisfaction from the Mediator Christ, and did rest satisfied
therewith. The afflictions and Punishments then, that the godly meet with,
being no parts of the Curse, nor of that Satisfaction that justice requires
for sin, nor flowing from vindictive justice; but being rather fatherly
chastisments, mercies and means of God, can do no hurt unto their state of
justification; nor can any thing be hence inferred, to the prejudice of that
glorious state.

5. But it is said, Pardon and Justification is one thing, and a man is no more
Justified than he is Pardoned; and Pardon is but the taking off of the
obligation to punishment, and consequently of punishment it self; and seeing
punishment is not wholly taken off, but there remains some part of the curse,
or of the evil threatened for sin, and will remain until the resurrection, it
is clear, that pardon is not fully compleet, not consequently Justification so
long as we live. But for answer, and to clear up the matter in hand more, we
say (1) Pardon of sins is not adequatly the same with Justification, nor the
whole thereof, but at most a part, or rather a partial effect in justification,
the person is constituted Righteous, and declared such, and thereupon has his
sins pardoned, and a Right to the purchased reward; and he is thus made and
declared Righteous, through the Mediators Surety-Righteousness, imputed to him,
and laid hold upon by faith. (2) When a person is justified, he is at once and
for ever freed from the punishment due from the Law and from vindictive
justice, for the broken Covenant: and the Obligation to punishment required by
vindictive justice, is taken away and dissolved; Christ having fully born that
Punishment, and satisfied that demand of Justice, they, in and through him, are
delivered from the Curse, and the maledictory sentence. (3) Hence all their
sufferings and afflictions here, being no part of the Curse, nor of
Satisfaction to divine vindictive justice, nor of the Condemnation threatened,
how ever they be materially evil, and Fatherly Chastisments or Punishments; yet
are no effects of Law-vengeance, nor parts of vindictive Punishment: and so
cannot give ground to infer an imperfect Pardon, or an imperfect
Justification. (4) Nor must we call them any part of the Punishment, threatened
by the Law, remaining yet unremoved; for that would make them parts of the
Curse; and yet Mr. Baxter Confess. p. 125. conceives it fittest to say, that
believers are freed from the curse, and are not under it, and adds his
reasons there: And the consequence is clear, because, what the Law threatens,
as such, belongs to the Curse; for the Law says, Cursed is every one, that
continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the Law to do
then, Gal. 3: 10. Deuteronomy. 27: 26. And therefore every Punishment, that is a
punishment of the Law, must be part of the Curse; So if the Punishments, or
Afflictions, that the Godly are now under, be part of the Curse, that is yet
remaining unremoved, or of the Punishment (as Mr. Baxter there p. 124. says)
it will inevitably follow, that believers are yet under the Curse, and not
wholly delivered there from; and as to these outward afflictions, many of the
truly Godly shall be more under the Curse, then several of the wicked: and if
they be under any part of the Curse, how can they be pronunced Blessed? how can
they be said to be Redeemed from the Curse of the Law? how can Christ be said
to have been made a curse for them; how shall their sufferings not be a part of
Satisfaction to Vindictive justice? Shasl not they be in part Satisfiers for
themselves? Shall not they then be beholden to Christ, only in part? How shall
then these Afflictions flow from love, run in the channel of love, and work-out
their good, through grace and love, if they be any real and formal parts of the
Curse? Shall not the curse then be a part of the blessedness of the Saints, and
of their bequeathed portion, which they may own as theirs, as well as they may
own life! Shall not the curse, or a part of the curse, separat from the Love
of God, and of Christ? What, I pray, will, if that do it not; and yet the
Apostle tells us Romans 8: 33. etc. that afflictions cannot do it, nor death it
self. How can any part of the curse work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory? and yet Afflictions do that 2. Cor. 4: 17. The curse
will not conform us unto Christ; yet afflictions will, and do Romans 8: 29. (5)
Even as to the remnants of the body of death, that cause the godly to groan,
and cry out. Miserable man etc. if we consider them, as an Affliction, we
cannot say, that they are a remanent part of Law-vengeance, of Law-punishment,
or of the curse, threatened in the Law; for then they should be effects of God's
hatred toward the Persons, and of pure vengeance and of juridical, and
judicial Wrath and Anger, and were not capable of Sanctification to their
spiritual advange; and Believers, upon this account, could not be said to be
delivered from the Law, and dead to that, wherein they were formerly held, as
they are Romans 7: 6. for they, who are under the Curse, and under such an
especial part or Effect thereof, cannot but be under the Law, and that, as a
cursing Condemning Law. Gal. 3: 10. Nor could the Apostle infer, as he does,
after the mentioning of the sad wrestlings, that the godly have, with the body
of death. Romans 7: 15. etc. that there is now therefore no Condemnation to them,
that are in Christ Romans 8: 1. for this would not follow from their being really
and properly under such a great part of the Curse. Sure, this cannot but be
derogatory unto the perfect Satisfaction made by Christ; seeing hereby there is,
in some measure, a Satisfaction made unto the justice of God: and it was the
end of Christ's suffering and satisfaction, to deliver his people from the
curse of the Law, in whole, and in part, and from that penalty threatened in the
Covenant of works. Christ was made a curse for us, and thereby did redeem us,
not in part only, but wholly, from the curse of the Law: and this penal Law Mr.
Baxter must understand page 127. Confess. or he speaks not to the purpose.
Nor can I say with him ibid. p. 119. that every threatening is it in one sense,
and the execution in another, that is commonly called the curse of the Law: for
the execution of the Law upon any person, is inconsistent with loving kindness
toward that person; but so is not every threatening, nay nor the execution
thereof upon believers, as we see Psalm. 89: 30, 31, 32, 33. Nor could these
executions of threatenings be said to flow from Love, contrare to Revel. 3: 19.
Heb. 12: 6. Prove. 3: 12. for there is no fatherly Love, in executing of the
Curse.

CHAP. XXI.
Justification is by Faith: what this Faith is, and how it is wrought.
HAving thus spoken unto, and labored to clear up the Nature and some causes
of this life of ^ustification; we come, in the next place, to speak to the
following part of the Text. Where the way, how this life of justification is
brought about and attained, is pointed forth, when it is said. The just shall
live by faith. Faith, we see, is here mentioned, as that which interesseth us
in this privilege of life. Whence we see

1. That no man is made partaker of the life of Justification, before Faith; or
that until souls exercise faith, they are without this life of Justification.
Some talk of a Justification from Eternity; and thus confound Justification
with Gods love of Election; or with Gods decree and purpose to justify. Some
speak of Justification of all, in the death of Christ; but neither is this to
be admitted, if we speak of actual Justification; It is true, Christ did, when
he laid down the full price of Redemption, conform to the Eternal compact
betwixt Jehovah and Him, make an absolute and actual purchase of all those,
that were given to him to be saved, and did buy and purchase all the Favors,
Blessings and Privileges for them, which were afterward to be actually
bestowed, in the time, and after the way and method, condescended upon by
Jehovah and the Mediator: (I am here speaking of such as came to have a being,
in the world, after Christ had in the fullness of time, come and laid down the
price; and not of those; who lived before, when Christ's death and Satisfaction
had only a Moral being, and yet full efficacy to produce the same saving
effects on believers:) and though in this respect, all the Elect may be said to
have been virtually justified, when Christ laid down the actual price, and was
justified from all the charge of their debt, that was laid upon him (as in some
sense, it may be said, that all the Elect were virtually Justified in Him, when
he undertook to make satisfaction for their debt) yet there is no actual
Justification before Faith; according to the Scriptures that speak of
justification, of adoption, and of Sanctification by Faith, showing that these
Benefits and Privileges follow Faith, as to their actual being, though they
were from eternity decreed, as was also Glorification, and were actually
procured by Christ's death: in which respect, as also in respect of Christ's
undertaking or substituting himself in the room of sinners, they may be said to
have been virtually, Sanctified and Glorified, even then. It is true, that
before Faith, the justification actual of the Elect is every way secured, and
all things tending thereunto are concluded and firmly laid, and all the other
anteceding causes are existent, before Faith, for Christ is appointed and
substitute Mediator; Christ has accepted and undertaken the work of Mediation;
He is come in the fullness of time, and has laid down the full price; The
Father is satisfied with the price paid. The Father laid upon him the iniquity
of all the Elect, and He has born it, and made full satisfaction, therefore he
is accepted of the Father, as Head of the Elect justified and possessed of
glory, so as they may be said to be risen with him in heavenly places, to wit
virtually, and meritoriously; and all this before faith, Thus God was in
Christ, reconciling the Elect world unto himself, not imputing trespasses unto
them, because he imputed them to Christ and made him sin, who know no sin and
this before the word of Reconciliation, ministered by the Ambassadors of
Christ, has wrought them up unto God by faith. 2 Cor. 5: 18, 19, 20. And this
I think was more, then what Mr. Baxter says confess. page 225, 226. to wit,
that he was providing a sufficient remedy for the pardon of it, if they would
accept of it freely given; for the world here spoken of is the world of the
Elect, though he think otherwise ibid. and the Lords not imputing their sin
unto them, was more then his not dealing with them, according to the desert of
their sin, but in mercy, for as yet many of them had not a being, and so were
not capable of being dealt with, according to the desert of their sin; but it
imports, what is more emphatically expressed thereafter verse. 11. to wit,
that God was laying their sins on Christ' and making him sin, as to its
demerite, or guilt, for them, that they might in due time be made the
Righteousness of God in him.

Yet notwithstanding of all this, actual justification and Reconciliation is
not before (...), as is clear from many passages of Scripture, asserting our
justification, life to by faith, Romans 1. 17. and 3. 28. and 9: 1. Ephesians 2: 8.
Gal. 2: 16, 20. Ad it cannot be said, to evite the force of these and the like
Scriptures, that this is to be understood only of justification, as to our
feeling, sense and apprehension: for the case, which the Apostle proves all to
be into before justification, in his Epistle to the Romans Chap. 1. and 2. and
3. is such as cannot consist with a justified state, as to be under sin, Romans
3: 9. to have their mouth stopped and be guilty before God verse. 19. But it is
manifest, that many, who are now not under the Law, nor under sin, but
delivered from under both yet may and do want the sense and feeling of their
justification, and doubt thereof. And beside this crosses the whole scope of
the Apostle, in proving justification by faith, which is to evince, that
justification is not by the works of the law, or the works of Righteousness,
which we do; so that the justification, whereof the Apostle speaks, cannot be
by works, but by faith alone; but the manifestation of justification to our
sense and consciences, can well be by works, as James shows and proves Chap.
2. Works can contribute unto this, but not unto that justification, whereof the
Apostle speaks, in his Epistles to the Romans and Galattans and which is
justification in the sight of God.

That justification is not before faith, is manifest from the condition, which
the Scripture tells us, such are into, who have not yet believed; for if that
condition be such, as is inconsistent with a state of justification and
Reconciliation, there can be no justification before faith: now the Scripture
tells us, that such as believe not, are condemned Ioh. 3: 18. dead in
trepasses and sins, children of wrath, Ephesians. 2: 1, 2, 3. Without Christ, and
without God in the world, and strangers from the Covenants of promise Ephesians. 2:
12. have made God a liar, 1 Ioh. 5: 10. cannot please God Heb. 11: 6. By all
which, and many like passages, that might be cited, it is manifest, that before
faith, there is no real justification, Faith is required in order to adoption,
and Remission of sins, and therefore must be before justification Ioh. 1: 12.
Act. 10: 43. Gal 3: 26. Act. 13: 38, 39, of 26: 18. But enough of this, seeing
M. Baxter has abundantly confuted it, in his Confess. page 229, etc.

Some move this Objection. If we are justified by faith, then faith is in order
before justification; and consequently the act is before the object, whereas on
the contrary, the act depends upon the object, and not the object upon the act,
Thus Bellarm^ de justif. lib. 1. c. 10. disputes against the assertion, that
makes the special mercy of God to be the object of justifying faith: wherein
the ground of the whole debate, lies in a mistake of that special mercy of
God; and whatever mistake may be, at least as to expression, in the assertion,
which Bellarmine opposes; yet Bellarmius Opinion can no way be owned, who does
so defend the object of faith, as that he makes justifying faith to be nothing
but Historical Faith. Learned and grave Mr. Norton, in his Orthodox Evangelist
Chapter 14. p. 314. in answering this objection, distinguishes betwixt the being
of justification and our being Justified; or betwixt justification in abstracto
i. e. without the receiving subject thereof, and in concreto i. e. together
with the believer, The first, which signifies Remission of sins and
Righteousness to Acceptance prepared, though not yet conferred upon the Elect,
he says, has a being before Faith and so the object is before the act: though
the ather be after faith. But I conceive there is no great necessity of this,
for answering of the argument, if any should propose it, to evince
justification before faith; and Bellarm. adduceth it not, to this end, as we
saw; for I see no ground to assert justification to be the object of justifying
faith, as if in order to justification, we were called to believe, that we are
justified, and that our sins are pardoned: (as was said above) And as for this
justification, considered in the abstract, which is said to have a being not
only in the Purpose of God, but also in the Covenant, between the Father, and
the Mediator, and in the Purchase of Christ; not only is it not called
justification in Scripture, but also, in so far, as it is the object of faith
(as all other revealed truths are) it is of the elect in general, and not of
this, or that particular person: so that though justifying faith may believe
that God Purposed and Christ Purchased, and the Covenant of Redemption did
expressly contain the justification of the Elect; yet it does not believe, in
order to the man's justification, that he in particular so was justified, either
in the Purpose of God, or in the Purchase of Christ, or in the Covenant betwixt
Jehovah and the Mediator; nor is this Faith called for, because this object is
not a revealed truth: Yet this same justifying Faith, is of that Nature, as to
produce afterward reflecting acts, whereby the man may see his own
justification and be persuaded of it, in truth, and hence also be persuaded,
that the Lord Purposed to justify him in particular; that Christ Purchased his
justification, in particular, and that it was an article of the Covenant of
Redemption, that he in particular should be justified.

2. While it is said, That the just lives by faith, we see that faith is the
way, whereby persons come actually to live the life of justification; and hence
it can not it self be the matter of their life: What interest properly faith
has in this affair, must be debated afterward; to wit, whether it be properly
imputed as the matter of our Righteousness; or only be to be considered as an
Instrument: or as a Condition, and how so?

3. We see, That this living by Faith proves that there is no justification by
works, in the sight of God; whence it is manifest, that faith here cannot be
considered as a work of the Law, or as a duty enjoined by the Law or under any
such consideration. (2) That works have no interest as a cause, or condition,
with Faith in justification. (3) That the life of justification, as to its
continnation is by faith, and by faith, as opposite to works; for the just, (or
the man already justified) lives by faith: This being also questioned, we will
have occasion to speak more to it afterward.

4. While it is said, the just lives by faith, it is considerable, That this
faith in its kind, and not in such, or such measure, is here said to be the
mean, whereby persons come to live the life of justification. So that this
true Faith, how weak so ever is the only mean of interessing a soul in this
privilege of justification. This will give occasion to speak of the object of
this justifying faith, which will help to clear the nature of it.

Our larger Catechism qu. 72. gives us such a definition or description of
justifying faith, that may satisfy us as to most of these difficulties; The
answer is this [justifying faith is a saving grace ( Heb. 10: 39.) wrought in
the heart of a sinner, by the Spirit (2 Cor. 4: 13. Ephesians. 1: 17, 18, 19.) and
word of God ( Romans 10: 14, 17.) whereby he being convinced of his sin and
misery, and of the disability in himself and all other creatures to recover him
out of his lost condition ( Act. 2: 37. and 16: 30. Ioh. 16: 8, 9. Romans 5: 6.
Ephesians. 2: 1. Act. 4: 12.) not only assenteth to the truth of the promise of the
Gosspel ( Ephesians. 1: 13.) but receives and rests upon Christ and his
Righteousness therein hold forth, for pardon of sin ( Ioh. 1: 12. Act. 16: 31.
and 10: 43.) and for the accepting and accounting of his person Righteous in
the sight of God, for salvation ( Phil. 3: 9. Act. 15: 11.)] And this question
is none of these particulars, wherein Mr. Baxter in his Confess. desires to
dissent from the said Catechism, as the next Question is; as we shall hear.

We may hence take notice of these particulars, concerning this faith', whereby
it may be known, and distinguished from what some may mistake for it.

1. As to its nature, and kind, it is saving; for all such, as have this grace
of justifying faith, are in the sure way of salvation; and whatever faith
persons may have, if they have not this, they are not in the sure path of life.
There is a faith of miracles, both Active and Passive, as we may say, that is a
faith to do miracles, and a faith to receive miracles wrought upon them. The
first was that which the Apostles had and others, who wrought Miracles; and is
to be understood Mat. 17: 20, 21. Luke 17: 6. The other is that, which some of
those had, who received miraculous cures, as the woman Mal. 9: 21, 21. and that
Man, who cried out, I believe, help mine unbeleefe Mark. 9: 24. and the man of
lystra Act. 14: 9. and others This in it self considered is not a saving grace.
Judas had this faith, whereby he cast our devils, and had commission to work
miracles with the rest Mat. 10: 8. Luke 9: 1, 6, 10. So also the Seventy
disciples Luke 10: 9, 17, 19. And how great a privilege so ever this was; yet
Christ told them verse. 20. that it was a far greater matter, and much greater
ground of joy, to have their names written in heaven, whereby he gives us also
to understand, that these are distinct and different from other, and also
separable. Many (says Christ Mat. 7: 22, 23.) will say to me, in that day,
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out
devils? and in thy name have done many wonderful works? And then will I
profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity.
And it is of this Faith, that Paul speaks 1. Cor. 13: 2. and though I have
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing,
Importing that this Faith may be, where there is no saving Christian Love.
There is an Histori^al faith, that is a believing not only of the histories
recorded in the word of God; but of the whole Revelation of God's mind there,
yet only as things historically recorded, working up the man, in whom it is,
unto a voluntary profession of that truth; This, though true in its kind, yet
is not saving, seeing many may have this, who are strangers to true saving
Faith. Simon Magns believed thus Act. 8: 13. who yet was but in the gall of
bitterness and in the bond of iniquity verse. 23. Many believed in the name of
Christ, when they saw the miracles, which he did, to whom notwithstanding
Christ did not commit himself Ioh. 2: 23, 24. Christ had many disciples, who
professed the truth and yet went back, and walked no more with him Ioh. 6: 66.
This faith, when it comes no further, is but such a Faith, as devils have, who
believe, there is a God, and tremble Iam. 2: 19. This is the fruitless,
workless Faith, that james speaks of Iam. 2: 14. that cannot save, and which
he calls a dead faith. verse. 17, 20. a faith that cannot work with works
verse. 22. There is a Temporary faith, which (whether we look upon, as distinct
from the preceding historical faith, or as an higher measure and degree
thereof, the matter is not much) is also different from and far short of this
saving Faith, whereby a man comes to live the life of Justification, though it
has some effect wrought upon the affections; this is the stonie-ground that
receives the sown seed Mat. 13: 20, 21. These are they, who hear the word,
and anon with joy receive it, yet have no root in themselves, but endure for a
while only; for when tribulation or persecution arises, because of the word,
by and by they are offended.

2. Every act of saving Faith, is not the justifying act of faith, or that act
thereof, whereby we are Justified before God. Saving Faith has many several
acts, as we may see Heb. 11. Though where ever there are any of the real acts
of saving faith, that man has also acted justifying faith: yet we may look on
Justifying Faith, or on the act of faith whereby the soul becomes Justified,
as some way distinct from other acts of Saving Faith. Though by saving Faith we
come to understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God Heb. 11: 3.
not in a mere historical manner, but savingly; yet, that act of saving Faith,
is not the Justifying act thereof, to speak so. Though the same Faith by which
the Ancients subdued kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the
violence of fire etc. was that by which they were justified, yet these were not
justifying acts of that faith; that is, in order to justification, faith acts
in another peculier manner: Though it be one and the same saving faith, whereby
a believer is united unto Christ, in order to answer the Challenges and
Accusations of the Law, and to free him from guilt and condemnation, and makes
use of Christ's Right, Strength Support etc. in times of Darkness, Temptations
and Difficulties: yet these acts of the same faith are not the same, but may be
looked upon as distinct: Faith acts one way on Christ in order to
Justification, and another way in order to Sanctification: Faith acts one
way, when it receives in, and another way, when it gives out, as it were,
Faith acts one way on Christ as Priest, and it acts another way upon him,
as Prophet and as King: yet we would know, that in all these actings of faith,
whole Christ is laid hold upon, though more expressly and explicitly, in the
uniting act, whereby the soul is married unto Jesus, and thereby becomes one
spirit with him. There can be no use making of Christ for any end whatsomever,
until the soul be united with himself, and in every act of faith, whereby
Christ is made use of, for what ever particular mercy the Believer would have,
be it Pardon, Light, Strength, Comfort, or such like, Christ himself is gripped
to, and laid hold on; for there is no separating of Him and his favors: yet
the Believer, while gripping and laying hold on whole Christ, takes him up
under that Relation, and eyeth that Office; that most nearly answers to and
correspondeth with his present necessity, and points forth that good, which
he is now desirous of, and so acts faith suitablie or puts forth faith in
suitable acts: as for example, when the believer is troubled with conscience of
guilt, he runs to Christ, yet in a special manner he goes to him, as
Priest, and eyeth that Blood, that only can purge consciences from dead works
Heb. 9: 14. When he is troubled with Raging Corruptions, and would have them
subdued, or would have his hard Rebellious Heart made more soft and pliable to
God's will, he goes to Christ; yet in special manner, he eyeth Christ as a
King and acts Faith upon him accordingly; So when he is troubled with
Ignorance, Doubts, and Darkness, he goes to Christ; yet he eyeth him th^n
especially as a Prophet and accordingly acts Faith upon him. Yet we would
know, that when the Believer acts thus, in this different manner, upon
Christ; whether as a Prophet, or as a Priest, or as a King, there is no
exclusion, far less any denial of the other offices; which cannot be, because
Christ himself, and consequently whole Christ, is always He, to whom the
believer goes, though with a more express, explicit and special application
to and usemaking of that office and work of Christ, which most suiteth the
believers present necessity. Now, though all these acts of faith, be acts of
saving faith; yet they are not all that act of faith which is or may be (for
distinctions sake) called, the Justifying act of faith; for this is that act of
faith only, which the soul exerteth, in order to Justification, and Absolution
from the Curse of the Law.

3. This Faith is no product of the power of Nature, accompanied with all its
advantages, and elevated to its highest pitch, and to the highest measure of
accomplishments: Nature, as now corrupted and depraved, not only will not
willingly complye with the design of Grace in the Gospel; but it cannot, being
nothing but pure enmity to the holy Ways and Counsels of God; all its mindings
are of the flesh, and all the minding of the flesh, or the carnal mind is
enmity against God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be Romans 8: 7. Persons, deluded by Satan, may imagine, and suppose with
themselves, that it is so wholly in their power to believe, that they can
exerte that Faith, at what time so ever they will: But, howbeit, out of their
own mouths such unbeleevers stand convinced, and condemned, for their not
believing; yet the mighty power of God's Spirit must be exerted, ere they be
brought unto a believing frame, or their souls be made to look toward Jesus in
earnest, so as to lay hold on him by Faith. Therefore is Faith called the gift
of God Ephesians. 2: 8. There is the working of the might of God's power requisite
unto believing Ephesians. 1: 19. Such then, as have not the workings of the Spirit
of God, Inclining, Drawing, Persuading and Causing the heart believe, are real
strangers to this grace, whatever great Enduements and Gifts, or ordinary
effects of the Spirit they may be possessed of.

The author of a Discourse of the two Covenants (a book recommended to us by
Mr. Baxter, in his preface, prefixed thereunto, as a Treatise, which will give
us much light, into the Nature of the Gospel) page 24. tells us, that man
himself, is not wholly passive, in this change, or what goes to the making of
it; but is so far active in it, as to denominate what he does by God's
assistance to be his own act. Whereby he sufficiently discovers an Arminian
design; yet so qualifieth his expressions, as may abundantly show, he
intends to evade. For he will not say, that man is not at all passive, in
this change, but only, that he is not wholly passive; and yet he dar not say
this confidently, but must add, or what goes to the making of it: and how much
he may comprehend under this, who can tell? But if man be not passive, he must
be active. How far then is he active? So far, says he, as to denominate what
he does by God's assistance, to be his own act. That the act of Faith is man's
act, is most certain, for it is he that believes; but the question is, what
change is wrought in the soul, by the Spirit of God, before the act of faith be
exerted? and what hand man's labors and endeavors have in the infusion of the
new Principle, the Divine Nature? Is not the man purely passive, in the
receiving of the effect of that creating act, or in the work of Regeneration?
That the Lord prescribes the use of ordinary means, wherein the man is to
wait for the free and gracious working of the Spirit is true; but there is no
connection made by the Lord, by any Law or Constitution, betwixt the use of
these means, and the gracious work of faith, nor betwixt ordinary Light and
Conviction, and the like common effects of these means, and Saving Grace. Yet
he tells us afterward, that if man do but what he can do, through the assistance
of God's: common providente (in whom we live, and move, and have our being) God
is most ready, through his good pleasure, or out of the goodness of his will
and pleasure, to work in him, both to will and to do savingly, to carry the
work quite through. But what Scripture does teach us this? Sure I am, that Phil.
2: 12, 13. with which he ushereth in this discourse, gives no ground for this;
for that is spoken to such, in whom the work of Salvation is already begun, and
who are commanded to work it out, and to say, that the case is the same, is to
overturne the whole Gospel, and present us with pure Pelagianisme; is there as
sure and certane a connection betwixt man's work of nature and God's gracious
works of Grace, as is betwixt the work of grace Begun and Carried on? His
adducing afterward p. 25. the commands to make ourselves a new heart, and to
repent etc. to enforce this, is but the old Pelagian argument brought again
upon the stage, to which I have said what I hope will befound Consonant to the
Scripture, in my book against the Quakers. But this man discovers himself
more plainly afterward page 28, where after mentioning some acts of men, which
cannot be called acts of supernatural grace, he tells us, if men will but go
thus far (as they can) out of a real-desire to ^e happy, I should make no
question, but that the Spirit of God would yield them his assistance to carry
them quite through, in the work of conversion. Beside that connection, whereof
he makes no question, though the orthodox have hithertill denied it, writting
against Pelagians, Jesuits and Arminians, we may observe this, here, That
nature can carry the work of conversion quite through, having only the
assistance of the Spirit of God; and what difference is there then betwixt
Nature and Begun Grace: for begun Grace needs the assistance of the Spirit of
God, to work Salvation quite through; and Nature needs no more? where are then
the Infused Habites? Is Regeneration only brought about by assistance? Need
they, who are dead, no more but Assistance? If this Author help us to clearness
in the doctrine of the Gospel, it must be the Gospel, that only Pelagians,
Jesuits, Arminians and Quakers own; but not the Gospel of the Grace of God
revealed to us, in the Word; which tells us of something more requisite unto
the Conversion of a sinner, and to the bringing of him to Believe and Repent,
than the Cooperation of God's assistance (as he speaks page 25.) and man's
endeavors. He tells us page 26. that there is a promise of divine assistance to
Man, using his ^ndeavours in doing what he may, and can do toward the
performing the condition of the Covenant: But he shows us not, where that
promise is to be found: and page 17. he talks of an implicit promise; and this
he very wonderfully infers from the Gospel, that was preached to Abraham:
for thus he speaks, for God in promising blessedness to the Nations through
Abraham's seed, therein promised all that was absolutely necessary for him to
vouch safe to make them blessed, and without which they could not be blessed.
And if so, then he therein implicitly promised to assist the endeavors of men
to perform the condition of the promise, without the assistance of whose grace,
they cannot savingly believe repent and obey. Whence it would seem (1) that all
men, are comprehended within this promise; and (2) That no more is promised in
reference to the Elect, than to the Reprobat. (3) That the promise of faith and
Repentance, is but a promise of of Assistance. (4) And this promise of
Assistance, is not to assist Grace, but to assist Nature. (5) That the promise
of Faith and Repentance was but an implicit promise, This is a sufficient
taste of this Authors Pelagian-Gospel.

4. We proceed. This work of the Spirit upon the soul, whereby the man is
brought to a closing with, and to a resting upon Christ, is ordinarily wrought
by the word: for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God Romans
10: 17. The Lord has established that great Ordinance of Preaching, for this
end; and for this end, he blesses it unto his chosen ones, we mean not this
exclusivly, as i^ the word could no other way beblessed; for he blesses, as he
sees good, for this end, the Reading of, and Meditation on the word also;
though the grand and special mean be the Preaching; as we see Act. 2: 37, 41.
and 8: 26-30. and 26: 18. The Lord, it is true, may send wakenings by his
Judgments and by other like Occasions; and may bless the private Endeavors of
Parents and friends, by their private Instructions and Admonitions: yet all
these are no way prejudicial unto, but rather contribute to the confirming of
the privilege of the word, as the Principal Mean and Ordinance, both as leading
thereunto, and as receiving strength thereby: for what ever real beginnings the
Lord may work so, they have this effect to commend the word more unto these
persons, and, in special, the public Administration thereof by his Authorized
Ambassadors: so that whatever saving work be wrought, as it is not altogether
without the word, some way or other made known; so it tends to the further
usmaking of the word publicly administered, where it may be had, as Saul, when
under that terrible work of God Act. 9. was directed to go to Ananias in
Damascus, to understand what he should do, and Cornelius was ordered Act. 10.
to send for Peter, to get instruction in the ways of God. And whatever work of
Light, Conviction, or Terror, be wrought upon any occasion, that is attended
with a contrary effect, is to be suspected, as not of God, nor saving. How
dreadful then their Condition is, who have not the word, but are without the
pale of the Church, where this word is preached; and their condition also, who,
though living within the Church, have this word as a sealed book, needs not
be said.

5. The condition of soul, unto which the Man is brought by the Spirit,
accompanying the Administration of the word, in order to his actual believing,
is considerable here; for thereby we will be helped to understand better the
Nature and Actings of Faith, whereby only, as a mean, relief is brought unto
the soul; and to know what that relief is, and wherein it lies, that the
distessed man is pursueing after, and seeking with earnesness. In order to
which, we would know,

(1) That the Spirit by the Word bears home Convictions of Sin and Misery,
discovers to the man, how he stands guilty of the breach of the Law of God,
and so charge sin home upon him, both Original and Actual, and thereby fixes
guilt upon the Conscience, showing how he has forfeited all Right to
blessedness and life, and how moreover he is under the Curse, threatened to the
breakers of the Law, and has the wrath and malediction of God hanging over
him: He is made to see the sins he never saw before, both of Omission and
Commission, and the sad Consequences thereof, to wit, how he is obnoxious to
the penalty, the insupporrable wrath of the living God. Thus the Spirit
convinces of sin Ioh. 16: 8, 9. thus he opens their eyes, and turns them
from darkness to light, in so far Act. 26: 18. thus the secrets of the heart
are made manifest 1. Cor. 14: 24, 25. and they become lost in themselves, like
a lost sheep, the lost piece of mency; and the lost son Luke 15: 6, 9, 24. and
like one of those whom Christ came to seek and to save Mat. 18: 11. Luke 19:
10. These are the sinners mentioned Mal. 9: 13. that is, such as are now
brought by the work of the Spirit, to see and feel their sinful condition, to
know that they are sinners, and that they are in a lost condition.

2) There is a discovery made of their Inability to relieve and help themselves
out of this woeful condition of sin and misery. They are made to see, that
nothing in them, or in any other creature, can make satisfaction unto the
justice of God and thereby redeem them from the Curse of the Law, and from the
wrath of God, that is lying upon them, the sense and apprehension whereof does
now press and pinch them sore. Which makes them cry out, with these pricked
in their hearts Act. 2: 37: and 16: 30. What shall we do to be saved? They see,
they cannot keep the Law: and though they could, it would not avail, as a
Compensation and Satisfaction to the Justice of God, for the by gone
innumerable Transgressions, whereof they stand guilty.

Whereby we see, that the troubled wakened soul, in this case, is brought to a
desparing in himself. He is under the sentence, and he sees nothing under
heaven that can command Peace to his soul; nothing within him, nor without him,
beside God, that can bring him out of this Prison, and relieve him from this
dreadful sentence, under which he is lying, as a condemned Malefactor: And we
see, what is properly the relief, that he would be at, and that he only
desires: to wit, To be freed and delivered from the sentence of the Law, and
from the curse of God; and to be brought into a state of Favor and
Reconciliation with God, that his sins may be pardoned, he may be accepted of
God, as Righteous, and so brought into a State of Peace and Salvation. This is
the plaster, that his soul is longing for; this is the only remedy that can
relieve him; this is the only good that he can be satisfied with: all the
Pleasures, Honors, and Rihes of the world will bring no relief or ease to his
distressed soul: And when he finds tha^ this is not to be found in himself,
nor in any other Creature, he must look for it, elsewhere. And thefore

(3) When the Spirit of the Lord is carrying on this work, he, by the preaching
of the Gospel, convinces the man of the reality and truth thereof, and
discovers the Suitablness, Fullness, Satisfactoriness, Glory and Excellency of
the remedy, that is hold forth in that Gospel, that has brought life and
immortality to Light, even in the Gospel of the grace of God, wherein is
revealed, what Christ God-man has done and suffered, to satisfy the justice
of God: therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: There
he sees, that the Father is well pleased with him, and with the Sacrifie,
which he offered up for sins, Whence the poor wakened sinner sees, that his
case is not utterly desperate, and that there is hope for him, through Jesus;
or at least that it is possible, he may be saved from the wrath to come; and a
may be of relief is a great relief: And he sees, that if that Righteousness
and Satisfaction of Christ were made over to him, or he interessed therein, he
were well; for that would sufficiently guarde him from the wrath of God, and
secure him, as to future blessedness. Thus the Spirit, by the word, reveals
the Gospel of Salvation to the end the wakened sinner may see his relief
there, and betake himself to the only relief that is held forth there.

6. Hence we see, that while the wakened sinner is in this condition, his maine
and only work will be, how he may be interessed in that al sufficient
Redemption, and Purchase of Christ, to the end he may be partaker of the
Ben^fites, that flow there from, and so be freed from the state of Sin, Wrath
and Enmity, wherein he is now ^ plunged: And when the Gospel calls for Faith,
in order to this, and he finds, that it is not in his power to Believe, but
that it is the pure gift of God, who must give the new heart, and the heart of
flesh, and must regenerat and beget him of new, and so create a new Principle
of grace in his soul, to the end he may be brought to act Faith on the offered
mediator and Mediation, and accept thereof, as his only Cure and Remedy.

7. So that, when the Spirit works up the soul to believe, he causes him
sweetly acquiesce, in the way of Redemption, revealed in the Gospel, and to
count it a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners 1. Tim. 1: 15. and to comply sweetly with
the design thereof, in all points: and for that end to close with Christ, and
to accept of him upon his offer, and particularly to rest upon him, and his
Righteousness, revealed in the Gospel, as the only ground of their hope and
peace: This being the thing that their soul longs after, to wit, how they
shall get guilt taken away and they be clothed with a Righteousness, wherein
they may with confidence appear before God, the Spirit of God, when working
the soul up to a compliance with the remedy, held forth in the Gospel, causes
them accept of Christ, as made of God unto them, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, and every such soul to say. In the Lord our
Righteousness, have I Righteousness. In him alone will I look for Pardon,
Acceptance, Reconciliation and life, and on him alone will I roll my debt, and
there will I rest, in hope.

8. Therefore, this Faith, though it bring the soul unto Christ, as the only
Redeemer, and is the man's clasping his arms about him, and embraceing him, as
all his Salvation, and rolling all his weight upon him, yet it looks to and
in a special manner, eyeth the Satisfaction, Merits and Righteousness of
Christ; for that is it, which the man mainly now stands in need of Justice
must be satisfied, says he, my sins must be pardoned, I must be accepted in
favor with God, I must have a Righteousness where with my sins may be covered,
and the month of justice, of the Law, and of my challenging conscience, may be
stopped, and whereby I may have Right to life: and this being held forth in the
Gospel, Faith brings the soul to a resting on this Righteousness of Christ,
that he may be found in Christ, not having his own Righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness,
which is of God by faith Phil. 3: 9. This is to believe on Christ Ioh. 3: 16,
36. Act. 16: 31. and faith in his blood Romans 3: 25. Thus the soul refugeth it
self from the storm of wrath, under the wings of Christ, and hides itself, as
it were, in him from the avenger of blood, the wrath of an angry God, purseing
for a broken Law. And here, the Man abides hid in Christ, and eleaveth to him,
as being glued to him, and utterly unwilling to be separat from him, or to
appear without his garment of Righteo^sness, which faith fasteneth on the soul;
and the man by faith trusts to this way, and rests upon it with full
confidence, nothing doubting of his saiftie thereby.

9. By this we see, how the way of justification by Gospel-faith serves both
for setting forth the Glory of God, the Riches of Free Grace, and for abaseing
of Man, as also for secureing of Life unto the Believer: for (1) Hereby the Man
is convinced of his guilt and declares himself to be guilty; for he his guilty
before God (...) Romans 3: 19. he is made speachless knowing nothing to speak in
his own defense, nor no apology to give in, his mouth is stopped, and he can
say nothing, but cry out, guilty, I am a child of death, the Lord is
Righteous, should he damn me for ever, I must justify him, when he speaks,
and clear him when he judges Psalm. 51: 4. (2) Hereby the Man pronunceth and
swears himself poor and bare; he forsakes all, and renunceth all, that
formerly he had any eye upon, or confidence in, counting them loss and dung,
as Paul did Phil. 3. He proclameth himself Empty, Lost, and Naked, and
declares he has nothing that he can lean to, within himself. He accounts
all his former Righteousness to be nothing but rotten rags, and filthy rags,
and Professes that he knows nothing within himself, wherefore, or whereupon
he can expect Reconciliation with the Lord, and to be Accepted of him. (3) Thus
all ground, or occasion of boasting, or of glorying before men, is taken away
from the believer Romans 3: 27. and 4: 1. (4) Thus the glorious beauty of free
Grace shines forth. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be of grace. Romans
4: 16. Grace here appears in its own glory, when free grace without us, and
contrare to our demerites, does all, provideth the Sacrifie, accepts of the
same, in their behalf for whom it was offered up, brings them to the actual
participation of the fruits and effects thereof by working up their hearts to
a satisfaction in it and to a resting upon it, and all this freely, out of free
Love. It is corruptly said by the fore mentioned Author of that discourse of
the two Covenants page 42. that Grace appears, in the Lord's making Faith the
condition of the promise, in that great things are promised upon such a
possible practicable easy condition, as faith is, considering the means and
assistance promised by God to work it: for this spoileth Grace of its Glory,
when Man is looked upon, and said to be the principal author of says, as he
is, upon the matter, said to be, when all that God does, is but called
assistance, and at least the man may challenge, as his own, no small share of
the Glory of acting Faith, and of going so great a length in the way to Faith,
without any more assistence, than he has need of, to eat his meat when
hungry, and of going on his own feet to the very place, where God stood ready
to lend him a hand to help him forward. Not to mentione, how this alters the
whole Nature of the Covenant of Grace, making it nothing but a new edition of
the old Covenant of works. (5) It is of faith to the end the promise might be
sure to all the seed Romans 4: 16. When all the business is wrought, as it were,
to our hand, and nothing more requisite to interesse us, in the noble Effects
of all, than our consent, and this also is wrought by the Spirit of God
conform to the Covenant of Redemption, can a more ensureing way be imagined?
Alas! what ground of Confidence or of Certainty, can the Arminian and Socinian
way, followed by the formentioned Author, give to a poor soul? When all is made
to hang upon the tottering and inconstant will of man, who has no more from
God, but some common assistances, standing ready to attend him, if he advance
so far his alone without them; and when he has gotten them to day, may run
back, and undo all again to morrow, and Apostatize for ever; for this also is
a part of that Gospel, that this man will teach us, page 135. if we believe Mr.
Baxter's Preface. Beside that hereby, no man can win to any solid Peace, or
Joy, so long as he lives; for he is but still performing the Condition of his
Justification, and perfecting it by his works; so that till they be at an end,
the Condition of Justification is not performed, and consequently no
Justification: and it is the maine scope of this man's discourse to prove the
interest of Gospel-obedience (as he calls it) as a Condition, as well as
Faith, or rather as a part or best part of practical Faith, in the matter of
Justification.

10. Hence we may also see, how erroneous and dangerous that definition of
faith as Evangelical, Christian and Justifying, is, which the mentioned Author
gives us page 38. to wit, Such an hearty assent and consent unto God's
declaration in the Gospel by his Son, concerning Christ himself and his Grace
and Favor toward men by him, and concerning their own duty, as causes a man
to expect from God, and to act in a way of duty, according to the tenor of such
a declaration, and his own concerns in it. This upon the matter is the very
faith of Adam, only Adam heard no word of Christ; and so it is but a Law-faith,
and no Gospel-Faith. And again more plainly by way of explication, he says
page 39. nor is it a bare belief, that God will for Christ's sake pardon and
save, as many as truly repent and amend their lives and become new creatures;
unless they so believe all this, as seriously and heartily to repent themselves
of their former folly, and to return to their duty in new Evangelical
obedience. Not only does this man take away from Justifying and saving Faith,
all that peculiar closing with Christ, and accepting of him, as Redeemer, and
all particular and special eye or respect had to his Righteousness and
Mediation; but he makes Justification depend on works, as well as on faith, or
on works, as the integral parts of practical justifying faith: It is true,
Saving faith, cannot but bow and incline the man, in whom it is, to all holy
Obedience; But to make these thus to be included in Faith, as the Condition of
Justification, is to give us the Socinian Justification, and the Socinian
Faith, for the true orthodox justification and faith: and if this be the Gospel
justification, and Gospel faith which (as Mr. Baxter thinks) this look will
help us unto, the Socinians are better acquainted with the Gospel, than the
orthodox have been, or are. And to evince this (which is all I need to do here)
I shall propose a few of their Assertions concerning Faith, that the Reader may
judge what harmony is betwixt this Author and them. The Racov. Catech. cap. 9.
de fide tells us, that faith is a Trust in God, whereby we not only confide in
him, but also obey him. This is short yet fully the same with our Auther's.
Socinus himself dial de justif. f. 11. what is that to believe in his name? It
is receive him, to believe his words, to confide in him, and finally to obey
him. And in not: in dial f. 25. he tells us, that the faith by which we are
justified, does contain obedience to the commands, not as an effect, but as
its substance and form, yea (faith he) it is obedience it self. And again de
fid. and oper. f. 60. he faith, I will have nothing else, than to con^ide de in
Christ; and this is done and receives its perfection, and as it were, its
form, when obedience is yielded unto his commands: So that betwixt justifying
faith and good works there is no difference. See him further f. 123. 134.
Smalcius de divin. Christ. cap. 14. f. 38. tells us, that faith in Jesus Christ
is a firm assent unto what he has said and a confideing truly so called,
whereby not only we firmly believe what he has said concerning us, but we
confide in him and adhere to him, (this is much more, than our Author says)
and heartly embrace his doctrine as celestial and saving, placeing our
considence and hope in him, as such and so great, a King, and as our Priest (fie
upon our Author, that is less orthodox, than this Socinian) hanging wholly upon
him, with a firm hope to obtain these things, which he has promised to such
as obey him, that is, if we amend our lives, according to his prescriptien, we
are confident to receive remission of sins, deliverance from death and eternal
life. But you will say, there is no mention made of good works in this faith.
See therefore what he says disp. 6. cont. Frantz de bon. open. These. 53, 55,
63, 68. We do not (says he) consider two parts of faith. Trust in God, and
Obedience to his commands, but we distinguish them, as if they were two: for
albeit really they may be taken for encthing, and are one, they can be some way
distinguished - Obedience is rather the form of faith, or faith it self, than
any part of it. And in this, the Arminian Remonstrants in their Confess. cap.
10. s. 1, 2, 3. do homolegate with the Socinians, telling us, that faith
comprehends all the commands of the Gospel, and that the command of Faith
must no other-way be considered, than as by a natural propriety it includes
obedience, and is a fruitful mother of good works: and that faith thus
considered comprehends a man's whole conversion, prescribed in the Gospel.
Socinus is plain Synops. 1. s. 8. and tells us, that the way of justification
is the same under both Covenants, seeing in both on God's part was required
Remission of sins: and on man's part, Repentance, and Obedience to his commands,
which is truly that very faith, that every did, and ever will make man
acceptable unto God. And then tells us, that we must beware to make
sanctification an effect of justification. These things may show, that this
part, at least, of this Authors Gospel is more learned out of the Socinian and
Arminian Schools, than out of the Scriptures: and if we would be guided into
this, we may follow other more ancient leaders, than is this Author, whom else
where, I suppose, Mr. Baxter calls Mr. W. Allen.

11. We would also take notice of this, That when the Scripture says, the just
lives by faith, or we are justified by faith, the meaning must not be, we are
justified by Hope, or we are justified by Love, or we are justified by Patience
or by any other Grace: for though all these Graces of the Spirit, may be
conceived as springing from one and the same root, and seed of God, which is
planted in the soul, in the new birth; and though, we may, by our acute wits,
so explain each, as to include the rest, more or less: Yet as divine
Revelation is the ground of all our Faith, in this matter, so Scripture
expressions, are the best guide to us, in our Expressions and Conceptions about
this matter. And as the Scripture does speak of and name these Graces, as
formally distinct, ascribing to each their distinct, and several Operation, End
and Use; so we never read, that we are said to be. justified by Love, or by
Patience, or by Hope, or any other; but always by Faith. This certanely must
instruct us, that Faith here has a peculiar and singular interest, and must be
considered, as looking to Christ, in a different way, from Hop and Love, which
also have Christ for their object, or Christ must be the object of Faith, in
another manner and under some other consideration, than he is the object of
other graces.

12. It is also considerable, that it is simply said, the just man lives by
faith, or we are justified by faith, and not the just man lives, or we are
justified, by a strong faith, or by a faith continueing to the end: Though it
be true, that a true and lively Faith is of that Nature, that it will continue
to the end, and will grow; yet we may not say, that only a strong Faith, or a
Faith as continueing to the end, is the condition of the Covenant, or of
Justification; for hence it would follow, that as no man of a weak, yet true
and sincere Faith, could be said to be Justified, so no man could be said to be
Justified until his Faith had endured to the end, which is contrary to
Scripture, speaking of believers, while in their infancy, as justified and
adopted, as partakers of, or at least, as having a Right to the consequences of
Justification, such as Pardon, Peace, Glorying in Tribulation, and Comfort etc.
The promise grants Justification and Adoption to Faith, that is of the right
kind, and no mention is made of that Qualification thereof, He that believes
is passed from death to life, and shall never die etc. Ioh. 3: 36. Ioh. 3: 16,
18. Ioh. 1: 12. If the meaning of such, as make Faith, as continneing to the
end, the condition of the Covenant and of Justification, were this, That Faith
as continued in to the end is the Mean of Continuance in the Covenant, and in
the state of Justification, they should speak truth: for the just lives by
faith first and last, as by Faith they are brought into the estate, so by faith
they are continued therein; Faith makes the first Union, Faith continues it:
But of this we shall have occasion to speak more afterward.

13. This faith is not one single act of the soul, nor seated in one faculty,
The various things, spoken of it in Scripture, and the various objects it
acts upon, and is exercised about, and the various and different necessities,
which believers stand into, with the corresponding uses, which faith serves
for, in these necessities, clear it to be no one single act of the Soul: I
would rather call it the act of the whole Soul, than the act of any faculty,
whatsomever.

CHAP. XXII.
Our act of Faith is not imputed to us a Righteousness.
Wproceed now to clear, at some further length, several Particulars, touched
in the foregoing Chapt. contributing to the explication of our Justification by
Faith: The first and great Question anent Faith is, whether it be imputed unto
the Believer, as his Righteousness, whereupon he is justified? Adversaries to
the truth both Socinians and Arminians do plainly assert, that our faith, or
that grace of faith is the very thing, which is imputed to the Believer for his
Righteousness. They are all convinced, that the sinner, must be clothed with a
Righteousness, some way or other, in some sense or other, ere he can be
Justified, for the Lord is Righteous, and will not justify the wicled, that is
such as have no Righteousness: and being willing to yield to the imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, they substitute, in place of Christ's
Righteousness, Faith, properly taken, or our act of Believing, as is it
performed by us, in obedience to the Gospel-command. Socinus de Serve. lib. 4.
c. 4. Cum igitur etc. i.e. seeing he teaches, by the example of Abraham that
Righteousness is imputed, when can doubt, that nothing else can hereby be under
stood, but that we arerighteous before God, because it has seemed good to the
Lord, to account our faith, in place of Righteousness. And thereafter. That
faith is imputed unto righteousness, is nothing else, than that faith is
accounted to us in place of Righteousness, but not that the Righteousness of
christ is imputed to us and cap. 11. Themselves say, that that says justifies
not by its proper worth, but because it apprehends Christ: But that
apprehension of Christ of yours, is a mere humane fiction, and a most vain
dream. And when we read, that faith was imputed to Abraham for Righteousness,
or unto Righteousness, we have no reason to think, that mention is there made
of the Righteousness of another, when it is manifest, that he is speaking of
his own. In his dial. de Justis. f. 14, 15. he tells us, that faith is by God
imputed to us for Righteousness, and he accounts that in place of
Righteousness, faith is in very deed that whereby the Scripture witnesses that
we are justified that is, accounted Righteous before God, and have our sins
pardoned. This faith makes us acceptable unto God unto eternal life. And in
not. ad dial. f. 27. Nothing else was said, than that faith is accounted to us
of God, and imputed for Righteousness, and that that faith is truly in us, who
will deny seeing these words are said to exclude the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness? The Arminians do homologate with the Socinians, in this Arminius
himself cont. Perkins. faith expressly, that faith it self is imputed to us and
in Praf. ad Hyppolit. this (faith he) is my opinion about justification, that
faith, and that alone is imputed unto Righteousness, that by it we are
justified before God, absolved from our sins, and accounted righteous,
pronunced and declared by God giving sentence from the tribunal of grace. Some
blaine ine for saying, that the act of faith it self, the (...) credere is
imputed unto Righteousness, and that in a proper sense, not metonymically I
say, faith is imputed unto us unto righteousness, for Christ and for his
righteousness sake. He owneth the same decl. Sent. ad Ord. f. 65. 66. and in
Resp. ad 31. Artic. f. 152-154.

John, Goodwine in his Treatise of Justification Part. 1. Chapter 2. asserteth the
same most considently from Romans 4. whose reasons hereafter shall be examied.
The same purpose he prosecuteth Part. 2. Chapter 6. answering the arguments of the
orthodox against that imputation, which shall be considered in due time.

Mr. Baxter in his Confess. page 18, 19. Excepteth against some words in our
larger Catechism and Confession of faith, to wit, that it is denied, that the
grace of faith, or any act thereof is imputed for Justification, unless it be
thus understood, that our faith is not imputed to us, as being in stead of a
perfect Righteousness of Obedience, to the ends, as it was required by the Law
of works; nor is our faith the matter, or the meritorious cause of the
remission of our sin, or of our right to Salvation. But the meaning of the
Assembly is plain enough against that, which is the opinion of Socinians and
Arminians, as the words of the Answer to quest. 73. of the larger Catech. make
manifest; where it is said (in answer to that Question, How does faith
justify a sinner in the sight of God?) Faith justifies a sinner in the sight
of God, not because of these other graces, which do always accompany it, or of
good works, that are the fruit of it; nor a^ if the grace of faith, or any act
thereof were imputed to him for his justification (and this is confirmed from
Romans 4: 5. comp. with Romans 10: 10.) but only as it is an instrument, by which
he receives and applies Christ, and his Righteousness. And in the Confess. of
Faith. Chapter 11. f. 1. nor by imputing faith it self, the act of believing, nor
any other evangelical obedience, to them, as their Righteousness. Nor is this a
determining of a point, expressly against the words of God, as he supposes; for
it is not the bare words, as Heretics interpret them, that is the mind of
God, but the true sense and meaning of his words: And in Confessions and
Catechismes, I judge that matters should be made plain, and that it were not
plain and ingenuous dealing to set down the truth in these expressions, that
heretics can subscribe unto, when it is known, they have an exposition of
these words contrary to truth: It seems that Mr. Baxter will not say, in the
explication of the Sacrament of the Lords supper, that the bread is not changed
into the body of Christ, lest he seem to contradict express Scripture, which
says, that Christ said of the bread, this is my body.

But now, as to the matter, I assert, with our Confess. and Catechis. and with
all the orthodox against Socinians and Arminians. That faith, considered, as
our act of obedience, is not that which is accounted our Righteousness, in
order to Justification, nor that, which is properly imputed to us for that end;
Nor is that the meaning of the Apostle. Romans 4. And of this I give these
reasons.

1. The Apostle, in his whole Disput about Justification, opposes Faith and
Works as inconsistent with, yea as repugnant to other: as is notoure; But this
could not be, if Faith as our act of obedience were imputed to us, as our
Righteousness; for faith, as our act of obedience, is a work, and a work
commanded by the Law of God, otherwise it should be unlawful, or a work of
supererogation. The meaning then of the Apostles Conclusion Romans 3: 28. should
be this, a man is justified by one dead of the Law, without all works or deeds
of the Law; which were a contradiction. And it is certain, that when the
Apostle excludes the works of the Law, he excludes their from being looked
upon, as our Imputed Righteousness; for Adversaries did plead for their
interest in justification, as a Righteousness to be imputed to the doers, where
upon they might be justified: if then faith as our work, were imputed as our
Righteousness, Paul's disput should be, whether all works should be imputed for
Righteousness, or one work of faith only: Nor can it be said, that by the Law
here, the Apostle understands only the Law of Moses, as such, for he is
speaking this, even of the Gentiles, who never were under the Law of Moses, and
instanceth Chap. 4, in Abraham, who was justified long before the Law of Moses,
as such, had a being. And he is speaking of the Law, by which is the knowledge
of sin. Romans 3: 20. and which works wrath Romans 4: 15. which cannot agree to
the Law of Moses only.

2. By asserting, that Faith, properly taken, is accounted our Righteousness,
the whole scope and all the Arguments, which the Apostle uses in this matter,
should be enervated and contradicted; as a very light view of them might make
manifest, and the following Arguments will evince.

3. Faith, considered as our act of obedience, and as a work of ours, is not
that Righteousness of God without the Law, which is witnessed by the Law, and
the Prophets: Nor is it that Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of
Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe Romans 3: 21, 22. Neither
Law nor Prophets did bear witness, that faith, as our act and work, was
accounted all the Righteousness that was to be imputed to the believer: Nor
said, that our act of faith was the Righteousness of God, without the works of
the Law. Nor is it imaginable, how faith can be that Righteousness of God,
which by Faith is imputed unto all, and put upon all that believe. Shall we
think, that the Apostles words have but this sense, That faith is unto and upon
them, that have faith; or that faith is imputed by faith? Sure the Apostles
words must be so understood, as to import, that the believer has by his faith
something imputed to him, which is distinct from faith, as is obvious.

4. If faith, as our work, were imputed as Righteousness, how could the
Righteousness of God be declared in the justification of sinners, and God be
just, when he was the justifier of him, which believes in Jesus; as the
Apostle says Romans 3: 26? Is our Believing such a perfect and complete
Righteousness, that God cannot but account us Righteous, because of it, and so
justify us, as Righteous, upon the account of it? Is it not sick of the same
discemper of weakness with other graces?

5. If Faith, as our act and work, were imputed to us, as our Righteousness,
how should boasting be excluded, and all occasion of glorying, though not
before God (before whom even Adam, though he had continued in his state of
innocence unto the end, could not have gloried) yet before Men, taken away, as
it is in the matter of justification Romans 3: 27. and 4: 2. The Law of works
will not exclude boa^ing, and faith, as our work belongs to the Law of works:
and if we were justified by Faith, as our imputed Righteousness, we should
certainly have ground of glorying before Men, as well as Adam should have had,
if he had stood in his integrity, and obtained the crown by his doing.

6. If Faith, as our work, were imputed to us for our Righteousness,
Justification and the reward should not be of grace, but of debt; as the
Apostle expressly affirms. Romans 4: 4, 5. Now to him, that works (and he who
believes, in this, which he now opposes; works) is the reward not reckoned
of grace, but of debt; but to him, that works not, but believes (believing
then here is opposite to working, and therefore cannot be considered, as a work
of obedience in us, but as carrying us out of our selves, to seek and lay hold
on the Righteousness of Christ, without us) on him, that justifies the
ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness; that is, the Righteousness of
Christ, which Faith laith hold on, is counted for Righteousness.

7. If Faith, as our act of obedience, were accounted our Righteousness, and we
were justified upon the account of it, as our Righteousness, God should not be
he, who justifies the ungodly, as he is expressly styled Romans 4: 5. And the
reason is, because he cannot be called an ungodly person, who has a
Righteousness inherent in him, and which is his own, and which the Lord
accounts to him for a Righteousness: he is not unrighteous, whom God
accounts Righteous, and he whom God accounts Righteous, cannot be called
ungodly: so that if God account Faith to us for our Righteousness, putting it
up upon our score, as our Righteousness, when God justifies us as Righteous,
by virtue of our faith, or as clothed with faith, as a compleet Righteousness,
he cannot be said to justify such as are ungodly. But now, the Scripture tells
us, that God is one, that justifies the ungodly, that is, one who has no
Righteousness inherent in him, upon the account of which the just and righteous
God can justify him; but one that must have a Righteousness from without,
Imputed to him, upon the account of which he is Justified, and accounted
Righteous in Christ, though unrighteous and ungodly in himself; our Faith
cannot be said to be imputed to us, as our Righteousness.

8. If Faith, as our act of obedience, were imputed to us, as our
Righteousness, Paul could not say, as he does Romans 4: 6. Even as David also
describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputed righteousness
without works: for then Righteousness should not be imputed without works; but
a prime, special, principal and comprehensive work (for with our Adversaries
here, faith is in a manner all works, or comprehends them, as we heard,
toward the end of the foregoing Chapter) should be imputed, as our
Righteousness, and not a Righteousness without works.

9. Free pardon of sins will never prove the man blessed, unto whom God
imputes Faith, in a proper sense, for his Righteousness; as it does prove him
blessed, unto whom God imputes Christ's Righteousness, or a Righteousness
without works: And the reason is, because faith is no satisfaction to the
justice of God; and therefore can not be our Righteousness, upon which we are
pardoned and justified. Now the Apostle argues thus Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. Even a,
David also describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works; saying, blessed are they, whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered, blessed is the man, to whom the Lord will
not impute sin.

10. The Righteousness imputed is something distinct from our Faith, and is not
our faith it self, for the Apostle says Romans 4: 23, 24. Now it was not written
for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but for us also, to whom it
shall be imputed, if we believe on him etc. If Faith it self were the
Righteousness imputed, these words could make no good sense. Shall we think,
that the meaning of the Apostles words is nothing but this. Faith shall be
imputed if we have faith, or our Believing shall be imputed to us, if we
Believe. This looks not like one of the discourses of the Apostle.

11. The imputation of our Believing, as our Righteousness, cannot ground our
Peace with God, not have we by it access into this grace, wherein we stand; nor
can we rejoice in the hope of the glory of God; nor glory in Tribulation: for
it is obvious, how weak a ground that were for such a great building. But the
Righteousness of Christ laid hold on by Faith, can be a sufficient basis for
all this Romans 5: 1, 2, 3.

12. Faith, as our work of obedience, is not the grace of God, and the gift by
grace, which must be imputed to us, as our Righteousness, upon the account of
which we are to be justified: as the offense and transgression of Adam was
imputed to his posterity, as the ground of death, passing upon them, and of
judgment or guilt to condemnation: But is only our receiving of that abundance
of grace, and of the gift of Righteousness Romans 5: 17. But that which is
imputed, as the ground of Justification, as Adam's disobedience was imputed, as
the ground of their Condemnation, is the Righteousness of the Second Adam, of
whom the first was a figure verse. 14, 15, 18, 19.

13. When the Apostle says 2. Cor. 5: 21. for he made him sin for us, who knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God, in him; his meaning
cannot be, that our Faith is the Righteousness of God, or that we are made the
Righteousness of God upon that account of having faith: for the Apostle is
holding forth here a comfortable commutation, which God makes betwixt Christ
and us, as the ground of that ministry of Reconciliation; to wit; that God was
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them, mentioned verse. 18, 19. And therefore as Christ has some thing,
that was properly ours, imputed to him by God, that is Sin or Guilt, which he
had not in himself: so we must have something, as the native fruit and effect
of that, that is properly Christ's, imputed to us of God, that is, his
Righteousness, which we have not in ourselves. And beside, this Righteousness
of God is that, whereupon Reconciliation is founded, as is manifest, comparing
verse. 19. with 21. But who will say, that our Reconciliation unto God is
founded upon our Faith, as if that were our Peacemaker, and our Atonement, and
Satisfaction; and as if that were Christ, in whom God was reconciling the world
unto himself. Was Christ made sin, that the imperfect grace of faith might be
made a compleet Righteousness and become our compleet Righteousness?

14. When the Apostle says Romans 9: 31, 32. That Israel has not attained to
the Law of righteousness, because they sought it not by faith, he must mean a
Righteousness, that is distinct from Faith, and therefore he cannot mean Faith
it self: for if he meaned faith it self, as our work, the words should have
this sense, they sought not Faith by Faith, and therefore they did not attain
to Faith. Shall we impute such jejune and insipide expressions to Paul, or
rather to the Spirit of God speaking in and by Paul?

15. The same Apostle tells us Romans 10: 3, 4. That the jews being ignorant of
God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have
not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God: And by this
Righteousness of God, he cannot mean, Faith: for their faith had been their
own, and so their own Righteousness, if Faith had been Righteousness: but he
must mean the Righteousness of Christ, which faith laith hold on, for he
adds, for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that
believes: So that it is the Righteousness of him, who is the end of the Law,
that is that Righteousness, unto which they should have submitted themselves by
Faith; and it is not Faith it self, but a Righteousness which is had from
Christ; who is the end of the Law, and a Righteousness, which is had by Faith,
and which every one partaketh of that believes, as the following words show.

16. When the Apostle says Romans 5: 19. by the Obedience of one shall many be
made righteous, does he mean by that obedience of one, our Faith; and not
rather the Obedience of Christ, which is imputed, and whereby we become
Righteous? As the disobedience of Adam was not some particular after deed of
his posterity, which was imputed to them for their disobedience; but it was the
particular fact of Adam, eating the forbidden fruit, which was imputed to all
his posterity, and whereby they were constituted sinners: so this obedience of
Christ cannot be any act of obedience in us, be it Faith, or what you will; but
the acts of Christ obeying the Law, and imputed to us, whereby we become
Righteous, and are constituted Righteous in the sight of God.

17. When Paul said Phil. 3: 9. and be found in him (i. e. Christ) not having
mine own righteousness, which it of the Law, but that which is through the
faith of Christ, the righteousness, which is of God by faith, can he mean by
this Righteousness, which he was desirous to be foundin, only Faith? If he had
meaned Faith, had not that been his own Righteousness? Is not our Faith called
our own? If not, why says James Chap. 2. show me thy faith, and I will show
thee my faith. And should not this Righteousness, if his believing had been it,
been of the Law? Or is faith according to no Law? If it be according to no Law,
it is no act of obedience. Moreover, how could Faith be said to be through
Faith? Is Faith a mean to it self? How can Faith be the Righteousness of God,
which is by faith? Was not the Apostles scope and desire, to win Christ? And is
Faith Christ?

18. If our act of believing be imputed to us as our Righteousness, then we
cannot say. In the Lord have we righteousness, contraire to Esai. 45: 24. in
order to a saying, in the Lord we shall be justified, as verse. 25. but rather
in ourselves have we Righteousness, in order to this end, for Faith or our act
of Believing is in our selves immediately, and is said to be our Righteousness,
Nor can we thus call the Lord our righteousness, contrate to Ier. 43: 6. But
rather our own act of believing shall be our Righteousness, and trusted to as
such. Nor yet could we say, that Christ is made of God to us righteousness. As
it is 1 Cor. 1: 30. unless that because by virtue of his mediation, our act of
believing is made of God to us Righteousness sure I am the emphasis of the
words points out some other thing, as has been seen.

19. Is our believing that rob of Righteousness, wherewith the Lord covers
such, as have ground to rejoice greatly in the Lord, and to be joyful in their
God Esai 61: 10? Such might as well rejoice greatly in themselves, and be
joyful in themselves, and in their Believing.

20. Is Faith that everlasting Righteousness, that the Messiah was to bring in
Dan. 9: 24 Does our act of believing last for ever? Paul hinteth some other
thing. 1 Cor. 13.

21. When Paul says Romans 10: 10. that with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, must not this Righteousness be something distinct from
believing? If not, we may as well say, that Confession with the mouth is the
same with Salvation, for he adds, and with the mouth confession is made unto
Salvation, wherefore, as Confession is but a mean and way unto Salvation, so
Believing is but a mean and way unto Righteousness.

22. Can we with any color of reason suppose, that our act of believing is
that Righteousness of God, which is revealed from faith to faith Romans 1. 17.
Can faith be said to be revealed from it self, and to it self?

23. Our act of Believing cannot be that Righteousness, whereof Noah become
heir Heb. 11: 7. for he became heir of this Righteousness by Faith: and he
could not be said to be come heir of Faith by Faith.

24. Faith is among the works of Righteousness, which we do: and al^ these
works of Righteousness the Apostle excludes from an interest in that
Righteousness, where-upon we are Justified, as opposite to mercy. Tit. 3: 5.
Therefore our Believing cannot be our Righteousness unto Justification.

25. If our act of Believing be imputed to us for Righteousness, then it alone
must be that fine linen, wherein the lambs bride is arrayed; and it must be the
fine linen, that is clean and white, for this fine linen is said to be the
Righteousness of the saints Revel. 19: 8. But that cannot be because our Faith
is not so pure, as that it may be called clean and white linen; the Saints
themselves are ashamed of their faith, as being so full of blemishes and
imperfections; as also because this favor granted to her to be arrayed in this
linen, comes in after that she has made herself ready verse. 7. which (as Mr.
Durham on the place shows) is to be meaned of Faith.

26. All this work about the Imputation of Faith taken properly, for our act of
Believing, is made of purpose, to shoot out the Imputation of the Righteousness
of Christ; as is clear by John Goodwines whole disput; and from his very
stateing of the question part. 1. page 7. saying. But the Question in precise
terms is this. Whether the Faith of him, who truly believes in Christ, or
whether the Righteousness of Christ himself be in the letter and propriety of
it, that which God imputes to a believer for righteousness, or unto
righteousness, in his Justification. Now let any judge which of the two has
more countenance in Scripture, when the one, to wit, the Imputation of Faith,
is but to be drawn, with any show of probability, from one place of Scripture
(and yet how small countenance that gives to it shall be seen hereafter) and
the other is so emphatically expressed, in so many places, both in the Old and
New Testament; And which of the two deserve most the name of Righteousness, in
order to our Justification: and the Imputation of which of the two is most
consonant unto the genius of the Gospel Covenant, which we must suppose to be
far different from the Nature and Constitution of the Covenant of Life, made
with Adam; and withal, which of the two ways speaks out most distinctly the
riches of the Love and Grace of God, and gives most sure ground of hope and
Confidence unto a poor wakened and distressed Soul; and finally, which of the
two is that, which the seriously exercised Christian dar with fixedness of
Resolution, Lean the weight of his soul upon, and exercised Christians find to
be that, whereupon they Loaning and resting find Peace, and Quietness of Soul?

CHAP. XXIII.
Some Arguments against the imputation of Faith, Vindicated from the Exceptions
of John Goodwine.
AFter these Reasons against the Imputation of our act of Believing, drawn from
the Scriptures, we come here to Vindicate some Arguments adduced by others to
the same end, from the Exceptions of John Goodwine, in his Treatise of
Justification. part. 2. Chapter 6.

The first Argum. is thus framed. That which impeacheth the truth, or justice
of God, can have no agreement with the truth. This is undeniable. But the
imputation of our act of Believing for Righteousness does so; because then he
should esteem and account that to be a Righteousness, which is not. Therefore
etc.

He excepteth against the Assumption and its probation thus. 1. This was in
effect the plea of Swencfe^dus, ( as recorded by Zanchy Epist. lib. 1. p. 215.)
and likewise of the Council of Trent ( as Calv. has observed Antidot. ad Sess.
6. p. 324.) to prove that the word Justification in the Scripture, was not to
be taken in a juridical sense to wit for absolution: but in a physical or moral
sense, for making of a man compleetly just and righteous. Ans. What Swencfeldus
said, I find not recorded by Zanchie in the place cited, in my edition, and if
his words be rightly repeeted in the margin, he has had the same judgment,
that Papists have, which is sufficiently known, and with whom none in reason
will say we conspire, upon the account of this argument, who but observes
this, (which abundantly discovers the impertinency of this Exception) That
the minor and its Probation speak not of the act of God Justifying, but of his
simple act of Estimating or Judging, which must always be according to truth,
and therefore we cannot think, or say, that God judges, or estimateth that to
be a complete Righteousness, which is nothing so. And beside, though
Justification it self were here understood: yet it might be said, without any
ground of imputation either of Popery or of Swencfeldianisme, that God, who is
the just and Righteous Judge, will not absolve a person as Righteous, who is
not Righteous, nor pronunce him Righteous, who has not a Righteousness, as he
has not, who has nothing but his act of Believing imputed to him.

Except. 2. Any action conformable to a righteous Law may be and is called
Righteousness, as that fact of Phineas Psalm. 106: 30. And faith being an
obedience to a special commandment (1 Ioh. 3: 23. 2 Pet. 2: 21. Romans 1: 5.) it
may be with truth, and sufficient propriety of speech, called a righteousness.
Ans. But of a particular Righteousness we are not here speaking, nor of a
particular Justification of such an act, but of a Justification, as to State,
and of a corresponding Righteousness, which must be universal, answerable to
the challenge of the Law; and no particular act of Obedience will be accounted
such a Righteousness by God, who is Truth and Justice it self, in order to the
condemned man's Justification. Beside himself tells us, in end, that this
exception is nothing to the purpose; for he does not conceive, that by Faith,
when it is said to be imputed, is meaned an act of conformity to any particular
precept of God. And therefore he.

Excepteth 3. That, which we mean, is this, that God looks upon a man, who
truly believes, with as much grace and favor, and intends to do as
bountifully by him, as if he were a man of perfect righteousness. Ans. But this
Excepter should have said, that Faith in the letter and formality of it, is
imputed; for thus he disputes against the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness:
and he should have said, that God looks upon the simple act of Faith, as
Perfect Obedience to all the Law: for when we plead for the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, he said, that thereby we make God to look upon us, as
performing that Righteousness, in our own persons. Neither will he and others
understand any other Imputation: and yet we see, how they can speak, when
explaining the imputation of faith, that they may think to evite the force of
an argument. But (2) though it be true, that God deals thus, as is said, with
Believers; Yet that can give no ground to think, that he imputes Faith for
Righteousness: because it is not upon the account of Faith, taken as an act of
their obedience, that the Lord deals so with them, but upon the account of
the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and received by faith. (3) A
Justified person is accounted Righteous not inherently but imputativly, and is
accepted as such, and pronunced such; and therefore must be righteous indeed:
for the judgment of God is according to truth: And if nothing be imputed to the
justified, but his faith, unto Righteousness, that faith must be accounted to
be a Perfect Righteousness; which yet it is denied to be.

He Excepteth 4. Nothing is more frequent with the best writers, than that God
accounts those just, who, in strickness of speech, are not such, but only have
their sins forgiven them. Ans. And their ground is good; because they always
suppose, that such, as have their sins pardoned, have a perfect Righteousness
imputed to them, and received by Faith, without which their could be no Pardon.

Argum. 2. If faith should be imputed for Righteousness, then should
Justification be by works^ or by some what in our selves. But the Scripture
every where rejects works, and all things in our selves from having any thing
to do in Justification.

He excepteth. That by works or some what in ourselves may be understood either
by way of merit, and in this sense the Consequence of the Proposition is
false; or by way of simple performance, and then the Assumption is false, for
the Scripture expressly requires faith, or a work of us, in order to
Justification. When Faith is required in order to Justification, in way of
simple performance, it is not required, as our Righteousness, far less as all
the Righteousness, which the Justified soul must have; but only as a mean, or
Instrument, laying hold upon, and putting on the Righteousness of Christ, which
is offered and imputed, and whereby the believer rests upon, and wrappeth
himself in that Righteousness, as the only Righteousness, wherein he can think
to appear before God's tribunal, and thus Faith is not considered as our act,
making up our Righteousness, but as bringing in, with a begger's hand, a
Righteousness from without. But when faith or Believing is purely considered,
as our work, and as an act of obedience in us, and yet is called our
Righteousness, and said to be all that Righteousness, which is had, and is
imputed, in order to Justification, it justifies as a work; and upon the
account of it, as something in our selves, we are said to be justified; and all
this in perfect opposition to the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness (2) It
is but a Popish evasion to say, that by Justification by works, the Scripture
only means justification by works, that are meritorious; as if either any
work of ours what somever could be meritorious; or as if such, against whom
Paul disputed, did mean a meritoriousness in their works; or as if the
Scripture did not infer merit from every work, that is ours, and that we do
to make up a Righteousness by, upon the account of which we might be justified.
Says not the Apostle Romans 4: 4. Now to him that works, is the reward not
reckoned of grace, but of debt, inferring debt and so merit from all works
that we do, whereby to patch up a Righteousness, in order to Justification? He
does not distinguish betwixt works, that are by way of merit, and other works,
but means even such works, as were performed by Abraham; who was far from
imagineing any merit is his works. (3.) And sure, if any work be accounted
meritorius, in this case, that must be so accounted, which is made the whole of
our Righteousness, upon which we are justified; and is said to be the only
Righteousness, that is imputed to us, for that end, that we may be Justified.
Is not that believing made our Righteousness, and thereby declared to be no
less meritorious, than Adam's perfect Obedience would have been?

Argum. 3. That which makes justification not to be of grace, cannot stand
with the truth of the Gospel. But the imputation of Faith for Righteousness
makes Justification not to be of Grace.

He excepteth, The Scripture still makes a perfect consistency of free grace
with the condition of says Ephesians. 2: 8. Romans 3: 24, 25. Nay the work of
believing is purposely required, that the freeness of his grace might have
place Romans 4: 16. How can a gift be conceived to be more freely given, than
when nothing more is required, than that it be received: now believing is
nothing else, but a receiving of that righteousness or justification, which God
gives in and with his Son Jesus Christ Job. 1: 12. Ans. Here are good words,
but nothing to loose the argument, for Faith, receiving a Righteousness, or the
gift of Righteousness, or the Atonement, or Christ and his Righteousness, is
but the instrument (as it were) of the soul, laying hold on, and in law
presenting (to speak so) the fidejussorie-righteousness of the Surety, Christ,
as the Righteousness, upon the account of which, and for which alone, he is to
be justified. But believing, considered in it self, as our work, and made to be
our Righteousness, and all our Righteousness, and said to be imputed for our
Righteousness, is not considered as a receiving of a gift of Righteousness;
(which is distinct from Justification, howbeit he confound them) but really is
made a price in our hand, wherewith to purchase the gift of Justification; and
the reckoning of this work to us (which is our work) as our Righteousness, in
order to justification, makes Justification not of grace, but of debt, as the
Apostle argues Romans 4: 4. and makes our Justification to be of works, and if
it be of works, it is no more of grace, as the Apostle asserteth Romans 11: 6.
The consideration of Faith, as the act of the soul, receiving and laying hold
upon a Righteousness, or on Christ, and his Righteousness, establishes the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; but the Imputation of Faith, properly
taken does quite extrude it: and these two are made incompatible by our
adversaries; and the one is asserted, that the other may be denied; for which
there were no necessity, if Faith were considered, in the Scripture sense, as
it ought to be, that is an Instrument laying hold on and bringing in a
Righteousness from without, even the Surety-Righteousness of Christ. So that
this exception, if it be ingenuous, must overthrow the Position maintained.

Arg. 4. That which ministereth occasion to the flesh of boasting in it self,
is not consonant to the tenor of the Gospel. But the imputation of Faith for
Righteousness does minister occasion to the flesh of boasting Therefore etc.

He excepteth, Suppose the act of believing, which is so imputed for
righteousness, be a man's own work, yet it is so by the mere gift of God Ephesians.
2: 8. Phil. 1: 29. 1 Cor. 2: 12. and 3: 6. and this cuttech off all ground of
boasting. 1. Cor. 4: 7. Ans. (1) Though there be no true ground of boasting of
that, which is freely given; yet the flesh can take occasion therefrom to
boast, as the Pharisee did Luke 18. when yet he acknowledged all to be gives,
for he thanked God for what he was not, and for what he did, and so
acknowledged all to be given, and all to be given freely. (2) The Apostle says
expressly, that boasting is not excluded by the Law of works Romans 3: 27. and yet
all works are given, and are not absolutely of and from our selves. (3) Says
not the Apostle expressly. Romans 4: 2. If Abraham were justified by works, he
has to glory: And yet I hope, Abraham did acknowledge, that all these works of
his were of grace, and of God's free gift, and not absolutely and every way his
own. (4) The works, required in the old Covenant of works, were not absolutely
Adam's own, but were in some sense also given of God; yet by that way of
Justification, there had been ground of boasting. (5) Though now there should
be no ground of boasting before God; (as neither would there have been ground
of boasting before him, by the way of works; for the Apostle adds Romans 4: 2.
but not before God) yet there is ground laid for boasting before men, when our
Believing is made our Righteousness, upon the account of which we are justified
and pronunced righteous in order to Absolution from what was brought in against
us. (6) Therefore is the way of Justification now so contrived, that man should
have ground or color of ground of boasting, even before men: for all that
Righteousness, which is required unto Justification, as that Righteousness upon
the account of which they are to be justified, and by which only they are to be
declared and pronunced Righteous, is not in them; but in another and imputed
unto them; it is the Righteousness of Christ made over unto them of God's free
grace, and received by Faith, which receiving hand is also given: so that the
Righteousness, upon which all are justified, is one and the same, and is a
Righteousness without them; and therefore the flesh has no seeming occasion of
boasting in this matter.

He excepteth 2. Suppose the act of believing were from a man's self, yet there
were no cause of boasting; because that weight of glory is not given to faith
for any worth in it, but by the most free gracious and good pleasure of God. If
a King for taking a Pin of a Man's sleeve should raise his house, and make him
honorable in the State, were it not a ridiculous thing for such a man to brag
of the Pin of his sleeve etc. Ans. (1) Can we think, that those, against whom
the Apostle disputed, in this matter, did think, that there was worth and
excellency in all their works, to merit the exceeding great and eternal weight
of glory? did Abraham think so. And yet though we cannot say, that he thought
so, Paul not withstanding denies, that he was justified by his works. (2) If
the act of Believing were from a Man's self, and made all that Righteousness,
which he is conceived to have when justified, and upon the account of which he
is justified, he should not only have occasion, but even cause of boasting
before men, notwithstanding of the disproportion betwixt faith and the weight
of glory: for it might then be said, that he had made himself to differ; and
that he had laid down, out of his own purpose, the whole price, that was
required, and so had, according to the terms of the Compact, made a purchase
of glory to himself: as the man with the pin in his sleeve, if the Law and
Covenant had so stood, that all that gave the Prince a Pin out of his sleeve,
shall receive such and such great things; and he only and a few more were so
good merchants, as to give the Pin, when others did not, might well have
boasted and said, he had not gotten those great things for nothing, for he laid
down the full price, condescended upon by Law and Covenant, and had ground of
boasting, at least, before men, though not before the Prince, who graciously
condescended to reward so richly such a mean gift. (3) This answer will say,
that there had been no ground of boasting, even by the old Covenant of works,
though man had kept the Law perfectly: for even then, it might have been
said, that the weight of glory was not given, for the really worth and
excellency of perfect Obedience; Perfect Obedience and Holiness having its
sufficient reward in its own besome; for it is a reward to it self.

But he says. If men had fulfilled the Law, and bin justified that way, there
had been some pretense of boasting or glorying in themselves. Ans. And why not
also, if faith be now accounted the fulfilling of the Law, and be now imputed
to us, as all our Righteousness? Let us see, if the reasons, which he brings
for the former, will not also evince this.

His first is this; Because such a Righteonsness had held some proportion at
least that should have been given to it Romans 4. verse 4. God had given them no
more, than what they had (at least in some sort) deserved. Ans. But who can
tell us, what that proportion, or that sort would have been? And may not also
the Righteousness of Faith (which is here supposed to be of our selves, and not
the mere gift of God) be said to hold some proportion, at least in some fort?
Yea, may it not, in this respect, be said to hold a greater proportion, viz.
that the exerting of the act of Faith now would argue more strength of free
will, to that which is good, that Perfect Obedience in Adam; for though we
should suppose, that man now had as full a power to believe, if he would, as
Adam had to obey, yet it cannot be denied, but there is much more opposition
now even within, to that which is good, than there was in Adam; and
consequently that the virtue appearing in the acting of Faith, must be
conceived as greater, than what could have appeared in Adam's full obedience,
who had nothing within to oppose him, or prove a remora in his way? As it would
argue more valor for a weak soldier to go a quarter of a mile fighting with
his enemies in the way, then for a giant to go twenty miles, wherein he should
meet with no opposition. But though the proportion were granted to be greater
betwixt the reward and Adam's Obedience; than is betwixt the reward and Faith;
yet there must be and will be a proportion granted: for majus and minus non
variant speciem, degrees make no variation in kind. (2) Can or will it be
said, that God had given the perfect obeyer no more, than he had, in some sort
at least, deserved, if we should suppose, there had been no promise made of
such a reward to obeyers, or antecedently to a Covenant? And if this cannot be
said (as it cannot be said, by any I suppose, who seriously consider the
matter) then the reward was made such only by God's free Condescension; and God
had, in that case, given what they had deserved according to the Covenant made,
wherein such a reward was promised to obeyers; and, in justice, bestowing it as
a reward upon such, as did fulfill the condition. Now, when Faith is said to
have the same place, in the New Covenant, that Perfect Obedience had in the
old, and so the same Efficacy and influence in the reward; and withal, it is
supposed, that Faith is now no more the gift of God, than Perfect Obedience was
under the old Law; is it not as true now, that God gives no more, than what
believers have by Faith (at least in some sort) deserved, by virtue of the
Compact and New Covenant, wherein this reward is promised, as it would have
been under the old Covenant? And is it not hence also manifest, that the New
Covenant is made to be of the same Nature with the Old, and that the reward is
as well now of debt, as is would have been by the Old Covenant? Is it not also
hence undeniable, that hereby there is a proportion acknowledged, in some sort,
betwixt Faith and the Reward? where is then the difference? Let us see, if his
next reason will help here.

Secondly (he says) because if they had made out their happiness, that way
they had done it out of themselves, that is, out of the strength of those
abilities, which were essential to their Natures, and in the strickest and most
proper sense that can be spoken of, or applied to a creature, their own. Ans.
(1) When he supposes (as we saw in the Exception) the act of Believing to be
from a man's self, must we not also say, that the believer making out his
happiness this way, does it out of himself, though not out of the strength of
abilities essential to his Nature. (2) I much doubt, if those abilities (if he
speak of moral abilities, as he must, or speak nothing to the purpose) can be
said to have been essential to man's Nature, for then it would follow, that man,
after he lost these abilities (as it must be granted he did, when he fell) was
no more a compleet man, wanting something that was essential to his nature.
These abilities may be said to have been natural or con-natural to him,
considering the state, the Lord thought good to create him in, and so not
merely supernatural; but how they can be said to have been Essential to his
Nature, I see not. (2) When God gave Adam these Abilities, and thereby
furnished him with a sufficient stock; was he not to acknowledge God for all
that he did? or was he afterward to act without dependence upon, or influence
from God, the first Cause? If not as it is confessed, when it is said to be so
only in a sense, that can agree to a creature; and when Faith is here supposed
to be from man's self acting in the same dependence on God, and receiving the
same influence from him, as the first Cause, may not Faith also be said to be
man's own, in as strick and proper a sense as can be spoken of, or applied to a
Creature? And even though we speak of Faith, in the orthodox sense, as being
the gift of God, yet seeing it flows nativly from the new Nature given in
Regeneration, and is said to be man's faith, and his act, all this difference
will not exclude all occasion of boasting and glorying before men, more then
Abraham's works would have done, if he had been justified by them. And yet the
Gospel-way of Justification perfectly excludes all boasting, being so
contrived in all points, as that he who glories may only glory in the Lord.

Argum. 5. If Faith be imputed unto us for Righteousness, then are we justified
by that, which is Imperfect, and which it self needs a Pardon; seeing no man's
Faith is perfect in this life. But there is no Justification to be looked for
before God by that which is Imperfect, but by that, which is Perfect. Therefore
etc.

He excepteth. These words then, we are Justified by that, which is imperfect,
may either have this sense, that we are justified without the concurrence of
any thing, that is simply perfect, to our justification, or that somewhat that
is comparativly imperfect, may some ways concur and contribute toward our
justification. In the first sense the proposition is false, in the later sense
the assumption goes to wreck Ans. This distinction is to no purpose; for it
does not loose the difficulty, in regard that the argument speaks of a
Righteousness, as the formal cause, or as the formal objective cause of
Justification, or as that upon the account of which the person is Pronunced and
Declared to be Righteous, and Justified: and so is levelled against Faith,
concluding that it cannot be our Righteousness, or the formal Objective cause
of our justification (as it is said and supposed to be by such, as say, that it
is imputed to us for Righteousness, for it is made by them to be all the
Righteousness that is imputed to us) and that because of its Weakness and
Imperfection.

He adds, in application of this distinction. The truth is, that the
Imputation of faith for Righteousness presupposes somewhat, that absolutely
perfect, as absolutely necessary unto justification. Had not the Lord Christ,
who is perfect himself, made a perfect atonement for sin, there had been no
place for the Imputation of faith for righteousness, for it is through this,
that either we believe in him or in God through him; and it is through the same
atonement also, that God justifies us upon our believing, that is, imputes our
faith unto us for righteousness. Ans. This presupposal does not help the
matter; for notwithstanding thereof, Faith it self is made the only Imputed
Righteousness; and faith is not considered as an Instrument, receiving Christ's
Righteousness; and the Atonement there through, but as a work, making the
reward of the Atonement to be of debt, ex pacto, and not of free grace, and so
to have a worth and a merit in it. Our Adversaries will not grant, that this
presupposed Righteousness of Christ, whereby the perfect Atonement was made, is
imputed unto us; for this is expressly denied: and beside, they say, that it was
equally made for all, and so is equally imputed to all; so far, as that
thereby, all are put into such a state, as, notwitstanding of the former breach
made, they may now, upon the new terms of Faith, receive the promised reward.
And thus, it is manifest that with them, this imperfect thing, says is that,
for and upon the account of which, they are justified. As for example (that we
may hereby illustrate and clear the matter) if we should suppose, that Christ
had by his Atonement delivered all from wrath, due for the former transgression
of the Covenant, and had put them into the former state, wherein Adam was,
before he fell, and procured that God should take a new essay of them, and make
promise of life unto them, upon the old terms (as some, who plead for
Universal Redemption, say God might have done, had he so pleased, after the
Atonement was made) in this case, might it not be said that every person, that
should now be Justified, upon the performance of these terms, were justified
by the performance of the Condition, as by his own Righteousness; and that this
new Obedience were all the Righteousness he had, and declared to have, when
justified? and should he not be justified upon the account thereof solely? And
was he more obliged unto the Atonement of Christ, than others, who did violate
of new these Conditions? And seeing now Faith is put in the same place, and made
to have the same Force and Efficacy; shall we not now be Justified by this one
act of Obedience, as we would have been, in the other case, by perfect
Obedience? And if it be so, is it not manifest, that we are justified by a
Righteousness, that is Imperfect, and that all the presupposal of a perfect
Atonement, does not avail? (2) When it is said, that it is through the
Atonement, made by Christ, that we believe in him, or in God through him, it
must be granted, that Christ has purchased Faith, and that either to all, or
to some, and if to all, then either absolutely, or upon condition if to all, and
that absolutely, then all should have faith; if upon condition, we desire to
know, what that condition is? If not to all, but to some only, then Christ
cannot be said to have died alike for all. (3) as to that he faith, viz. That
it is through the same atonement, that God imputes our faith to us, for
righteousness, and justifies us upon our believing, it being the same that
others say, who tell us, that Christ has procured faith to be the condition
and terms of the new Covenant, we shall say no more now, than that we see no
ground to asserte any such thing, and here after we shall give our reasons.

Argum. 6. If faith be imputed to us for Righteousness, then God should rather
receive a Righteousness from us, then we from him, in our Justification. But
God does not receive a righteousness from us, but we from him in Justification.
Therefore etc.

He excepteth by denying the consequence upon these reasons. (1) Because God's
imputing Faith for righteousness does no ways implye that faith is a
righteousness, properly so called, but only that God by the means thereof, and
upon the tender of it, looks upon us as righteous, yet not as made either
meritoriously, or formally righteous by it, but as having performed that
condition or Covenant, upon the performance whereof he has promised to make us
righteous, meritoriously by the death and sufferings of his own son; formally
with the pardon of all our sins. Ans. All this can give no satisfaction, for.
(1) If no Righteousness be imputed to us, in order to Justification, but Faith,
and if faith it self be hereby made no Righteousness, then we are justified
without any Righteousness at all; and God shall be said to pronunce them
Righteous, who have no Righteousness at all; or Justification must be some
other thing, than a pronunceing or declaring of a man Righteous. (2) Why have
we heard so much above said for Faiths being Righteousness and why have there
been so many passages of Scripture adduced to confirm this, particuiarly such
as mention the Righteousness of faith, or the Righteousness of God by faith?
But it may be, this salvo is added, a Righteousness properly so called: Yet
then it will follow, that it must be, at least, a Righteousness improperly so
called, and that must be an improper speech, faith is imputed for
righteousness, and if that be an improper speech, why is there so much noise
made about the impropriety of the speech, when we take Faith for the object of
faith, in that sentence, faith imputed unto righteousness? All that great
clamoure must now recurre upon the excepter, and his followers. (3) If this,
which he has given, be the meaning of these words, faith imputed unto
righteousness, let any judge, whether our sense of them, or this be most
genuine, and freest of trops and figures, and which of the two is apparently
farthest fetched. (4) Faith then, it seems, is tendered unto God, and faith
being but a Righteousness improperly so called, we tender unto God, in our
Justification a Righteousness only, that is improper, and thereupon are
declared Righteous, whether properly, or improperly, I know not. (5) If upon
the tender of Faith, God look upon us as Righteous, then we m^st be righteous;
for we must be what he sees, and acknowledges us to be: And then I ask,
whether does he look upon us, as properly Righteous, or as improperly
Righteous? (6) If God look upon us, as having fulfilled the condition of the
Covenant, and as Righteous upon that account, then he must look upon us, as
properly righteous and faith must be a proper righteousness; or he must say,
that Christ has purchased, that an improper Righteousness shall be the
Condition of the Covenant, for we heard, he said, that Christ had purchased,
that Faith should be the condition. But the performance of the Condition of
God's Covenant must be hold for a proper Righteousness, as perfect obedience
was under the first Covenant. And we heard lately, that Faith was truly and
properly called a Righteousness, and that it might be so called with truth, and
in sufficient propriety of speech, in his answer to the first argument. (7) If
we be righteous by faith, and be looked upon, as such by God, having performed
the condition of the Covenant, it is not imaginable, how we shall not be, if
not meritoriously, yet at least formally Righteous; seeing as Adam by Perfect
Obedience, would have performed the Condition of that Covenant, under which he
was, and thereby had been both Meritoriously and formally Righteous; so must it
be now, in respect of faith, which is made to have the same place, force and
efficacy, in the new Covenant, and that through the procurment of Christ, that
Perfect Obedience had in the old Covenant. (8) He says, we are made
meritoriously righteous by Christ's sufferings. But what is the meaning of
this? Is this the meaning thereof, that Christ's sufferings has merited a
Righteousness to us? Then hereby nothing is spoken to the point; for we are not
now speaking of Christ's Righteousness, but of ours. And again I would
enquire, what Righteousness has it merited unto us? Whether a meritorious
Righseousness, or a formal Righteousness (as he distinguishad) or both? Or is
the meaning this, That through Christ's merits and sufferings, we have a
Righteousness, which is meritorious? If so, I enquire, what is that
Righteousness? Whether is it Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, and made
ours; or is it our Faith that becomes meritorious? If this last be said, that
is granted, which was denied; and Faith must be accounted our meritorious
Righteousness. If the former be said, imputation of Christ's Righteousness will
be granted, and more than we dar say. (9) He says, we are made formally
righteous, with the pardon of sins: But this is never proved, and it has been
often asserted: And how will he make this a Formal Righteousness, and
Righteousness properly so called? Is this any conformity to a Law, in whole, or
in part? Did not himself insinuat in his answer to the first Argum. that
nothing can with truth, and in sufficient propriety of speech, be called a
Righteousness but what is a conformity to the Law of God? And sure I am, Pardon
of sins is not any such conformity. (10) The sum of this answer is, this
Faith is not imputed, as a Righteousness; but it is said to be imputed unto
Righteousness, because it is the fulfilling of the Condition of the new
Covenant, whereby we come to be made Righteous meritoriously by Christ's death,
and Righteous formally with the pardon of sins. And what a wiredrawn,
untelligible and self-contradictory sense this is, let every one judge.

He denies the consequence. 2. Because, suppose that this inference lay in the
bowels of what we hold, that faith were a proper righteousness; yet neither
would this argue, that therefore God should receive a righteousness from us, in
our justification; for we rather receive our faith from God for our
justification, shen God from us, in our justification; though I grant that in a
sense a far off, and with much ado, it may (happily) be made a truth, that God
receives our faith from us in our justification. Ans. But, sure, though Adam's
obedience was originally from God and efficiently, he being the First Cause;
yet had Adam been justified, according to that Old Covenant, he had been
justified by his own works, and not by the Righteousness of another, bestowed
on him by God; so he had been said to have presented his own Righteousness unto
God, in order to his justification, and God might have been said to have
received it from him, in his justification, or rather, in order thereunto. Now,
just so is it here, as to Faith: for faith is our work, and we come with it to
God, and he takes it from us, and thereupon justifies us, according to our
Adversaries opinion, not in a sense a far off, or made with much ado, as he
supposes, but in a sense most plain and obvious.

He says lastly. That that imputation of faith for righteousness, which he
protecteth, supposes a righteousness given unto and received by men, because
it could not be truly said, that God does impute faith for righteousness unto
any man, except he should make him righteous upon his believing. Now, as it is
impossible, that a man should be made righteous without a righteousness in one
kind or other; so is it impossible also, that that righteousness, wherewith a
man is made righteous in justification should be derived upon him from any
other, but from God alone, for this righteousness can be none other, but
forgiveness of sins. Ans. (1) How can the Imputation of Faith suppose a
Righteousness given, unless the Righteousness be given, before Faith be
imputed, seeing what is supposed is always first in order of nature, if not
also in order of time? And if matters be thus, sins are first forgiven, and
then Faith is imputed. (2) If the supposing of a righteousness will follow, to
wit Remission of sins, then there is no answer to the argument, for the
argument speaks of a Righteousness anterior to Justification, and in order
there unto. (3) It is again said, but was never proved, that to forgive sins
is to give a Righteousness. And I would ask, what for a Righteousness this
pardon of sins is? is it a Righteousness perperly so called? But that cannot
be, for all such Righteousness consists in obedience to the Law: therefore it
must be a Righteousness improperly so called, and if so, it cannot be called
our formal righteousness, as he said it was. (4) When he says, we are made
righteous in justification, and yet will not grant an Imputed Righteousness,
and his Remission of sins is not yet found to be a proper Righteousness, the
sense must either be Popish, or none at all.

I shall not here add other reasons against this Assertion, whereby it might
be made manifest, how dangerous this Opinion is, if it be put in practice; and
how it tends to alter the Nature of the Covenant of Grace: It may suffice at
present, that we have vindicated these few reasons against it, and that we have
found it, in the foregoing Chapter, inconsistent with the doctrine of grace, in
the New Testament and repugnant to the Nature of Justification, as declared and
explained to us by the Apostle: and that we shall find it, in the next
Chapter, without any footing in the Apostles discourse Romans 4. which is the
only place adduced for its confirmation.

CHAP. XXIV.
The imputation of Faith it self is not Proved from Romans IV.
THe maine, if not only ground, whereupon our Adversaries build their Assertion
of the Imputation of our act of Believing, is Romans 4. where they tell us, the
Apostle does frequently and expressly say, that Faith is imputed unto
Righteousness. We must therefore, in order the vindication of truth, vindicate
this place from their corrupt glosses; and to this end, we shall first show,
that that can not be the meaning of the Apostle, in this place, which our
Adversaries contend for; and next we shall examine what they say to enforce
their Exposition of the place.

That the meaning of the Apostle Romans 4. where it is said Abraham believed God,
and it was counted unto him for righteousness: and afterward his faith is
counted for righteousness, and faith was counted to Abraham for righteousness
etc. is not that Abraham's act of believing was accounted the Righteousness,
whereupon he was accepted, and was imputed unto him as a Righteousness in order
to his justification; and consequently, that the act of Believing is now
imputed to Believers for their Righteousness, as said Servetus, Socinus and his
followers, Arminius and his followers, Papists, and others; that, I say, this
is not the true meaning of the place, may appear from these particulars.

1. If the act of Believing be accounted a Righteousness, it must either be
accounted a Perfect Righteousness, or an Imperfect Righteousness: If it be
accounted for an Imperfect Righteousness, no man can be thereupon Justified;
But Paul is speaking of a righteousness that was accounted to Abraham the
father of the faithful, in order to Justification, and that behoved to be a
perfect righteousness, for all his works, wherein was an Imperfect
Righteousness, were rejected: It cannot be accounted for a perfect
righteousness, because then it should be accounted to be,what it is not, and
this accounting being an act of God's judgment, it would follow, that the
judgment of God, were not according to truth; contrare to Romans 2: 2. The reason
is, because our faith is not perfect in it self, there being much dross
admixed, and many degrees wanting in it: far less can it be a Perfect
Righteousness, seeing a Perfect Righteousness must comprehend full Obedience to
the whole Law of God.

2. The Imputation, whereof the Apostle speaks, is of some thing to be made
the Believers, by the Imputation of God, which the Believer had not before: But
this cannot be Faith, or the work of Believing, because Faith is ours before
this Imputation; for Abraham believed God, and then followed this Imputation;
and verse. 24. it is said, that it ( to wit, some other thing, than the act of
believing) shall be imputed to us, if we believe: therefore it is not the act
of Believing, properly taken, that is imputed, or accounted here.

3. Faith being antecedent to this Imputation, if the act of Believing be
imputed, the word impute, or account here, must not signify to Bestow, Grant
or Reckon upon their score; but simply to Esteem, Judge or Repute: and thus
Faith, or the act of believing shall be in a believer, and yet not be a
Righteousness, till God repute it, to be so: But when God esteems, judges,
or reputeth any thing to be in us, he does not change it, nor make it
something, that it was not before; but judges it to be, what it is indeed, for
his judgment is according to truth Romans 2: 2.

4. This sense and gloss is quite opposite unto, and inconsistent with the
Apostles maine scope, in the first part of that Epistle, which is to prove,
that Righteousness is now revealed from faith to faith Romans 1: 17. and that we
are not Justified by the works of the Law, but freely by grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through faith in his blood Romans 3: 24, 25. And therefore not
through the Imputation of Faith, the act of Believing, or any work of
Righteousness, which we have done: for that should not exclude boasting, or
glorying; but through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, received
by Faith.

5. That which was accounted to Abraham for righteousness, did exclude all
works, and that to the end, that all ground of boasting, even before men, might
be take, away verse. 2. and 3. Therefore Faith as a work, or the act of
believing can not be it, which is here said to be reckoned or accounted to
Abraham for righteousness: for this is a work, and being made the Ground and
Formal Objective Cause of justification, can not but give ground of glorving
before men.

6. This gloss makes the Apostles discourse wholly incoherent; for he says
verse. 4, 5. Now to him, that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but
of debt: but to him, that works not, but believes on him, that justifies
tht ungodly, his faith is counted for Righteousnese. Now if Faith, properly
taken, be imputed, the reckoning shall be of just debt: for to reckon a men
righteous, who is righteous antecedent to that act of accounting, is no act of
grace, but of just debt: but Faiths being accounted for Righteousness is an act
of grace, and therefore it must be the Object of Faith, or the Righteousness,
that Faith laith hold on, that is here said to be counted upon the Believers
score; and this indeed is no act of just debt, but of grace.

7. Again, as was said above, if Faith properly taken, or the act of Believing
be imputed for Righteousness, God should not be the justifier of the ungodly;
nor could Faith act upon God, as such, with truth. And yet the Apostle tells us
here expressly, that Faith acts upon God, as one that Justifies the ungodly.
He who has a Righteousness in himself is no ungodly man; and God justifying a
righteous man; could not be said to justify the ungodly. But if we take faith
here, for the object of faith, or for the Righteousness of Christ, which faith
flees unto, and layth hold on, all is clear and harmonious; for then that man
is not a worker, but believes, and he believes on God, that justifies the
ungodly, that is one, that has no Righteousness in himself, but must have it
elsewhere, even imputed to him, and bestowed upon him, through Faith; and when
he thus heleeveth, or layelh hold on Christ's Righteousness, this
Righteousness, which by faith he leans to, is counted on his score for
Righteousness, and he is thereupon justified.

8. Leaving what was formerly adduced against this gloss from verse. 6, 7. 8.
of this Chapter Chap. XVIII. we shall see what other passages in this chapter
will say against it. The Faith that was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness,
when he was in uncircumcision, verse. 9, 10. is the same with the Righteousness
of faith, which he had, being uncircumcised verse. 11. But this Righteousness of
faith is not his act of Believing, nor Faith taken properly, as an act of
Obedience; but the Righteousness of the promised seed of the woman, in whom all
Nations of the earth should be blessed, embraced by faith: for it is this, and
not the mere act of believing, that was sealed by the sign of Circumcision
verse. 11. for this Sacrament was a seal of the Covenant; and we know,
Sacraments seal the whole Covenant, and all the promises thereof, to such as
believe; and never seal our Faith, or the like, to be our Righteousness.

9. The same, that was imputed to Abraham for Righteousness will be imputed to
all believers verse. 11. But that is not the pure act of Believing; for Abrahamt
act of Believing was a strong act, and is declared and explained to be such,
but every believer, who yet must be justified, has not such a strong act of
faith, as Abraham had: And we cannot say, that some are less, and some are
more justified, because the faith of some is weak, and the faith of others is
strong: and yet this must be said, if the act of Believing be imputed for a
Righteousness, for the Righteousness of one shall be greater than the
Righteousness of another: and their Justification must hold correspondence with
the ground thereof.

10. That which was imputed to Abraham, and will be imputed to all believers,
for a Righteousness verse. 11. must be a Righteousness, which such have imputed
unto them, who do believe; for it is added, that he might be the father of all
them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be
imputed unto them also: Abraham had Righteousness imputed to him, or reckoned
upon his score, through faith, while he was uncircumcised, that he might be the
Father of Believers, among the Gentiles, to whom also, when they believe, a
Righteousness will be imputed, as it was to Father Abraham.

11. It is again called verse. 13. the Righteousness of faith, and through it,
he sais, the promise was to Abraham, and to his seed: but the promise is not
through faith, as an act of virtue and obedience in us; for then it should be
through the Law; but as the promise was made upon the account of the
Righteousness of the promised seed, (our faith can not be said to procure, or
purchase the promise) so its application is by Faith, laying hold on and
gripping to that Righteousness.

12. If faith properly taken were imputed, it should be made void, and the
promise of none effect, and they that are of the Law should be heirs, for
faith taken properly, for the act of Believing, belongs to the Law: and when
it is made our Righteousness, it is opposite to the free promise; for what is
promised or given upon the account of Righteousness, or any thing within us, is
not a free and gracious promise: And when a free and gracious promise is taken
away, all the right use of Faith is taken away; and so Faith is made void; for
the very essence of justifying faith lies in looking to, laying hold on and
leaning to a free and gracious promise.

13. The Apostle verse. 15. proves, that they, who are of the Law, cannot be
heirs; and consequently that Faith, or the act of Believing cannot be imputed
for Righteousness, as it is our act, done in obedience to the Law; by this
reason, because the Law works wrath etc. And this also makes against the
Imputation of faith, properly taken, because that is an act of obedience to the
Law, and cannot become our Righteousness, being Imperfect, and consequently not
conform to the Law, which requires Perfection in all duties, or other ways
threatens wrath. And if any shall deny this of faith viz. that it belongs to
the Law, they must say, that there is no Law for it, and consequently that not
to believe is no sin, for the Apostle adds, where no Law is, there is no
transgression.

14. The ground of the free promise is that which must be Imputed, and laid
hold on by Faith: But that cannot be Faith properly taken, as our act; for then
the promise should not be of grace, as it is expressly said to be verse. 16. nor
should it be sure, if it depended upon our faith, and not upon that, which
faith laith hold on.

These things, beside what was mentioned before from this same Chapter verse. 6,
7, 8, 23, 24. may satisfy us, in this matter, and sufficiently evince, that it
is not the Apostles meaning, that Faith, properly taken, as our act, or our act
of Believing, is imputed unto Righteousness; but that the Object of Faith or
the Righteousness of Christ laid hold on, and applied by Faith is that
Righteousness which is reckoned upon the believers score.

Let us now, in the next place, see what the Adversaries say, to make us
believe, that Paul says Romans 4. That our very act of Believing is imputed to
us for Righteousness: and that thus the Apostle must be understood, and not as
meaning the object of faith or the righteousness of Christ. The forecited
Author John Goodwin of Justify. Part.1. Chapter 2. adduceth some grounds for his
gloss, which must be examined.

His first ground is the letter of the Scripture, that speaks it once and twice
yea a third and a fourth time verse. 3, 9, 22, 23, 24. Certanely, says he,
there is not any truth in Religion, not any article of ^he Christian belief,
that can boast of the letter of the Scripture, more full, express, and
pregnant for it. Ans. We find it only twice said, in express terms, that
faith is counted for Righteousness verse. 5. and again verse. 9. that faith was
reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness. It is then too widely spoken, when he
says, that there is not any truth in Religion, nor any article of the
Christian Faith, that can boast of more full, express and pregnant letter of
Scripture; yea even, though it were as often and as express as he allegeth: but
we must let many such confidente expressions pass with him. (2) The question
is not touching the letter, or the words; but the true meaning: and if a truth
be but once delivered, in the Scriptures, it is sufficient to command our
faith; but words never so often repeated, when corruptly glossed, yield no
foundation to faith. We know, what Papists say, of these words, This is my
body, which with them is as full, express and pregnant a proof of their dream;
as this passage of Paul's is of our Adversaries fancies. And we know what
Arrians say of these words My Father is greater than I: And yet their false
glosses cannot be embraced for truths, let them boast of express Scriptures,
never so much. And what error I pray, or heresy is it, that does not pretend
to the like? Let us see his next ground.

2. Says he. The scope of the place rejoiceth in the Interpretation given. I
grant indeed, that this is a good rule or interpreting of Scriptures; for it is
as a sure thread to lead us through many labyrinths: But, which is the misery,
many imagine that to be the scope of the place, which is not so indeed; and
thus perv^rting or mistaking the scope, they must needs pervert all. Yet let us
see, how he would make the scope contribute to his Notions. The Apostles maine
drift (says he) was to hedge up with thorns that false way of Justification,
which lay through works and legal performances; and with all to open and
discover the true way of justification, that is, to make known what they must
do, and what God requires of them to their justification; and that is (as Ioh.
6: 28, 29.) faith or to believe in the proper and formal signification, and not
the righteousness of Christ, this he required of Christ himself, he requires
our faith in Christ himself, and nos in his righteousness. Ans. Paul's scope is
indeed to hedge up all Justification by the Law, or by the works thereof, in
subordination to this other, of showing, that in the Gospel, the Righteousness
of God is revealed from faith to faith Romans 1: 17. And therefore he cannot
speak, for the Imputation of Faith, in its proper and formal signification; for
that is a work, commanded by the Law of God; and the Imputation thereof is
expressly alleged by our adversaries, to shoot out the Righteousness of God,
which is revealed from faith to faith. (2) To say, that the Apostle here only
requires faith in Christ, and not faith in his Righteousness, in order to
Justification; is either to divide Christ and his Righteousness, or to give us
an Historical Faith, in stead of justifying Faith; that is such a faith in
Christ as is the faith of any other truth revealed in the Scriptures, such as
the creation of the world: And this is indeed to make a fundamental Alteration,
in the Gospel Covenant and to destroy the true Nature of Justifying faith. (3)
It is true, the Apostle is withal showing what we must do, in order to our
Justification; but this no way impeacheth the interest of Christ's
Righteousness, as the formal ground of the Justification of the ungodly; but
rather establishes it: for he shows, that we are not now Justified by our
doing, or working, but by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and
received by Faith. (4) Though God does not require of us the performance of the
Righteousness of Christ; yet he requires of is, that we lay hold thereupon,
and be covered therewith by faith, that under that rob, we may appear before
our judge; for to this end, is Christ made of God unto us Righteousness, and is
become the Lord our Righteousness, 1. Cor. 1: 30. Ier. 23: 6. And he requires
of us, that we renunce all our own Righteousness, in this affair, and
acknowledge the Righteousness of Christ the only Righteousness, upon which we
are to be justified, and therefore he wills us to say that in the Lord have
we Righteousness. Esai. 45: 24. He is pleased to add Therefore for Paul to have
said, that the righteousness of Christ should be imputed unto them, had been
quite beside his scope. Why so? His telling them what was required of
themselves, makes nothing against this, but does rather confirm it; for when
faith is pressed upon us, it is clearly supposed, that the Righteousness of
Christ is Imputed, this being the peculiar work of faith, as justifying, to
bring in and put on Christ's Righteousness: and so, where our Redemption or
Justification by Christ is mentioned, faith (though it be not expressly
mentioned) is to be understood, as the Mean or Instrument, whereby the same is
applied to us; as also the Redemption and Righteousness of Christ is to be
understood, where Justification by faith is only expressed: And as sometimes we
find both expressly mentioned; so both are most emphatically comprehended and
included, in that expression, now under consideration. Such a glorious and
firm connection is betwixt all these Causes of our Justification, and such a
beautiful harmony of grace, that as they cannot be separated, so the
deforming, misplaceing or any way altering of any one piece thereof, destroys
the harmony, and darkeneth the beauty of the whole.

In the third place he argues against faiths being here taken Tropically or
Metonymically and to this end adduceth these confiderations 1. It is not likely
that the Apostle, in this great and weighty point, should time after time, in
one place after another, without ever explaining himself, through out the whole
disputation use such an harsh and uncouth expression, or figure of speech, as
is not to be found in all his writting beside, nor in all the Scriptures. Ans.
Figurative expressions are neither harsh in themselves, being rather
emphatically explicative, and more forcible upon the understanding, as to the
uptaking of these mysteries; nor are they strange and uncouth to the Apostle,
even in this matter, as might be abundantly evinced, almost as to every
expression, used in this matter, or at least, as to such expressions as are
about the maine parts thereof: Let any read Paul's writtings on this subject,
here, and his Epistle to the Gallatians and he shall find this true, almost in
every Chapter. But it should satisfy us, that the Holy Ghost has thought fit,
to express the matter thus; and that to prevent mistakes, he has given both
here and elsewhere, abundance of clear, plain, and down right expressions, for
a supply, as has been shown above, so as none may mistake, but such as will
wilfully step aside to follow their own ways: And it is not fair for such, to
object this, who, of all others, make the Scriptures to speak most figurativly
and trop^cally, when they have a mind to evade the dint of our arguments from
Scripture; of which very many instances might be adduced. It cannot but seem
strange to any, who has read the Scriptures with attention, to hear one with
such confidence saying, that the naming of the act for the object is such an
harsh and uncouth expression and figure of speech, as is not to be found in all
the Scriptures again; when the same man hereafter cannot but, confess that Hop
is often put for the thing hoped for, and is manifest from Romans 8: 24. Col. 1: 5,
27. and else where and also faith put for Christ Gal. 3: 23. twice, 25. once.
This putting the object for the act is a known and common Hebraisme.

His 2. consideration is this: It is evident (said he) that that faith, or
believing, which verse. 3. is said to be imputed to Abraham for righteousness,
is opposed to works or working verse. 5. Now between faith properly taken and
works, and so between believing and working, there is a constant opposition:
but between the active obedience of Christ and works, there is no opposition.
Ans. It is most true, that in the matter of justification, believing is opposed
to working, and that constantly; and therefore he is concerned to look to it,
who will have us considering Faith here only in such a way, as it cannot be
opposed to, but every way agree with works, as one of them. (2) The opposition
betwixt our Righteousness, consisting in works which we do, and the
Surety-Righteousness of Christ, consisting, not in his Obedience Active only,
(as he mistakingly supposes all alongs) but in both active and passive
Obedience, whereby he gave full satisfaction to the Law, in all its demands, is
so Palpable, that it cannot be well dissembled, far less denied.

His 3. Consideration is, that it is said verse. 5. His faith is imputed to him,
where it is evident, that that faith (whatsoever we understand by it) which is
imputed for Righteousness is His, that is, some what that truly and properly
may be called his, before such imputation be made unto him. Now it cannot be
said of the Righteousness of Christ, that that is any man's, before the
imputation of it be made unto him: But faith properly taken is the believers,
before it be imputed, at least in order of nature, if not of time. Ans. The
words verse. 5. are, His faith is counted for, or unto Righteousness. And so
whatever be understood by faith it may in some respect, at least, in order of
nature, be his, before it be counted for or unto Righteousness, or reckoned
upon his score; Yea it must so be, that it may rightly be reckoned on his
score: And this is clear of the Righteousness of Christ, which becomes the
believers by faith, and is given to him, and bestowed upon him, and so made
his, by virtue of his union with Christ through faith: His mistake lies here,
that he takes these words counted for Righteousness, to be every way the same,
with imputing to or bestowing upon a person; while as the formal difference is
manifest, though the one includes the other, and Accounting unto Righteousness
does in this matter, presuppose the Imputation or bestowing of that, which is
counted to such an end. Further, why may not his faith, denote the object of
his faith, as our hope, or our love may denote the object of our hope and love?
And whence then shall there any necessity arise to say, that that object shall
be truly and properly called his before the Imputation of it be made unto him,
taking this Imputation for bestowing, as he seems here to do? but if
Imputation be taken for counting on their score it presupposes their interest
in the same, prior in order of nature, (as is said) and that most manifestly.

In the fourth place he says. Though we should grant a trope in this place,
and by faith, its object should be meaned: Yet it will not follow, that the
Righteousness of Christ, should be here said to be imputed, but either God
himself, or the promise of God, for it was God be believed verse. 3. Ans. In
that promise made to Abraham, and which he believed, the sum of the Gospel
was comprehended, as Paul himself teaches us Gal. 3: 8. And this promise was a
bundle of promises, and therefore is called promises, in the plural number Gal.
3: 16, 21. and was the Covenant confirmed of God in Christ verse. 17. and the
Inheritance verse. 18. and life verse. 21. which cannot be had without a
Righteousness Ibid. even the Righteousness of Faith that was to come, to wit of
Christ verse. 22, 23, 24. who is the only mediator verse. 20. and is there
expressly called Christ and was to be revealed. Hence they, that have believed
in Christ Jesus and are baptized into Christ, and have put on Christ, and are
in Christ, and are Christ's, are Abraham's seed and heirs according to the
promise verse, 26, 27, 28, 29. And if such be Abraham's seed, Abraham must have
been such himself; that Father and Children may be of one Complexion; for the
promise, that he should be the heir of the world was not to Abraham, or to his
seed, through the Law, but through the Righteousness of faith. Romans 4: 13. that
is, through the Righteousness of Christ the object of faith, and who is
expressly called Faith Gal. 3: 23, 25. And it is added Romans 4: 14. for if they,
which are of the Law, be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of
none effect: Faith, that may be, Christ, the object of faith, is made void, and
all the actings of faith upon him are vain and of none effect, conform to
what the same Apostle says Gal. 2: 21. If Righteousness come by the Law, then
Christ is dead in vain. And as this Faith is made void, so the promises of
this Faith, that was to come, are of no effect. Therefore the object of
Abraham's Faith was Christ, the promised Messiah and that Faith that was to
come, and the Righteousness of that Faith. He reckons up, in the following
words, to very little purpose, the several objects of faith from Ioh, 3: 16.
and 5: 46. and 20: 31. and 8: 24. Romans 10: 9. 1. Pet. 1: 21. Ioh. 12: 44. 1.
Ioh. 5: 10. And supposes, that no where Christ's Righteousness is mentioned as
the Object. But where ever Faith, or its Object is mentioned, in the matter of
justification, Christ's Righteousness is never excluded, more then himself, for
as himself was the Cautioner, so his Righteousness was fide-jussry; and faith
acting upon one must necessarily act on both, these being inseparable; beside,
that elsewhere this is expressly enough mentioned. Yet he grants, that it is
of nearer concernment to the maine, to beleev this righteousness of Christ than
the believing of many other things besides, comprehended in the Scriptures. But
why, I pray, if this belong not to the object of justifying faith? He not only
will have us believe, that Christ's Righteousness is not reckoned amongst the
objects of faith, as justifying; but he will also give a reason, why it is no^
so reckoned; to wit, because, though it ought to be and cannot but be believed
by that faith, which justifies, yet it may be believed also by such a faith,
which is so far from justifying, that it denies this Christ to be the Son of
God. Thus some jews gave testimony to his innocence, who yet received him not
for their Messiah, not believed him to be God; and this is the frame of the
Turkish faith, for the most part, concerning him, at this day. Ans. It is one
thing to believe a Righteousness, but it is another thing to believe in it, and
rest upon it. The innocence of Christ as man, before men is one thing, but his
compleet Surety Righteousness as one that was both God and man, is another
thing. Now Justifying faith looks to, and rests upon his whole
Surety-Righteousness and looks upon him, as God-Man; Therefore it cannot be
thus believed (which is the only right way of believing it) but only by such,
as lean to this Righteousness, as the Righteousness of the promised Messiah,
and Mediator, God-Man, as Abraham did, and as all his children do: and this is
the only Faith, that is Justifying and Saving. It seems by this expression,
that there is no more to be regairded in Christ's Righteousness, but the mere
innocence of a man.

Fifthly he tells us. That faith, which is here said to be imputed verse. 3. is
that faith, by which be believed in God, that quickens the dead etc. verse.
17. But the Righteousness of Christ can in no tolerable construction be called
that Faith. Ans. That the Proposition is false, appears sufficiently from
what is said: And these words verse. 17. show, how firmly and fixedly Abraham
received, and rested on the promise, and thing promised: but it is not said,
that that was imputed to him for his Righteousness; but that which was imputed
was the Righteousness of the Faith, that was to come, whereon he believed and
rested.

Sixthly and Sevently he says, that the faith, that was imputed unto Abraham
was that, wherein he was said not to be weak verse. 19 and is opposed to
doubting verse. 20. and by which he was fully assured, that he who had promised,
was able to do it verse. 21. Ans. This is like ways denied: for the thing that
was imputed, was not that act of Faith, but the Righteousness of the Messiah,
whom he undoubtedly expected to come out of his loins, as Man, and that even
when he had no appearance of an issue: for it is this Righseousness which is
the Righteousness of Faith, and is distinct from the act of Believing; for it
is said, that it shall be imputed to us, if we believe; which expression could
be no way satisfying, if nothing were meaned to be imputed here, but our
Believing; for then the sense would be this, we shall be reputed believers, if
we be believers.

Eighthly he says. That which shall be imputed unto us for Righteousness, is
said to be our believing on him, that raised up the Lord Jesus verse. 24. Ans.
This is sick of the same disease with the foregoing: nothing like that is here
said, but rather we may see, that some distinct thing is promised to be imputed
to us, if we believe on him, that raised up Christ from the deed, which clearly
says, that the Imputation of something to us for Righteousness is promised,
when we believe: and shall any man then think, that Believing it self is the
thing, which is to be imputed?

Lastly he tells us, (which is but what we heard before, and is shortly this)
That a tropical and metonymical interpretation, turns Paul's perspicuity into
greater obscurity, than any light of the Scripture knows well how to re^^eve.
Ans. Whatever darkness he conceive herein, Yet others see in these tropical
expressions a greater beauty of illustration, and a greater emphasis of
strength and signification, than all his Rhetoric is able to darken. The
Apostle, not only here, but almost every where, while speaking of this subject,
follows this same manner of expression, Especially Gal. 3. Nor do we say,
that the word Faith is here taken simply for Christ's Righteousness; but for
Christ's Righteousness laid hold on and applied by Faith; so that what is in
one place called the Righteousness of Christ, is in another place called the
Righteousness of Faith, and the Righteousness, which is by Faith and through
faith: as Christ is called our hope, not simply, but as our hope acts upon
him, as the real and true object thereof.

He cannot deny, but Faith is sometimes taken for its object, even for Christ;
yet he says. 1. That though the faculty be sometimes put for the object, yet
the act seldom, or never. The act or exercise of the grace of hope is never
put for the things hoped for, but hope it self is sometimes found in that
signification as Col. 1: 5. Tit. 2: 13. N^w that which is here said to be
imputed unto Abraham, was not the habit or grace of Faith, but the act. Ans.
Neither habit, nor grace, nor act of Faith is here said to be imputed, but the
object, which the act may also denote, as well as the habit. And if he limite
and restrick this to any particular act, he must say, that Abraham was not
^ustified before ^his time and that after this act was past, it could not be
said, that his Faith was imputed to him for Righteousness,

But 2. he says. That though it were granted, that as well the act it self, as
the faculty or habit may be sometimes put for the object, yet when the act and
object have been named together, and the act expressed by an object proper to
it, and further something immediately ascribed to this act, under that
consideration (all which is plainly seen in this clause, Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed to him for Righteousness) in this case to conceive and
affirm, that what is ascribed, is neither ascribed unto the act it self, there
mentioned, nor unto the object mentioned, but unto a third thing, not once
mentioned in the text, is to turn our back upon the text. Ans. Do we not see
Tit. 2: 13. where it is said, looking for that blessed hope and glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, that Christ is
denominated by the act or habit of hope, and called our hope, and that here
both act and object are named together, to wit, looking, looking for our
Savior Jesus Christ? It is true, there is nothing here immediately ascribed to
this act; but not withstanding thereof, we see Christ the object of hope,
denominated by the act or habit of hope. And whereas it is said that this
third thing, the Righteousness of Christ, is not once mentioned, it may
suffice, that it is sufficiently included, and clearly enough expressed, when
mention is made of Righteousness, and of the Righteousness of faith, and of
Righteousness imputed. (2) It is also to be considered, that in that clause,
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness, it is not
said, that Faith, or his Believing was counted to him for Righteousness, but
that it was counted etc. and that is not his Faith, but the marrow of the
Gospel, which God at that time preached unto him, and so there is nothing in
this clause, immediately ascribed to this act but a third thing is understood.

Lastly, he says, The righteousness of Christ is not the object of faith, as
justifying; only the Scriptures propose his Righ^eousness, or obedience to the
Law, as that, which is to be believed; and so it may be termed a partial
object, as is the creation of the world, and that Cain was Adam's son. But the
object of faith as justifying properly is either Christ himself, or the promise
of God concerning the Redemption of the world by him. Ans. (1) Hereby we see,
that in stead of a justifying faith, he gives us a mere historical faith: and
indeed such as deny the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, must of necessity
substitute a new sort of faith, in room of that, which we own for the only
Justifying faith. But though justifying faith contain in it that historical
faith, and presuppose it; yet it includes more, and has other peculiar
actings of soul upon and toward Christ, and his Righteousness (which here we
cannot separate, far less oppose to other, as our Adversary does) in reference
to the man's liberation from the sentence of the Law, and the Curse due to him
for the breach thereof, now charged home upon him by the Lord, and an awakened
conscience: (2) By Christ's Righteousness we do not understand his simple
innocence, or freedom from the transgression of the Law; but his whole
Mediatory work, in his state of humiliation, as satisfying the offended
Lawgiver, and answering all the demands of the Law, both as to doing and
suffering, which debt we were lying under. (3) Justifying Faith eyeth him thus,
runs to him and accepts of him, as he is thus set forth by God to be a
Propitiation, through Faith in his blood Romans 3: 25. and as making
Reconciliation, for faith receives the atonement Romans 5: 11. and it receives
abundance of grace, and of the gift of Righteousness verse. 17. Justifying faith
must receive him, as the Lord our Righteousness; and as made of God to us
Righteousness. Therefore is this Righteousness of God called also the
Righteousness of Faith, or the Righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe. Romans 3: 22. A Righteousness,
which is through the Faith of Christ, or the Righteousness, which is of God by
Faith. Phil. 3: 9.

Thus have we examined all, that this Man has brought by way of Reason (for as
for Authorities on the one hand, or other, I purposely wave them in this whole
discourse) to prove, that Faith properly taken is imputed for Righteousness and
that the tropical sense, commonly received by the orthodox (which we have also
chosen to follow, notwithstanding that there is another sense given of the
words by some, to evite in part this tropical sense, and by which the
Adversaries against whom we here deal, can receive no advantage) is to be
utterly laid aside and rejected; and in answering him, we have answered others
also, who do but-urge the same things.

Yet if any should enquire. If the Apostle does not mean, that faith properly
taken is our Righteonsness, and is imputed to us and accounted our
Righteousness, why would he say so plainly, that Faith is imputed, or counted
for Righteousness. I Answer. The expressions, which the Holy Ghost has used,
should satisfy us, though we should know no reason beside his good pleasure,
why he did express the matter so: It is our part, to search into his meaning,
according unto the surest rules of finding out the sense of the Scriptures,
among which this is to be reckoned as a ^^ite one, not to be rejected, viz. to
attend the scope, with the connection and cohesion of the words as they lie, and
contribute unto that scope, together with the common plain and frequently
reiterated expressions and assertions of the Spirit of God, in other places,
where the same matter is treated of: for to the end, that we may be exercised,
in the study of the Scriptures, and in comparing Scripture with Scripture for
finding out the mind of the Lord, has he thought good to express the same
matter in diverse places, and in various ways, and in some places more
plainly, what in other places appears more obscure. And it cannot be judged a
saife way of interpreting Scripture, to fix upon one expression and give it a
sense, or take it in such a sense, as tends manifestly to darken the whole
doctrine of the Spirit of the Lord, concerning that truth, and to cross the
scope, to mat the connection, and to contradict multitudes of other passages of
Scripture. It is not unusual for the Apostle to use several expressions, in a
figurative sense. How often is the word Law taken for obedience to the Law? What
sense could be made of Gal. 3: 25. if the word Faith should be there taken
properly, and not for its object? as also verse 2, and 5. of that same Chapter.
And what sense shall we put upon these expressions. They which are of faith
Gal. 3: 7, 9. and as many as are of the works of the Law verse. 10. and upon
many such like, if all these words must be taken properly? Nay, how little of
this whole matter of Justification is expressed to us, without Trops and
figures? which yet do not darken, but give a more special and divine luster
unto the Truths, so expressed. How often is the word Hop put for its object, for
the thing hoped for? And though this might satisfy us herein; yet further, if
I might adventure to give a reason of this manner of expression here, ot rather
to point forth what this expression should signify and hold forth to us, I
would say, That Paul is not handling this Controversy about Justification, in
a mere speculative manner; and therefore does not use such Philosophical and
Metaphysical Notions and expressions there about, as some now think so
necessary, that without the same they judge themselves not in case to explain
the matter to the capacity of the meanest, which would rather have darkened,
then explained the matter to the ordinary capacity of Christians, as I judge
the way, that some of latetake, in explicating this matter, contributeth much
more to the darkning of the same: at least to me: But the Apostle is handling
this matter in a practical manner; so as both such he wrote unto, and the
Church of Christ to the end of the world, might so understand this necessary
and fundamental truth, as to put the same in practice: And therefore does say,
that Faith is imputed unto Righteousness, to show, that it is not the
Righteousness of Christ, conceived in our heads, that will save and justify
us; but his Righteousness laid hold on, brought home and applied by Faith: that
so all might see and be convinced of the necessity of faith, whereby the soul
goes out to Christ, lays to his Righteousness, and might not satisfy
themselves with a Notion of Christ and his Righteousness, never applied by
Faith; but be enduced to lay hold on him by Faith, to the end they might have
an interest in Christ's Righteousness, the same being, upon their faith,
bestowed upon them, and reckoned upon their score. The expression is most
emphatick to hold forth, the necessity now of faith, according to the Lord's
Sovereign appointment, as if thereby Christ's Righteousness and their faith
were become one thing, as being wholly inseparable in this affair, so that it
comes to one, whether by faith, we understand the Grace as acting upon and
connoting the Object, or the Object, as acted upon by the Grace of Faith as in
that expression, the Righteousness of faith Romans 4: 13. Faith may either be
interpreted to be Christ, as said hold on by faith, and so the meaning will be
through the Righteousness of Christ, laid hold on by Faith, and faith may be
the same way explained in the following verse. 14. and 16. for if they which are
of the Law, be heirs, faith is made void, i. e. if the grand heritage come by
the Law and by obedience to it, the Gospel, holding forth Christ to be laid
hold on by faith, is made void, as to this end: and again verse. 16. therefore
it is of faith, that it might be by grace i. e. it is of and by Christ, laid
hold upon by Faith, that it might be by grace. Or faith in all these may be
interpreted to be faith as acting upon the object, Christ and his
Righteousness; and the consequence and force of the words will be found to be
the same, whether of these ways we explain the matter. As, when speaking of
the Israelits stung in the wilderness, it were all one to say, they were healed
by the brazen serpent, to wit, looked to; or they were healed by their look, to
wit, upon the brazen serpent, for still it will be understood, that all the
virtue came from the brazen serpent (or him rather, that was typified thereby)
yet so as it was to be looked upon; and that their looking was but an
Instrumental mean thereunto, and when a mean thereunto must include the object
looked unto. We hear it sometimes said of persons miraculously cured, that
their Faith made them whole, while as the virtue came from the object acted
upon by faith, as Peter fully explaineth the matter saying Act. 3: 16. And his
name, through faith in his name, has made this man strong. Thus we see, how
this matter may be saifly and must be understood, when the virtue and efficacy
of the Principal cause is attributed to the Instrumental cause: And yet, lest
any should stumble at the expression, and pervert it, as many do, to day, the
Apostle abundantly Caveats against this by telling us so plainly and so fully
and so frequently, of the Righteousness of God, which is had by faith, and
through faith, as we have seen; and never speaks of a Righteousness had,
because of faith, or for Faith; nor says he, that faith is our Righteousness,
while treating of Justification.

CHAP. XXV.
Faith is not our Gospel-Righteousness.
OUr Adversaries, to strengthen their Assertion of the Imputation of Faith, in
a proper sense, to the exclusion of the imputation of the Righteousness of
Christ, have other two Positions, which they own and maintain. One is, that
our Faith or our act of believing is the whole of our Gospel-Righteousness: And
the other is. That Christ has procured that it should be so, by procuring the
New Covenant, whereof this faith is made the Condition. To this last we shall
speak something, in the next Chapter; and of the other here.

How much Mr. Baxter does contend, for our Faiths being called and accounted
our Gospel-Righteousness, is known. The forenamed Author of the discourse of
the two Covenants is very plain page 48, etc. where he is explaining, what
God's counting Abraham's faith to him for Righteousness is. There he tells us,
that he takes it to signify thus much, to wit. That God, in a may of special
grace, or by virtue of a new Law of grace and favor, which was established by
God, in Christ (Gal. 3: 17.) that is, in reference to what Christ was to do and
suffer, in time then to come, did reckon his practical faith to him for
Righteousness, that is, that which in the eye of that new Law, should pass in
his estimation for righteousness, subordinat to Christ's Righteousness, which
procured this grant or Law. And thereafter page 40. he tells us, That it is an
act of God's special favor, and by virtue of his new Law of grace, that such a
faith, as he has described (that is, a faith taking in all Gospel Obedience,
as we saw above) comes to be reckoned or imputed to a man for Righteousness;
and through God's imputing it for righteousness, to stand a man in the same, if
not in a better stead, as to his eternal concerns, as a perfect fulfilling of
the original Law from first to last would have done. Christ's Righteousness
being presupposed the only Meritorious Cause of this grant or Covenant.
Thereafter page 50. he tells us, there are two things, which constitute and make
up the Righteousness of the Law of Grace, first, that which consists in the
forgiveness of sins and 2. the righteousness of sincere obedience: And in
inference to both, he says, faith is imputed for righteousness be virtue of
the Law of Grace; for, says he, faith as practical is imputed to a man for
righteousness, as it is that and all that, which is required of him himself by
the Law of Grace, to entitle him to the righteousness, which consists in
remission of sins. And then as to the second he says page 52. That faith is
imputed for righteousness, which is practical or productive of sincere
obedience, without which proper^y it is not a fulfilling of the Law of Grace,
as a condition of the promised benefits, and consequently cannot justify a
man, in the eye of that Law: for, as he adds, there must be repentance, and
forgiving men their injuries, and faith must be such as works by love, and
then he tells us, that Abraham was justified by his works. Jam. 2.

All which abomination of doctrine, and perversion of the right ways of the
Lord, we are not here to examine: It is enough, in reference to the clearing of
what is now before us and under consideration; that we see here a plain
d^lmeation and explication made of that Gospel, which Mr. Baxter said, this
Treatise would lead us into the knowledge of: and which is the very same, upon
the matter, with that Gospel, which Socinians and Arminians hold forth, joining
herein with Papists, as we saw in part above Chap. XVIII. toward the
beginning, and we shall at this occasion trouble the Reader with some more of
their expressions, that we may see, that the doctrine, which is now so much
cried up, and followed after, is nothing but old Socinianisme and so, owned and
professed by such, as do not deserve to be called Christians, Socin. de Servat.
lib. 4. c. 4, 7, 11. God justifies the ungodly, but now converted, penitent,
and after he has left off to be ungodly: the justified are not ungodly in
themselves, neither are they so called, yea they are not sinners; and which is
more, they do not now sin. And so faith and works, that is, obedience to the
commands of Christ, as the form of faith, does justify us before God, and by
them through them (per illa, ex illis) he justifies us. Smalcius disp. 4. c.
Frantzium. Regeneration, all other good works, Love, Prayer, Obedience, Faith,
Charity etc. are so far from being effects of justification, that without them
justification can no way really exist, for God justifies no man, but him, who
is compleetly adorned with all these virtues ^ yea the study of good works and
walkeing before God were the cause (though not the chief) of the justification
of Noah, Abraham and others, who are said to be justified by faith. Socin. ubi
supra de Serve. lib. 1. c. 4. Faith does not justify by its proper virtue, but
by the mercy and go^d will of God, who justifies such, as do such a work, and
imputes it for righteousness. With Paul, to have righteousness imputed is
nothing else, but to have faith imputed, and to be accounted just, faith is so
imputed to us, as that because of faith, we, howbeit guilty of many
unrighteousness, are esteemed perfectly righteous, or God so deals with us,
as if we were perfectly righteous who can doubt, that the Apostle means no
other thing than that we are not righteous before God, because our works
require that, as a due reward, but because it has so seemed good to the Lord,
to take our faith in place of righteousness; so that we receive the reward of
grace, by which we are declared righteous before him. More might be adduced for
this end, as it might be shown also, how herein the Arminians conspire with
them against the orthodox. And as for the judgment of Papists, in this point,
it is likewise known.

It will not be necessary that we insist, in disproving that, which has been
so much witnessed against by the orthodox writting against Papists, Socinians,
and Arminians, upon these heads: It will suffice, I suppose, if we give a few
reasons, why we cannot acquiesce in the doctrine, proposed by the forenamed
Author.

1. Hereby works of obedience are exalted to the same place, and are allowed
the same Force, Influence and Efficacy into Justification, with Faith, whereby
all the Apostles disputes for Faith and against Works, and for faith as
inconsistent with and exclusive of works, are evacuated and rendered useless;
So that the Apostle has either not spoken to the purpose, or has not spoken
truth: either of which to say is blasphemy. The Apostle argues thus, we are
Justified by faith; therefore we are not Justified by works. This man reasons
on the contrary, we are justified by faith, therefore we are justified by
works; because by a faith that includes works; as if the Apostle had meaned a
Faith that was dead, and had no affinity with works.

2. Hereby he confounds all these duties, which are required of Believers, or
of such, as are in Covenant with God, with that which is solely required of
them in order to their first entering in Covenant, or into a state of
Justification: as ^ one should say, that all the marriag-duties, required of
such as were already in that marriage state, were conditions of entering into
the marriag-state.

3. Hereby he confounds Justification, with Glorification, making all that
Faith and sincere obedience, which is required in order to actual Salvation and
Glorification, to be necessary before Justification: And thereby must say, that
no man has his sins pardoned, so long as he lives; but if he be sincerely
obedient, he is in the way to a Pardon, and to Justification. He cannot say,
that by a practical Faith, he only means such a true and lively Faith, as
will in due time produce these effects: for, as that will not consist with his
explication of that practical Faith, so it would cross his whole design. The
just man in the eye of this new Law, (as he says p. 49.) is every one that
rightly believes, repents and sincerely obeyes, because that is all that it
requires of a man himself to his Justification and Salvation. Where we see,
that with him, Justification and Salvation go together, and have the same
conditions, and he that is just must be one, that has these Conditions; and he
who has not these Conditions is not just in the eye of that new Law; and if he
be not just in the eye of that new Law, his faith cannot be accounted to him
for Righteousness, nor he Justified.

4. The man hereby confounds the two Covenants, or gives us a new Covenant
of Works, in stead of the Covenant of Grace; for this practical Faith, which
includes all obedience, has the same place, force and efficacy in the new
Covenant, that compleet Obedience had in the old. And this Gospel is but the
old Law of works, only with this change, that where as the old Law required
Perfect Obedience to the end, in order to Justification and Salvation; this new
Covenant of works requires Sincere Obedience to the end, in order to
Justification and Salvation: And so thus we are Justified and saved as really
by and upon the account of our works, as Adam would have been, if he had
continued in obedience to the end; and this Faith and sincere Obedience is as
really, and, to all ends and purposes, as effectually and formally our
Righteousness, as Perfect Obedience would have been the Righteousness of Adam:
And thus the reward must as really be reckoned to us of debt, and not of grace,
as it would have been to Adam, if he had stood: And as fair a ground is laid
for us to boast and glory, though not before God, as had been for Adam, if he
had continned to the end. The evasion he has to make all this of grace, saying
p. 49, 50. And yet every believers justification will be all of grace, because
the Law by which they are justified is wholly of grace, and was ena^ed in mere
grace and favor to undone man, is not able to help him; for it was wholly of
undeserved grace and love, that God did so far condescend to Adam, and to all
mankind in him, as to strick a Covenant with him, a promise of such an ample
reward upon his performance of the condition of Perfect Obedience to the end;
and yet, notwithstanding this Law was wholly of grace and was enacted in mere
grace and favor: for neither was the Lord necessitated thereunto; nor could
Adam say, he had deserved any such thing at God's hand, the reward had been
reckoned to Adam, if he had stood, of debt, not simply and absolutely, but ex
pacto; by reason of the compact: So that we see, the cases run parallel and the
Covenant is of the same nature and kind. The difference betwixt the Power
granted to Adam, and now to man, to perform the conditions required, is with
him, the same upon the matter; for if man will go the length he can and may, he
may be sure of God's help to convoy him all the length he should; And what had
Adam more? And as for the diversity of the conditions, which then were Perfect
Obedience, and now only Sincere, that can make no alteration in the Nature of
the Covenant: and beside, I see not, why this Man can not as well say that if
man now will go as far, as he may and can, by his own stock of power, unto the
performance of Perfect Obedience, God will certainly give him his help to carry
him forward; as he says, that if man will now go all the length he can unto
the performance of Faith, Repentance, and new sincere obedience, God is ready
and willing to contribute his help to carry him forward thereunto.

5. He confounds the right to, with the possession of life eternal, as to
their Causes and Antecedents; for as new and holy Obedience is by us made the
way to the possession of the Kingdom: so by him it is made the way or cause of
the Right jus to the Kingdom; for he requires it as antecedent to a man's
Justification and first being brought into a Covenant state with God, when he
first receives the Right to the inheritance; And thus the Inheritance is made
to be of the Law, and not of promise, contrare to Gal. 3: 18, for the whole and
sure Right thereunto is had by Obedience to the Law, with him.

I shall say no more to this here, because there is a sufficient confutation of
this to be found in Mr. Durham on the Revel. page 234. etc. where that
digression is handled, concerning the way of Covenanting with God, and of a
sinner obtaining of Justification before him. And in all such as write against
Papists and Sociniant, on this head.

But if it be asked, may not faith be called our Gospel-Righteousness, and be
said to be imputed to believers, as such a Righteousness, without any wrong
done to the Righteousness of Christ, which keeps still its own place of being
our legal or pro legal Righteousness? I Ans. Though it be true, that Faith is
now required of all that would be Justified; yet I no where find, that it is
called our Gospel Righteousness; and I judge it not saife to admit expressions,
without warrant of the word, in this tender matter; especially such
expressions, as have a manifest tendency to corrupt, rather then explicate the
truth, in this particular; as, I judge, will be found true of this expression;
for how beit it be said by the Asserters thereof, that Faith, is but a less
principal and Subordinat Righteousness; Yet in effect, according to their
explication of the whole doctrine (as may be seen by this Treatise last
mentioned and answered) it is made the Principal and only Righteousness, that
is imputed to us: for Christ's Righteousness, say they, is only imputed, as to
is effects, or in its causality. See Baxter against D. Tully p. 70. (just as
Suarez said de divin. gr. lib. 7. de sanct. hom. c. 7.. 39. cited by Mr.
Rutherfoord Exercie. Apel. Exerc. I. c 2. page (mihi) 64. the merits of Christ
are not given to us, that we might be formally justified, but that they may be
a price wherewith we may buy a Righteousness, whereby we may be formally
justified; as he who gives a price to another, whereby he may buy clothes, is
said to clothe him, not foomally, but effectivly, morally, as is manifest:) And
even as to these effets it depends wholly upon Faith, and this Faith is only
said to be properly imputed for our Righteousness. And beside, they tell us,
that the Righteousness of Christ is alike common to all, to the Reprobat as
well, as to the Elect, and so it can be imputed properly to none: And as to its
effective ^mputation (as Suarez calls it) or Imputation, as to its effects or
in its causality (as others speak) after that it is offered and held forth to
all, and has the same common effects, unto all, until the condition be
performed, that depends wholly upon man's performance of the Condition; And as
to its antecedent effects, it is equally and absolutely imputed to all; that is,
it is imputed to none, but the effects thereof are equally made common to all,
in making Salvation possible, and the condition to be faith, and the like: And
as to the special effects, (as they may be called) which depend on faith, when
one believes, and so fulfilleth the Condition, he has thereby a
Gospel-Righteousness, or this Faith of his is reckoned upon his score, for a
Gospel-Righteousness, and thereupon he receives Pardon, Justification etc. Now
let any Judge, whether or not these effects are not more the effects (at least
more immediately) of their own Gospel-Righteousness, than of Christ's: for
Christ by all his Righteousness did purchase these effects to all a like, and
that conditionally; and now they themselves by their own personal Gospel
Righteousness of Faith, do make an actual purchase of these effects, according
to the Covenant, ex pacto. And to say, That Christ did by his merits purchase
the New Covenant, does but confirm, what I have now said, towit, That all
that, which Christ procured, was, That all such, as should acquire a
Gospel-Righteousness of their own, shonld be justified etc. And thus Christ
died to purchase a virtue and merit to our faith, and that to this end, it
should become a Gospel-Righteousness, whereby they might have whereof to boast
and to glory before men, at least. Hence we see that Christ's Righteousness
might rather be called the Subservient and ours the Principal. And further,
(which may justly make Christians ab horre this opinion) Thus this poor
convinced sinner, pursued by justice for a broken Law, is called to lean his
whole weight of Acceptance with God, and found all his hope of Pardon and
Justification, upon his own Faith, or Gospel Righteousness, as the only
Righteousness, wherewith he is to be covered, and the only Righteousness, which
is imputed unto him; and not upon Christ and his Righteousness, for what Christ
did or purchased was common to all, and had only a conditional virtue, which
the personal Righteousness reduces into act, and so must have a principal
share of the glory; for as to what Christ did, Judas had the same ground of
thankfulness and praise, that Peter had, and Peter no more then Judas; and thus
Peter was to sing the song of praise for his Justification and Pardon, unto his
own personal Faith and Gospel-Righteousness. If this be not the Native result
of this doctrine, let any put it in to practice (which I shall be loath to
advise) and try, whether thereby more of their weight is laid on Christ, or on
their own faith: And on the other hand, let any serious and exercised Christian
be enquired, and see if their practice agree with this doctrine.

If it be said, That there is no such hazard, so long as Faith is not
considered here as abstracted from its Object Christ, but is considered with a
respect thereunto. I Ans. (1) We have seen, what a poor and general respect
faith by some of our Adversaries is said to have to Christ, whereby it is made
nothing but a mere historical faith and the Author of the Discourse of the two
Covenants, p. 31. says, that even that faith, that had not the Messiah in the
promise is imputed for Righteousness. (2) As for such as confess that
justifying faith has a special respect to Christ and his Righteousness, we
would know, whether it has this respect, that it peculiarly refugeth the soul
there from the storm of wrath, and brings in thence Christ's Righteousness,
or cartieth the man out to it, that he may lean upon it, and plead the same, as
the only ground of his Absolution from the sentence of the Law? And if this be
granted, then it is manifest, that the believer has no Righteousness, but
Christ's Surety-righteousness, where withal he desires to appear before God,
and this is it alone, to which he leans, and through which alone he hops
for Pardon and Acceptance, without the least reflecting act of soul upon his
own Faith. (3) But again if so, faith must stand alone, as acting thus in a
peculiar manner on Christ, which no work else is fitted to do; and therefore
Faith and Works must not be joined together; nor must Faith be considered, in
this affair, as comprehending all Obedience in it, as we see, they say. (4)
But when Faith is made our Gospel-Righteousness, in whole, or in part, howbeit
they say, they consider Faith, as acting on its object Christ; yet it is
manifest, that it is then considered with relation to its object, in a
Physical, or metaphysical manner, as all acts (specified from their objects)
may and must be considered; but not in a theological sense, as required in the
Gospel, to bring-in the Surety Righteousness of Christ, and to lean the soul
thereupon, as its only Righteousness: for when it is said to be our whole
Gospel Righteousness, it is considered as a moral vert^e, and as an act of
Obedience in us, constituting us Righteous in a formal sense, according to the
new Law, which is hereby fully and in all points performed and obeyed; much
more, when works are joined with it, does it with works put on a far other
respect, than to be the hand receiving the Atonement, and the gift of
Righteousness.

But says Mr. Baxter against Mr. Cartwright p. 179. In regai^d of that
justification, which is from the accusation of the Law of works, I say faith is
but a condition and no otherwise justifies, but because it is made that
condition by a New-Law, per legem remediantem, and we must be judged by that
Law: therefore, when the case is, whether we have performed the conditions of
that new law, or not? then faith is materially that Righteousness, by which we
must be justified, against all accusations of Nonperformance. Ans. (1) I doubt
if such as never heard a report of Christ, shall be judged by the New-Law; far
less by it alone. (2) God will not call in question a Believers faith, nor
accuse him of Nonperformance. Nor will the Gospel, or New-Law do it; so that
the Believer needs not plead his performance; in reference to a Justification
at the tribunal of God. (3) When Faith is made a Condition by a New-Law, and
thereby become the believers Righteousness, this Righteousness is the
Condition, and is therefore a Righteousness, because made a condition, by that
new Law; yea and elsewhere ibid. page 106. this Righteousness is said to be
compleet and perfect, as all Righteousness must be: we see, what weight is laid
upon it. And when there is no other Righteousness properly imputed to us, (for
as for that Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, which he would yield to as
the only sound sense, it is but what Jesuits, Socinians, and Arminians yield
to, and we cannot be satisfied with,) who sees not, how this matter is framed
so, as all the weight of the soul must be laid upon this personal
Righteousness, especially when it is made another Sort of Condition, than we
can acknowledge it to be, as shall be seen afterward; and when it is the
immediate ground of our Right to Pardon, Justification, Adoption etc. for
Christ's purchase was (to him) general and common, and no more for one, than
for another, and to all conditionally.

If it be said. What hazard is there, so long as Christ's Righteousness is held
to be that, which satisfies for the breach of the Covenant of Works, and is
full Satisfaction to justice, and which has purchased the New Covenant, and
the new easy terms; our Righteousness, in performing the new easy terms,
whereby we come to have Right to life and all the benefits purchased by
Christ, is no way prejudicial unto that, nor robs not Christ's Satisfaction
of the least of the glory due to it. I Ans. The hazard still continues, for
hereby (...) Gospel Righteousness, be it Faith alone, or Faith and Works
together, is made the immediate and sole ground of our Right to the benefits;
for what Christ did, was general and common, and He, by what he did, made no
particular purchase of any good unto any, but procured the New Covenant, and
the new grant of life upon the easy terms, alike unto all: the satisfaction,
which he made unto the Law giver for the breach of the old Covenant, was not as
a peculiar Cautioner, for any in particular, but was equally for all, and as
much for the damned, as for the saved; So that our Right to the benefits
comes purely and wholly from our performance of the New-Termes, which Christ
is said to have purchased. Therefore, though our personal Righteousness has no
interest in purchasing the New Covenant, or in making satisfaction to Justice,
unto that end; yet Justice being now satisfied equally for all, and the New
Covenant being purchased alike for all, our personal Righteousness is that,
which must bear the glory of our interest in the benefits: and the Obligation,
where in we stand to Christ, upon that account, is the same that others are
under who reap none of the benefits, which we reap by our New Righteousness.
And here it is also manifest, that Faith (if that should be made the
Gospel-Righteousness alone, without works) in order to the justification of a
sinner, is not conceived to act upon Christ, as the Lord our Righteousness,
that the soul may put on his Surety-righteousness and thereby answer all
challenges of the broken Law: but is conceived as our Work, and as our
Performance of the New Conditions, and as such is rested upon, and leaned to;
Whereby man, has ground of glorying before men, in himself, and not in the
Lord alone, for all have alike ground of glorying, upon that account, seeing
what the Lord did was common to all, and this new personal Righteousness makes
the difference.

But it will be said, That Christ's Righteousness, being acknowledged to be our
only legal Righteousness, whereby we answer the charge of the Law, the
asserting of a Gospel-Righteousness, whereby we come to have an interest in
that legal Righteousness, can do no prejudice. I Ans. Beside that this makes
two distinct Righteousness as, and the one a mean to obtean another, the one
within us a price ( ex pacto) for the other without us; and all this in order
to Absolution from one charge of the Law brought in against the sinner: hereby,
as to us, our personal Righteousness is really made our legal Righteousness,
because it is made that Righteousness, whereupon this man, and not the other
that wants it, is freed from the charge of the Law: for, according to this way,
Faith is not employed to lay hold on Christ's Righteousness, that by presenting
that Surety-Righteousness unto justice, the soul may escape the charge, but
when the charge of violation of the Law of God is brought in against the
sinner, his only relief is his Gospel-Righteousness, which he presents,
whereupon he pleads for Pardon and Absolution, by virtue of the new Covenant,
which Christ has purchased; for should he allege the death and satisfaction
of Christ that should give no relief, because that was for all alike, and
thereby the New Covenant was purchased where in the Gospel Righteousness
(whether Faith alone, or Faith and New Obedience) was set down, as the
Condition; and therefore it can stand him in no avail; but he must refuge
himself from wrath under the wings of his own Gospel-Righteousness (for he has
no other) and thereupon rest secure, and be confident of his Absolution from
all that the Law could charge against him. As, for example, if the Princes son
should by a valuable price, given to the Prince, procure new Terms and
Conditions to be proposed to a company of condemned treatours lying in prison:
if any one of these were challenged for the old crime, and threatened with the
execution of the sentence past upon that account, it would be of no avail to
him, to say, the Princes son has laid down a valuable price to buy me from
death, because he knew, that he did that for all the rest, in purchasing a New
Covenant, and new conditions; but the first and sure course he would take,
would be to present his performance of the new conditions, and say, the charge
cannot reach me, because I have performed the Conditions of the New Covenant,
procured by the Princes son. This I suppose is plain and clear, and this in
our case, would be found to be the only saife course, that poor challenged
sinners would take, if they should act according to the doctrine of our
Adversaries, to which, (as I said) I should not dar to advise one or other. But
really the Gospel-way (which is opposite to this) is plain and saife, if we
have but so much humility, as to complye therewith: And a difference may seem
small, in the debate, which yet in practice may prove great and of dangerous
consequence.

CHAP. XXVI.
Christ did not procure by his death the New Covenant, or the terms thereof.
WE heard what the Author of the discourse of the two Covenants, and what John
Goodwine said of this New Covenant. As the foundation of their assertion of the
imputation of faith, properly taken, they tell us, that the New Covenant
wherein this Righteousness is required, as the condition thereof, is founded
wholly in the blood of Christ, so that whatever is required of man by way of
condition of his acceptance with God, becomes accepted to that end, upon
account of Christ's suffering, Mr. Allen p. 16. and p. 53. 54. says. Nor does
this, that faith accompanied with obedience is imputed for righteousness, at
all derogate from the obedience and sufferings of Christ, in reference to the
ends, for which they serve. Because the whole Covenant, and all the parts and
terms of it, both promises of benefits, and the Condition on which they are
promised, are all founded in Christ his undertaking for us; and all the
benefits of it accrue to us upon our believing and obeying, upon his account
and for his sake. Mr. Baxter also tells us, in his book against D. Tully p.
66. That that which Christ did by his merits, was to procure the new Covenant.
And elsewhere p. 181, that they were the meritorious cause of the forgiving
Covenants, and the like he ^aith elsewhere frequently. The Arminians ground the
imputation of faith upon the merits and obedience of Christ Apol. f. 113. And
Arminius himself disp. 19. these. 7. that justification is attribute to faith,
not because it is the very righteousness, which may be proposed to God's rigide
and severe judgment, howbeit acceptable to God; but because, by the judgment of
mercy triumphing over judgment, it obtains pardon of sins, and is graciously
imputed unto righteousness, the cause of which is both God righteous and
merciful, and Christ by his obedience, oblation and intercession. And in his
Epistle ad Hyppolet. he tells us, that the word imputing signifies that faith
is not the righteousness it self, but that it is graciously accounted for
righteousness, whereby all worth is taken away from faith, except, that which
is by God's gracious estimation and that gracious estimation of God is not
without Christ, but in respect of Christ, in Christ, and for Christ. Christ by
his obedience is the impetrating cause, or meritorious, why God imputes faith
to us unto righteousness. And again in his Artic. perpend. de justif. What
fault is it so say, that faith by free and gracious acceptance is accounted
for righteousness, because of Christ's obedience.

But with this assertion, we are not satisfied, for these reasons

1. The Arminians, who maintain this so confidently, make it the whole of what
Christ merited by his death and Satisfaction, saying that Christ by his death
did so satisfy the offended party, as he would be favorable to the offender;
and so say, that he acquired to the father a jus and a will to enter into a new
Covenant with men. See their Confess. c. 8.. 9. collat. cum Apolog. c. 8.. 9.
and as the learned Voetius infers Select. dispp. p. 2. p. 233, 234. it
follows hence, that Christ was not in very deed our Cautioner; that he died
not in our room and stead; that he did properly obtain and acquire nothing to
us; and that he did not sustain the person of the elect, while he suffered on
the cross.

2.... that Christ procured no more, but a power or liberty unto God of
prescribing new Conditions; and some go so far, as to say, that this liberty
was such only, at the Lord might, if he had pleased, have appointed the old way
of works again, for the condition; So said Grevinchovius ag. Amesius. But it
is true, they yield more, who grant, that he purchased the New Covenant: Yet by
this purchase, they can not say, that Christ died to redeem us from our sins
from the wrath of God, from a vain conversation, and to save us: And indeed
the same person last named, says expressly, that Christ died not properly to
say any one. And what can else be said by such, as make this the whole of what
Christ did purchase? And how-rational is that consequence, which the same
person has, when he says it might so have come to pass, that Christ had had
the end of his death, and that no one had fulfilled the new Covenant, and had
been saved; for they will not grant, that Christ did purchase faith.

3. Hence we see, that such as say, that this was all which Christ procured by
his Death and Merits, do manifestly spoil us of all the rich Benefits, which
Christ has purchased, as being no immediate fruits of his death; such as
Faith, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Grace, and Glory, and thus
evacuat the whole virtue of the death of Christ: And this do Mr. Allen's words
p. 54. import while he says, that all the benefits of the Covenant accrue to
us upon our believing and obeying, upon his account and for his sake: and so
they do not accrue to us upon his account and for his sake immediately; but
immediately upon the account and for the sake of our Believing and Obeying; only
for Christ's sake is this connection made.

4. Who ever assert, that Christ has purchased the framing and Constitution of
this Covenant, in its terms and conditions, ought to confirm this their
assertion out of Scripture; and till this be done, we are a liberty to deny it,
how confidently so ever it be affirmed. It is certane, that such a principal
point and ground article of our Religion would not be darkly expressed in the
Scriptures, far less wholly passed over in silence, as, for any thing that yet
is made to appear, it is: for as for 1. Cor. 1: 30. and Ier. 23: 6. which Mr.
Allen cites, any may see how impertinent they are, that we say no more.

5. If so, then we must say with Papists, that Christ has procured a worth to
our Faith and Obedience, to merit ex pacto, the good things promised unto
such, as are believers and obedient: Yea hereby there would be more of merit
in our Faith, then in Christ's obedience.

6. We mnst say, that Christ has purchased that we might be Justified by an
Imperfect Righteousness; For sure, our faith and new Obedience is not perfect
even when sincere, they labor of many Imperfections, and have dross and
faultiness admixed: As also that he has purchased, that an Imperfect
Righteousness should be accounted and esteemed a perfect Righteousness; and
consequently that the judgment of God shnuld not be according to truth: which
were blasphemeous and iniquous to imagine.

7. Thus in effect, Christ should be made the minister of sin, by changing the
conditions of the old Law, which were perfect and compleet Obedience, into an
obedience far short of that, and thus he must be come either to dissolve the
Obligation of the Law, that it should not exact now, what it did exact of old;
or to loose us from the Obligation thereof; that we should be in part Law less;
neither of which can be asserted; and yet this Position makes clear way for
either, or for both.

8. Then we must say, that Christ has purchased such a way of Justification,
as leaves ground to men to glory and boast though not before God, yet before
men; for hereby he is made to purchase the renewing of the old Covenant of
works, with some mitigation, as to tht terms, though with little mitigation,
as to the persons; unless we say with these Arminians, that Man is as able to
believe and obey sin^erely, if he will, as Adam was to obey perfectly: But sure
Christ came for a far other end, than to leave man any ground of boa^ting, or
of glorying in himself for his Justification and Salvation, as having made
himself to differ.

9. Then Christ has purchased a way, whereby man might hold his Pardon,
Justification, Adoption etc. more of himself, than of Christ; for Christ by
this way cannot be said to have purchased our Pardon, Justification etc. but
only that we should have these favoures upon our Faith: or have such and such a
reward of our Faith and Obedience; As he, who procures that a person shall
have such a benefit upon condition he perform such a piece of service, cannot
be said to have procured that reward; for notwithstanding of this procurement
(if it may be so called, which is at best, but a conditional uncertain thing)
the person might never have got the reward.

10. Then the making of the New Covenant, and the making of it on these terms,
should be an act of mere Justice, in God, and not an act of his free Grace,
Love, good Pleasure, Will and Kindness: for it is Justice and Righteousness in
God, to do that, which Christ has purchased and procured to be done; though,
it is true, it may thus be accounted a mere favor, that it was of God's free
will, to enter into such terms of agreement with the Mediator, and to yield to
the making of such a condition, upon Christ's purchase. But the Apostle tells us
Ephesians. 1: 9. that God made known unto us ^he mystery of his will, according to
his good pleasure, which he purposed in himself. Which mystery of his will is
the New Covenant and dispensation of grace in the Gospel; and it is ascribed
not to the merits of Christ; but to God's good Pleasure, and to the Purpose,
which he purposed in himself. So the saving of such as believe, flows from
the love of God, as well as, and no less then the sending of Christ Ioh. 3: 16.
God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten son, that every believer
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. So Ephesians. 3: 9, 10, 11.
the fellowshipe of the mystery was hid in God; and the manifold wisdom of God
(which shines forth in the New Covenant) was according to the eternal Purpose;
which he had purposed in Christ Jesus, our Lord. This is ascribed to God's Love
Ioh. 3: 16. and will Ioh. 6: 40.

11. I grant, it may be said, that as Christ has purchased to his own Pardon,
Justification, Adoption and Salvation; so, as a consequence of this, he has
purposed the Means, or rather the Application of the means, thereunto, that
so the good things purchased may be actually conferred, according to the manner
and method condescended upon by Jehovah and the Mediator in the Coveuant of
Redemption; for He has chosen us, in himself having predestinat us unto the
Adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has
made us acctpted, in the beloved, in whom we have redemption, through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins etc. Ephesians. 1: 4, 5, 6, 7. the chosen ones are
predestined both to the end, and to the means leading to the end^: But this
matter is not consistent with their Assertion, who say, that Christ by his
death has purchased Faith and New Obedience to be the Condition of the
Covenant, because by their Universal Redemption they leave all at an
uncertainty, especially when also they will not grant, that Christ has
purchased Faith itself to any person.

12. It must be said... that Christ purchased the terms of the new
Covenant.... and purchased, that God should abolish the Law quite, and not
require a conformity thereunto, as our Righteousness, by virtue of the new
Covenant, nor exact full Obedience to the Law, from any, in our name; and
consequently it must be said, that Christ has purchased, that the Law giver
should wholly pass from that established Constitution, do and live, without
any real accomplishment thereof, or requiring the accomplishment thereof from
any, on their behalf, to the end, the Lord might be just, when he is the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

13. This assertion also stricketh against Christ's being the Surety of the New
Covenant: for it is not the work of a Surety, as such, to purchase the Making
and Constitution of a Covenant; but to confirm and ratify the same, and to
engage for the party, for whom he is a Surety, that he shall perform the
conditions, accorded to in the Covenant; and so to establish the Covenant or
contract, already agreed unto and constituted.

14. Thus it should be said, that Christ died rather for graces, than for
persons, to wit. That Faith and new obedience may be elevated beyond their
ordinare sphere, and exalted to be the Condition of the New Covenant. But the
whole Scriptures speak otherwise of Christ's death.

15. If this were the thing that Christ procured, he could not be said to have
Redeemed any, not so have died in the room and stand of any, but only for our
good, as say the Sociniant, To purchase a new Covenant, is not to be a
Propiltation, an (...), to ^ear our sins, to Reconcile any, unto God.

16. Mr. Baxter himself against Mr. Cartwright p. 91. has these words. And
therefore the Performer and the Accepter did themselves (NB.) choose, on what
terms it (i.e. Christ's Righteousness) should be applied to us, or be made
ours, quoad fructus: And the terms resolved on were the New Covenants
conditions, which are now required of us to our participation hereof. These
words import some other rise unto this Covenant, than the purchase of Christ.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Faith is, and may be called a Condition of the new Covenant, and of
Justification, how not.
IT may be of some use.... to enquire in what way faith is and may be called a
Condition.... The orthodox never denied, that it may be called a Condition....
yet with all we must always look upon Faith, as an Instrument, or Instrumental
Mean in Justification, because of its being as the hand of the soul to
receive, bring-in, grip-to and lay hold on the Righteousness of Christ, as the
Righteousness of a Cautioner and of a public person, to the end they might be
Justified, Absolved from the sentence of the Law, and Accounted and pronunced
Righteous, in the sight of God.

Upon the other hand, Socinians and Arminians, who cast the whole Gospel in a
new mould of their own, deny Faith to be an Instrument, and assert, that it is
only a Condition, or a cause sine qua non, as they speak: And this they do,
that their doctrine about Justification (which is wholly corrupt) may appear
to hang the better together. We heard how they denied the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness; and now they must of necessity also deny, Faith to be
considered here as an Instrument ^ for they know that it was called an
Instrument merely upon (...) account of the Surety-Righteousness of Christ,
which it was to apply, to receive, and to put on. They affirmed, that Faith
properly taken was imputed unto Righteousness, and by virtue of Christ's
merits was accepted of God for a Righteousness, and was so accounted, and now
consequentially they must say, that Faith (together with new Obedience, which
they also (...) and conjoine, as making up one Righteousness) is to be looked
upon, us a Condition, or causa sine qua non. Socinus de Justice. tells us, that
though that obedience, which (...) perform unto Christ, be neither the
different nor Meritorious cause, of our Justification and eternal Salvation,
yet it is the caus^ sine quation, as they say. The same he says Synops.
justis. 2. p. 14. So does Volkelius do vera Relig. lib. 4.c. 3. and Smalc,
Coner. Frantz. disp. 4. p. 103. So the Remonstrants in their Apologief. 112.
Faith (say they) if we consider the matter aright, cannot properly be called an
Instrument of Justification; nor can the act of believing be an Instrumental
action; far less can it as an Instrument be opposed to faith, as an action,
Corvin. cont. Tilen, Faith carries that respect unto the gift of adoption,
that it is an obedience required of God, upon condition of which the gift of
adoption is decerned unto the sinner for a reward, faith is not a means, or
instrument, but a condition, ordained of God for obtaining of life. Simon
Episcop. disp. 22. faith, in this matter, comes to be considered, not as an
instrument apprehending Christ's Righteousness imputed, but as apprehending
Christ Jesus, by whom that Righteousness is obtained. It cannot be called
properly an instrument, but a condition prescribed by, and required in the
Gospel Covenant, without which God will not pardon sin and impute Righteousness.

Lawyers, as may be seen in Spigely and Calvinilexic. ^urid. tell us of various
sorts of Conditions; Some Possible, Some impossible; Some certain, some
uncertain; Some... Voluntary conditions, say they, do suspend the whole
obligation, until they be performed, Casual (and also necessary) conditions do
only prorogue the effect of the obligation, the obligation itself, and its
force is instantly perfected. A condition thus taken they usually define,
Suspensio, cujus de futuro effectus, vel confirmatio pendet; or futurus eventus
pendet: or le^^ adposita hominum actionibus, eas suspendens: or Modus qui
suspendit actum, donec ca existente confirmetur: or Modus vel causa, que
suspendit id quod agitur, donec ex post facto confirmetur.

They tell us with all, that the word Conditio is some time, in the Law, taken
pro Modo, though in many things, these two differ much; and that it is the same
with ratio, lex, pactio, pactum, fortuna, status, locus jus, causa; so that it
admits of various significations: and in which of these significations here
definitly to take it, the Scripture gives no determination; for it is no
scripture-expression, in this matter: And if it be said, that the terms used
in Scripture, in this matter, such as these, believe, and thou shall be saved,
to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe, if thou shall believe thou shall be
saved, and the like, will sufficiently warrant the use of the word Condition; I
Answer, So will the like terms of being justified by Faith, and through faith
(...), allow us to call faith an Instrument, which yet our Adversaries, as we
have seen, will not suffer us to do. But moreover. We do not condemn the use
of the word Condition, in this affair, simply, but allow it, and also make use
of it: But this however is manifest, that seeing it is no Scripture word, we are
under no Law to receive the word, in that determinate sense, in which the
Adversaries use it, and must use it according to their principles: nor are we
to conceive of Faith Repentance and new Obedience, as such conditions, as they
hold them forth ^ be.

We know, how variously the word Condition is used, in our ordinary language:
and how some time, that is called a condition, which is the real price, and
worth of the thing given upon that condition; as when a man is willing to quite
his house, lands or horse to another, upon condition of so much money, which is
the real price, or a valuable consideration: if we should call Faith and Good
Works such a condition, the error would be worse than Popish. But Mr. Baxter
tells us Apol. ag. Mr. Black p. 39. 27. that he does not understand the word de
condition contractus vendition is and emptionis, vel emphyteusis, or any the
like, that is proper pretium; but it is the condition purae donation is, but
some what partaking naturae sendi, as to some of the benefits. And yet this
will not sufficiently clear the matter, especially seeing that natura feudi is
not fully explained, and the feud-duties, (whether we look to the first use of
these donations; or to perfect practice, or whether we speak of the highest
degree, that is, of the Vassallage of dukes, marquises and Earls.... And some
are most personal, being but yearly pensions, which is extinct with the death
of the giver, or of the receiver, other divisions may be seen in Craig de
feudis lib. 1. Dieg. 10. And as to the way of giving these: though it be said
to be by donation; yet the Service required in most, may be very onerous, to
speak nothing of such, as are purchased by money, or by excambion; nor yet of
such, as are burdened with that, which we call Ward, and Ward and Relief.

Mr. Baxter ibid, defines to us, the condition of the Covenant, which he
calls a potestative condition, thus; Actio voluntaria de futuro, a Deo
legislatore and Christo Testatore, innovalege, foedere, Testamento requisita,
ut ex ejus praestatione, constituatur jus actuale ad beneficium: vel, ut
obligationem and eventum suspend at donec praestetur: for (he adds) ex
stipulatione conditionali neque obligatio, neque act to ulla est, antequam
conditto even^at; quia quod est in condition, non est in obligatione. But
first, as to the name potestative condition, as opposed by the Lawyers to what
is Casual; and as importing that the person of whom that condition is required,
has full power to perform it, if he will, except some inevitable, and
unfore-seen impediment fall out, which is not ordinarily supposed; how can any
reckon Faith amongst these, unless they grant, that it is as much in Man's
power to believe, as it is to one at Rome, to ascend the Capitol, if he fall
not sick, or break not his leg? Whereby to all, who are not Pelagians,
Socinians and Arminians in this matter, but acknowledge Faith to be the pure
gift of God, and wrought by the Spirit, Regenerating the soul and giving an
heart of flesh, it may be manifest, that no kind of Conditions, spoken of by
Lawyers, who treat only of Compacts, and other Actions, betwixt man and man,
can comprehend this matter; whereof we are now speaking. Where is there such an
instance, in all the Law, of a person promising to give or to do such or such a
Favor, Courtesy, upon condition that he do something, which is not in his
power, nor in his will, and which he only who promises, can make him able and
willing to do? This would either be looked on by them, as an impossible
condition, which is next to none, or if the promiser should possibly make him
to fulfill, as a casual condition, or rather, as no proper condition at all. If
a father should promise his little child an apple, on condition he should
touch the Crown of his fathers head with his finger, which were impossible for
him to do, unless the Father should either stoop so low unto him with his head;
or take him up in his arms, that he may reach his head; who would call this a
potestative condition? But next, what means Mr. Baxter by this jus actuale?
Is this the same with jus in re, as opposed to jus ad rem? this jus ad rem;
which yet I suppose, he will not grant, or does he mean by this.... But what
is a Potential Right? Is it the same with a remote right? and how very far
remote must that Right be (if it be at all) which the Reprobat have? And is
there no difference as to this Remote and Potential Right, or what way it may
be called, which is opposite to an Actual Right betwixt the Reprobat and the
Elect, before Faith? It is like, Mr. Baxter will say, there is none, by reason
that the Redemption is Universal and for all alike, and so that Right, how ever
it be called, that preceedeth the Actual Right, is equally common to all, if we
mean that Potential Right, which follows upon the Redemption. But to us, who
affirm, that Christ died only for the Elect, and that he took on their debt;
and in due time made fall satisfaction, according to his undertaking, these
Elect ones for whom Christ engadged, in the Covenant of Redemption, have
another sort of right, call it Potential, or what you will, than the Reprobat
have: because Christ has purchased all the blessings, promised in the
Covenant, unto them: and he has a Right kept, for them, and not for the
rest: so that a Right unto all these good things, being purchased by their Lord
Redeemer, and Cautioner, and left unto them as his sure legacy, in his
Testament, and all so ensured, that in due time, according to the method
condescended upon, they shall be put in possession of the same, their Right is
in Christ's purchase, and they are put in actual Possession of Justification,
when they believe; which Faith is also purchased for them: all the benefits
they shall enjoy concerning grace and glory are equally by him purchased, and
are equally near related unto his merits and death, as to the right, though as
to the actual collation, Sovereign wisdom has appointed an Order, and
determining of one, before another, and so has resolved to give faith, and
than Justification etc. And though it be true, that in this case, what is
inconditione, non est in obligatione, as to the actual possession; yet we
cannot think, but the holy and Just God, having received satisfaction from the
Mediator, in behalf of such, for whom it was laid down, is under an obligation
(as we may conceive, and speak) unto the Mediator, to cause him see of the
travel of his soul, and to give him his seed, and those he purchased, and in
due time to call them effectually, and work Faith in them, and then Justify
etc. Adopt them etc. and thus bestow all the benefits purchased upon then* in
the time and method wisely determined. But if Mr.Baxter understand by this jus
actuale, that is constituted upon the performance of the condition, a plain,
and simple Right unto the benefit, we can acknowledge no such Condition, lest
we render the death of Christ void: for in him alone, have we all our Law-title
and Right to all the blessings of the Covenant, to Faith, and all that follow
upon it.

That we may put an end to this, we shall first show, in what sense, we cannot
admit Faith to be a Condition, and then show in what sense we do admit the
denomination.

As to the first we say. 1. We cannot admit it to be a Condition, in their
sense who will have Justification so to depend upon it, as on a Procuring
Cause, some way or other meriting, at least ex pacto or ex congruo as Bellarm,
says that benefit as a Reward: for this destroys the Freedom of Grace,
that: shines forth in our Justification; and overturneth the whole nature of
the Covenant of Grace, and spoileth Christ of his glory; and does man to come
in, as a sharer in the glory of that purchase.

2. We cannot admit it to be a Condition, in their sense, who take a new
Obedience with it: for this takes away the special Use of Faith and its
special End, in laying hold on and refuging the soul under the wings of the
Surety-Righteousness of Jesus Christ; This changes the nature of the Covenant
of Grace, and makes it a new Covenant of Works, and gives ground of boasting
and of glorying before men; yea and makes the reward of Justification, and
what follows thereupon, to be of debt, and not of grace: And such a Condition
in the Covenant of Grace we cannot own.

3. We cannot admit it to be a Condition, in their sense, who make it strickly
a Potestative Condition; placeing it in the power and free will of man, to
believe or not, as he will; for as this overturneth the whole Covenant of
Grace, and exalts proud man; so it parts, at least, the glory of Redemption
betwixt Christ and Man; and gives man ground to sing to the praise of his own
Lord, free will; and to say, he has made himself to differ, and he owes but
half thanks, and hardly so much, to Jesus Chaist, for all that he has done
and suffered, in order to the purchasing of Salvation.

4. We cannot own it for a Condition, in their sense, who make it, or it and
our new obedience together, our Gospel-Righteo^sness, and that Righteousness
which only is properly Imputed to us, and Reckoned upon our score, as the
Righteousness, upon the account of which, we are Justified: for thus the nature
of the Covenant of Grace is changed; God is made to estimate that for a
Righteousness, which is no fulfilling of the Law; and Christ is made to have
procured, that it should be so; and that his own Surety-Righteousness, should
no otherwise be imputed.

5. We cannot account Faith a Condition, in their sense, who ascribe to it or
to it with works, the same Place, Use and Efficacy in the new Covenant, that
Perfect Obedience had in the old Covenant of Works: for this makes the New
Covenant nothing but a new Edition of the old; and shoots Christ, the Lord
our Righteousness, far away, who is and should be our immediate Righteousness,
that in him we might be found hid, and secured from the dint of the Law-Curse;
and with all gives proud man too palpable ground of boasting, contrare to the
whole Contrivance of the Gospel Covenant.

6. We cannot own it for a Condition, in their sense, who reject it, and
disowne it for an Instrument, or an Instrumental Mean, in our Justification;
because they deny that particular and special Use, which it has, in our
Justification, and so pervert its whole Gospel-Nature: Its special use and work
in Justification being to lay hold on the Lord Jesus, and his side
jussorie-Righteousness, to carry the Man out of himself, as renuncing his own
Righteousness, and every thing that is not Christ and his Righteousness, that
as poor, empty, and naked he may lay hold on, and rest upon the
Surety-Righteousness of the public person and Cautioner, Jesus Christ: for
thus Christ and his Righteousness are put by, and he gets not that rent of
glory that is only due to him; and the soul is made to lean upon something
beside this Rock of ages.

7. We cannot admit it for a Condition, in their sense, who will have us hereby
to have gotten a legal Title or Right unto Justification and other benefits
according.... following the same; seeing this puts the crown upon Man's head, as
having by his deed acquired a jus and Law-right unto these blessings, which
become hereby a reward not of grace, but of just debt: We acknowledge all our
Right and Title to all the blessings of the Covenant, to be from Christ, the
only purchaser; and of him must we hold all, that all may be of free grace, and
he, even he alone, may have all the Glory, having redeemed us with his precious
blood, and purchased the whole Inheritance, of grace and glory for us.

8. We cannot account it a Condition, in their sense, who plead for Universal
Redemption; because thereby Christ is only made to have purchased something to
all alike, and that Conditionally, and no more grace and glory for Peter than
for Judas, but Peter by his own Pains and Industry, by his Faith and New
Obedience, did purchase the whole personal and immediate Right unto the
blessings, which he enjoys; and has received no more from Christ, than what
Judas had, and so has no more ground of exalting him for Redeemer, than those
have, who perish, seeing what he purchased was common to all, and no more for
one in particulur than for another: for this sets the crown upon man's head,
who has saved himself by his sweating, pains and labor; and spoileth our
Lord Redeemer of his glory.

9. Nor can we account it a condition, in their sense, who will have the whole
or principal part of what Christ purchased to be the New Covenant and the
Terms and Conditions thereof; as if Christ had been a Cautioner for none in
particular, but had so far redeemed all, as to have brought them into such an
estate, wherein they might now work and won for themselves, run and fight for
the prize, according to the new Conditions purchased; and so, if they run well,
sacrifice to their own net, and burn incense to their own drag, because by
their own industry and care in performing the Conditions, now made easier,
than they were to Adam in the first Covenant, their portion is fat, and their
meat plenteous.

10. Nor yet can we call it a Condition, in their sense, who will have us look
upon it, in the work of Justification, purely as a work of ours and as an act
of Obedience to a command; and as such a work, as comprehends in it all the
works of new Obedience: for thus its peculiar Use of applying Christ, and of
apprehending his Surety-Righteousness, is taken from it; and the whole nature
of the new Covenant is changed into the old Covenant of works; and Christ's
^idejussorie-Righteousness is not made our immediate Gospel-Righteousness; yea
when we are thus justified by Faith, we are justified by works; whereby the
whole of the Apost^l's disput is overturned; and we are taught to lean to, and
lay our weight upon a Righteousness within ourselves; contrare to the whole
scope of the Gospel.

Upon the other hand, we say, Faith may be looked upon, and called a Condition
of the Covenant, and of Justification, in this sense; That Christ having
purchased all the good things of the Covenant, all the sure Mercies of David,
all Grace, and all Glory, unto the chosen ones, and the Father having promised
the actual collation and bestowing of all and every one of these mercies and
blessings, so purchased and procured; and Jehovah and the Mediator both, in the
counsel of their will condescending on such a method and way of making the
ransomed ones the owners of the Blessings purchased, that is, first to give the
New Heart and the heart of fless and in effectual calling, work them up to
Faith in and Union with Christ and so draw them to the mediator, and cause them
accept of him, and wait upon him, and rest there, for life and salvation; and
then to Justify, Accept of as Righteous, Adopte them, and then work the
works of holiness by his Spirit and more, in their soul; and so carry on the
work unto Perfection, till grace be crowned with glory: matters, I say, being
thus wisely ordered, in the council of heaven, there is a Priority of order;
Faith, receiving Christ, and resting on his Surety-righteousness, going before;
and Justification following, and a firm connection made betwixt the two, that
who so ever believes thus, shall be justified, and none shall be justified who
believes not thus: Now, when by virtue of this constitute order and Method,
explained and revealed in the Gospel, the Ambassadors of Christ, in obedience
to their Injunctions, call upon all, who hear the Gospel, to receive Christ
and refuge themselves under his wings, and receive the atonement through his
Righteousness, and promise them thereupon, in their Masters name, Pardon, Peace
with God, Reconciliation; and acceptance etc. nothing more is here insinuated,
than that such a Method and Order is wisely determined, and that there is a
fixed connection made betwixt Faith and Justification; so that who ever would be
saved from the wrath to come; and would enjoy God for ever, must come unto God
in this way, and according to this method, and must receive his blessings and
Favoures, in this order, first believe, and lay hold on Christ and his
Righteousness, and then receive Justification etc. Thus we see faith is no
legal, Antecedent Condition, no Proper or Potestative Condition; but only a
consequent, or Evangelick Condition, or a Condition denoting a fixed and
prescribed Order and Method of receiving of the blessings purchased by Christ,
with a firm and fixed connection betwixt the performance of the condition, and
the granting of the thing promised thereupon. Thus Christ has the whole glory
of the work; Man is abased, and has nothing to glory of in himself; The reward
is not of debt, but purely of grace; The wisdom and love of God is wonderful
and remarkable; All ground of carnal security and self confidence is removed; A
plain and powerful ground is laid for ministers, to press, exhort, and obtest
to Faith in the first place, with all seriousness and zeal; Full security and
ground of confidence of being Justified and Accepted of God upon our believing,
is given; The difference betwixt the Covenant of works and the Covenant of
Grace, is distinctly observed; The Antinomian mistakes, saying we are Justified
from Eternity, or at the death of Christ, or at any time before faith, are
manifestly obviated; And all grounds of excepting against, or dissatisfaction
with this way, are removed from all such, as will willingly comply with the
design of free grace, in the Gospel.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How faith is and may be called an Instrument, in Justification.
COncerning the Instrumentality of faith in Justification, much needs not be
said, howbeit too much has been written, about it and that to very little
edification; so I judge: I am sure, to little use, as to the clearing up of
that concerning point of Justification, and the true interest of Faith therein.

We heard, in the beginning of the proceeding Chapter, how both Socinians and
Arminians did disowne faith its being an Instrument, and Papists also before
them did plead against it: On the other hand, the orthodox, writting against
Papists, Socinians, and Arminians, did unanimously assert Faith to be an
Instrument, or to be considered as an Instrument, in the matter of
Justification. And few, or none, can be instanced of those, who hold with the
orthodox, in all chief Controversies, about Justification, that did impugn,
or so much as deny Faith to be an Instrument, in justification; Yea John
Goodwine, in his book of justification, does expressly call it an Instrument in
justification.

It is true, the Scripture no where calls faith an instrument; and the same
being no Scripture expression, there needs not be much strife about it, nor
will there be, among such, as are unanimous, in the maine and principal
Questions about Justification; or to that, which is only designed and intended
by that expression. And though the Scripture does not use that expression,
interminis, yet no man can hence infer, that all use of it, and of the like
should be laid aside, nor can such be supposed to add to the Scripture, (as
Mr. Baxter hinteth. Apol. against Mr. Blake p. 40.) who call Faith an
Instrument; more then he can suppose that himself adds to the Scripture, when
he calls faith a Condition, or a causa sine qua non, for these are as little
to be found expressly, in the Scriptures, as the other. Nor do they, who say
Faith is an Instrument, so much plead for the name, as for the thing intended
thereby: All expressions, that are not in Scripture, must not be laid aside, in
our speaking of divine things* for then we must lay aside the word Trinity,
Sacrament, Satisfaction and several others: far less must the truth, which we
conceive can be intelligibly and usefully expressed by those borrowed words and
terms, be laid aside, because the term itself, by which we express our
Conceptions of the truth, is not in so many letters and syllabs to be found in
Scripture, if so indeed, we had quickly lost a fundamental point of our
Religion, and yielded the cause unto the Socinians. If the Scripture may be
explained, we may make use of such expressions, terms and sentences, as will,
according to their usual acceptance, contribute to make the truths revealed
in Scripture intelligible to such, as hear us. And when some terms have been
innocently used in Theology, for explication of truths, whether to the more
learned, or to the more unlearned, and have p^ ssed among the orthodox without
control, or contradiction, beyond the ordinary time of prescriptions; it
cannot but give ground of suspicion for any, now to remove these old
Landmarks, especially when it is attempted to be done, by such means and
arguments, as will equally enforce a rejection of many Scriptural expressions:
for should all the Metaphorical expressions and sentences, which are in nature,
be so canvassed, and rejected, because every thing agreeing properly to them
when used, in their own native soil, does not quadrate with them, as used in
the Scriptures, in things divine, where should we Land? If these divine
mysteries had been expressed to us only in terms, adequatly corresponding with
and suiting the matter; how should we have understood the same? Therefore we
find the Lord condescending in the Scriptures, to our low Capacities, and
expressing sublime and high mysteries, by low and borrowed expressions, to the
end, we might be in case to understand so much thereof, as may prove, through
the Lord's blessing, saving unto us: And thereby has allowed such, as would
explain these matters unto the capacity of others, to use such ordinary
expressions, as may contribute some light and understanding to them, in the
truths themselves.

Now when the orthodox have, according to their allowed liberty, made use of
the word Instrument, in this matter, and maintained that Faith was, and was
nothing more then an Instrument, in Justification; it is not fair to reject it
altogether, because improper, though fit enough to signify what they did
intend thereby; and because all the properties, that agree to proper Physical,
or artificial Instruments, do not agree to it; and because if the same be
strickly examined, according to the rules of Philosophy, concerning
Instrumental Causes, it will be found to differ from them. Mr. Baxter himself,
writting against D. Kendal.. 47. tells us, that the thing; which he denies, is,
that Faith is an Instrument, in the strick logical sense, that is, an
Instrumental efficient cause of our Justification; and that he expressly
discla^meth contending de nomine, or contradicting any, that only use the word
instrument, in an improper large sense, as Mechanics and Rhetoricians do: So
that the question (says he), is de re, Whether it efficiently cause our
Justification, as an Instrument? But it may be conceived to have some efficient
Influence, in our Justification, not as that is taken simply and strickly for
God's act justifying, but as taken largely, comprehending the whole benefit:
as activly coming from God, and as Passively received by or terminated on us,
and that as an Instrument, though not in that proper sense, that Logicians, or
Metaphysicians take Instrumental causes, and explain them, in order to
physical and natural Effects. We know, that Justification is a supernatural
work and effect; and therefore, though in explaining of it in its Causes, we
may make use of such terms, as are used about the expressing of the Causes of
Natural, or Artificial Works and Effects; yet no Law can force us, to
understand by these borrowed expressions, the same proper, and Formal Efficacy,
Efficiency and influence, which is imported by these Expressions, when used
about Natural Causes and Effects.

But Mr. Baxter against Mr. Blake. 5. tells us, what great reasons he had to
move him to quarrel with this calling of faith an Instrument viz. he found that
many learned divines did not only assert this Instrumentality, but they laid so
great a stress upon it, as if the maine difference betwixt us and the Papists
lay here, And yet any might think, that they had reason so to do, when Papist's
on the other hand, laid as great stresse upon the denying of Faiths
Instrumentality. He tells us moreover, that our divines judged Papists to err
in Justification fundamentally, in these points 1. about the formal Cause,
which is the formal Righteousness of Christ, as suffering and perfectly obeying
for us. 2. About the way of our participation herein, which as to God's act is
Imputation, and that in this sense, that legaliter we are esteemed to have
fulfilled the Law in Christ. 3. About the nature of that faith, which
justifies. 4. About the formal reason of faiths interest in justification,
which is as the Instrument thereof. I doubt not (says Mr. Baxter) but all
these four are great errors. But we neither may, nor can call all errors, which
Mr. Baxter calls errors. We have seen above how necessary truths the two
first are, and have explained, in part, the third, wherein I confess, too many
(yet not all) of the foreign divines have, as to expression, missed the
explication of true Justifying faith and it may be, it was not their design to
describe it so, as it might agree to the faith of every sincere, though weak
believer: but rather to show its true nature, grounds and tendency, when at its
best; and yet what Papists hold, on the contrare, is more false and absurd. But
as to this fourth, it seems, that it has a necessary dependence upon the
foregoing; and this to me seems to be the maine reason, why our Divines did
own and plead for Faiths Instrumentality, in the matter of Justification, viz.
because the Righteousness, which they called the Formal, or others the Material
Cause thereof, was not any Righteousness inherent in us, as Papists said; but
the Surety-Righteousness of the Cautioner Christ, without us: And therefore
they behoved to look on Faith, in this matter, otherwise then Papists did, and
not account it a part of our Formal Righteousness, but only look upon it, as an
hand to lay hold on and bring-in the Surety-Righteousness of Jesus Christ; and
therefore judged it most fit to call it only an Instrumental Cause. And how
ever Mr. Baxter exaggerat this matter, as complying with Papist's in condemning
us, as to all these controversies, and think it no wonder, they judge the whole
Protestant cause naught, because we err in these, and yet make this the maine
pairt of the Protestant cause; yet we must not be scarred from these truths;
Yea, because this point has such a connection with the other, concerning that
Righteousness, upon the account of which we are to be Justified in the sight of
God, we are called to contend also for this, and that so much the rather, that,
though Papist's do utterly mistake the Nature of Justification, and confound it
with Sanctification; yet Mr. Baxter has more rational apprehensions there
about, and yet will not have Christ's Righteousness to be that Formal
Righteousness, upon the account of which we are Justified.

Yet notwithstanding, we need not own it for such an Instrument, or such an
Instrumental cause, as Philosophers largely treat of, in the Logicks and
Metaphysics, knowing that the Effect here wrought is no Natural Effect,
brought about by Natural Efficient and Instrumental Causes; Only we say, the
Scripture affirming, that we are justified (...) and (...), gives us ground to
call Faith (if we will use such terms, to express our mind) an Instrument,
seeing these expressions point forth, some special interest and influence, that
Faith has in Justification, and no other Influence or Causation can be allowed
to it, conform to the Scriptures; but that, which, we express in our ordinary
discourse, not in a strick Philosophical sense, by an Instrument. And that so
much the rather, that hereby is pointed forth that, which is the maine ground
and design of using this term, viz. the Application of the Righteousness of
Christ, which is made by Faith, as a mean or mid's laying hold upon without
which we cannot be Justified, according to the Gospel; And though in these
borrowed expressions from Causes, metaphysical accuracy be not intended, yet
the true meaning and intendment of the users of these terms being obvious, it
is but vanity, to raise too much dust thereabout; unless difference about other
more Principal Questions, in the matter of Justification, enforce it, as indeed
all such as place the Formal Cause or reason of our justification before God in
our own Inherent Righteousness, and not in the Righteousness of Christ imputed
to us and received by faith, must of necessity deny all interest of faith here,
as an Instrument, or as any thing like it; because, having all their
Righteousness within them, they have no use for Faith to lay hold-on and
bring-in one from without.

There things may satisfy us, as grounds of this Denomination.

1. That in justification, we are said to be receivers, and do receive
something from the Lord; not only the Passive justification itself expressed by
our being justified, but of some thing in order thereunto, as of Christ
himself, the Abundance of Grace and of the Gift of Righteousness, the
atonement, the word of promise, yea every thing that concurreth unto
justification, or accompanies it, we are said to receive, Ioh. 1: 12. Col. 2:
6. Rem. 5: 11, 17. Act. 2: 41, and 10: 43. and 26: 18. Heb. 9: 15.

2. That the only Grace, whereby we are said to receive these things, is Faith:
receiving is explained to be believing Ioh. 1: 12. Act. 2: 41. comp. with verse.
44. we receive forgiveness of sins by faith Act. 26: 18.

3. That the Surety-Righteousness of Christ, is that only Righteousness, upon
the account of which we are justified before God, and not any Inherent
Righteousness within ourselves, has been evinced above.

4. That this Righteousness of the Surety must be imputed unto such, as are to
be Justified, or reckoned upon their score; has also been evinced.

5. That this Surety-Righteousness of Christ must be laid hold on by us, in
order to our justification, has been shown; and must be granted by all, that
acknowledge it to be the Righteousness, upon the account of which we are
Justified.

6. That the Scripture says expressly, that God justifies (...), and (...), by
faith and through faith, and (...) by faith Romans 3: 24, 25, 28, 30. Gal. 3: 8,
and 2: 16. and that even when justification is denied to be by works; So that
Faith must have a far other interest in; and must otherwise concur unto our
Justification, than any other Works, or Graces; and therefore must be looked
upon, as having some peculiarity of interest and influence here, and this
peculiarity of interest, can not be otherwise better expressed, so* as the
matter shall be cleared, then by calling it an Instrument. Not as if it did
concur to the produceing of the effect of justification by any Physical
operation, as Physical Instruments do; but as a medium and mean required of us,
in order to Justification, according to the free pleasure of God, who disposes
the order and method of his bestowing of his Favors upon us, and the Relation
and Respect; that one has unto another, as he sees most for his own glory,
and for our good; and that such a mean, as concurreth therein, and thereunto,
according to what is said, in such a way, as we be can best understand by
calling it an Instrument; for we can not allow it to be called any way
meritorious, or any formal disposition of the soul or Preparation unto the
Introduction of an Inherent Formal Cause of Justification, as Papists say; nor
can we allow it to be called such a proper and Potestative Condition, as some
would have it to be, as we saw in the forgoing Chapter.

7. That no real inconvenience can follow upon the owning of Faith for an
Instrument, in justification; for Justification is not here taken simply and
strickly for that, which is properly God's act, but more largely and complexly,
including other things requisite unto Justification, such as the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, which Faith, as the Instrument or hand of the
soul, lays hold on, and bringeth-in, for this end, that the man being clothed
therewith, may be acquitted before the Tribunal of God, Pardoned, and accepted
of as Righteous. And howbeit it be God, that justifies, and as to this act of
God justifying, Faith has no real interest or influence; yet the Scripture
saying, that God justifies by Faith, and through faith, we must acknowledge
some interest, that Faith has, in the work and Effect; as when the Scripture
says, that He purifieth the heart by faith Act. 15: 9. the purifying of the
heart is God's work, and yet it is said to be done by Faith, which is our work.
It is said Heh. 11: 11, that through faith Sara herself received strength to
conceive seed and verse. 33, 34. that some through faith subdued Kingdoms,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire etc. all which were
the works of God, and yet while they are said to be done by faith, faith must
have had some interest and influence in these effects. So in working faith in
the soul, which is God's work alone, the Lord uses the preaching of the
Gospel, and ministers, and the peoples harkening and listening to what is
preached, as means and midses thereunto; though preaching and hearing be men's
work, yet God uses them for his ends; and as he sends Preachers to preach,
and moves persons to hear, that thereby he may, according to his own will and
pleasure, work Faith in then; so he works Faith in souls, that he may,
thereby Justify them. Nor is it of any weight to say, that if Faith be an
Instrument, it must work as an efficient cause, because the Instrumental Cause
belongs to the Efficient; for neither do all Philosophers agree to this, some
holding Instruments to be a fifth kind of Cause; nor are we obliged to stand to
their prescriptions and rules, especially in these things, that are no natural
causes or effects; no man says, that faith has the same kind and measure of
Efficiency in and toward the effect, justification, that all Instrumental
causes, or Instrumental causes so called, have in the Effects, which they
concur to the producing of; what efficiency has an examplary cause, which
some Philosophers reduce to the efficient viz. Keckerman: But that Faith has
some Influence, is manifest from the Scripture, not of it self, it is true, but
by the gracious appointment of God; and that this Influence cannot be better
and more saifly expressed, than by the name of an Instrument, appears to us
clear; hereby nothing of the glory due to God, or unto Jesus Christ, and to his
Righteousness, is ascribed unto man, nor is any more hereby granted unto Man,
than to a beggar, as to the enriching of himself, when it is said, his hand
made him rich, by receiving the Purse of gold, that was given unto him: yea
hereby is Christ and his Righteousness more fixedly established, in their due
place, because faith is considered not as a Righteousness of it self, nor as a
part of Righteousness; but purely and simply as an Instrument of the soul
laying hold on the Righteousness of Christ, and pleading the same, as the only
Formal ground of his justification before God. If it be said, that it were
saifer to call it a causa sine qua non. We must first know, what is properly
signified thereby, and whether it will help us more, to understand the just and
true import of the Scripture expressions about Faith in Justification; for no
terms ought to be used, that attain not this end, or have not a direct
tendency thereunto; such terms, however we may please our selves in the
invention of their application unto the business in hand, and think we are in
case to defend the same against opponents; yet if they do not contribute
manifestly to the clearing and explaining of the matter, according to the
Scriptures, can only darken the matter: And no reason can enforce us to embrace
them, with the arbitrary explications and limitations of the Authors, and to
reject or lay aside such, as do more obviously explain the matter, unto all
such, as have orthodox apprehensions of the matter; and have given offense to
none, nor have been excepted against by any, but such as were not orthodox in
the point of justification; and whose erroneous Principles led them to deny, or
except against the same. And what for a cause shall we take that, causa sine
qua non to be? (which cannot be so explained in our language, as that every one
that hears it, shall be in case to understand, what it means) Such as speak
of it, call it causa fatua, and refer to it external occasions, time and
place, and such like things, without which the action cannot proceed, as the
place wherein we stand, and the time, wherein we do any thing, which have no
more interest in, or relation to one action, than another, for all must be done
by us, in some time, and in some place: And shall we say, that faith has no
other interest or influence in justification, than the hour of the day, when or
the place wherein a minister preaches, has into his preaching? Shall we have
so mean and low an account of the ordinances and appointments of God, in
reference to spiritual ends? Seeing the Lord has appointed Faith, in order to
Justification, we must not look upon it as a causa fatua, or as a mere
circumstance, but as having some kindly influence in the effect, by virtue of
the appointment of God, and such a connection therewith, that it no sooner
existeth, but as soon justification follows. Faith then can not be called a
mere causa sine qua non. Historical faith and several other antecedents, may be
a conditio or causa sine qua non; for no man of age can be justified without
it; yet we may not say, that we justified by it, as by saving faith; the same
may be said of Conviction and Sense of sin, of some measure at least, of legal
Repentance, and of desire of Pardon and of Peace, which yet may be, and often are
without justification. And it may also seem strange, how this causa sine qua
non, can be called a potestative condition; or how that, which is said to be a
proper Potestative Condition, ex cujus praestatione constituitur jus actuale ad
beneficium, can be called a mere conditio or causa sine qua non, seeing it has
such a considerable moral influence in the effect?

But says Mr. Baxter against Mr. Blake. 27, faith cannot justify both as a
Condition, and as an Instrument of Justification; for either of them imports
the proximam and causalem rationem of faith, as to the effect; and it is
utterly inconsistent with its nature, to have two such different nearest causal
interests. Ans. When we speak of Faiths justifying, as an Instrument, we
consider the physical, or quasi physical way of its operation, and denote only
its kindly acting on Jesus Christ, and on his Righteousness which it lays
hold on, applies, apprehends, and puts on. And when we say it justifies
as a condition, we consider it as appointed of God unto that end, and as placed
by Him, in that state and relation unto justification, which now it has: And
either of these can be called the proxima ratio causalis of Faith, according to
its different consideration: if justification, (meaning not God's act only, but
the complex relative change) be considered in genere Physico, or quasi physico,
then the nearest causal interest of faith, is its instrumentality: but if it be
considered in genere morali, or legali, then its nearest causal interest is,
that it is a condition. As when a rich man bestows a purse of gold on a
beggar, and requires that he, in order to the possessing of it, streatch forth
his hand, and take it, considering this act of enriching him in genere physico,
his hand acts herein, as an Instrument, apprehending the purse, and taking it
to himself: considering this, in genere legali or morali, the streatching forth
of his hand, and apprehending the purse is a condition; for so the donor has
determined to give the riches, after such a manner and method, for his own
ends, according to his good pleasure. Thus we see, how faith can, in its way,
produce one and the same effect of justification, both as an Instrument, and as
a Condition, taking these terms, in a large sense, according to the matter in
hand.

Mr. Baxter says Confess. p. 89. he denies that Faith is an Instrument of
Justification, because he dar not give so much of Christ's honor to man, or
any act of man's, as to be an efficient cause of pardoning himself. Ans. And he
knows, that the orthodox do of purpose, call faith an Instrument in
justification, in opposition to the Papists, that Christ may wear the honor
alone, and man may be abased: and if they have been unhappy, in falling upon
the medium to that end; Yet their Intention was honest. But when Faith is
called an Instrument in justification, justification is not taken for an act of
accepting and pardoning alone; for they knew, that it was God only that
accepts and pardons, and that it is he only, who Justifies; but they took
justification in a more comprehensive sense, as including Christ's
Righteousness, the only formal ground of justification, in reference to which,
Faith is said to act as an Instrument receiving. And this may satisfy such, as
will not have the mysteries of God cast in a pure Philosophical mould, because
some such terms are used for explications sake.

Mr. Baxter Confess. p. 95. says. Such as say, faith justifies qua
instrumentum, de most certainly make it to justify, as an action. And in his
postscript, to Mr. Cartwright. Those that make faith to justify, as an
Instrument, or as apprehensio Christi, do set up the (...) credere, which they
cry down; for that, which they call instrumentality, is the apprehensive act,
and apprehendere and credere are here all one. They contradict themselves in
saying, that Paul excludes all works, because faith (say they) justifies not
as a work: for to justify qua instrumentum, or qua apprehensio Christi, is to
justify as a work, or as this work. And so this doctrine sets up justification
by works and that in an unlawful sense; for it makes the formal reason of
Faiths justifying to be its apprehension, that is, that it is such an action;
or its instrumentality, which is an operation.] Ans. This is no new Objection;
for Schlichtingius the Socinian Cont. Meisnerum p. 130. did object the same
upon the matter. It is true, when we say faith Justifies as an Instrument, we
make it to Justify as an action, taking qua specificative as he himself also
must do, when he faith it justifies as a Condition Potestative, for a
potestative condition is some action performed, and himself, as we heard,
called it actio voluntaria de futuro. But he knows, that when it is said,
that Faith justifies, as an Instrument, the meaning is but more emphatically
to show, that it is the Righteousness of Christ, which faith apprehends, by
which we are justified, and that they, who cry up the (...) credere, make that
the Righteousness, by which we are justified; so that the (...) credere in
their sense, who will have it imputed to us for Righteousness, respects
immediately the benefit, to wit, Pardon, Acceptance etc. Faith as an
Instrument, or apprehension, in our sense, respects Christ and his
Righteousness immediately, which it receives as an Instrument, in order to the
benefit, which is had upon the account of Christ and his Righteousness, made
ours; In our sense, faith is no more, but as the hand receiving bread, and as
the mouth eating it, in order to food and nourishment thereby; in their sense,
faith is made the very food and nourishment, or meat it self that nourishes:
When we say, that Faith Justifies as an Instrument, it is but, as if we said,
man lives by his hands taking meat, and by his mouth eating it; when they say,
that faith justifies as a work, and that the (...) credere is imputed for
Righteousness, it is, as if they said, the hand and the mouth are the very
food, or the meat it self, by which we live and are nourished: we, looking upon
Faith as an Instrument, as upon the hand and mouth, as instruments of
nourishment, ascribe all the virtue of nourishment unto the meat. They, denying
the hand and the mouth to be considered here as instruments, and saying that we
live and are nourished by the hand and the mouth, (just as they do, when they
make the (...) credere our Righteousness, in reference to justification)
ascribe all the virtue of nourishment unto the hand and the mouth, and so set
up the hand and the mouth, in the place, that is due unto the meat, and rob the
meat, of that power and virtue, that is only proper to it. Yet withal, when we
say, that hands and mouth nourish us as Instruments, we do not deny, but in a
general sense, our receiving of meat with our hands, and eating of it with our
mouth, are conditions of nourishment, importing hereby, that the wise God has
appointed this order and method, giving us hands to receive meat, and mouths
to eat it, and a stomach to digest it, in order to the living, and receiving
thereby nourishment; only we do not say, they are such conditions, as have all
the virtue of nourishment in them. This is but a similitude, and so must halt
in some things, as all similitudes do; yet it serves to illustrate the matter,
and to show the difference betwixt our expressions, and the expressions of our
Adversaries, in this matter; and how little ground there is so this objection,
and particularly how, when we say faith justifies as an Instrument, we do not
withal say, it justifies, as a work, in our Adversaries sense; And how, when
we say, Faith is a condition, we do not withal say, that it justifies as a
potestative proper condition, in our Adversaries sense; as also, how we cannot
admit, that faith shall be called no more, than a causa sine qua non; seeing it
is so manifest, that eating and digesting of meat has another influence into
nourishment by food, than a mere causa sine qua non has into any effect.

Mr. Baxter Confess. p. 95. 96. I must therefore profess, that after long
consideration I know no one term, that properly expresses this nearest and
formal interest of faith in justification, but only the term condition, as
that is usually taken for the condition of a free gift, and when the Scripture
tells us, how faith justifies, it is in such terms, as these, if thou
confess with thy mouth etc. he that believes shall be saved etc. In all which,
if the conditional if, and the conditional form of the promise, express not a
condition, I despair of ever understanding it in this life. Ans. As for the
nearest and formal interest of Faith, in Justification, if all other questions
touching that fundamental truth of Justification, were satisfyingly determined,
and put to an end, there needed not be much controversy; but when as we have
seen, the decision of this has such an interest in the decision of more
substantial points, or necessarily attends the same, inquiry with sobriety
after the truth, even in these lesser things, cannot be condemned; And, on the
contrare, receding from, and condemning received terms and expressions, which
have an obvious, plain and sound meaning, being taken, according as they have
been constantly used, because not quadrating every way with men's new
Philosophical and too metaphysical apprehensions and notions, in this matter,
cannot but be displeasing. And too much Philophical accuracy in the clearing up
of these mysteries, is not the most edifying and saife way of explication. 2.
We are not against the use of the term Condition in this matter, knowing that
faith may well be called a condition, but the question is in what sense we must
take the word, condition: And to say, that it is taken, as commonly used for
the condition of a free gift, will not satisfy in our case; because though the
gift which we expect by faith, is to us indeed free; yet it is a purchased free
gift; and such a free gift, as these who get it, have all the legal title and
Right thereunto, through the Ca^tioners purchase and payment, and only come to
the possession of it through Faith, according to the wise method and
Connection, made by the Sovereign Lord. Adam's perfect obedience might have
been called the condition of a free gift: and we cannot give the same place and
power to Faith in the New Covenant, that perfect obedience had in the old; for
Adam if he had perfectly obeyed, had got his reward without any intervention
of a Price by a Mediator, purchasing it, but we must hold all our reward solely
of Christ, that he may have the glory of all (3) as ( if) can denote a
Condition, so (by, (...)) can denote an instrumental cause. Himself tells us
som-where in his Confut, of Ludom, Colvinus, alias Ludov, Molinaeus, that (...)
denotes an efficient cause and we read, that we are Justified by faith, (...).
And further, though these passages, which he cites, and the conditional if,
and the conditional form of the promise, do indeed express a Condition; yet
they do not say, or prove that the term Condition is the only one term, that
properly expresses the nearest and formal interest of faith in Justification;
or that the term of an Instrument is no way fit to express this near and
formal interest of faith in justification, seeing to be justified by faith, or
through faith, (...) (all which the Scripture uses) is as expressive of an
Instrumental interest, as if thou believe etc. is expressive of a condition.

He says ibid. p. 89. Conclus. 10. That the difference betwixt him and others,
is not that he gives any more to works, than they; but that they give more to
faith, than he, and consequently to man: and if he be guilty of equalling faith
and obedience too much, it is not by bringing up works too high (to be
Instruments of Justification, as they make Faith) but in taking down Faith too
much, and consequently, in too much abaseing all acts of man. Ans. If he bring
up works to Faith, in our Justification, and give a like interest to both, he
gives more to works, than the orthodox will do: And when we call faith an
Instrument in justification, we give not so much to it, as they do, who call it
conditio potestativa, and give it the same place in the New Covenant, that
perfect obedience had in the old, as was seen above: And who ever say this, are
so far from debasing man and his actions, that they give him, as much ground of
glorying and boasting, as ever Adam would have had, if he had fulfilled the
condition, and given full and perfect Obedience: And he cannot but know, that
that term, Instrument, was of purpose applied to Faith, in this matter, to
depresse man, and to keep the crown upon the head of Christ, as it is apt
enough to do, if it be but candidely understood, and taken as it is applied,
and no further, nor vexed with metaphysical niceties, a way, that might render
every borrowed term, whether from arts or sciences, how expressive so ever of
our meaning, and explicative of the matter intended, utterly useless. It is
true, when he calls faith only a causa sine qua non, he seems to giveless
to Faith, than we do, if that term be taken, in its strick sense, as it is by
Philosophers taken, who will not have it called a Cause at all, but rather
conditio sine qua non: But thus he depresseth it below that place and interest,
which is due to all the institutions and appointments of God, as such; for none
of them can rightly be called conditio sine qua non, and no more, in reference
to that effect and end, for which they are appointed of him; and far less can
Faith be said to be only conditio sine qua non, in reference to justification,
seeing by the unalterable appointment of the Sovereign Lord, justification so
depends upon and is connected with Faith, that who ever believes (to wit,
savingly, or with that Faith, which here we only understand) whenever he
believes, does immediately pass from death unte life, and is justified. But no
man will say, that the effect does so much depend upon, or is connected with
that, which is but a conditio sine qua non, as was before shown, in several
Instances: And where is then his Conditio Potestativa? is that but a causa
fatua.

But ibid. Conclus. 9. he tells us, that one maine reason, which constrained him
to deny that Faith is an Instrument in justification, is because he dar not
give so much of Christ's honor to man, or any act of man's, as to be an
efficiont cause of pardoning himself. Ans. When we make Faith an Instrument in
justification, we make it not an Instrument of the act of pardoning, which is
solely the Lords act; but taking justification largly as including the
Righteousness of Christ the only ground thereof, we say, that in reference to
Christ, and this Surety-Righteousness of his which is imputed, in order to the
Lord's justifying and Pardoning of us, faith acts as an Instrument,
apprehending Christ and his Righteousness, and upon that account is to be
considered as an Instrument, in the matter of justification: And himself Concl.
11. ibid. says that he ever held, that it is only faith, that is the receiving
of Christ, and that faith being the only receiving grace (wherein no mere moral
duty or grace does participate of its honor or nature) it was therefore by God
peculiarly destinated or appointed to the office of justifying, as fittest to
the glorying of free grace, and of God Redeemer therein. And if this be the
all. (as to the substance) of what we say, or the most of that which we mean,
when we call faith an Instrument, what ground was there of differing from his
brethren? or what ground was there to fear, that Christ's honor should have
been wronged thereby? Sure, while Faith is called an Instrument, as receiving
Christ and his Righteousness, in order to justification, Christ is more
honored in that affair, than when our Faith is made our Gospel-Righteousness,
and called a perfect Righteousness and so our whole Righteousness (as some) a
chief part of it (as others) upon the account of which we are justified.

CHAP. XXIX.
What Interest Repentance has in our Justification.
IN reference to the clearing of this Question, about the Interest of
Repentance in Justification, it will not be necessary to speak much of
Repentance it self, the premitting of a few things will be sufficient unto our
purpose.

The Hebrew word, which is rendered repent, is of a general signification for
it signifies to return, whether from a place, or from the distemper of our
minds, or from our former courses; and so denotes a motion or change of the
body from one place to another; or of the mind from any purpose, or of the
whole way and walk, and in special, it sometime signifies a change of the
whole man to the better, both as to his Mind, Resolution, and Deportment, and
thus denotes a man's turning unto God: And accordingly we read in the New
Testam. of the Prodigals coming or returning to himself, or to his right mind
and wits; and we hear of Repentance toward God. In the N. Testam. there are
two greek words, the one (...) importing such a change, as it attended with
after care; the other (...) signifying such a change, as denotes after-wit or
after thought. Some do so difference these two, as that they say, the last
signifies so to sorrow for what is done, as to amend it, called by the latins
Resipiscere and therefore properly is meaned of a good and saving Repentance,
wherein the penitent returns to his right wits, so as to reform and amend
what has been amiss; and the other denotes properly care, anxiety and
solicitude after something done, called by the Latins poenitere, and this may
be used in an evil sense, as denoting properly no change of mind or carriage
to the better, but simply such a trouble and anxiety for what is done, as
makes them wish, it were not done, whether the thing done was good or evil.
But in the New Test. we find not this difference constantly observed; for
(...) is taken both in a good sense, for a good Repentance, and saving Mat. 21:
32, 29. and for a common Repentance, that is not saving. Mal: 27: 3. where
mention is made of Judas repenting (...) indeed and (...) that comes
therefrom, import a good and saving Repentance, except, Heb. 12: 17.

What this word denotes, when used of God, either affirmativly, or negativly,
we need not here enquire. It is more for our purpose to consider, that
Repentance may be taken in a threefold sense, 1. for a common work of legal
sorrow through conviction of hazard, because of sin, whereby the man may rue,
be grieved, and be sorrowful for what he has done, and wish he had not done
it, as Judas repented of his wickedness. This may be; and yet not be attended
with Pardon of sins: And, as to such, in whom the Lord purposes to carry on
the work of Condition, and Humiliation until it come to real Conversion, and
an Union with Christ, though it may be called a conditio sine qua non of
Justification and Pardon, in such, in regaird that usually, if not always, the
Lord premitteth some thing of this, as to some sensible measure, or other, unto
his more gracious workings; yet this Common Repentance has no proper interest
in justification, and cannot be called a Condition thereof, far less a Cause,
seeing in it self it has no certain connection with justification, and though it
be an antecedent in the justified, yet it may be, and often is, where no
justification follows, being in many nothing but the sorrow of the world,
that works death 2. Cor. 7: 10.

But 2. There is a Repentance, that is only peculiar unto such, as are already
Justified and Pardoned, following upon and flowing from the sense and
intimation of Pardon expressed by Self-abhoring, Self-lothing, Melting of
heart, and Tenderness and the like. so Ezekiel. 16: 63. That thou may remember
and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame,
when I am pacified toward thee etc. So Ezekiel. 36-25, 26, 27, 28. comp. with
verse. 31: See also Ier. 31: 19, 20. Neither can this be called, or accounted a
Condition of Justification, and Remission, because it manifestly follows not
only Justification, and Remission, itself, but also the sense and intimation
thereof; and therefore cannot go before it.

But. 3. The greatest difficulty is anent that work of Repentance, which is a
saving work of the Spirit going a longs with Faith, ariseing from the sense of
sin committed, and the apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ, causing
spiritual and kindly grief, sorrow and indignation at themselves and their
sinful ways; with an hatred of sin and a fixed purpose to forsake it, and to
turn to the Lord and this is frequently mentioned in the Scriptures. Now this
Repentance may be considered two ways, first as it is in these, in whom the
Lord is working a work of Conversion, and whom He is translating out of
dearkness in to the Kingdom of his dear Son, and Secondly as it is in such, as
are already brought in to a justified state, after new sins committed. As to
this last, we will have a fit occasion to enquire afterward, how or what way it
is required in reference to Remission and Pardon of after-sins. The first
falls now under consideration, because we are speaking of Justification,
which holds forth a change of state, as was formerly explained.

That we may therefore proceed the more distinctly in this Inquisition, we must
first take notice of the several senses of the word, or of the terms
equipollent in Scripture; and see what is properly denoted there. by. And

1. Sometime it denotes most grief, sorrow, or that which is called
contrition, or that part of Repentance, as Luke 10: 33. where it is explained
by sitting in sackcloth and ashes. Ier. 8: 6. - No man repented him of his
wickedness, saying what have I done. Thus it may also be taken 2. Cor. 11: 21.-
and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not Repented
of the uncleaness and fornication and lasciviousness, which they have
committed. Here, I say, it may be looked upon as mostly denoting this part of
Repentance; though not as excluding the other parts.

2. Some time it denotes mostly a change of former courses and ways; whether
of error, as 2. Tim. 2: 25. If God per adventure will give them Repentance to
the acknowledging of the truth; or of Conversation, called Repentance from dead
works Heb. 6: 1. So 2. Chron. 7: 14. it is called a turning from their evil
ways and from sins Ezekiel. 18: 21. It was said to Simon Magus Act. 8: 22. repent
of this thy wickedness. See Rev. 2: 21, 22.

3. Sometime it denotes the whole work of Conversion and turning unto God,
Act. 26: 20 - that they should Repent and turn to God, where the latter
expression is but exegetick of the former. So also Act. 3: 19. Repent ye
therefore and be converted: where both expressions denote one and the same
thing, the last being explicative of the former Ezekiel. 18: 30. Repent and turn
yourselves. And this is imported by many Synonimous expressions, in the Old
Testament, as Seeking the Lord Deuteronomy. 4: 29. Turning to the Lord verse. 30.
Returning to the Lord. Hos 5: 4. Seeking the face of God 2. Chron. 7: 14. and
the like. See also Revel. 3: 19.

4. It is sometimes expressly distinguished from Godly sorrow, and mentionned as
a Consequent, or fruit and effect of it 2. Cor. 7: 9 - ye sorrowed to
Repentance. 10. for Godly sorrow works Repentance.

5. Sometime it is express distinguished from Faith, as Act. 20; 21 -
Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 6: 1. not
laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith
toward God. So Ier. 31: 19. after I was turned (that is wrought up to faith) I
repented.

6. Sometime it signifies nothing else, upon the matter but a receiving of the
Gospel and a believing in Christ, not only Mark. 1: 15. repens ye and believe
the Gospel; where the later is explicative of the former, but also in many
other places, where John Bapist's ministry is spoken of, the sum whereof is
said to have been Repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand Mat. 3: 2. and
his baptism was called the Baptism of Repentance Mark. 1: 4 or unto
Repentance Mat. 3: 11. See also Luke 3: 3. Act. 13: 24. Now, that this
preaching of Repentance, and Baptism of or unto Repentance, which is said to
have been John's ministry, and work, was the preaching of Faith in the
Messiah, Paul tells us expreslie Act. 19 4. Then said Paul, John verily
baptized with the baptism of Repentance, saying unto the people, that they
should believe on him, which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.
So that, by this Commentary of Paul's, we understand both what was the scope of
his Baptism of Repentance, and also what was the meaning of his calling on his
hearers to Repent, to wit, to embrace Christ, who came after him, and to
believe in him. And by this Commentary, we may understand the purpart of
Christ's preaching Mat. 4: 17. from that time Jesus began to preach, and to
say, Repent; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And this is called Mark. 1:
14. the Gospel of the Kingdom of God. As also of the preaching of the Apostles
and Seventy disciples, when they were sent to say, the Kingdom of God was come,
or is nigh unto you Luke 10: 9. Mat. 10: 7. which is called the Gospel Luke 9:
6. and Repentance Mark. 6: 12. they went out and preached that men should
Repent. By this also we may understand the meaning of these and the like
passages Mat. 9: 13 - I am not come to call the Righteous, but sinners to
Repentance. So Mark. 2: 17. Luke 5: 32. as likewise of that passage Luke 15: 7,
10 - joy in heaven, over one person, that repents: for this is Christ's
saving of the man, that was lost Mat. 18: 11. Luke 15: 4. and 19. 10. See also
Mat. 11: 20. Act. 2: 38. and 11: 18. and 26: 18. and 20. compared together.

7. Sometime it denotes a recovery from some measure of defection, into which
persons are backsliden, as Revel. 2: 5. Remember therefore, from whence thou
art fallen, and Repent, and do shy first works. So Chapter 3: 3. Remember
therefore, how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and Repent.

8. Sometime it is distinguished from works of Obedience, that follow upon it
and flow from it; as Mat. 3: 8. bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, that is
fruits suiting or answerable unto a Christian state, or a state of believing in
Christ, which before we saw was denoted by John's Baptism. So Luke 3: 8. and
Act. 26: 10.

9. Sometime it includes all, that is required, in order to Salvation, upon
man's part, as 2 Pet. 3: 9 - not willing that any should pert^h, but that all
should come to Repentance. So that Repentance includes all, that is requisite
to escape perishing. So Luke 13: 3, 5 - except ye Repent ye shall all likewise
perish. So also Act. 5: 31. to give Repentance to Israel, and Remission of
sins; where, as Remission of sins may comprehend all the spiritual favors and
privileges, which Christ bestows, so Repentance may include all the gra^es
and blessings, which he bestows, in order to the actual participating of
these privileges. Thus we may understand it Act. 17: 30. but now commands all
men every where to Repent, that is, by the preached Gospel, wherever it comes,
commands all men to relinquish their courses of vanity and to embrace the
Gospel of Salvation, and to walk accordingly. So Luke 24: 47. And that
Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations: which is the short sum of the Apostles Commission, to wit, to exhort
to all Christian duties, imported by Repentance; and hold forth all Gospel
privileges, as an encouragment thereunto, included in Remission of sins.

Having premitted these things; in order to the clearing of the question, we
would know further.

1. That the Question is not, whether the doctrine of Papists about Repentance
in order to Justification, be to be owned, in whole, or in part? for none now
appears in the direct owning of their Assertions, who commonly are utterly
ignorant of true Justification, as different from Sanctification, as may
sufficiently appear by the very naming of their positions for (1) They look
upon Repentance as having force and efficacy to expel sin, as light has to
expel darkness, taking Remission to be a destroying of the very being of sin,
and expelling of Corruption by contrary gracious Qualities, and inherent
Holiness, of which they make Repentance a part. (2) They make Repentance
concur, as a material cause dssposing the soul for receiving a gracious
Quality, for the expelling of sin. (3) They make Repentance to obtain pardon by
way of merit, and (4) by way of Satisfaction. Not to mention (5) their
Sacrament of Penance. All which the Reader will find not only rejected; but
also shortly and solidly confused by worthy and judicious Mr. Durham in his
Comment, on the Revel. in that digression on Repentance. page 251.

2. Nor is the Question, whether the Lord call for Repentance as a duty, at the
hands of such as either are to be Justified, or are already Justified? for both
these we willingly grant, as being divine truths, richly confirmed in the
Scriptures, what ever Antinomians say to the contrary.

3. Nor is the Question, whether Repentance be a Condition of the Covenant, or
not? For if by a Condition of the Covenant, we understand every thing, that is
a duty, required of the Covenanters, it is readily granted, as was said, that
Repentance is a duty required of such as are really in Covenant with God; but
if by a Condition of the Covenant be meaned a duty required in order to the
closing of the Covenant, or entering into Covenant, upon the performing of
which the Covenant is immediately closed and entered into, this ^s denied; and
abundantly confuted by Mr. Durham, in the forecited Digression.

4. But the Question is, if Repentance has the same Place, Office, Use and
Consideration in Justification, that Faith has; so that it may be every way as
well, and as fully called the Coudition of Justification, as Faith is; and so
that it is called for in order to Justification, upon the same account, and
under the same formality, that Faith is called for. Socinians and Arminians (as
we heard above) join Repentance and Faith, in the same Order and Place, and
ascribe the same Office Use and Power unto both, in order to Justification. And
Mr. Baxter tells us Confess. page 37. n. 19. That Repentance is made by God, in
the Gospel, a proper Condition of our first general pardon of sin, as well as
Faith is. And he laith down a ground for this interest of Repentance (which, I
suppose, will reach to the including of other works also) in the foregoing n.
18. saying, a quatenus ad omne vale^ consequentia. If faiths formal interest in
pardon be, as it is the Condition of the act of pardon, then whatsoever is such
a Condition, must have the same Kind of formal interest, as faith. By the first
general purdon of sin here, he means Justification; for with him Remission of
sins and Justification is all one thing. And yet afterward page 96. Concl. 29.
he has words, which would seem to give some peculiar interest unto Faith; and
so contradict what is here said, for he says, If any say, that seeing faith
has a peculiar aptitude to this office, therefore it must have a peculiar
Interest. I answer, so it has. For I, it does alone, without (merits, or)
any positive Gospel works of obedience (as such at least) procure (as far as
belongs to its office) our first full Justification. 2. The love of Christ
received, Gratitude etc. are but as modification of Faith, which is called the
receiving itself. Though some of them be distinct physical acts, yet all the
rest, morally considered, are but as it were, the modification of faith: I mean
of that act, which is the acceptance of Christ, and life freely given etc. Now,
I suppose, he will grant (as he does above, as we may see) that Repentance has
not that peculiar aptitude, to this office, that Faith has; and consequently
cannot have that peculiar Interest, as he confesses: I suppose also, that he
will put Repentance, in the same rank with Gospel-Works of Obedience; and
consequently it must no more share of that special Interest, that belongs to
Faith, in this office, than they: I suppose likewise, that he will grant
Repentance to be but, a Modification of Faith, as well, as Love and Gratitude:
and then I would know, how Repentance can be said to be as proper a Condition
of Justification, as Faith is? Sure, if it be as proper, it must have as
peculiar an interest, for this peculiarity of Interest cannot respect its
aptitude merely, but its de^^gned and appointed state, in that office;
otherwise the objection, which he moved, and answered, should have this sense,
seeing Faith has a peculiar aptitude to this office; therefore it must have a
peculiar aptitude to this office, which were non sense.

Now that Repentance has not the same Interest in Justification, that Faith
has, we judge evident from these grounds.

1. The Scripture tells us, that we are justified by Faith, and that several
times, and not only says it, but proves it, as we saw above: But it no where
says, that we are justified by Repentance. And reason would require, that such
as say, that Repentance has the same Interest in Justification, that faith
has, should tell us, where it is said, we are justified by Repentance: for
when it is thus said of Faith, and no where thus said of Repentance: there must
be a vast difference, as to their interest in Justification; unless they can
give us some Scripture expressions concerning the Interest of Repentance,
aequivalent to this, we are justified by Repentance. If it be said. That this
is equipollent when it is said, Repent that your sins may be blotted out: and
Repentance and Remission of sins are joined together and the like. I answer,
Leaving the particular examination of these and the like passages alleged,
until afterward, I shall only say this at present. (1) That justification and
Remission of sins are not every way the same. Though Mr. Baxter has several
times said it; yet in his Catholic. Theolog. of God's Covenant etc. Sect.
XIII. n. 203. he says our first constitutive justification is in its own
Nature a Right to impunity (and this, as he often elsewhere tells us, is
Remission) and to life or glory. Now what is beside a Right to Impunity, also a
Right to life and glory, is more than Remission of sins: And therefore the
consequence from Remission to Justification cannot stand. (2) In like manner,
because it is said Luke 6: 37 - forgive and it shall be forgiven you, it may be
inferred, that for-giving of our Neighbor some fault, that he has done us, is
the Condition of our Constitutive Justification, and has as great an interest
in our Justification, as Faith it se^f, and by it we have as really Right to
impunity, and Right to life and glory, as by Faith. It is true, Mr. Allen will
not think this very absurd, who reasometh from this same passage, not far
otherwise. In his discourse of the two Covenants. page 52. Yet I suppose,
others will: and I doubt, if Mr. Baxter shall make this one and the same thing
with Faith, as he labors in his Catholic Theol. to make Faith and
Repentance one.

It will be said, when we are said to be Justified by Faith, it is all one, as
if we were said to be Justified by Repentance: for Mr. Baxter clears, Of
God's Govern. Sect. XII. how Faith and Repentance is all one thing. I Ans. (1)
if the Spirit of the Lord had but once said, in his word, that we were
justified by Repentance, we might then be allowed, to think of such
explications, as might make either both one thing, or show, how both has the
same interest in Justification: but when the Scripture never once says, that
we are justified by Repentance, for us to devise such explications, as to make
the Scripture speak what it never speaks, is not fair, nor is it to
edification, because it has no tendency to explain the matter, as expressed
in the Scriptures; and is so far from clearing up the truth, that it darkeneth
all; for hereby we are taught to understand faith, wherever we hear of
Repentance, and Repentance, where mention is made of Faith; so that we may
ascribe all to Repentance, that is spoken of Faith Heb. 11. and say, that
Repentance is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen etc. (2) Though it is true, the word Repentance (as we have seen) is
sometime taken so largely, as to include faith; yet that will not allow us, to
say, we are Justified by Repentance, as we are justified by Faith: It is best
for us to follow Scripture language: The Scripture expressly denies, that we
are justified by works; and yet Repentance is sometimes, taken in such a large
sense, as to include all acts of Obedience; This way then would allow us to
sav, we are justified by all works of obedience, (even as to constitutive
Justification) as we are by Faith: Yet Mr. Baxter in his Confess. p. 89, 90.
puts a difference betwixt Faith and Evangelick Obedience as to this
Constitutive Justification, making the one, like consent to marriage relation,
or taking one to be my Captain; and the other like conjugal fidelity and
obedience, or obeying the captain, and sighting under him, and tells us, that he
no more comprizeth all Obedience in Faith, than conjugal obedience in the
marriage consent. (3) That Repentance is not the same with Faith in the matter
of justification; (in reference to which, we now speak of both) will appear
from our following reasons: So that whatever pains be taken to make them one,
on other accounts, will be to no purpose, as to our present business.

2. If Repentance have the same interest in Justification, that Faith has,
then works shall have the same interest with Faith; but this is diametically
opposite to all the Apostles disput Romans 3. and 4. and Gal. 2. and 3. The
reason of the Consequence is, because Repentance includes works, and is a
special work and act of obedience itself Mr. Baxter tells Confess. p. 94. That
Paul's scope is both to take down Moses's Law (especially its necessity and
conceited sufficiency) and the Dignity of legal works (and consequently of any
works) and that therefore by works Paul means to exclude only merits, or
works, which are conceited Meritorious, or which for the worth of the dead
done, should procure Pardon and acceptance with God, without a Mediators blood;
and so Paul himself described the works, that he speaks against. Romans 4: 4.
That they are such as make the Reward to be not of Grace, but of debt. Ans.
This is but the same we heard before from John Godwine, and the same answer may
suffice. (1) If the scope of Paul had been only to take down Moses's Law; why
did he speak so much of the Gentiles, and show how they were all under sin, and
therefore must be justified by Faith, and not by the Law, or by works? This had
no manifest tendency to that scope. (2) Why brought he in the Instance of
Abraham, who was before the Law of Moses? Abraham's not being justified by
works, could not prove the insufficiency of Moses's Law thereunto: (3) To
think, that the Jews did conceit, that they would obtain Pardon and
Acceptance with God, only by their laborious performance of Ceremonies and
costly Sacrifices, excluding all Moral acts of obedience, is apparently
groundless; contrary to Romans 9: 30, 31, 32. and 10: 3, 4, 5. and would say,
that Paul took not a right medium to destroy that conceit, for his nearest and
surest course had been to have shown the nullity of that Law, now under the
Gospel; hereby all occasion of further debate being perfectly removed. (4) Paul
is so far Romans 4: 4. from describing the works, that he speaks of, to be such
only as make the reward of debt, that he proves that Justification cannot be
by works, by this medium, because then the reward should be reckoned, not of
grace, but of debt, and so tells us, that all work make the reward of debt:
This is a manifest perversion of the Apostles argument: for he says not, now
to him, that so works, as to conceit his works meritorious, the reward is
not reckoned of grace, but of debt; but now to him that works: far less can
this be the meaning or construction of the words, now to him, that makes the
reward to be not of grace, but of debt: for what sense is here? And further the
meaning of the following words must accordingly be this; but to him that so
works, as not to make the reward of debt but of grace, his working is counted
for Righteousness. While as the Apostle says a plain other thing. But to him,
that works not, but believes on him, that justifies the ungodly, his faith
is counted for righteousness. Sure, working without this conceit of merit, is
not believing on him, that justifies the ungodly, neither are these works
counted for Righteousness; for holy Abraham wrought without that conceit and
yet he was not justified by works, verse. 2, 3. Nor did David mean, that man's
blessedness did consist in the imputation of such works; nor did he describe
that blessedness, when he said, blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven
etc. Consider 1. Cor. 4: 4, Ephesians. 2: 9. Phil. 3: 9. Tit. 3: 5.

3. Repentance has no isntrumental acting on Christ and his Righteonsness, in
order to our being justified. But Faith has this, as was shown in the
foregoing Chapter. Therefore Repentance has not the same Interest in
Justification, that Faith has. It is requisite and necessary, in order to our
Justification, that we be clothed with a Righteousness, even the
Surety-Righteousness of Christ: and Faith only can lay hold on this and put it
on, and not Repentance. Repentance does not act so upon any thing without a
man, to bring it home that it may become the man's Righteousness, it has other
work, and acts upon another object, upon sin within the man. It is true Mr.
Baxter in his Catholic Theol. of God's Government Sect. XI. will have faith
rather to be called a receiving cause than an Instrumental, and a medium or
dispositive cause of the effect, justification as as received, but not as
given. And then Sect. XII. he calls Repentance a disposit to materiae
recipientis too, and a part of the condition of the Covonant. But we think it
needless here to distinguish, with him, betwixt, receiving Justification, and
being Justified, we do not call Faith an Instrument of God's act Justifying, as
was said above. If Faith and Repentance be dispositive causes of the effect and
causa dispositiva be part of the causa materialis, as he also says, I suppose,
they are not mere causae sine quibus non; as he said elsewhere. But to our
business, we have cleared before, how ^aith acts in the matter of
Justification, how it receives an imputed Righteousness and laith hold on this
Surety-Righteousness of Christ and applies it, to the end, the accused
impeached man may have wherewithal he may stand before the Tribunal of God,
and be accepted of as Righteous, in his Cautioner, and through his Cautioners
Righteousness imputed to him, and now received by Faith: and though Mr. Baxter
do account Faith's accepting of Christ, and life offered on that condition,
only its aptitude to the office, and that the formal reason of its office as to
our Justification, is its being the performed condition of the Covenant, as he
there speaks; yet that will not invalidat our argument: for (1) Faiths
aptitude (as he calls it) or rather its work and acting in Justification, is
not merely an accepting of Christ, and life offered on that condition; but it
is the accepting, laying hold on, leaning to, and applying the
Surety-Righteousness of Christ, presupposing the accepting of Christ himself.
(2) Though it may be said, that the nearest formal Reason of Faiths office, is
the Lord's appointment; yet this being too too Philosophical here contributeth
nothing to the clearing up of the matter, in order to practice, so neither was
Philosophical accuracy the ground whereupon they went, who said, that Faiths
interest in Justification, was as an Instrument, but rather their end was to
clear the matter in order to Practice; so as poor souls might not fall into
mistakes; and this I judge to be the best Theological acuracie, howbeit he
should account many such speeches nothing but unintelligible phrases, and such
doctrine to contain such senselesness and consequents, as the opening up of
would offend, as he there speaks. (3) It is certain, that Repentance does
not so act on Christ, and his Surety-Righteounsness, in order to Justification,
as Faith does, Repentance, as such is no acceptance of a free gift, far less of
a gift of Righteousness, and of an Atonement there-through; Repentance acts
not thus on Christ: Yea the reason he gives Confess. p. 39. why Repentance was
made a condition of pardon, does sufficiently show, that it cannot have that
interest, that Faith has. His reason is this. Because without it (Repentance)
God and the Redeemer cannot have their end in pardoning us; Nor can the
Redeemer do all his work, for which we do accept him: for his work is, upon the
pardoning of us, to bring us back in heart and life to God; from whom we were
fallen and strayed. This was Christ's work. Therefore the condition, which
Christ makes, are, as if he should say, If you will be saved by me, and are
willing that I shall bring you back to God, I will both bring you into his
favor by Pardon, and into a capacity of personal pleasing and enjoying of him.
Now, our Repentance is our consent to return to God, and the change of our
minds, by turning from former sin, that was our idol, and being willing by
Christ to be restored to obedience. By this, I say, it is clear, that
Repentance has a more direct aspect upon, and reference to the consequences of
Pardon and Justifiction itself; we grant its necessity unto all the ends
mentioned, and its necessary presence in such as are Justified; and that its
contrare, or positive impenitency, cannot consist with Faith, in such as are to
be Justified: Yet that will not give ground to infer, that it has the same
Interest, Influence and Consideration, in Justification, that Faith has.

Mr. Baxter In his Confess. p. 39, 40. seems to grant this whole Argument,
when he expresses himself thus. This I say, that man may see, I do not level
Faith with Repentance, much less (as they charge me) with actual external works
of obedience, which in this first remission and justification, I take not to be
so much, as existent. What he adds concerning the Ratio forma^ts, why faith
or Repentance have such an interest in our Pardon, to wit, because God has
made them the Conditions of the promise, cannot hinder our conclusion, until
first it be proved, that God has made Repentance such a Condition, we are
speaking here of the difference, that is betwixt the two, as to their Nature
and Aptitude, which he confesses to be very great, and also as to their place
and use because of the great difference, that is betwixt them, as to Nature and
Aptitude.

4. If the Interest of Faith be not, as it is a work, or inward grace. inherent
in the soul, but as such a going out of the soul from it self, and all its own
inherent good, and from all external privileges, or what may be called adherent
personal good, unto an offered Mediator, that it may embrace him, and lay hold
on, and lean to his fide jussorie-Righteousness; then Repentance cannot share
in this Interest with it. But the former is true. Therefore etc. The
Conncection may be cleared from what is already said: we are not speaking of
that here which Mr. Baxter will have to be the nearest formal reason, nor of
that only, which he will have to be its nature and aptitude: but of its Use and
proper Actings in this office, in reference to the end, Justification; which
are such, as cannot agree to Repentance, as is manifest. Himself tells us in his
Confess. p. 89, 90. That he takes Repentance to be to our faith in Christ, as
the breaking off from other Suitors and Lovers, and turning the mind to this
one, is to Marriage. Whereby we see, that though Repentance be necessarily
required, in one that is a believer, and that faith can not be without
Repentance; Yet Repentance has no place in the office of Justification, it
has no plain formal and immediate interest in the receiving of Justification;
as that turning to the mind from other Suitors to that one has no formal
interest or place, in closeing the Marriage Covenant, though it be a very
necessary prerequisite unto right closing and consenting the marriage Covenant.
This gives ground for another Argument.

5. As upon the account that a woman has changed her mind from other Suitors,
to one, it cannot be said or inferred, that therefore the Marriage Relation is
made up with that one Suitor; which is done only by a formal full and explicit
Consent: so upon the account that one is a penitent, it cannot be formally
inferred, that that persons is in Covenant with Christ, and is Justified.
Because as Mr. Baxter has told us, Repentance is unto Faith, but as the woman's
changing her mind from other Suitors to one, is to the consenting unto the
Marriage proposal. And if upon a Persons being a Penitent it cannot be formally
inferred, that he is in Covenant with God and a Justified person, then
Repentance has not that interest in Justification, that Faith has, for upon a
man's believing, it can formally and immediately be inferred, that he is in
Covenant, and is Justified. I say formally; because consequentially it will
also follow, that a Penitent man (meaning one that is truly penitent) is
justified, upon this account, that where ever there is true Repentance, there
is also true Faith: But as the change of the woman's mind is not formally the
making up of a marriage Covenant; So neither is Repentance that, which formally
constitutes a man a Covenanter with Christ, and a Justified person, only Faith
does this; as the woman's consent makes up the marriage-Relation.

6. I^ Repentance has the same interest in Justification with Faith; then as
our Adversaries say, that Faith is imputed to us, as our Gospel Righteousness;
so must they say, that our Repentance is imputed to us for Righteousness. But,
beside the reasons, whereby we proved above, that Faith was not imputed to us,
as our Gospel Righteousness, which will also serve here, mutatis mutandis, we
may add this, that there is nothing in Scripture giving the least countenance
hereunto, even as to words or expressions.

7. If Repentance have such an interest in Justification, as Faith has, then
this must either be true of Repentance as begun, or as perfected (I mean as to
p^rts) But of neither it can be true; not of begun Repentance, for questionless
there are some beginnings of Repentance before Faith; (taking Repentance
largly, as it is here taken,) as the woman's change of her mind from other
Suitors, is before her closeing a Marriage Covenant with this man and then it
would follow, that a man were Justified before Faith; which I suppose will not
be said. Not of compleeted Repentance, for that follows faith; for thus it
follows godly sorrow, 2. Cor. 7: 10. and is expressed by that Carefulness,
Clearing of ourselves, Indignation, Fear, Vehement desire, Zeal, and Revenge,
mentioned 2. Cor. 7: 11. all which must follow Faith; And repenting Ephraim
Ier. 31: 19. said, after I was turned, I repented; and after I was instructed,
I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded etc. This being
instructed, and being turned includes Faith; and the rest, that followed upon
it, are expressions of Repentance: and hence it would follow, if only
compleeted Repentance be that Repentance, that has the Interest in
justification that Faith has, a man cannot be said to be justified upon his
believing, no not until Repentance be brought to this Perfection; And then
Faith cannot be the consenting act, whereupon the bargane is closed.

8. Repentance can bring nothing in, that can stay, or prove a support unto an
awakened soul, pursued with the sense of wrath for the breach of the Law; nor
can it present any thing unto God, as a ground, whereupon to be delivered from
guilt and wrath, as Faith can do and does, by laying hold on Christ and his
Righteousness, an only sufficient ground, whereupon the poor soul can have
hope, and with confidence can expect Absolution: Therefore it cannot have the
same interest, in justification. The antecedent is clear, and undeniable, and
the Consequence is also manifest; because this interest in the matter of
justification must be estimate according to the ground of Hope, that is yielded
thereby unto the poor vexed and tossed soul, and the ground of Confidence that
is had thereby of Acceptance of God.

9. To say, that Repentance has the same interest in justification, that Faith
has, will prove, I judge, dangerous doctrine to many poor wakened sinners; and
prove a mean to keep them off the Rock of ages, and at least, a mean to
hinder or retard their motion Christ-ward, in order to Peace and Reconciliation
with God: for experience teaches such, as deal with wakened Consciences, that
the most of their work often times is to keep them from resting on someting
within themselves, in order to Peace, and particularly from relying and resting
upon some sort of Grief, Sorrow, or Repentance, which they conceive to be in
themselves and to b^ing them unto a cleanly resting upon Christ and his
Righteousness, forsaking all other things: And when now they hear, that
Repentance has the same interest in justification that Faith has, how will
they be fortified in their Resolutions, so that all the labor and pains of
Ministers, or other Christians may prove much fruitless, unless the Lord come
in a wonderful manner, and many others may perish in their presumptuous
thoughts, founded on their inward Sorrow and Repentance, as they supposed,
because they would never go out of themselves to lean to Christ and his
Righteousness. It is true, These of the contrary mind, press not Repentance
alone, but Faith and Repentance together. Yet by their way, I find not the
right Gospel-exercise of Faith-pressed, that is, faith bringing in an imputed
Righteousness, or laying hold on Christ for Righteousness, and refuging the
Soul in Him, and resting upon that, as the only and absolutely surest ground of
Confident appearing before God, and of expecting Pardon and Peace; but only
such or such an act of faith pressed, as being now under the New Covenant in
the same place, that Perfect Obedience had in the Old, whereby, as the Old
Covenant is but renewed, so the wakened or alarmed sinner is but taught to look
after and lean to something within himself, as his immediate Righteousness, upon
which he must be justified.

10. If the Surety-Righteousness of Christ imputed by God, and received by
Faith, be only that Righteousness, upon the account of which, the poor sinner
is to be accepted of God as Righteous, and to be absolved from the Curse of the
Law; As we have above proved it to be; then Repentance cannot have the same
interest in justification, that Faith has; because it neither does, nor can so
lay hold upon this Cautionary-Righteousness, as Faith does. Or we might frame
the argument thus. If Repentance have the same interest in justification, that
Faith has, Christ's Cautionary-Righteousness shall not be the only
Righteousness, with which, the soul that is to be justified, must be clothed;
because Repentance cannot put on Christ and his Righteousness, as faith does.
But this last cannot be said, for reasons given already.

11. If Repentance has the same interest in justification, that faith has,
then even by Gospel justification, there should be ground left to man, to
boast, and to glory before men; and the reward should not be of grace, but of
debt; contrary to Romans 3. and. 4. The Consequence is clear, because Repentance
acts not on a Righteousness without us; and can be considered no other way,
then as an act of Obedience in man, and so as a work: and Faith by this way
goes under the same Consideration; and is not considered, as bringing-in the
Surety-Righteousness of Christ, and laying hold on it alone; (as it is by our
way) for both are looked upon as dispositive causes, and as parts therefore of
the material cause, and as proper potestative conditions, just as perfect
obedience was under the Old Covenant. And whatever difference be acknowledged
to be betwixt them, as to their Essence and Aptitude, whereby Faith is said to
be an acceptance of the gift formally, Repentance not so, in its averting act
(as Mr. Baxter is speaking Cath. Theol. ubi supra Sect. XII. n. 201.) whatever
it may be as to other acts: yet they are both made formal Potestative
conditions, as is said, and so solely considered, as works done by us: and all
such, as was evidenced above, make the reward of debt, and give ground of
boasting; because, being our formal works, they are made the immediate and
formal, legal ground of our Justification, being made our immediate, formal and
perfect Gospel-Righteousness; as was seen above.

12. Add to these. That if Repentance have the same Interest in Justification,
that Faith has, God cannot be believed on, as the justifier of the ungodly,
contrare to Romans 4: 5. for Faith and Repentance are hereby made the man's
personal Righteousness, and Mr. Baxter tells us Confess. p. 46. n. 38. that
there is no such thing in rerum natura, as a true Righteousness, which does not
formaliter make the person so far Righteous. Now a Righteous man can not be an
ungodly man; that were a contradiction. It is not here enough to say, that the
man is ungodly before he be Justified; for in the act of justifying, or while
he is a justifying, he is considered, not as ungodly, but as Righteous, yea
antecedenter to his being Justified, he is considered as a Righteous man, and
is therefore justified because Righteous in himself, having performed the
conditions, whereby he becomes personally Righteous. And therefore while he is
justified, God does not justify an ungodly man. But it will be said, that this
will as well follow upon our way. I Ans. Not at all, because though we place
Faith in priority of Nature, before Justification, yet we make not faith a
personal Righteousness; so that while the believer is justified, a man guilty
in himself and void of all Righteousness in himself, is justified; so that God
justifies an ungodly man. But it will be said. By our way, the believer is
considered as clothed with Christ's Righteousness; and upon that account,
cannot be called nor accounted an ungodly man. I Ans. He is still,
notwitstanding an ungodly man in himself, having nothing, wherewith to satisfy
justice, or to procure Peace to himself; but what he has imputed to him, from
a Cautioner: And thus God is justifier of the ungodly, in himself; that by his
faith proclaims himself such and one that is not in case to pay one farthing
of his own debt.

Other Arguments may be brought from our foregoing debate against the
Imputation of Faith, in a proper sense, and Faiths justifying as a work, I
shall now proceed to examine what is alleged for the Interest of Repentance.

Obj. 1. Mr. Baxter. In his Confession page 37. n. 19. cites some passages of
Scripture, whereby he thinks to prove, that Repentance is made by God, in the
Gospel, a proper Condition of our first general Pardon of sin, as well as Faith
is. The first whereof is Luk 13: 35. But this I judge is miscited, there being
nothing there, that looks here away possibly it should be Luke 13. v. 3, 5.
and of this place, we will have occasion to speak afterward. The next he cites
is Act. 3: 19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord. Ans. But (1) Repent here can not be meaned of the acting of that
Repentance, whereof we are here speaking, to wit, of that particular and
special grace, which is distinct from Faith, and that because of the exegetical
term added, and be converted. So that Repent here can denote nothing else, but
a turning from all their sinful opinions and ways, and an embraceing the
Gospel way of Salvation, that thereby they may be saved for ever. And (2)
Neither is the Apostle speaking here of constitutive justification, or of our
first general Pardon; but of a blotting out of sins a long time hereafter, to
wit, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, at
his second coming, as the following verses show. So that (3) As by this
blotting out of sins, all the favors and great rewards of free grace, which
the Righteous judge will give in that day, are signified, or comprehended under
it, which he mentioned especially, that it might suite the charge of the
grievous guilt of killing the Prince of life, which he was laying home upon
them; so under the other two terms, of Repenting and being Converted the whole
of the duties, required in the Gospel, are to be understood. If it be said.
That Repent and be Converted is as much as Repent and believe, and so the
Particular grace of Repentance is here understood. I Ans. (1) Then it will
follow, that neither are conditions of Pardon here: but both are requi^ed in
order to Pardon, at the great day, when Christ shall come agai^e; for the
blotting out of sins, here mentioned, is said to be at that time, as the
following words clear. (2) This will say only (though it were the true meaning
thereof, as it is not) that Repentance is required of those, that would expect
of Christ Pardon at his second coming, as well as faith; which we deny not. (3)
This Repentance should not be compleet Gospel Repentance, because it is
anteriour to Conversion, or to Faith, while as the best part of true Repentance
follows, as we cleared above.

Obj. 2. He cites next Act. 2: 38- Repent and be baptized every one of you,
for the remission of sins. Ans. (1) This would plead for Repentance alone,
without Faith. (2) It would plead for as great an interest for Baptism, as for
Repentance: Neither of which can be owned, as true. Therefore the true meaning
of the place is, Turn from your former way of seeking slavation, by your own
corrupt Imaginations and Superstitions, which led you, out of blind zeal, to
crucify the Lord Christ; and embrace the Gospel of Salvation, now preached to
you through that Lord, whom ye crucified, that ye may receive Remission of
sins, through Faith in him; and be baptized, that you may have the outward
sign of your professing of having Remission of sins through him, and a seal of
Remission, granted to you, through him. And this may be cleared from the
promise subjoined, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, which is no
where promised unto Repentance; but unto the faith of the Gospel, and the
receiving of Christ therein, and was accordingl^ bestowed Act. 8: 12. with 15,
17. and 9: 17. and 13: 52. and 15: 7, 8. and 19, 1: 2, 6. And what Peter
exhorted then unto, they did verse. 41. And what was it, that they did? They
gladly received his word, that is; willingly and cheerfully they embraced the
Gospel, and so were added to the Church.

Obj. 3. He cites Act. 26: 20. that they should repent and return to God, and
do works, meet for repentance. Ans. But here is no mention made of
Justification, or of Remission of sins; And who denies, but people are to
Repent, and return to God, and do works meet for Repentance? This is not the
thing, that is here in question. If he mean verse. 18. where it is said. To open
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among
them, that are sanctified by Faith, that is in me. I Ans. There is no word of
Repentance here, but express mention made of Faith. It is true, turning from
darkness to light ande. will include Repentance: Yet it is by Faith, that both
Forgiveness of sins, and the Inheritance, and Sanctification is had; for by
Faith that is in me, may refer to all these three: And though this should be
denied; Yet all that could be hence inferred, would amount but to this, That
Repentance is necessarily called for in these, who receive forgiveness, and the
Inheritance, or would receive them. But all this is nothing to our present
question.

Obj. 4. He cites in the Margin Luke 24: 47. And that Repentance and
Remission of sins should be preached in his name. And Luke 15: 7. I say unto
you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner, that repents. Ans.
This last place makes no mention of Pardon, or of Justification, and only
says, that Repentance will Include Faith, and does import the whole Conversion
of a sinner unto God, whereof Faith in Christ is the first and chief step. As
to the other place, we told before, that by Repentance here is understood all
that duty, which is called for in the Gospel, this being a short sum of the
whole preaching of the Gospel, and that therefore by Remission of sins all the
blessings and favors, that sinners need and are promised in the Gosspel, must
be understood. So that this makes nothing against us: Yea if these two
expressions were strickly to be taken, it would give ground to infer, that
Repentance alone were the Condition of Remission. But what says all this to
the purpose now in hand? do any of these expressions give the least color to
infer, that Repentance strickly taken has the same use and Interest in
Justification, that Faith has?

Obj. 5. Others possibly may urge Act. 8: 22. Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven
thee. Ans. (1) If this place prove any thing that way, it will say as much for
the Interest of Prayer in Justification, equal to the Interest of Faith; as for
the Interest of Repentance. (2) Yea and plead for these only with exclusion of
Faith, or at least for the Sufficiency of Repentance and prayer without Faith,
which is not here expressly mentioned. (3) But Repent here is taken in a
comprehensive sense, as including Faith, its ground and Cause, and whereof it
is the expressive evidence, and sensible effect; So that the presence of
Repentance in such, as would be Pardoned, may hence be well inferred: which is
granted necessary, upon several accounts, but the present question is, whether
it has the same Place, Office and Influence in Justification and Pardon, that
Faith has?

Obj. 6. It may be, some will f^rther object Luke 13: 3, 5- except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish: And this likely was the passage, which Mr. Baxter
cited in the first place, the printer putting verse. 35. for 3. 5. through a
mistake. But I Ans. This place only proves, what is not denied, to wit. That
Repentance is necessarily required of such, as would be saved: And if hence it
be inferred, that therefore not only its presence, but its interest is the same
with Faiths, in Justification; the Interest of good works and of all commanded
duties, may be hence inferred to be the same with Faiths, in justification,
because these are as necessary, in order to Salvation, as is Repentance.

Obj. 7. Prove. 28: 13. He that covers his sin, shall not prosper; but who so
confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy. Ans. (1) If forsaking of sin
be here taken strickly for Repentance, and if this place be urged pertinently
to the point now in hand, Confession of sin will be made to have the same
influence, and will be made more necessary, than Faith it self, which is not
here expressly named. (2) Finding mercy is not strickly to be understood of
Justification, or of mere Pardon, but is to be taken more largly for Felicity
here and hereafter, as being opposed to a not prospering: And so hence can only
be inferred the necessity of the presence of confessing and forsaking of sin,
in such as would find grace and mercy in the eyes of the Lord, and would
prosper in all their ways.

Obj. 8. Christ is sent, to preach good tidings to the meek, the broken
hearted, the mourners, and to such as are under the Spirit of heaviness Esai.
61: 1, 2, 3. Ans. This place indeed proves, that Christ was anointed to
preach good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, to comfort
all that mourn, to appoint and give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; but
here, as the Repentance imported is something more than ordinary, as the
expressions intimate, so the good, that Christ is here said to be sent to do
unto them, is something more than ordinary, to wit, Comfort and Joy in an high
measure, which is more than mere Pardon, or Justification; some pardoned and
justified may stand in need hereof, being indeed mourners in ashes, and under a
spirit of heaviness, notwithstanding of their being in a justified state. So
that this place comes not home to the point now in question.

Obj. 9. Is not this to favor the Antinomians, who say, that Repentance is
needless, and is a mere legal duty, neither to be urged, nor practiced under
the Gospel. Ans. Though we say, that Repentance has not the same Place, Office
and Interest in and about Justification and Remission of sins, that Faith has;
Yet we give no countenance unto the Antinomian error, because we affirm
Repentance to be necessary, in all such as are Justified, and the real
beginnings of Gospel Repentance to be also necessary, unto such as are to be
justified, I say the beginnings, because I conceive, the principal parts or
workings of saving and Gospel-Repentance follow faith, and upon Faith in Christ
is the union betwixt Christ and the Believer made, and the man brought into a
justified state. Seeing then we press and urge the exercise of Repentance as a
constant duty, and require it in all such, as would enjoy Peace and Comfort
here, and be saved here after, we yield nothing unto the Antinomians. And
against them we urge the same Scriptures, that have now been alleged, and
others also, as irrefragable proofs of the necessity of this grace, though to
other ends, than to be justified thereby, in such manner, as we are said to be
Justified by Faith.

Obj. 10. Do not our Divines ordinarily say and prove, that Faith and
Repentance are Conditions of the Covenant of Grace. I Ans. True, but their
meaning is not, that Repentance is the same way a Condition of Justification,
that faith is; but that term, Conditions of the Covenant they take largely, to
wit, to signify and import the duties required of such, as are within the
Covenant of Grace; and not strickly, for Conditions of entering into Covenant;
These two are carefully to be distinguished: many things may be called the
Conditions of marriage, that is, duties of married persons to other, that can
not be called Conditions of making up the marriage Relation, as is manifest;
and so is it here. Many duties are required of Believers, that neither are, nor
can be called Conditions of Justification, or of entering into Covenant with
God.

Obj. 11. But do not many both in sermons and in writtings, even when speaking
of Pardon and of justification, join Repentance with faith? Ans. It may be so;
but their meaning is not, I conceive, to give an equal share of Interest, Power
and Office in and about justification, unto Repentance, with that, which they
acknowledge Faith to have, but either their purpose is, hereby to show the
inseparable connection, that is betwixt faith and Repentance, or to show, that
they speak of that faith, which is attended with this necessary Grace of
Repentance, and does effectually work the same; or both rather: So that their
true meaning is, to give the due privilege and interest unto that says, which
can prove it self to be real and true justifying faith, by effectuating
Repentance, never to be repented of; and thus they withal satisfy an
Objection, or question, that might be made, if they had mentioned faith alone;
for it might be enquired, How shall we know, whether our faith be of the right
kind, or not? Now their joining of Repentance with faith, does shortly answer
this question; Repentance being a concomitant, and a fruit of true faith, and
more sensibly felt, and obvious to their perception, might be to them a vive
and perceptible expression of true and justifying faith.

Obj. 12. But seeing faith by some is called, that which does morally qualify
the subject to be a fit patient so be justified: why may not Repentance have an
equal share in this moral Qualification, with Faith? I Ans. If we should make
faith to have no other Interest in justification, than Repentance has, or may
be yielded to have, we may easily grant, that Repentance has the same and
equal Interest with faith: but it is denied, that faith has no other
Interest, but as that, which does morally qualify etc. drieness in wood may
qualify it for the fire, and yet the wood may be long so, before it become the
subject of fire; and so may it be with moral qualifications: many a man may be
morally qualified to be a fit match for such a woman; or a woman for such a
man; and yet the marriage Relation never be made up betwixt them: But this
cannot be said of faith, whereby the marriage is made, and the person is
actually justified, and not a bare fit patient to be justified.

CHAP. XXX
Whether Love, purpose of Obedience, or perseverance be Conditions of
Justification.
BY what is said, in our foregoing discourse, we may know, what is to be
answered unto these Questions, so that we need not insist long, in the
discussing of them. Some of late lay down for a ground (and hereby give
occasion to discuss these and such like questions) that whatever is or may be
called a^ the Covenant of Grace, is, upon that account, and may be called, the
Condition of Justification; thus confounding the whole order of the Gospel, and
making all duties, required of such, as are in Covenant, and ordained of God
for other ends and uses, to be required as Conditions of entering in Covenant,
and to have the same use and end in and unto justification, which faith has;
contrary to express Scripture, saying, that we are justified by faith, and not
by works of Righteousness, which we do, and contrary to the whole method of
the Gospel, and grounds laid down therein, for an acceptable performance of
obedience.

As to Love, Papisit's make it the form (as they speak) of faith, not in it
self simply considered, but in order to Justification and Salvation thereby,
saying that faith without Love is dead: And it is true, that true and saving
faith works by Love: and that faith cannot be called Saving or Justifying,
which does not excite unto acts of Love, and many may deceive themselves with a
faith, that will not be found, when tried, to be of the right stamp: as the
Apostles James teaches. But yet they put no specific difference, commonly,
betwixt this dead faith and faith informed; for both (as to what is essential
and intrinsik to faith, which they hold to be an assent unto all things,
revealed by the Lord unto men, upon the account of the Veracity and Authority
of the Revealer) are one and the same; so as one and the same faith may be
sometime dead, when to wit, not working by Love, and sometime lively, when
formed with Love. But of these things we need not here speak: only we see, that
with them, Love is in a manner more necessary unto Justification, than faith;
and must be looked on, as a necessary condition thereunto, even as that,
without which faith can do nothing. And to confute this here is but vain.
seeing it shall serve nothing to our purpose; because with them justification is
the very same, we call Sanctification.

But others, who have more sound and distinct apprehensions of justification,
tell us, That love is the condition of justification, because a condition of
the Covenant of Grace; as if all the duties of such, as are in Marriage
Relations, were conditions of making up the marriage Relation, Others, who
distinguish betwixt Faith and Evangelick Obedience, as betwixt consent to a
man's Soveraignity, and obeying him, as Sovereign, as does Mr. Baxter Confess.
p. 89, 90. Yet say, that Love is comprised in Faith, and is some degree of
Justifying Faith and not properly a fruit of it; because the wills
apprehension of a thing good, or earnest willing and accepting it, is the fame
with Love; so is the wills Consenting, Electing and accepting; and all this
being in Faith, Love must be comprehended in it; Yea they say, that as Love and
Faith are propounded in the Gospel, as of the same necessity, so they are
necessary in Justification, and concurrent in apprehending Christ. So spoke Mr.
Baxter in his Aphorisms. And in his Confess. p. 34, 35. he says. Though
Charity, as it respects other objects, is no part of faith, yet as it
respects an offered Savior, it is as much essential to faith, to receive
Christ with Love, as it is essential to a Savior (the object of faith) to be
good for us; for good as good is received by love. Nor was it ever the Intent
of the Holy Ghost, to take faith in Christ, in so narrow a sense, as includes
not Love to him, when it is saving Faith, that is spoken of.

In reference to all which, we need say but those few following things.

1. The Scriptures do plainly enough distinguish betwixt Faith and Love, They
are reckoned as distinct fruits of the Spirit Gal. 5: 22. Love, joy-faith yea
Faith is said to work by love Gal. 5: 6. we hear of the work of faith, and
labor of love 1. These. 1: 3. we hear of Charity out of a pure heart, and of
faith unfaigned. 1. Tim. 1: 5. And the grace of our Lord (says Paul 1. Tim. 1:
14) was exceeding abundant, with Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. We
hear of the brestplate of Faith and Love. 1. These. 5: 8.

2. The Scriptures do plainly tell us, that we are Justified by Faith, as we
heard, but never says, that we are justified by love: And sure, as it is best
for us, to regulate our expressions, according to the Lord's Revelation of this
mystery; so it cannot but be offensive to use such expressions, as not only
are not scriptural, but also seem inconsistent with Scriptural expressions:
when the Scripture says expressly and frequently, that we are Justified by
faith, and that in opposition to works, and not only says it, but proves it,
it cannot be justifiable in us to say, that we are Justified by Love; seeing
that would at least seem to cross the Apostle's assertion, the force whereof
is (as ours abundantly evince against the Papists) that we are Justified only
by Faith, and consequently by no other grace: neither by Love, nor by Hope, nor
by Patience, etc.

3. By the Scriptures telling us, that we are Justified by Faith, and never
saying, that we are Justified by any other grace, as by Love etc. we are given
to understand, that Faith has other Operations, Uses and Ends, in the office
of justification, than Love, or any other grace has: And therefore to
insinuate, that love has the same Interest and Office in and about
justification, that Faith has, is to deny, or overturn the proper and
specific actings of Faith, in order to justification: And, how small a matter
soever this may appear to be at first; yet, when it is further prosecuted, or
the ground of this searched into, or its design and tendency considered
impartially, it will befound of a deeper consequence, and to tend to the
alteration of the whole specific nature of the Covenant of Grace, as it is
distinct from the Covenant of Works: for though both Faith and Love may and
must be looked upon, as acting upon the same object Christ; yet when Faith is
conceived as acting no other way, than Love, and both, as potestative
Conditions, or as parts of one Potestative Condition, and no other way; it is
plain enough, how the special actings of faith, in compliance with the design
of God's Wisdom, Grace, and Love in the Gospel contrivance, and thereupon in
receiving and resting upon Christ, as the alone propitiating Sacrifice, and on
his Surety-Righteousness, as that alone, by virtue of which they are to expect
Justification and Acceptance with God, and to receive the Atonement, are laid
aside: And the believing soul is supposed not to act on Christ, nor apply Him
and his Righteousness in order to the being Acquit from the sentence of the
Law, and from the Curse, due for the breach of the same, in that particular
manner, that both its case and condition requires, and the Gospel points
forth, and the experience of soul, attaining hereby to Peace, does confirm.

4. It is true, there is Love to Christ, in the soul, that believes, and it
must be so; and it is true also, that this Love is called for in the Gospel;
but hence it will not follow, that Love is the Condition of Justification, or
that every thing, that is present with, or accompanies faith in justification,
has the same Life, Ends, and Interest in Justification, or the same Influence
thereupon, that faith has; far less will it follow, that that which follows
faith, and whereby faith works through all the after-carriage of a Believer,
has the same Place, Power and Interest in and about justification, that faith
has, as we showed above of Repentance.

5. If by this Love nothing else were meaned, but that Love of desire, that
necessarily accompanies the souls accepting, and closeing with what is good,
or offered as good; sure, it would have given no ground of offense to have
called it so, and would have been more acceptable, than to have called it
otherwise, even though speaking strickly, the Love of desire may be called
Love, and is a Love, in its own kind: and therefore, I judge, that
denomination might have been rather chosen, which would have given no offense,
than the other, which to avoid suspicion and offense, calls for so much
waste of words, to render the expression less, noxious, especially, seeing for
all that is said, in clearing of the same, all ground of suspicion is not
removed, but that some other thing was intended, than that mere Love of desire,
that is inseparable from the will's earnest pursuit after, or embraceing any
good thing offered; especiasly when it is said, That Ioh. 16: 27. and 14: 21.
make Love the antecedent Condition of God's Love and Christ's Love to the
person. And that that goes with Remission and is a Love of Reconciliation; and
Reconciliation comprehends Remission: At least you will never show out of
Scripture, that the procureing God's Love, and the Procuring Remission and
Reconciliation have not the same conditions: for hereby it is manifest, that
Love, even as distinct from faith (as it is Ioh. 16: 26 -because ye have loved
me and have believed that I am come out from God) is made as formal and full a
Condition of Reconciliation and Pardon, and consequently of justification, as
faith his; Yea and that both faith and Love are made Conditions procuring God's
Pardon and Reconciliation. Thus speaks Mr. Baxter against Mr. Cartwright page
202. But lest any should think, that either of these places cited should prove,
what Mr. Baxter alleges them for, it would be considered. (1) That Ioh. 14:
21. He is speaking of such, as are already believers and justified, when he is
speaking of such as have already Christ's commandemants, and keep them. (2) He
speaks of the Fathers and of his own Love of such, in the future time, which
cannot be meaned in reference to his Disciples, unless we think, they were not
yet justified, contrary to the very forgoeing verse, and many other passages in
that discourse, particularly Chap. 14: 1, and 15: 3, 4, 5, 9. (3) This is
meaned of a Love of Manifestation; as Christ's own words added exegetically
declare. And I will Love him and will manifest my self to him. (4) This same
sort of expression of Love is also to be understood Ioh. 16. as the whole scope
clears, this being spoken to persuade them, that they should receive the
return of their prayers and should not ask the Father in vain; for such a
Love carries he toward you (as if he had said) that, in a manner, I need not
intercede for you. (5) And so the Love of the disciples here mentioned, is that
Love of complacencie, which they had in Christ, in abiding still in his
Company, and delighting in him, whom they had followed as their Master, all
alongs; and the cause from whence this flowed, is added, and have believed,
that I came out from God.

As to the second particular, to wit. Purpose of obedience. M. Baxter in his
Aphorisms told us, that as the accepting of Christ for Lord (which is the
hearts (Subjection) is as essential a part of justifying faith, as the
accepting him for Savior: So consequently, sincere obedience (which is the
effect of the former) has as much to do in justifying us before God, as (some)
Affiance, which is the fruit of the latter. Hereby he would seem to give the
same Interest unto actual Obedience, in Justification, that he gives unto
Affiance, which cannot be wanting unto Justifying Faith, yea himself confesses
to be an essential act of Faith, in the margin of these words, Printed with
Mr. Cartwrights observations and his Reply page 204. But in his Confess. (as we
heard above) p. 89, 90. he puts as great a difference betwixt faith, and
Evangelick Obedience, as betwixt the Consent to Marriage Relation, and the
conjugal Fidelity and Obedience of a wife to her husband: So that hereby it is
manifest, that with him, all Obedience cannot comprised in faith, and so cannot
be a Condition with Faith of Justification: and this he says page 90.
expressly. So that I do no more (as I am accused) comprize all Obedience in
Faith, because I comprize a Love to the Redeemer, and a Consent to be governed
by him, then I comprize all Coujugal Obedience and Fidelity of a woman to her
husband, in the Marriage ^^venant or Consent, because I comprize in it Love to
the Man and a Covenant of fidelity and obedience to the future. His meaning is
not then, that actual Obedience is either a part of faith, or has the same
interest of a Condition in Justification, that faith has. Therefore he tells us
more plainly and positively his meaning, as to this, Confess. page 38: 39. n.
22. This Covenant (says he, meaning the Covenant, that a Believer enters
with Christ, as a Savior, and in him, with the offended majesty ( contains
an engagement to future obedience: So that though our first faith be not the
same thing with Obedience to Christ - yet in taking Christ for King, it
essentially contains a Resolution and Covenant to obey him. Hereby we see,
that a Resolution, Promise, or Covenant to obey Christ, for the future, is
essentially included in faith, as justifying, and consequently that this must
be as kindly a part of the Condition of Justification, as any thing in Faith.
And next, that the ground of this is, because justifying faith, as justifying,
does as kindly and really take Christ for a King, as for a Priest. This is
further explained by what he says immediately before n. 21. The very nature of
this saving Faith, is to be a Heart-Covenanting of a Sinner with Christ, as a
Savior - Even as is a Covenant of a woman to her husband, a Soldier to his
Commander; a Subject to his Prince, a Scholar to his Master; it is our
becoming his Disciples.

By which we see these things laid down, as truths to be received.

1. That the souls Covenanting with Christ, or accepting of him, as offered in
the Gospel, is like the Covenanting of a woman with her Husband, of a Soldier
with his Commander* a Subject to his Prince etc.

2. That as the Woman, Soldier or Subject, Resolve, Covenant and Promise to
perform obedience unto the Husband, Commander, or King, so the Sinner, in
Covenanting with Christ, does Resolve, Covenant and Promise to perform
Obedience unto Him.

3. That therefore, this Resolution, Covenanting and Promising to perform
obedience, being essential to Justifying Faith, is a formal Condition of
Justification, and the meaning of faiths being the Condition of Justification
must be this, the Man's Resolution, Covenanting and Promising to perform
Obedience, is the Condition of Justification; or at least this part of faith,
as well as others, is the Condition.

4. And the ground of this is, because Justifying faith, even as Justifying, or
in order to Justification, acts as directly and expressly on Christ as a King,
as on Christ, as a Priest.

In Answer to which, I shall but briefly say these things.

1. The similitudes adduced halt in one thing, and that one thing, is all, as
to our present business. A woman Covenanting with her husband, and thereby
promising obedience, or a Soldier with his Commander, or a Subject with his
Prince, presuppose and acknowledge, Power and Strength in themselves to
perform the obedience promised, and upon the Supposition and Conviction of
this power and ability in themselves to perform what shall be commanded, they
willingly and of their own accord, promise to put forth that Power, Strength
and Ability of theirs, unto the performance of obedience, that shall be
required. But it is not so, in our case, The Sinner, who is now supposed to be
about Covenanting with Christ, through the Spirit of Conviction, and
Humiliation, is put far from all his natural Pelagian conceits and
apprehensions of himself, and of his own abilities; He is now made to see, that
as he has nothing at present, wherewith to Satisfy God, for the sins that are
charged upon him; nor to allure Christ, to do for him; unless it be
wretchedness and misery, that may move Christ to compassionate his case; so he
can do nothing for the future, that can be accepted of God, till he be renewed;
He is made to see, that there is a Natural Impotency (I mean not a physical
impotency, as if he wanted a soul, or Faculties) in him to any thing that is
good, and a pravitie of Will, whereby it is impossible, that he can do any
thing, conform to the will of God, until he be Regenerated, made willing by
an omnipotent Power, and have a new active Principle of life and grace, given
unto him, or infused in him, by the Spirit of Jesus.

2. Whereupon, it is manifest, That a sinner in that plight (and in that
Condition we must consider him to be, who is now seeking to be Justified, and
to be delivered from the wrath of God for sin) in fleeing to Christ for refnge,
cannot be thought to be making any such Promises, or having any such
Resolutions, in order to his Justification, and and Freedom from the Curse of
the Law; He, that is thoroughly convinced of his total Impotencie, will not
think (while he is under the power of these Convictions) of making any
Engagements for obedience in time to come: Yea, where any such things really
were, it might be feared, that the work of Conviction was not keep enough; and
that such, so acting, would not receive Christ freely, as he is offered in the
Gospel; but rather came with a price in their hand, a parcel of fair promises
for the future, of doing that, which was not in their power. But it will
possibly be said. That though there be no express and explicit Engaging and
Promiseing here; yet there cannot but be a virtual engageing; as in the making
of Marriage, though the woman do not explicitly promise obedience, yet her
engagement is included in her acceptance of the person. I Answer. Let us
suppose, that the woman is every way as unable to obey her husband, as the
sinner, not yet converted, is to obey the commands of God; and that from her
husband alone she must receive that, whereby she shall become able: and then
see, if her consenting to the match do formally include, even virtually, her
engagement to future obedience. I do not suppose, by all this, that the
Believer is under no Obligation, or Engagment to Obedience; for as he has
received a principle of obedience, even the new heart, the willing mind, and
the renewed faculties; so he is under many Obligations, Promises, Vows and
Engagements explicit and virtually, to carry as devouted unto God, in all
obedience: but we are speaking here of a person, not yet out of the state of
nature, but being under the terrors of the Lord, and Convictions of guilt and
misery, is seeking after a Reliete, unto his present case, to wit, how he may
be freed from the Curse of the Law, and put in a Justified state, and in
Favor with God.

3. Hence, it is much to be doubted (however it be put beyond all doubt, or
disput, with Mr. Baxter) whether Faith, Saving and Justifying, include
essentially any such formal Engagement and Resolution unto Obedience; seeing the
person, of whom we are speaking, flees to Christ, for relief, as one, that is
thoroughly convinced of his own Impotency, Inability to do any thing less or
more for his own help, or for pleasing of God. This Resolution unto new
obedience is rather included in Repentance (which is distinct from Faith, as we
saw above) and so it is mentioned, in the description of Repentance, given in
our shorter Catechism.

4. But it will be said, How then is Christ received by faith, as a King? I
Ans. Not to debate that here, which is to be spoke to afterward, ( to wit,
whether justifying faith, while it is acting, in order to Justification, does
receive Christ, as a King? or rather, (for this is more properly the question)
whether a person, under the Conviction of sin and wrath, and seeking for Pardon
and Acceptance in and through Christ, does six the eye of his soul upon Christ
as King, or as Priest? Or whether there is that in Christ, considered as a
King, or considered as a Priest, that is more suitable unto the present case of
the convinced sinner? Or whether, or not, the Person, in the Condition
mentioned, seeks relief rather from Christ, as a Priest, offering up
himself, as a Sacrifice giving his blood for a Ransom, to Satisfy the justice
of God for sins; or as a King, endued with Authority to subdue sin? And if the
question thus were proposed unto the experienced Christians, or unto the
persons, in such a Condition, it would, I suppose, receive a very quick
answer.) Unto the question now proposed I say, That, though it were granted,
that Faith, in order to the man's Justification, did act as well on Christ as a
King, as on Christ, as a Priest (which yet cannot be granted; as is already
hinted, and shall be cleared afterward) yet it would not follow, that this
Faith did essentially include a Resolution and Engagment to future obedience:
for it is not here, as in Subjects receiving a person for their King, as was
said already, whose Persons or Subjects, have power and ability, and their will
(as to these things) in their own hand, and may therefore promise obedience,
according as the Relation made up, formally engages unto; and yet Mr. Baxter
ag. Ludiomaeus Colvin.. 15. says That this is but to consent to the Relation,
or to his Soveraignity, that they may obey him, and Love, honor and obedience
come after. But if we should suppose a company of men, lying bound in chains,
in dunge^ns, under the feet of cruel Tyrants and Enemies. and in that case
receiving one for their King; would their receiving of him for their King
firstly and primarily import a formal engagement, on their part, to obey him? I
suppose, it would import some other thing, anteriour to that, to wit, their
ready consent, that he, by all the power and might he can make, shall loose
their bands, and set them at liberty, and put them in the case and condition of
free Subjects. Now the case is so here with us, with advantage; for not only,
are we in bands, and lying in prison, and so unable to perform any Obedience;
but naturally, till a change be made, we are utterly unwilling and averse from
performing any acts of Obedience, though it were in our power, so that before
we be in case to yield obedience, the whole man must be renewed, Judgment, Will
and Affections; when therefore, we, in such a case, receive Christ, as our
King, it is firstly and chiefly, that he may make us willing in the day of his
power; that he may make us his Subjects, willing and obedient, and ready to do
his will; that he may loose our bands, deliver us from the bondage and slavery
of sin, bring us out of captivity, and from under the power of Satan, and work
in us both to will and to do, according to his good pleasure. These are Acts of
Christ's kingly power, these are Benefits, that answer the present necessity
of wakened souls: these therefore must be the good things, their souls must
seek after, and for these things must they go to him, as King, and in
reference to these must they lay hold on Him: So that this is mainly employed in
their receiving of Christ, as King. In like manner, when they receive him, as a
Prophet they do not come unto him, as other Scholars do to their Masters,
bringing a Capacity, a Faculty and an Ingine with them for learning, without
which all the Masters pains in giving Instructions, and theirs in studying
hard, will be in vain: but they come unto him, in the through conviction of
their Blindness, Incapacitie to learn, want of Understanding to perceive the
things of God, and to take up the mysteries of the Kingdom: that he may teach
them, as never man taught; by giving them an hearing ear, and an understanding
Heart, by opening their eyes, to see the mysteries of God and of Christ; that
he may so teach, as to write his laws in their heart; cause their hear^^ to
come to wisdom, and cause them, to know the way, wherein they should walk. It
is true, the receiving of Christ as King includes also their obligation to
own him, as such, by receiving his Laws, subjecting unto his Dispensations,
etc. And the receiving of him as Prophet, includes their obligation to
acknowledge him for their only Teacher, and to depend on him for their
Instruction: But yet I say, as this speaks out no formal promise or engagment
to actual Obedience and actual learning, but rather an Engagement and
Resolution to be willing that he may act the part of a Prophet and of a King
toward them, and so cause them carry and look like Scholars and Subjects; so
the thing that is firstly and mainely in their eye, in their coming to Christ,
is that which suiteth their present case, and answers their present felt
necessity, and is an help to their present pinch. What Engagements may be laid
upon them by these Relations; or what Resolutions they may have, after they are
renewed in the Spirit of their minds, and united unto Christ, unto actual
obedience, in the power and strength of the Lord, is not to the present
purpose, while we are speaking of what the Soul does, in order to Justification.

5. Hence we see, how groundless it is, to say, that a Resolution to actual
obedience is a Condition of justification: This we find no where required in
order to Justification: This is no where called a Condition of Justification.
We are no where said to be Justified by this Resolution. This is inconsistent
with the frame of a poor wakened soul, seeking Justification. This would in
part make the gift of Justification not free and of free grace, but to be of
works or of a Resolution for works; and so would give ground (in part at least)
of boasting and of glorying, contrare to the whole frame of the Gospel. And so
this would lessen the difference betwixt the Old Covenant of works, and the New
Covenant of Grace.

Having thus dispatched the second particular, we come unto the Third; to wit,
to enquire, whether perseverance be a Condition of Justification? And of this
we need not speak much, seeing by what is already said, it is apparent how false
this is. Every thing, that is required of such, as are Believers, cannot be
called a Condition of Justification. It is said, that a Condition suspendeth
the obligation, to bestow the benefit promised upon Condition, until it be
performed: And so it will hence follow, that, if Perseverance to the end be the
Condition of Justification, no man can be justified, until he have persevered
to the end; and so no man shall be justified in this life; whereby an end is
put to all our present debate, the subject thereof being taken out of the way.

If it be said. That faith is the Condition of Justification, as it endures to
the end. I Ans. That that faith, which will endure to the end, is the
Condition, I grant. But I deny, That Faith is the Condition of Justification,
as it endures to the end, we no where read of Faiths being the Condition,
under this reduplication, as enduring to the end; for then it would follow,
that no lively faith, how strong so ever, could unite a soul to Christ, until
it had endured to the end, and so man upon his first Believing (...) be never
so livly and strong, can be said to be justified, to have passed from death to
life; contrare to all the Scriptures. And this would too much assimilate the
New Covenant unto the Old, wherein Adam was to work out his days work to the
end, ere he had Right to his wages. Yea and hence it would follow, that in this
life, there were none of the fruits of justification to be had, such as Peace
with God, Access to God, Glorying in tribulations, Joy and Comfort, contrare
to experience, and the Scriptures. Romans 5: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 11. and 8: 35. to the
end. Luke 7: 50. Mat. 9: 2. 2. These. 2: 16. Heb. 6: 18, 19. 1. Pet. 1: 4.

So that in a word, from what has bein said, it is evident, how little ground
M. Br. has to glory in this way of his, and though to an inadvertent person it
may appear Plausible, what is adduced for a reason, yet when considered, it
will be found fioath and a flourish of words: for be it so, that justifieing
faith receive whole Christ (which we do not deny: for Christ is not divided:
for as there is but one faith, so but one Christ. And I will have occasion to
speak more fully to this matter afterward.) Yet what does Mr. Baxter gain?
has he gained his Pepper-corne of Faith or Gospel-obedience to be imputed unto
us for Righteousness according to the new law (he should say, the new edition
of the Old Covenant, or rather the Old Covenant newly established?) no, by no
means: for be it grainted, That Iustifieing Faith as such respected Christ
equally as King and Prophet, as it does him as Priest (which yet I deny, and
shall, without divideing Christ, make it appear) I ask him, how does it
receive Christ Jesus the Lord? Surely he cannot but say, as he is offerred in
the Gospel; well then, the Lord, who knows what we are, offers him to us,
and makes him to us wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and redemption, so
that God in the offer of his Christ as a King, looks upon the sinner in the
same capacity to obey him, as in the offer of him as a Priest he is to pay his
debt, and that is not only in no capacity but as opposite to such a thing of
himself. Hence it as evident that Faith receives Christ as a King not by
promiseing or purposeing to obey him, but from a Conviction of its own aversion
to purpose to please God, that he by his Kingly Power shall kill the enmity,
Conquer the soul, bring it to purpose, as well as practice, work in it to will
as well as to do, cast down imaginations, that exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God, and bring every thought in captivity to his obedience, so
when Faith acts on him as a Prophet, there is in this act neither purpose nor
promise, to obey him as a teacher etc. But from a Conviction that the mind is
not only void of light, but it is prepossessed with corrupt principles, so
that the man that has nothing but the soul of a man, takes up the whole Gospel
Mystery as foolishness. And it is impossible for him, to know these things,
since they must be spiritually discerned. I say from this Conviction he
receives Christ as his wisdom, as he that shall give him an understanding, to
know him that is true; and to make him who is not only as a beast, but so much
worse, that his light is darkness, of a quick understanding in the fear of
the Lord, and wise to salvation. Now this exactly answers the sinners need,
and has all his wants made up by Jesus Christ according to his riches in
glory, and God's end in making his Christ to poor sinners wisdom,
Righteousness etc. That so he, who glories may glory in the Lord. Now if Mr.
Baxter will Consider this, he will even lay aside his Pepper-Corne as of no
Price; for here all is without money and without Price to the poor soul etc.
and he is considered as a receiver of all from Christ.

CHAP. XXXI.
Gospel-obedience is not the Condition of Justification.
THough, as we heard, Mr. Baxter himself will not say, that Gospel-obedience is
the Condition of Justification; yet he recommendeth a book to us to peruse, to
the end we may receive much light in the knowledge of the Gospel, I mean the
discourse of the two Covenants formerly mentioned, wherein this is asserted
with great confidence: And though this be sufficiently confuted by what is
said; yet we shall in short take some notice of the grounds of this Man's
Confidence, and give some remarks upon what he says.

He tells us page 132. That the sense, in which the Apostles did assert it,
(i.e. Justification by Faith without the works of the Law) was, that faith
Justifies without works, antecedent to believing (This is what Bellarmin and
other Papist's say) and without works, as the works of a literal observation of
Moses law, which was opposed by the jews to faith. This is but his fiction,
and its grounds may come to be considered afterward. But what is this Faith? It
is a Faith (says he) that has Repentance, Regeneration and sincere Obedience
in a holy life for its inseparable effects. Then (1) this Faith is not fruit
of Regeneration, because Regeneration is an effect of it. (2) Then upon a man's
sincere Believing, he cannot be said to have passed from death to life, and be
freed from Condemnation, nay not until all the effects of faith be produced.
And this he expresses more clearly within a line or two, calling Regeneration
and new obedience parts of the Condition; thus making men able to Regenerat
themselves, with some help of the Spirit, according to his former doctrine.

Passing his inveighing page 134. and forward, against the orthodox doctrine,
concerning Justification by faith alone; and loading it with Socinian
reproaches, wherein he bewrays more acquaintance with Popish, Socinian and
Arminian Principles and Consequences, than with the Gosp. I doctrine, either in
Theorie or pract^ce, I proceed to examine his grounds, which he lays down
Chap. 7. page 140, 141. and prosecuteth to the end of that Chapter. His grounds
are Ten in number.

The first is. That works of Evangelical obedience are never in Scripture
opposed to God's grace in reference to Justification and Salvation. Ans. (1)
Here we have the fundamental error of his whole discourse hinted to us; when
he puts Justification and Salvation together, making all that is
antecedently required unto Salvation, to be also antecedently required unto
Justification; or he must acknowledge no justification, until Salvation come;
(2) A perfect contradiction to this ground of his we have Ephesians. 2: 8, 9, 10.
for by grace are ye saved, through faith, not of works, lest any man should
boast: for we are his workmanshipe, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. Here grace is
opposed to works, to good works, unto which we are created in Christ Jesus, and
in which we are to walk, and that in reference to the Salvation, that is in
justification. The man was so wise for his own unhallowed ends, as never once
to take notice of this place. He cannot but grant, that Works and Grace are
opposed to other: but he gives us a very sceptick evasion, telling us, that
then by works we are to understand either works antecedent to conversion, or as
they are denied (I think he would have said deemed, or some such thing) to
merit, at the hands of God; or the works of the Law of Moses, as erroneously
contended for by the jews; or the works of the Law as Typical and as opposed
to things typified; or the works of the Law, as the Law is in its rigor
opposed to the milder oeconomie of the Gospel. And yet all this will not help
the matter, for Paul tells us, that even Abraham was not justified by his works,
but by faith, in opposition to works Romans 4: 1, 2, 3. And Abraham's works here
excluded from Justification, can be reduced to none of these heads of works
here mentioned; They were not works antecedent to Conversion; for in opposition
to these it is said, his Faith was reckoned unto him for Righteousness, long
after his Conversion. Nor did the holy father dream of any merit in his
works, nor were these the works of the Law in any of the senses mentioned; for
Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness, even when he was in
uncircumcision. Romans 4: 9, 10, 11. etc.

He takes notice of Tit. 3: 5. not by works of Righteousness, which we have
done, but according to his mercy, he s^ved us: but gives us p. 143. this
gloss. This change of their condition was not effected, or so much as begun
among them by any reformation of their own, till the Gospel came to work it
(which is meant by the appearing of the kindness and Love of God verse. 4. and
is of like import with. Chapter 2: 11, 12. Ans. By what either Law or Reason he
restrains that appearing of the kindness, and Love of God, mentioned verse. 4.
to the Gospel, I know not. (2) And though the Gospel were here understood, that
would not help the matter; for the Text says, that after this did appear, he
saved them (that is Justified in the first place, as we see verse. 7.) according
to his mercy, and not by work of Righteousness. (3) These works are called
works of Righteousness; But no works of their own, before Conversion, can be so
called: can the works of such as are foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lasts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one
another, be called works of Righteousness? and yet such were these, before the
kindness and Love of God reached them, as verse. 3. shows. He thinks the same
answer may be given to 2. Tim. 1: 9. And so we think, the same reply may
suffice.

His 2. ground is p. 114. That Paul, in speaking against Justification by works,
gives sufficient caution not to be understood thereby to speak against
Evangelick obedience in the case. That is, not to speak against justification
by Evangelick works; which were to say, he took much pains for nothing; for if
he had but said, that the Ceremonial Law was abrogate, he had sufficiently
confuted justification by the Ceremonies, if that had been all the Law he
meaned. But how proves this man, what he here alleges? He adduceth Romans 3:
31. But I wonder how did the Apostle by his doctrine establish the Ceremonial
Law? In the Spirit of it (says he) in as much as in preaching Justification in
the Gospel way, he preached in plain precepts, the necessity of that spiritual
purity unto Salvation, which was but darkly taught by the Ceremonial Law. Ans.
(1) Then this man supposes, that he is establishing the Ceremonial Law, by his
doctrine in this book; for he thinks, that therein he is preaching up
Justification in the Gospel way. (2) Neither did the Ceremonial Law more
darkly, nor does the Gospel in more plain terms preach the necessity of
spiritual purity, as the Condition of Justification: So that this Author
beggeth what he cannot prove. (3) But that this is the Moral Law, has been
frequently shown above; as also it has been shown, how and what way it was
established, by the doctrine of just^fication without works; so that we need
not regaird his saying; that by the doctrine of justification by faith, they
established the moral Law, both in the letter and Spirit of it, in teaching the
necessity of Evangelical obedience to it, after a more spiritual and forcible
manner, than had been taught before. For this says nothing for their pleading
for obedience to this Law, as a Condition of Justification; which is the thing,
he should have said: And if he know not, how Justification without the works of
the moral Law, can consist with necessity of Obedience to the Moral Law, upon
Gospel grounds, he is ignorant of the Gospel, and has been more educate in
Socinus his School, than in the orthodox Church.

He cites to the same purpose Romans 10: 4. and tells us, that Christ was the end
of the Law in his doctrine, having taught that Righteousness of living, which
the Law itself taught, but in a more excellent spiritual and effectual manner.
Which is a very Socinian like gloss, but no way suiting the words, nor the
scope of the Apostle, as the very reading of them may evince, and the following
words verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. may put beyond all question, His citeing thereafter
page 146. Romans 7: 4. Gal. 2: 19, 20. is to no purpose; for in neither of these,
nor any where else, does he cry up holiness, performed in any manne^
whatsomever, as a Condition of Justification; and this our Author should show,
or he does nothing: for we are not against the necessity of holiness, but see
more Sure, more Comfortable, more Heart quieting, more Divine, and more
Gospel-like grounds, whereupon to press holiness, than any he discovers in
all his book, or can, according to his principles.

His 3. ground is p. 147. That Regeneration or the new creature, as including
Evangelical Obedience, is opposed to works of the Law, in the business of man's
Justification, as well as Faith is, and as well as the grace of God it self is.
And this he thinks to prove from Gal. 6: 15. as Schlightingius the Socinian
did before him cont. Meysner p. 148. But one thing is to be proved, to wit,
that the Apostle is speaking this, in order to justification, and so
contradicting all the former disput he had; which neither Reason, nor Religion
will allow us to think, nor do the words, nor any Circumstance of the words,
nor any thing of the scope, or of the thread of the Apostles discourse give the
least countenance hereunto.

His 4. ground p. 148. is also from Schlichtingius ubi supra. That Evangelical
obedience as well as faith, and together with faith, is opposed to the works of
the Law, in reference to Justification and Salvation. Gal. 5: 6. Ans. He
supposes here, that Circumcision is the same with the works of the Law, while
as these that were crying it up at that time, took it only for a privilege,
which might be kept together with Christianity; and therefore the Apostle
told them verse. 3. which they did not take notice of, that by their taking on
that badge of circumcision, they made themselves debtors to do the whole Law
(2) All that is required in reference to Salvation, is not required in
reference to Justification. (3) Faith working by Love denotes the right and
the livly Faith, which only is Justifying and Saving, but brings not in all
Evangelick Obedience under Love, as sharing with faith, in the same prerogative
of justification, as was showed above.

His 5. ground p. 149. is. That Evangelical Obedience alone is opposed to the
works of the Law, in reference to Justification. And this he confirms by 1.
Cor. 7: 19. borrowing it from Schlightingius, the Socinian, where only two
things are wanting, to make this passage a confirmation of his Assertion, one
is, that by Circumsion here is meaned the keeping of the Law: and what shall
then be understood by Uncircumcision? The other is, that the Apostle is
speaking this in reference to Justification, contrary to the whole context.

His 6. ground ibid. is. That faith itself is an act of Evangelical obedience.
Unto which we need say nothing here, having said so much above, to show, that
Faith in the matter of justification is not considered as an act of
Gospel-obedience, but as an Instrument, laying hold on the Righteousness of
Christ, the Cautioner.

His 7. ground is p. 152. That by Gospel-obedience Christians come to have a
Right to Salvation Revel 22: 14. This (...) liberty (as it is translated 1.
Cor. 8: 9.) Power or privilege, as it would seem to import 1. Cor. 9: 18. and
elsewhere, is no proper Right; for all that can be called proper Right, the
Saints have it through the purchase of Jesus Christ; his blood and his blood
alone, has bought the inheritance to us: And hereby we see the true tendency
of this Man's doctrine, even to give us heaven as that, which we have bought
with our labor and obedience; that is, to give us heaven by a new Covenant of
Works, which Christ has procured to be made with us. But this Right, is but a
liberty to take possession of the crown of life purchased by Christ, and
promised, at the end of the journay, in the way, wherein the Lord has
appointed us to walk toward the possession thereof: And can only prove, what
we deny not, to wit, the necessity of Holiness, in order to the actual
enjoyment of life: But what says this unto justification? He will not have us
put any difference betwixt them, alleging that, such as do, are more curious
and nice in distinguishing, than Paul was. And why so? Paul calls Justification,
the justification of life. Romans 5: 18. Therefore Justification and
Glorification is one and the same, and have every way the same conditions: Ans.
It follows not. He cites next Romans 8: 30. which clearly makes them
distinct. What more? He (i.e. Paul) proves that men shall be justified by
faith, because it is written, the just shall live by faith Gal. 3: 11. and with
him to be justified and blessed are all one Gal. 3: 8, 9. Romans 4: 7, 8, 9. Ans.
What that from Gal. 3: 11. can be made to prove by him, I know not. And as for
the next, it will prove as much, that is, just nothing. He might as well
infer, that Poverty in Spirit, Mourning, Meekness, Hungring and Thirst^ng
after Righteousness, Mercifulness, Purity in heart, Peacemaking and Suffering
of persecution, were all the same with glory, because of what is said. Mat. 5:
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Yet he proceeds at this rate, and tells us p.
^54. That Paul uses Righteousness, or Justification and life, as Synonimous
terms Gal. 3: 21. Ans. As if Justification were not a state of life, unless it
were the same with Glory. We have shown above, what a life it is. And (says
he) Justification and Condemnation are put in direct opposition to eachother
Romans 5: 18. and 8: 33, 34. Ans. And what then? In short (says he) Salvation as
well as justification is promised to believing Ioh. 3: 16. Act. 3: 31. Heb. 10:
39. and therefore both must be the immediate effect of faith. Ans. Himself
answers all this, by adding if we take Salvation, as begun here in this life,
as the Scripture represents it to be Ioh. 5: ^4. 1. Ioh. 3: 14. and 5: 12. He
would further prove it from Iam. 2: 14. As if in one Chapter the Apostle could
not speak, both of Justification and Salvation, unless he would make them both
one thing: But though there be a life begun in Justification, that shall at
length end in Glory, we see no ground to say, for all that he has brought
forth, that they are so the same, as to require the same previous Conditions:
How profitable so ever Mr. Baxter account this Treatise to be, yet I cannot
think, that he shall approve of this, which yet is the maine design of the
book.

His 8. ground p. 156. That the promise of forgiveness of sins is sometimes
made unto Evangelical obedience. This he goes about to prove from 1. Ioh. 1:
7. Where the Apostle is showing the Advantages that such have, as have
fellowship with God through faith in Jesus Christ, evidenced by their walking
in the light (as is clear from verse. 6. and this in particular, that as they
will be daily failing, so they will have ready access to the blood of Christ;
to get all their sins cleansed away. Neither is the Apostle here speaking of
the first Pardon granted, when persons are translated into a state of
justification, but he is speaking of such* as are already in that State. He
cite^h next to this purpose 1. Pet, 1: 2. and adds they were not elected to
the benefit of being sprinkled with the blood of Christ, without obedience.
Making that a condition of being sprinkled with the blood of Christ, which the
Apostle mentions, as a distinct medium, to which they were elected, in
reference to eternal life, the supreme end, as to them: And he might as well
say, they were not elected to the benefi^e of obedience without being sprinkled
with the blood of Christ: and that too agrees more with truth.

His 9. ground p. 157. is. That to forgive injuries is an act of Evangelical
obedience to that precept Mat. 11: 25. And yet without this, men cannot be
pardoned and so not justified Mark, 11: 25. Mat. 6: 15. and 18: 35. Ans. Though
men cannot be pardoned without this, it will not follow, that therefore it is a
part of the condition of Justification: but only proves, that this must be
present, as an evidence of their acting Faith on Jesus Christ, in truth and
reality, in order to pardon: And these passages are explications of the fifth
petition of the Lord's prayer, the sense whereof is well given in our larger
Catechism. 194. in these words, which we are the rather emboldened to ask. and
encouraged to expect, when we have this testimony in ourselves, that we from
the heart forgive others their offenses.

His 10. and last ground is. That Repentance is an act of Evangelical Obedience
Act. 17: 30. and yet pardon of sin, which is essential to justification, is not
to be obtained without it. Luk 13: 3, 5. Ans. Of Repentance we have said enough
above Chap. XXV. I wonder how he can to this end cite Luk 13: 3, 5. where no
mention is made of Remission of sins; but perishing threatened to all, that will
not repent.

I shall not here meddle with his mis representation of our doctrine, in the
following pages, nor with the grounds and reasons of the preference he gives,
unto his way, seeing, by all that he speaks, he bewrays utter ignorance of the
Gospel truth, which we own, and of its true Tendency to promove Gospel
holiness, beyond any other way, what somever, hatched by Papist's and
Socinians, that may be little or nothing beholden to Jesus Christ, for Grace
here, or for Glory hereafter. And his Insinuations, as if we did not press
Repentance and Holiness, is little to his credit, or to the credit of the
cause he maintains, seeing the contrary is so well known, to say no more.

Nor shall insist on the grounds he lays down, to overturne the whole
argueings of the Apostle in this matter, seeing they are, upon the matter, the
same, that others have laid down, and have been before spoken to: for from a
tedious discourse concerning the mistaking apprehensions of the jews, about
the Law and the works thereof, in order to justification, to very little
purpose, he infers p. 117. that doubtless Paul's denial of Justification and
Salvation to be by the Law, is to be understood in the very same sense, in
which the incredulous jews, against whom he disputed, did hold these so be
attainable thereby: Forgetting with all, that what Paul wrote, was dictated by
the Spirit, and so that for the use of the Church unto the end of the world.
But sure, if no other works were here understood, than this Author will have
here understood, it could be of little use to the Gospel churches, after the
subject of the question, the Ceremonial Law, it self is taken away: And had it
not been a shorter and most effectual way to have confuted the jews error
here, simply to have proven (as he does elsewhere) the abolishing of that Law?
Beside, we find many things spoken of this Law, against Justification by
obedience to which the Apostle disputes, that cannot agree to the Ceremonial
Law, as has been several times touched. But let us hear what the true question
was. We must understand him (says he) to deny a freedom from the eternal
punishment to be attainable by legal Sacrifices: and also to deny that the
promise of eternal life was made upon Condition of literal Circumcision, and a
literal observation of the Mosaical Law. Ans. If this had been all to what
purpose, I pray, did the Apostle labor so much to prove, that not only the
jews, but that the Gentiles also were under sin, Romans 1. and 2. The Gentiles
were not, nor yet were to be under the Law of Ceremonies. (2) How could the
Apostle infer, that by the deeds of the Law, there should no flesh be
justified, from his proving, that both jews and Gentiles were guilty of the
breach of the Moral Law, whereby every mouth was stopped, and all the world
become guilty before God Romans 3: 10-20? (3) did only the Law of Ceremonies give
the knowledge of sin? Himself proves the contrary page 57. (4) did the curse
only belong unto the Ceremonial Law? or did Christ only become a Curse, in
reference to the breaches of that? Gal. 3: 10.

He will not so much as yield p. 119. that Paul does, on the bye, deny
Justification by other works: And that merely because it would destroy his
fabric of a Iudaical Socinian justification: though he pretend, that thereby
the Apostles doctrine would be made inconsistent, not only with the Faith of
the holy men of old, but also with his own doctrine: But neither did the holy
men of old express the Condition of Justification (which he confounds with
the Condition of the Covenant of mercy) by loving God and keeping his
commandments; nor does Paul speak any such thing, as we have seen, what ever
he with Socinians and Arminians say.

He gives us another character (which also we heard from others before) of the
works, by which Paul denied men were justified, calling them such works, which
were apt to occasion boasting Ephesians. 2: 9. Romans 4: 2. But thus he quite
perverreth both the sense of the words, scope and argueing of the Apostle; for
the Apostle clears that it is by grace we are saved: and not by works, upon
this very account, that if we were saved or justified upon the account of any
of our works, man should boast Ephesians. 2: 9. Not of works; why? lest any man
should boast, manifestly declaring that all works were laid aside, in this
matter, and that for this end, that no man should have any occasion of
boasting: and this is not spoken, as every one may see, to qualify, or
specify the works that are excluded; these words carry nothing of a
restriction in them: The same is clear also Romans 4: 2. If Abraham were
justified by works, he has whereof to glory* shalll the meaning be, Abraham
was not justified by such works, as give ground of gloriation? then the meaning
lies not in the words, but the words do expressly cross and contradict that
sense, unless we shall suppose them to have no sense: to speak nothing of the
following verse. 3. where believing is mentioned, and not another sort of works,
to wit, such as give no ground or occasion of boasting, which, in this case of
justification, no man can describe unto us, or tell us what they are.

He tells us p. 122. that the meaning of these words Romans 3: 28. Therefore we
conclude etc. is no more but this, viz. That a man is justified in the Gospel
way But not only is that in the general included; but that Gospel-way is
particularly expressed, to be by faith without the deeds of the Law: And
consequently his Popish, and Socinian way is diametrically opposite to the
Gospel-way.

He goes about to explain to us p. 124. etc. what is meaned by their own
Righteousness, that is so frequently set in opposition to the Righteousness of
God, and tells us, that it was so called upon a threefold account. 1. Because
they sought the pardon of their sins by their own Sacrifices. Ans. And why not
also by their works of Obedience? Sure. neither Abraham, nor David sought for
pardon upon any such accout, and they renunced other works, than these. Is that
all the Righteousness that Paul renunceth Phil. 3: 9? Was he then occupied
about Sacrifices? Some thing else sure is understood. 1. Cor. 4: 4.

2. Because (says he) they did not think Regeneration, or Supernatural grace
necessary to the obtaining of it. Ans. And truly, all the Regeneration and
Supernatural grace, which he thinks necessary, is but that a Pelagian, Jesuit
and Arminian will think necessary, and no more, as we saw above. But does he
think, that Abraham, or David had any such apprehensions? and yet even their
works are excluded from justification. Was that the Righteousness that Paul
called his own Phil. 3: 9? I think for shame he will not say it. And what
means Paul to say 1. Cor. 4: 4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
hereby justified. This sure, must include works done by supernatural Grace; and
after Regeneration.

3. Says he. Because it was a way of seeking to be justified of their own
devising, and not of God's appointing. Ans. This is very true, but it is not
the whole truth in this matter: And his way is of the same Nature, no more
consistent with the Gospel method of justification, through the Righteousness
of God by faith, than theirs is; for the Imputed Righteousness of Christ he
rejects with contempt: True justification he is ignorant of; He knows no
Faith, but what is Popish and Socinian. His New Covenant is but a new edition
of the old. His Regeneration is Pelagian. His Good Works are but works flowing
from a Principle of Nature, aided with a common divine assistance.

Let us now in end hear, what is the result of all his discourse. It is to
show; That they were the works of the Law, as exclusive of Faith in Christ, and
his death: and Not those, which are the immediate effects of Faith in Christ, in
his death and in his doctrine. But the Gospel tells us, that in the matter of
Justification, all the works, of the Law, are exclusive of faith in Christ,
even Abraham's works David's works: and Paul's works; and therefore they were
all laid aside, and justification was only looked for through Faith.

Thus we have seen, what a Gospel this is, which Mr. Baxter recommendeth to us,
the consideration whereof may move some to say.

Noscitur ex socio, qui non dignoscitur ex se. CHAP. XXXII.
Of the object of justifying Faith.
THough something of the Object of Faith was hinted before Chap. XX. when we
were speaking of the Nature of Faith: yet it will not be amiss, to speak a
little more of it here, both in reference to what follows; and also, and more
particularly in order to the better understanding of, what it is to Live by
Faith.

In order therefore to the explaining of this Object, we would premit these few
things.

1. As was mentioned in the forecited place, there is presupposed unto the
right exercise, and actual exerting of Faith, accepting the offered Savior and
Salvation through him, a Conviction of sin and misery, in one measure, or
other, whereby the Sinner is brought to a desparing in himself, seeing he can
find no remedy, or relief for himself, within himself, and to a concluding,
that he is an undone man, if there be no other remedy, than what he is able to
do for himself: for after all means assayed (and a soul in that case is ready
to turn to many hands, to seek relief, and until preventing grace come, will
embrace and close with any promising way, how chargable and troublesome so ever
it be, ere it sweetly comply with the only Manabasing and Grace-exalting way of
Salvation, through Faith in Christ, revealed in the Gospel) he finds himself
disappointed. And further, it is presupposed, as necessarily requisite
hereunto, some knowledge of the grounds of Religion; and particularly of the
Gospel, of Christ, of his offices, Work etc. all revealed in the Gospel.

2. When we speak here of the Object of Faith, we mean that Faith, by which a
Soul is united unto Christ, and closes with Him, as offered in the Gospel, and
improveth Him to all ends and uses, which their case and necessity, in all
time coming, calls for. So that it is one and the same Faith, whether it be
called Uniting Faith, Saving Faith, Justifying Faith, Sanctifying and
heart-purifying Faith, or the like. It is one and the same radical grace,
receiving these or the like various denominations, from the effects brought
about by it, or the several ends and uses it has, and is appointed for. And
the same Faith brings all these effects about, in its way, according to the
Order, Method and measure, ordained of God: the same Faith, whereby the
believer is Married to Christ, and Covenanteth with Him, as Head, Husband, Lord
and Savior, by the same is he justified, adopted and brought into a state of
Peace and Reconciliation with God. By the same Faith also does the man get his
heart Purified, and he lives the life of Sanctification. By the same also he
gets Strength, Reviving, Comfort, and Support in times of Temptation and
Trial. So that the Believers life first and last is by Faith, the beginning,
progress, all the steps of it, and final Salvation is by Faith; whence it is
called Saving Faith, to distinguish it from that Historical Faith, which,
(though true in its kind yet) is not from the saving grace of God, nor has it
effects accompanying Salvation.

3. Though this Faith be one and the same, by which the Believer lives first
and last; and which proves serviceable and useful to him, on all occasions,
and to all ends and uses, that his several necessities call for: Yet in
reference to these various ends and uses, it acts not after one and the same
manner, in all points: Faith acts not every way, after one and the same
manner, in order to get Strength for Duties, that it acts, in order to get
Sin Pardoned: It acts not the same way for Subdueing the reigning power of
sin, that it acts for Justification, nor does it act the same way for Comfort
and upholding strength in a day of trial, that it acts, in order to
Justification: And yet we need not say, that it acts distinctly and
differently, according to every distinct benefit, and blessing, that is had
thereby: The diffe^ent natures of the necessities we stand into, with the
different ways of the ^ord's communicating what we stand in need of, according
to the various Relations he stands in, and various offices he has taken on,
in reference to his peoples good, may satisfy us herein, and according as
these several particular necessities may come under one head, and relief may
be conveyed to them, after one and the same manner: All which will be best
discerned by the understanding Christian, in his application to Christ,
according to his Condition and wants, which he would have helped and supplied.

4. Hence, though the Principal Object of this Faith be always one and the
same; Yet there may be some peculiarities in that object, which Faith eyeth
more in one case, than in another: As we find the Saints, in their adresses to
God, in their several straits and necessities, sometimes pitching upon one
attribute of God, sometimes upon another; according as thereby Faith presented
God to the soul in a sutablness to the present case it was in; and so when
dispensations seemed to cross the promises, Faith eyed God as Faithful and
Unchangable; when enemies appeared strong, difficulties invincible, and the
like, Faith took hold on God, as the Almighty, to whom nothing was impossible;
and when sin appeared as a discouragment to drive them from their hopes, Faith
took hold of the mercy of God etc. So when a poor sinner is under the
convictions of sin and threatenings of the Law, Faith must take up Christ in a
sutableness thereto, and eye something in Him, that peculiarly suiteth that
case; and when again the believer has need of Light, Instruction, Strength,
Comfort, Throwbearing and the like, he fixes his eye on some thing in Christ,
that suiteth that particular necessity: and so Faith acts accordingly: And
thus, though the object remain the same, and Christ be always made use of;
Yet Faith may and does act more immediately on Christ, as Prophet, when in one
case whereunto this office carries a respect; and at another time more
immediately and directly on Christ, as a King, when the present necessity
calls for help from Christ as King; and again faith acts on him, as a
Priest, when only that, which Christ, as a Priest did, can answer their
present necessity. Yet, (which is carefully to be observed, to prevent Mr.
Baxter's challenge) I do not say, nor see I any necessity to say, that these
several acts of Faith, are as so many several Conditions unto the receiving of
the several favors, taking the term Condition in his sense; I do not say,
that Faith acting one way on Christ is a proper Condition of Justification, and
Faith as acting another way on Christ is the proper Condition of Adoption, and
that Faith acting a third way on Christ is the proper Condition of
Sanctification etc. but that, as the effects and benefi^es, which sinners stand
in need of, are ascribed unto several effectuating acts of Christ, and to the
several Relations and offices he has taken on; so Faith in order to the
receiving of these benefits, acts suitably on Christ, and the Believer is,
taught so to do by the Spirit of the Lord, to his Comfort, Hope and
Encouragment.

5. I presuppose here the Formal Object of all divine faith, which is the Truth
and Veracity of God; for all divine faith gives credit unto divine
Revelations upon the Credit* the Truth and Veracity of the Revealer. Thus
says the Lord, who is true, and who is Truth itself, is the sole Formal ground
and Ratio of this Faith.

6. I presuppose here also that Comprehensive Material Object of all divine
Faith, which is the whole will and mind of God, concerning whatsomever thing it
be revealed, whether by the Scriptures, or by the Light of Nature. If the Truth
and Veracity of God be the only Formal Ground of this Faith, then all that this
God reveals must be believed and received, as true, when known to be revealed
by Him. By faith we understand, that the worlds were framed by the word of God.
Heb. 11: 3. and we believe all things which are written in the Law and the
Prophets Act. 24: 14. Yea and in the whole word of God: I do not here
determine, what particular Truths, revealed in the word, are necessarily to be
expressly and explicitly believed, by every one, that has a true Saving Faith,
and what not: only this I say, that many particular truths, are revealed,
whereof a true Believer may be ignorant, and yet have a true Saving Faith,
receiving all, which he knows to be revealed by the Lord, and rejecting no
one Truth whatsomever, that he knows to be revealed.

But we are here to speak of that Object of Faith, which immediately and
directly concerns our delivery from our natural state of sin and misery; and
our eternal Salvation: And this, we judge, to be whole Christ Jesus, as he is
hold forth and revealed in the Gospel. We say Christ Jesus (1) wholly, and (2)
as he is held forth and revealed in the Gospel. And both these, for
explications sake, may be branched out, in several particulars.

I say then first. That whole Christ is the object of Saving or Justifying
Faith. Hence are we so often times commanded to Receive him, and to Believe in
and on Him and in his name; and Faith is expressed by a Coming to him, Eating
and Drinking of Him, Receiving of him, etc. Ioh. 1: 12. and 3: 16, 36. and 6:
29, 35, 37, 40, 44, 47, 51, 54, 55, 58. and 7: 38. Act. 10: 41, and 13: 38, 39.
and 26: 18. Rom 3: 22. Gal. 2: 16. and many more places. Hence this Faith is
called the Faith of Christ Gal. 2: 16. and the Faith of the Son of God Gal. 2:
20. So then Saving and Justifying Faith takes whole Christ.

1. Faith takes him and closes with him wholly; as to his Natures: Faith
receives him, as Mediator, God and Man in one person, though it be formally
terminated on him, as God Ioh. 14: 1. and as the Son of God Gal. 2: 20. Yet
faith receives him, as God manifest in the flesh. 1. Tim. 3: 16. as the word
made flesh Ioh. 1: 14. as the Christ, the Son of the living God Matt. 16: 16.
Ioh. 6: 63. as the Immanuel, God with us Esai. 7: 15. Mat. 1: 23. Luk 1: 31.

2. Faith takes him wholly, as to his Offices; as a Prophet, as a Priest, and
as a King: Faith embraces him, as that great Prophet Act. 3: 22. as the Word
of God, that came out of the bosom of the Father, to reveal his mind and
counsel for our Salvation Ioh. 1: 17, 18. Faith receives him also as Priest,
offering up himself to God a sacrifice for sins, and making Satisfaction to the
justice of God, and as Interceeding with the Father Ephesians. 5: 2. Heb. 2: 17.
and 7: 25. and 9: 14, 28. Hence we hear of Faith in his blood. Romans 3: 25. And
Christ crucified is proposed to Faith to receive, and feed upon. And in order
to Justification and Pardon, faith (as we shall hear) has a special eye unto
the Surety. Righteousness of Christ. Faith also receives him as a King, to
subdue their souls to himself, to make them Subjects, to swey his scepter in
their souls, to subdue all their spiritual Enemies, and to Support, Rule, Guide
and Defend them by his Spirit Esai. 33: 22. Act. 5: 31. Psalm. 110. through out.

3. Faith receives him wholly, as to the Relations he has taken on, in
reference to his people, to wit, as an Husband Ephesians. 5: 30, 31, 32. as an Head
Ephesians. 5: 23. and 1: 22. Col. 1: 18. as the Chief-Corner stone Ephesians. 2: 20. 1.
Pet. 2: 4, 5, 6, 7. as a Vine Ioh. 15: 1, 2, 5. As a Witness, Leader and
Commander Esai. 55: 4. as a Light Esai. 42. 6. and 49: 9. Faith receives him
under whatsoever Title, and Denomination, he is held forth for the comfort of
his People.

4. Faith receives him wholly, as to the Work imported, and Ends designed by
these Offices, Relations, and Denominations, which he took upon him, and under
which he holds forth himself.

5. Faith receives him wholly, as to the Furniture and Qualifications, whereby
he was fitted for the discharge of the duties, belonging to the Offices, which
he did execute both in his Estate of Humiliation and Exaltation; and for
throughing and perfecting of the work, which he undertook to do: so that Faith
receives him, as the Anointed of the Lord, and as having the Spirit of the
Lord upon him, and as having all Fullness, all Power and Authority, even the
Spirit without measure, Esai. 61: 1. Luke 4: 18. Ioh. 3: 34. and 1: 14, 16.
Col. 1: 19. and 2: 3, 9, 10. Mat. 28: 18.

6. Faith receives him wholly, as to all the sinners Necessities, Cases,
Wants, Straits, and Difficulties, which they either are, or may be into, from
first to last: All the Vessels must hang on Him, as the nail, that it fastened
in a sure place Esai. 22: 24, 25. Faith eyeth Him, and Him alone, and seeks
the upmaking of all in Him alone, as knowing that in Him only, sinners can be
compleet Col. 2: 10. and out of his fullness must they receive, and grace for
grace. Ioh. 1: 16. Therefore is he held forth, as fournished with all richly,
that we stand in need of, as a Store house and Treasury of all necessaries, as
having Eye salve, Gold and Raiment, and what we need. Revel. 3: 18.

7. Faith receives Him, with all the Sufferings, Crosses, and Inconveniences,
that can follow: Faith takes up the Cross, and follows Christ. Mat. 10: 37,
38. Mark. 8: 34. Mat. 16: 24. Luk 9: 23.

Next I say, That Christ as revealed, held forth, and offered in the Gospel, is
the object of Saving and Justifying faith: And so

1. He is received, as the result (to speak so) of the wonderful Contrivance
and Design of free Grace, Love, Goodness, Mercy, and Wisdom, concerning the
glorifying of God, in the Salvation of the chosen ones, in and through Him:
faith here observes and closes cheerfully with that gracious Covenant of
Redemption, betwixt Jehovah, or God Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and the Son in
order to the Salvation of poor man, through the Sons becoming Mediator,
God-man, and becoming Cautioner, for such as were given unto Him, and coming in
their Law-place, and suffering for them, and their debt. etc. Faith closes
with, and embraces this foundamental Ground of Salvation, in all its Parts,
Ends and Means: and so receives Christ, as standing in such a place, and as
engageing to through such a design of Love and free Grace; so far as the
Believer comes to know and understand the same to be revealed. We may consider
to this end Esai. 53. through out Ephesians. 1: 3. and forward. Romans 3: 21-27. and
other places; and there see how Christ is held forth.

2. He is received as the great Gift of God Ioh. 4: 10. as the Sovereign Mean,
through which all the great design of Grace is brought about, in a glorious
manner, as the authorized Ambassador of God, and messenger of the Covenant
Mal. 3: 1. as the grand Effect of Love, Grace and Goodwill Tu. 3: 4. Ioh. 3:
16. as foreordained and set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his
blood Romans 3: 25. and as made of God unto us wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. 1. Cor. 1: 30. He is received as the Power of
God, and as the Wisdom of God 1. Cor. 1: 24. as He, in whom God was reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them 2. Cor. 5: 19.
and as made sin, though he knew no sin for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God, in him 2. Cor. 5: 21. that is, as the Lord our
Righteousness Ier. 23: 6. Thus faith, in receiving Christ, as thus held forth
in the Gospel, eyeth God, the Giver, the Sender, the Maker of Christ to be sin,
and eyeth God, as the Justifier of the ungodly in him Romans 4: 5. and as the
Reconciler of us to himself by Christ 2. Cor. 5: 18. as forgiving sins, and
granting Redemption through Christ's blood, according to the riches of his
Grace, wherein He has abounded toward us, in all wisdom and prudence. Ephesians.
1: 7, 8. Here is the incomprehensible riches of the Mercy and Grace of God
Father. Son and Holy Ghost, eyed as the Object, according to their peculiar
method and order of working, in this grand affair.

3. He is received as offered and held forth in the Promises: Thus was he
embraced of old, as the promised Messiah, and as the substance of all the
Promises, which the Fathers of old saw a far off Heb. 11: 13. Ioh. 8: 56. That
promise made to Abraham that in him all Nations should be blessed, was the
Gospel Gal. 3: 8. and contained a bunddle of promises verse. 16. And the faith
of this, was that faith, by which Abraham was justified Romans 4: 16-22. Hence
all the promises are made good in and through him; and they are all yea and
amen, in him 2. Cor. 1: 20. And he is the Substance of them all; for they
either hold forth his Person, or his Work, or some thing of Him, or some thing
from Him, according to the Various Exigencies and Necessities of his people.

4. He is received as the grand mean of declaring and setting forth the
glorious Attributes of God; which the Lord will have manifested in and by this
noble design of the Gospel: for Faith sweetly acquiesceth in this design of
God's, to preach forth his Excellencies and Virtues, in this manner; and
therefore receives Christ, as offered and held forth in the Gospel, for such a
glorious End; and so receives him, as the great Gift of Love Ioh. 3: 16. as
the mean, whereby the Righteousness of God is declared Romans 3: 25. and his
Grace Ephesians. 1: 5, 6. and as the Power of God. and the Wisdom of God. 1: Cor.
1: 24, Ephesians. 3: 10. Thus Faith sees the glory of God shining with a peculiar
splendor, in the face of Jesus Christ 2. Cor. 4: 6.

5. So is he received as the grand and only Mean to bring about all the great
Ends, designed of God, and desired by them: so that in the receiving of him,
all these ends are closed with, and expected: such as Remission of sins,
Justification, Acceptance, Adoption, Sanctification, Peace of Conscience, Joy
in the Holy Ghost, yea life, and Immortality and full Redemption Ephesians. 1: 7.
Col. 1; 14. Act. 26: 18. Romans 3: 25. and 4: 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 1: 11, 12, 13, 14.
Romans 5: 1, 2, 3. 1. Pet. 1: 3, 4. So that Faith eyeth here, by way of end, all
that Grace and Glory, they would have, and can desire to make them up,

6. And, in a word, He is received as the grand mean to Interest them in God,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as theirs; to bring them nigh unto God, and in
Covenant with Him, and to enjoy the several Effects and Benefits of their
Workings. They come to God through Him, as the only way to the Father Ioh. 14:
6. They close with the Father, as their God and Father through Him, and with
the Holy Ghost, as their Sanctifier, and comforter through Him, who sends the
Spirit from the Father, Ioh. 15: 26. and 14: 26.

All these several things belong unto the adequate and full Object of that
faith, whereby believers become Justified, Adopted, Sanctified, and shall be at
length finally Saved, for they shall receive the end of their faith, the
Salvation of their souls 1. Pet. 1: 9. Yet to prevent mistakes, we would add
some few considerations.

1. By all this, we do not mean, that all these Objects, or Various parts or
Considerations of the one adequate and compleet Object, are expressly and
distinctly conceived and laid hold on by every Believer, when they act faith on
Christ, or come unto God through him, according to the Gospel-command: But that
these things belong to the full Object of Saving faith, and are implied
therein; so that whoever believes savingly, believes these several truths,
according to the measure of the Revelation of God, and of their Capacity and
Information. So that a more full and explicit belief of these particulars is
now required under the Gospel, than was required under the Old Testament, when
^his Revelation was not so full and plain, as now: and more is required of
such, who have had clear information of Gospel truths; than of others, who
have wanted that Advantage: and more also is required of such, as have large
Capacities and Understandings, than of others, who are more Rude and of a
narrower Reach.

2. Wherever any of these truths are rightly believed, and heartily closed
with, all the rest are implicitly also received; for they cannot be separated;
the whole contrivance is such a noble piece af divine art and of infinite
wisdom, that all the several pieces, are indissolubly knit together: Hence what
ever piece it be, that the believer first does directly and explicitly close
with, or under whatsoever notion Christ at first be embraced, according us the
believer comes to more distinct apprehensions of other pieces or parts of this
contrivance, so his heart complyeth with, and he cordially embraces the same.

3. We may be hereby helped to understand, the several and various expressions
used in Scripture, to point forth faith, acting on its object; for, however
these be not always one and the same, but different; yet the same whole object
is implicitly understood; and these particulars, expressly mentioned, must not
be considered abstractly, or alone; but according to their several place in the
grand design, and with respect thereto; as when the object of faith is said to
be He, who justifies the ungodly Romans 4: 5. and to be Him, who raised up Jesus
our Lord from the dead verse. 24. and in that same Chap. the object of Abraham's
faith, whereby he was justified, is the Promise, that God would make him a
Father of many Nations etc. verse. 17, 18. etc. all these must be considered
with respect unto Christ, the grand medium, who was appointed to be a Savior
to all Nations, and was to die and rise again, after satisfaction made to
Justice, and in and through whom alone God will Justify the poor sinner, that
is ungodly in himself. With reference here unto must we understand the
Publicans saying, God be merciful to me, a sinner, and the saints under the Old
Testam. their so frequent fleeing to the Grace, Mercy and Bounty of God; for
all this was with respect to the only Sovereign way, that the Lord had
condescended upon, whereby to show forth, and manifest, his Mercy and Goodness
and Grace to sinners. In the New Test. we find more express mention made of
Christ, as the object of faith, as Jesus of Nazareth, the true Messiah, who was
promised Ioh. 20: 31. 1. Ioh. 5: 9, 10, 20. Ioh. 1, 45. Act. 13: 38. or as Lord
and God. Ioh. 20: 28. as the Son of David. Mat. 15: 21. and 9: 27, and 20: 30.
and 21: 42. As the Son of God Ioh. 9: 35. as the Christ the Son of God Ioh. 11:
27. Act. 8: 37. as come forth from God Ioh. 16: 30, 27. as the Lord Jesus Act.
16. 31. as raised by God from the dead Romans 10: 9 as one that died and rose
again 1. These. 1: 14. as sent of God Ioh. 17: 8. that Jesus is the Christ. 1.
Ioh. 5: 1. So that under all these and the like, one and the same thing for
substance is pointed forth; though some particular in that grand design of
grace is more expressly and immediately pointed at; yet that particular is to be
understood with reference to the whole; and the whole is to be included. So
also when God is mentioned as the object of faith; either absolutely 1. Pet. 1:
2. Tit. 3: 8. Heb. 5: 1. 1. These. 1: 8. or in Reference to Christ, whom he sent
Ioh. 5: 24. or through whom he is believed in 1. Pet. 1: 21. or the like, the
matter must be thus understood.

4. Hereby also may the Various Explications of this object of faith, given by
men, be some way understood and reconciled, when some say, the Mercy of God is
it, others say, the Promises, some Remission of sins, and the like? some God
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: for such as seem to restrict it most, may be
understood as not speaking exclusively of what else the Scripture mentions as
belonging thereunto.

5. All this notwithstanding, faith may have and has a special respect to
Christ as Priest, and making Satisfaction to justice, and laying down the
Ransome-money, and paying the debt, according to his undertaking as Surety, in
order to the particular benefit of Justification, and of Pardon of sins; as
was in part cleared above, and may be more spoken to afterward, in the
following Chapters.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The Righteousness of Christ is the special Object of Faith in Justification.
COnsidering what has been said at some length above, concerning the
imputation of the Surety-Righteousness of Christ, in order to Justification, we
needed not insist on this here; Seeing if what is said touching that fundamental
point hold, this will not endure much debate: Yet because Mr. Baxter in his
Apology against Mr. Blake. 11. is pleased to tell us, that Faith, which is the
Justifying condition, is not terminated on the Righteousness of Christ: And
that it is a mere fancy and delusion to speak of the receiving a Righteousness,
that we may be justified constitutive thereby, in such a sense, as if the
Righteousness were first to be made ours, in order of nature before, our
Justification, and then justification follow, because we are Righteous.

But, sure, this eyeing of, laying hold on, and leaning to the Righteousness of
Christ, holds clear correspondence with the experience of the Children of
God, not only at their first Conversion, when delivered from under the
Convictions of sin, and the terrors of the Law; but even afterward, when
exercised with new assaults of Satan, objecting unto them their Unworthiness,
and Filthiness, and hence inferring their exclusion from the face of God: for
then their maine quieting refuge is the Righteousness of Christ; wherein they
seek only to be found, acknowledging that in themselves, they are but sinners,
and so rejecting their own worth and holiness, as too ragged to cover the shame
of their nakedness, wherein they have the Apostle Paul going before them Phil.
3: 8, 9. (which may also serve, for a scriptural proof and ground of the truth
in hand) He rejected all these things, wherein sometime he gloried, and he did
now (even long after his Conversion, while a prisoner at Rome and after all his
great Labor and Pains in spreading the Gospel) count all things (nothing is
here excepted) but loss (says he) for the excestency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus, my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do
count them but dung. that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having
mine own Righteousness (it is nor good that Mr. Baxter should carp at Writters
and Preachers, for speaking and teaching after this manner, as he does Cath.
Theol. Mor. Works. 176.) which is of the Law; but that, which is through the
faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by faith. This says ^early,
that in order to Justification before God, faith laith hold on a Righteousness,
which is of God, and which is had by the Faith of Christ.

And this Surety-Righteousness of Christ, is that which can only prove suitable
unto the case of a wakened sinner, pressed with the guilt of sin, and seeing
justice armed against him, stopping his way to life, because of his
Un-righteousness. What can be more welcome unto such a sinner, than the news
of a Righteousness, and of having Christ to become the Lord his Righteousness,
as made of God Righteousness? And what can his faith grippe to more earnestly,
than to this Righteousness, that he may be covered therewith, and think with
joy of appearing before God? How else shall he think to be justified by God,
who is just, even when the justifier of a believing sinner. He knows, that
God is Righteous, and will not acquit the guilty; and therefore he must have a
Righteousness, that he may be in case to stand before the Righteous God: So
that he can have no peace, till by faith he have interest in the
Surety-Righteousness of Jesus Christ; for he knows, that he has none of his
own, and that there is none any where else to be had.

And further, this way does exceedingly serve to demonstrate, upon the one
hand, the Righteousness of God, who will not Justify without a Righteousness,
or one that has no Righteousness; and upon the other hand, it commends the
riches of the free Grace and Mercy of God, when the sinner sees, how free Love
has provided such an alsufficient Remedy, a Righteousness against which, no
exception can be made, and a Righteousness, under the wings of which, he may
saifly hide and shelter himself and being covered with which, he may rest
confidente of acceptance, and so may with full peace of mind rest here, and
rely upon it. As also it serves exceedingly to abase man in his own eyes, and
to make him for ever keep a low sail, and walk humbly before this God, and
give Him the Glory of all.

Hence this Righteousness is called the Righteousness of Faith, or of Christ
believed in, and laid hold on Romans 4: 13. and the Righteousness of God, which
is by faith of Jesus Christ Romans 3: 22. Phil. 3: 9. and a Righteousness through
the faith of Christ, ibid. All which and the like expressions do manifestly
say, that faith laith hold on a Righteousness, even on the Righteousness of
God. And this Righteousness is said to be unto all, and upon all them that
believe Romans 3. 22. (...). And imputed, or reckoned upon their score. Rom 4:
24. Mr. Baxter in the forecited book Cath. Theol.. 131. says that the meaning
of this Romans 4: 24. is no more, but that God reputeth, or judges us Righteous.
But how can he repute us Righteous, unless we have a Righteousness, either of
our own, or from some other: of ourselves we have not a Righteousness, unless
he account believing all our Righteousness, against which we have said enough
above; and the very words of the text will not admit of this gloss, as was
also shown above. If it be the Righteousness of Christ, who was delivered for
our Offenses, and was raised again for our Justification verse. 25. then it is
fit object for faith to lay hold on, it being Christ's Surety-Righteousness, or
the Righteousness, which he performed and wrought out, when he was delivered
for our offenses; and which was publicly declared to be accepted, when he was
raised again for our Justification. And whatever Mr. Baxter think, this is,
and must be so far made our own, through the gracious Imputation of God, that
the Righteous God, whose judgment is to according to truth, may pronunce us
Righteous, and accept of us, as such. But says he, Imputing Righteousness to
us, is a consequent act (after faith) of God as judge, and not an antecedent
donation] Yet it is such a consequent act of God, as necessarily presupposes
God's free antecedent Donation: for it is God's reckoning that Righteousness
upon the believers score, in order to the Justifying of him thereupon; and
because this Righteousness must be given, we not having it of ourselves, there
must a free donation antecede, and this groundeth Faiths accepting thereof, and
receiving of it. And himself immediately before this, says, that God, giving us
all the effects, or Salvation merited, in it self properly, is said also not
unfitly to give us the merit or Righteousness, which procured them, that is, as
it was paid to God for us, to procure them. And if so, why does he inveigh so
much, in the foregoing pages, against the orthodox doctrine of Imputation;
seeing he cannot but know, that they do not say, that God does give us the very
habits of holiness (as he speaks there) which were in Christ, nor the
transient acts which he performed, nor the very sufferings which he under-went,
nor the Relation of Righteous Satisfactory and Meritorious, as it was that
numerical relation, which immediately resulted from Christ's own habits, acts
and sufferings: They dream of no such Translation of accidents. But only say,
that seeing (as Mr. Baxter here and elsewhere says) this satisfactory
Righteousness was paid to God for them, and accepted of God, as a complete and
Satisfactory Righteousness, they by faith coming to be united unto Christ
(according to the way and method, which the Lord has wisely condescended
upon) have an interest in that Satisfactory Righteousness, as legally made over
unto them, and therefore have the benefits purchased thereby; as when a
stranger, who was not under the Obligation, comes to pay the debt of a debtor
lying in prison, the payment must in Law sense be made, and accounted the
debtors, or put upon his score, and received upon his account, ere he can
therefore be relieved out of Prison.

But in the forecited place against Mr. Blake he makes this Righteousness and
Remission all one thing: And indeed if it were so, it could not belong to the
Object of Faith, other ways, than as an end, intended to be obtained thereby.
But to us Remission is a benefit purchased by this Righteousness, and
follows upon our having interest therein through Faith, according to the
appointment of God: a Pardoned man, as such, is not a Righteous man. But he
tells us there, that our divines of the Assembly do perfectly define justifying
Faith to be, a receiving and resting on Christ alone for Salvation, as he is
offerest in the Gospel. It is of dangerous consequence to define justifying
faith to be the receiving of justification, or Righteousness. Ans. Here we have
Justification and Righteousness made one and the same, which with me, differ as
Cause and Effect; our divines of the Assembly give a more full definition or
description of Justifying Faith, in the Larger Catechism, and there tell us,
that thereby the convinced sinner receives and rests upon Christ, and (N.B.)
his Righteousness therein (i.e. in the Gospel) held forth, for pardon of sin,
and for the accepting and accounting of his person Righteous in the sight of
God for Salvation. And if Mr. Baxter would say so much, as is here, this debate
would be at an end, and yet I find not this among his exceptions, against that
Catechism, in his Confession. And when our devines mentione this Receiving and
Resting upon Christ's Righteousness, they make not Justifying Faith to be a
receiving of Justification; but the one a cause of the other: And he adds a
little thereafter, (which is considerable to our present purpose) That receptio
Ethica activa of justification, or of Righteousness (for they are both one
thing with him) goes before Justification, as a small and secondary part of
condition, it being the accepting of Christ himself, that is the maine
condition: And we never spoke of the receiving by Faith of Christ's
Righteousness, as exclusive of the receiving of himself. He tells us next. That
Christ's Satisfaction or Redemption (solvendo pretium) and merit, cannot
properly be received by us; for they are not in themselves given to us. We
grant the price was paid to God, but it being paid to God for us, it may be
imputed to us, and reckoned upon our score; and we may that way receive it by
faith, and Lean our soul upon it, to the end, that the fruit of it may be given
to us. And likewise he grants ibid. that justifying faith does as necessarily
respect Christ's satisfaction and merit, as it does our Justification thereby
procurea. If he will grant, that Justifying Faith respects Christ's
Satisfaction and Merit, as the Cause, in which we are to have an interest, and
under which we must refuge our selves, and upon the account of which we are to
be accepted of God, and accounted Righteous in his sight, all is granted that I
desire.

But his following exceptions are founded upon a manifest mistake of his own,
taking this Righteousness, whereof we speak, and Justification, for one and the
same thing: for he says. To say therefore, that the justifying act of faith,
is only the receiving of Christ's Righteousness, or of Justification, is to
exclude the receiving of Christ himself, any way, even to exclude him as
Satisfier from the justifying act: and to exclude from that act his Redemption
by Bloodshed, Satisfaction and Merit. The mistake here is palpable: for we
look on Righteousness, which faith receives, as the Cause, and on
Justification as the Effect: when this Righteousness of Christ, the causa
proca^arctica of our Justification, is received by faith, it is impossible, but
Christ himself must be received as a Satisfier: his Redemption, Bloodshed,
Satisfaction and Merit, cannot be excluded; for therein was the Righteousness,
which faith laith hold upon, in order to Justification. He adds for
confirmation, for if it be only the receiving of Righteousness, that is the
justifying act; than it is neither the receiving of Christ himself, nor yet the
acknowledgment of his Satisfaction and Redemption by his blood. But this is
nothing but what was said, repeated again, Neither do we say, that the
Justifying act of Faith, as it is called, is a receiving of Christ's
Righteousness, as distinct from himself: nor is it imaginable, how Christ's
Righteousness can be received, without the acknowledgment of his Satisfaction,
and of the Redemption by his blood.

How he can say, that Christ's Righteousness and our Justification, are but one
and the same thing, I do not understand, when as he says himself* Cath. Theol.
of moral works Sect. 13. n. 208. that our first constitutive justification
(which is it whereof we are here speaking, to wit, that by which a soul is
brought from an Unrighteous to a Righteous State, as he speaks, n. 207.) is
in its nature a right to impunity and to life, or glory. Now sure, this
Relation, or Relative state is one thing, and the Righteousness of Christ, the
ground and meritorious cause thereof is a far other thing. And when he says
Apology ag. Mr. Air.. 4. that he is well content to call Christ's
Righteousness of Satisfaction the matter of ours, and that the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, taken for Donation, is the form of Constitutive
Justification, and that sentential adjudication of Christ's Righteousness to
us, is the form of our sentential Justification.

That Faith in order to Justification does in a special manner, eye the
Righteousness of Christ, is clear from Esai. 45: 24, 25, Surely shall one say,
in the Lord have I Righteousness; and then follows. In the Lord shall al^ the
seed of Israel be justified. This truth is also clearly held forth, when faith
in the matter of Justification, is called faith in Christ's blood Romans 3: 25.
for when faith laith hold on the blood of Christ, it cannot but lay hold on his
Surety-Righteousness, whom God set forth to be a Propitiation; and in and
through whom there was a Redemption wrought verse. 24. for this hlood was the
Redemption-money, the price paid, in order to Redemption. 1. Pet. 1: 18, 19.
And the blessedness of Justification is through the Imputation of
Righteousness, without our works Romans 4: 6. and therefore faith, in order to
the obtaining of this blessedness, must eye and rely upon this Righteousness
which is the Righteousness of him, who was delivered for our offenses and was
raised again for our Justification verse. 25. where we may also observe a
manifest difference betwixt this Righteousness, (which consists in his being
delivered for our offenses) and our Justification; the one being the Cause (as
was said) and the other the Effect.

Moreover, this same truth is clear from R^m. 5: 17. where we read of the
receiving of the gift of righteousness, which is by faith, and that in order to
a reigning in life by one Jesus Christ: where also we see a difference put
betwixt this gift of Righteousness and Reigning in life; which is also more
clear, in the following verse. 18. Even so by the righteousness of one, the
free gift came upon all men unto Justification of life: this righteousness of
one, to wit, one Jesus Christ, is the Cause, and the Justification of life, is
the Effect: And further this difference is again held forth. verse. 19, 20, 21.
Our being made Righteous is different from the obedience of one Christ Jesus;
and by the Imputation of this Obedience to us, do we become Righteous, as our
being made sinners is different from Adam's act of Disobedience; and we are
made sinners by the Imputation of it to us. And as sin and death are different,
when it is said, that sin has reigned unto death; so Eternal life is different
from Righteousness, when it is said, so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life.

We need say no more of this, seeing it clearly follows, from what was
formerly at length confirmed; to wit, That justification is by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Faith in Justification respects not in a special manner Christ, as a King;
but as a Priest.
MR. Baxter did long ago in his Aphorisms tell us; That the Accpting of Christ
for Lord, is as essential a part of Justifying Faith, as the accepting of him
for our Savior; that is, as he explained himself, That faith, as it accepts
Christ, for Lord and King, does justify. And this was asserted by him, to the
end, he might clear and confirm how Sincere Obedience comes in with Affiance
to make up the Condition of Justification; for his Thesis LXXII. did run thus.
As the accepting of Christ for Lord (which is the hearts Subjection) is as
essential a part of Justifying Faith, as the accepting of him for our Savior;
So consequently, sincere obedience (which is the effect of the former) has at
much to do in justifying us before God, as Affiance ( which is the fruit of the
later. Hence the question arose, and was by some proposed thus; Whether faith
in Christ qua Lord, be the justifying act: or, whether the Acceptance of
Christ, as a Lord, and not only, as a Priest, does justify. And Mr. Baxter in
his Confess. p. 35.. 13. says, that it is not only without any ground in God's
word, but fully against it, to say, that faith justifies only, as it
apprehends Christ, as a Ransom, or Satisfier of justice, or Meriter of our
Justification; or his Righteousness as ours; and not as it receives him, as
King, or as a Savior from the stain and tyranny of sin.

I have showed before, that the moving of this question, is of little use, in
reference to that end, for which, it seems, it was first intended, to wit, to
prove, that Sincere Obedience has as much to do in Justification, as faith, or
Affiance has; where I did show the inconsequence of that consequence. That
because Justifying Faith receives Christ, as King; Therefore Obedience is a
part of the Condition of Justification, yea, or therefore a Purpose, or a
promise of Obedience is a part of the Condition of Justification. So that, in
order to the disproving of that Assertion, that makes obedience, or a Purpose,
or a promise of obedience, an essential part of the Condition of Justification
we need not trouble ourselves with this question: Yet, in regaird that the
speaking to this may contribute to the clearing of the way of Justification by
faith, (which is our great design) we shall speak our judgment there anent.
And in order thereunto, several things must be premitted.

As 1. The question is not, whether Christ, as a King, belongs to the
compleet and adequate object of that faith, which is the true and justifying
faith: for this is granted, as was shown above, this faith, being the same
faith, whether it be called True Faith, or Saving Faith, or Uniting and
Covenanting faith, or Justifying faith, it must have one and the same adequate
Object.

2. Nor is the Question, whether Faith in order to Justification, does so act
on Christ, as a Priest, as to exclude either virtually, or expressly, the
consideration of any other of his offices, or of Christ under any other of his
offices: for under whatever office Christ be considered; when faith acts upon
him, whole Christ is received, and nothing in Christ is or can be excludes; So
that there is no virtual exclusion; nor can there be any express exclusion of
any of his offices, when he, under any other of his offices is looked to a
right and received; for such an exclusion would be an open rejection of Christ,
and no receiving of him.

3. When we speak here of receiving of Christ, as a Priest, or in respect of
his Sacerdotal Office, it is all one, as if we named his Sacerdotal work, or
what he did in the discharge of that office, offering up himself a Satisfactory
Sacrifice, and giving his blood, and life for that end, and suffering inwardly
and outwardly, what was laid upon him by the Father, in order to the making of
full Satisfaction to justice, and paying our debt, by his Righteousness Active
and Passive.

4. Nor do we, when we speak of Faiths acting on Christ, as a Priest, so limite
and restrick the same unto his Sacerdotal work, as to exclude any thing, that
is presupposed thereunto, concomitant thereof, consequential thereunto and
depending thereupon, or is necessarily requisite unto the effectual application
of the same unto our Justification and Advantage. When therefore it is said,
that in Justification, faith eyeth in a special manner the Sacerdotal office
and work of Christ, there is no exclusion of the Consideration of that
fountain Love, Grace, and favor of God, whereby Christ was given unto the
chosen, and appointed to be their Priest, and to make Satisfaction for them:
Nor of his foregoing Incarnation, Obedience, Resurrection, Asctnsion etc. nor
of other thlngs that are necessarily requisite hereunto, for all these are
necessarily herein included.

5. When we speak of the Souls acting faith, in order to Justification, we do
not suppose, that at that time, the troubled soul can have no other end or
design before his eyes; nor be troubled with no other evil, or with the
thoughts thereof, that he would be delivered from; and so in order to getting
help therein, and a remedy thereof, cannot eye something else in Christ,
answering and suiting the same: for a Sinner in that case, may be troubled with
the sense of the great Unbeleef and Hardness and Impenitency of his heart, the
Unholiness of all his ways, his Blindness and Ignorance; as well as with the
sense of his Guilt, and of his being under the Curse; and so may and must be
supposed, in coming to Christ for relief, to eye in a special manner, that in
Christ, which is answerable to these his Necessities: And in this respect, a
Sinner may be said to go to Christ, as a Prophet, and as a King, as well as to
him, as a Priest; But in reference to these evils, they are not said or
supposed to go to Christ, for Justification; for that respects merely their
state of Sin and Guilt.

6. But the real question should be, what is the special and practical meaning
of these words, we are justified, or live by faith: and to this end, the true
Question is, what special way does faith act on Christ (for it is here
presupposed, that Christ must be the Object of Justifying Faith) in order to
the sinners Justification? or what is that in Christ, that faith specially
eyeth, and carries the soul out unto, when Justification before God is only
designed? Or when the wakened sinner is earnestly desireous of delivery from
the Guilt of sin and from the Curse of God, and of enjoying the Favor and
Reconciled Face of God, whether he is to apply himself by faith unto Christ, as
King, or unto Christ, as a Priest and to what he did as a Priest, for the
relief of sinners?

In answer to the Question thus proposed, I say, That the wakened sinner, in
that case, while seeking relief from sin and guilt, and from the curse, by
Absolution and Justification, in the sight of God, in compliance with the
Gospel method and design, making Justification to be by faith, and in
obedience to the Gospel command, saying, Believe and be justified, is to act
faith in a special manner on Christ's Mediation and Satisfaction; and to betake
himself to Christ as a Priest, and rest on him and on what he di^ as a Priest,
that is, on his death, Blood, and Satisfaction. This is it, which others call
the justifyinh Act of Faith: or that special act of faith, required in order to
Justification.

Though what was said in the foregoing Chapter to prove, that Christ's
Righteousness is the Object of Justifying faith, may serve for confirmation of
this; Yet we shall, in short, lay down these grounds of proof, and

First Several Scriptnre-expressions, where Justification is spoken of and
cleared in its causes, show and point forth what is, which faith should
specially eye, and be employed about, in order to the interesting of the soul
in this benefit: such as

1. Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption
that is in Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through
faith in his blood. Here, as justification is said to be brought about and
effect^at through the Redemption of Christ, who was a Propitiation, and this
respects only his Priesthood; so the special object of faith, in this
affair', is expressly said to be his Blood, through faith in his blood, to tell
us, that all such, as would have interest in this Privilege of justification,
must by faith eye the Propitiation, the Bloody Sacrifice of Christ; And by
blood we find it often said, that Remission of sins is had Col. 1: 14. Ephesians. 1:
7. Mat. 26: 28. and not without it. Heb. 9: 22.

2. Romans 4: 24, 25.- to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him, that
raised up Jesus, our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our offenses,
and was raised again for our Justification. As justification, here is held as
procured and brought about by Christ, as a Priest, for as such, was he
delivered for our offenses, and as such was he raised, or brought out of
prison, so faith here, even when acting upon God, yet it is with a special
relation to Christ's Priesthood, or to his Satisfaction; for it is a Believing
on him, that raised up Christ Jesus, our Lord, from the dead, that is, in God
as declaring he has now received full Satisfaction from the Cautioner Christ
by bringing him out of prison; and consequently in that Satisfaction given by
Christ, wherewith the Father is now well pleased. See also Romans 10: 9.

3. Romans 5: 9, 10. Much more then being now justified by his blood: for if when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son etc. As the
way is here pointed out, how justification and Reconciliation was effectual by
Christ, to wit, by his Blood and Death, or by what he did and suffered as
Priest and Cautioner; so accordingly is our faith directed to look, in order to
a partaking of this Justification and Reconciliation, especially when this is
so clearly and expressly explained to us.

4. Romans 8: 33, 34. - It is God that justifies - It is Christ that died, yea
rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes Intercession for us. All which grounds of justification belong to his
Priestly Office. And, if these be here laid down for grounds of Comfort and
Assurance unto Believers, to fottifie them against all Assaults of the Accuser
of the brethren, and against all Accusations, or Condemnations of men or
devils; sure, the way is also pointed out, how faith should act, in order to
their being brought into a state of justification.

5. 2. Cor. 5: 19, 21. To wit God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself; not imputing their trespasses unto them for he has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
The way how Reconciliation was brought about, is here set down, to the end the
ministry of Reconciliation, mentioned verse. 18. and whereby persons are
beseeched to be Reconciled verse. 20. may be understood, and such as are called
upon may know in special what to do, in order to be reconciled, to wit close
with him, and be in him, and be united to him, who was made sin, for sinners,
that they might be clothed with a sufficient Righteousness in him: so that this
points out Faiths eyeing Christ, as such a Cautioner, having the debt of
sinners imputed to him, and becoming a Sacrifice for sin.

6. Gal. 2: 16, 20. - We have believed in Christ, that we might be justified by
the faith of Christ. And what he did, when he thus believed in Christ, that he
might he j^stified, he plainly tells us verse. 20. saying I am crucified with
Christ: thus he wan to the life of justification; by eyeing Christ on the
cross, making satisfaction unto justice, and assenting unto that way, and
acquieseing in it, and resting and relying upon it. And in the same verse. he
tells us, that his faith by which he lived, was on the Son of God, who have
himself for him, that is, unto death.

7. Gal. 3: 11, 13. The just shall live by faith. This is the Text we are upon,
and we have cleared how this life here mentioned is the life of justification;
But what is the special object of this faith, in order to justification? That
is clearly enough pointed to verse. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, being made a curse for us. It is Christ, and Christ as Redeeming
from the Curse of the Law, and that by being made a curse for us; which only
looks to his Priestly office.

8. Phel. 3: 9, 10, 11. Paul was desireous to be found in Christ, and to be
partaker of his Righteousness alone, which was by faith* But what was it in
Christ, that the eye of his Faith was mainly fixed upon? He shows that verse.
10: 11. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable to his death etc. Christ's
Sufferings, Death and Resurrection were most in his eye.

9. Ioh. 3: 14, 15. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even
so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have eternal life. The special object of faith here is Christ, as
lifted up, that is, as Crucified. Ioh. 12: 32, 33.

It will not be sufficient for weakening of these reasons, to say. That none of
these conclude, that faith in order to Justification, eyeth Christ as a Priest
only: for (1) They sufficiently prove, that faith in this matter of
Justification goes to Christ, as a Priest, and eyeth his Sacrifice, Blood and
Redemption through his death; and we are called to prove no more, because it
lies upon those, who are of another judgment, to show us from Scripture, that
Faith, in order to the obtaining of justification, acts on Christ's Kingly
office, and receives him, as Lord. (2) We know what outcryes Papists make
against the like Arguments of Protestants for justification by faith, because
it is not said, we are justified by faith alone. (3) Though the Scriptures do
not as plainly say, that faith in justification does not in an especial manner
eye Christ, as King and Prophet; as it says, we are not justified by works;
Yet we are bound to follow the light of the word, and to regulate our
conceptions, by what we find there expressed, and if we find not any mention
made of faith in Christ's command or Government, or the like relating to his
Kingly office, as we hear of Faith in his Blood and the like relating to his
Priestly office, we may saifly judge, that the one, being so clearly mentioned
and so frequently, is a denying of the other, that is never mentioned.

Secondly. The very case and condition, wherein such are, who are desireous
justification, may clear this: for they are now awakened, and made to see
their natural state of death, wherein they are under the sentence of the Law,
under the Curse and Malediction of God: And therefore the thing, which their
soul now seeks after, is a suitable Relief, something that may answer this
case and may prove a fit Relief to them thus imprisoned, and in chains,
because of their Debt and Transgressions: And therefore, as all Reason
requires; so experience proves, that these wakened sinners seek after the
Satisfaction through the Death and Merits of Christ, that they may have an
Interest therein, and the benefit thereof, to the quieting of their souls;
They lay hold on the Sufferings of Christ, that they may be hid in his wounds
(as it were) that so they may be healed by his stripes; and have a
Righteousness, under which they may with confidence stand, and appear before
God; They become crucified with Christ, sweetly acquiesceing in, resting
satisfied with, contentedly accepting of, and confidently resting and relying
upon, his Merits, his Death, his Payment and Sntisfaction (...) justice. Seeing
then, that this (as experience proves) is the way, that pursued souls take, to
refuge themselves under a Crucified Christ, to flee to his Death and Merits,
this, or Christ as a Priest dying and paying the debt, must be the special
Object of the Faith of an hunted soul, panting after justification, or freedom
from Condemnation.

Thirdly, Christ's other Offices, as his Kingly, or Prophetical office, do not
hold him forth, as immediately suitable unto souls under this pressure; nor is
there any thing properly belonging to these offices, that promises immediate
Relief unto a Soul, in this case, seeking after Reconciliation with God, and
Pardon of sinners, which is only had by Christ's Death and Blood Romans 5: 9, 10.
and 3: 25. Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14. Christ by his Kingly or Prophetical office,
does not act toward God, in the behalf of sinners, but by his Priestsly
office he does Heb. 5: 1, 5, 6, 7. And it is after this, that poor sinners,
pursued with the sense of wrath, do seek, and this can only give present and
futable Relief.

Fourthly. The Faith of Believers under the sense of sin and guilt, under the
Law, was thus led to act on the promised Messiah, when he was typified unto
them by their Sacrifices, and they were to put their hands on the head of the
Sacrifice, thereby, rolling their sin and guilt upon the Sacrifice, or on Him
rather, who was the true Sacrifice, represented by these outward Sacrifices,
and thereby professing their Faith in Him, as the only Satisfying Sacrifice,
that could make Atonement, and Pacify an angry God, and deliver them from
wrath.

Fifthly, Christ is held forth, as having taken an these different offices, and
as to show his being a full and compleet mediator, able to answer all our
necessities, and ^s authorized to give forth suitable relief; so to instruct us
how (...), and to act faith upon him sutabl^e, with hope and confidence,
Therefore as he is a King to subdue Enemies, the faith of his people is to act
upon him, as such, when they would have their spiritual Enemies subdued; and as
He is a Prophet to teach, the faith of his people must act upon him, as such,
when they would have Light, Counsel and Direction; so, as He is a Priest to
Die, Satisfy, make Atonement, Reconciliation and Peace, their Faith is to act
upon him, as such, when they would have Guilt removed, and Peace made up
betwixt God, and their souls.

Sixthly. The end and design of asserting Christ, as King to be as specially
the Object of Faith, in Justification, as is Christ, as Priest, may
sufficiently render it suspicious; for it is, as we touched above, to bring-in
our Obedience, as distinct from Faith, or as included in it, to be the
Condition of Justification, the same manner of way, that Faith is: though, as
was cleared above, the consequence will not be found good. The real question
here (as is well observed by others) is not, whether any thing of Christ, ^ to
be excluded from being the Object of Justifying Faith. But what, in and of our
selves, under the name of Receiving Christ as King, is to be admitted to share
with Faith, in its place and interest, in our Justification?

Seventhly. To say, that faith acts, in order to justification, in as special
a manner, on Christ as a King, as on Christ as a Priest, is to alter the
Nature, Use and Ends of Faith, in this work and to give it the Place and Power
of a proper potestative condition, as it is a virtue and work of ours; and not
to look upon it as bringing all suitable supplies, in a distinct manner, from
Christ, as was shown above: and this is but suitable to that alteration of the
Nature of the New Covenant, that is made by the asserters of this, whereby it
is of the same specific nature with the Old Covenant of Works; as if it were
no more, but a new Edition thereof, with some alterations, as to the Conditions.

Let us now see, what Mr. Baxter says to the contrary, in his Catholic Theol.
p. 2. of moral works Sect. 7. p. 55. etc.

He tells us (n. 105.) That to be justified by faith in Paul's sense, is all one
as to be justified by becoming Christians. Ans. We grant, with him, that to be
a Believer, a Disciple, and a Christian, are all one, in the Gospel sense, and
that by the same Faith, by which one is justified, he is a Christian also: but
this proves not, that Faith, in order to justification, acts not, in a
special manner, on Christ, as a Priest; and we have found, how Paul both in his
Doctrine, and in his own Practice, explaineth the acting of Faith in
Justification. This may serve for an answer also to what he says (n. 106.) to
wit, that the faith, by which we are justified is essentially a believing
fiducial consent to our Covenant relation to God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost: for we grant, that it is but one and the same Faith, which does all
this, but yet this Faith may be conceived, as acting in a peculiar manner in
order to justification. We grant also, that it is the same faith, by which we
have Right to the benefits of the Covenant, and by which we are justified; Yet
we say, that in order to Justification, that same Faith, which receives whole
Christ, and thereby a Right to the benefits of the Covenant, acts in a
peculiar manner on Christ, as Priest, in order to Justification.

He tells us next (n. 108.) That the faith by which we are justified, has God
the Father for its object, as essentially, as Christ the Savior. Ans. And we
do not deny God the Father to be the Object of that Faith, by which we are
justified. And will he say, that Faith in God without Christ will justify a
sinner, or that there is any believing in God the Father now, without believing
also in Christ? The places he cites Ioh. 17: 3. and 13: 1. show the contrary.
Adam's Faith indeed was such before the fall; but our Faith now must be of
another kind. It is to as little purpose for him to say (n. 109.) That it is
as essential to this faith to believe in Christ, as the Purchaser of Holiness
and heaven, as to believe in him, as the purchaser of pardon: For he purchased
all as a Priest, and not as a Prophet or King and when faith acts on him, as
a purchaser, it acts on him, as a Priest. But he adds. And to believe in
him, as the Teacher and Ruler of the Church, as to believe in him, as the
justifier of believers. True because believing in him, as a Ruler, and
believing in him as the justifier of believers, are both to believe in him, as
a King: And this is not the thing that is denied, Believing in Christ, as the
justifier of believers, is not the same with believing in him, as a Priest, in
order to justification, which is the thing, he should have said here, if he
would have spoken to the purpose.

What he says (n. 110.) concerning Faith's being the act of the whole soul,
and having for its object God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost and in Christ,
all that is essential to him, as a Savior, was granted, and asserted also by
us formerly: but it makes nothing to our present question. He tells us (n.
111.) That to say, that some one only of these parts of Christ's office, as
they are conceptus inadaequati of a Savior, is the only object of justifying
faith or that by believing in Christ, as our Teacher and Ruler, as well as
Priest, and as a Justifying judge, as well as a justifying Sacrifice, and as a
fulfiller of the Law, is to ^xpect justification by works, as Paul denies it.
This is a vain distinguishing, a falsifying the doctrine of Faith and
Justification, a departing from the Scripture simplicity by corrupting seeming
subtility, and one of those humane Inventions, which have wronged the Church.
Ans. These, are but angry words, and carry with them no force of reason: And
who is most guilty of vain distinguishing and of falsifying the doctrine of
Faith and Justification etc. he, or such as he opposes in this matter,
indifferent persons are at freedom to judge: And whether his new Doctrine, or
the old, which he so violently, in all his writtings, oppugneth, has more of
seeming subtility in it, to the wronging of the Church, in its peace and quiet,
every one may judge by the effects. But as to the matter in hand, he may know
(1) that there is a difference betwixt saying, that some one only part of
Christ's office is the only object of justifying Faith (as he here speak) and
saying; that faith (whose adaequate object is confessed to be as large, as he
himself does make it) in order to a souls justification, acts in special
manner on Christ as a Priest, not excluding Christ as a King, or as a Prophet,
but rather including whole Christ, according to the manner above mentioned,
(which is the thing we say.) (2) Where reads he of Faith in Christ (in order
to justification) as our Teacher, or Ruler or Justifying judge, or justifying
Sacrifice? He should remember what he said (n. 107.) when speaking against the
Phrase justifying faith, and faith justifying us, as being humane, and not
Scriptural at all. (3) Indeed believing in Christ as Teacher and Ruler etc, in
our sense, cannot infer justification by works: but he knows, that it was
for this end, to bring Works in with Faith, as equal Conditions, or parts of
one Condition of Justification, that this new question was stated by him, in
his Aphorisms; And whether such doctrine be consonant to Paul's or not, we
have seen in part above.

He adds (n. 112.) That it is but the same deluding subtilty, and vain
curiosity, playing with deceitful words, to say, that we are justified by
faith, quatenus recipit Christ justitiam, as it believes in Christ's Sacrifice
and perfect obedience only; and not as it believes in him, as Teacher and
Ruler, Sanctifier, judge. when the Scripture says no such thing at all, but
simply makes faith in Christ, ( supposing faith in God the Father) to be that,
by which we must be justified. Ans. We mind not to be startled at his bold and
angry expressions, for we meet with them so often. Whether the Scripture
warrandeth us to say, what we have said, or not, the Reader is at liberty to
judge, from what is said. And we have nothing here yet said by him, to prove,
that we are justified by Faith in Christ, as Teacher, or Ruler, which is it we
are looking for here.

More of this Stuff we have (n. 113.) This distinction (says he) is founded
on another falsehood supposed, which is that the effects of all Christ's saving
works, are as distinctly to be ascribed to Receiving acts of faith, as they are
to the the several procuring acts of Christ, the object of Faith, which is
another corrupting addition to God's word. Ans. Who it is that says so, as to
all the several effects, I know not; Nor do I see any necessity to say so; as
to some, and in special, as to Justification, we but follow the Scripture,
going before us, as is shown. And we make no addition; but he is the man, that
is singularly guilty of adding to God's word, in this point; for he says,
that faith, in order to justification, acts not only in a special manner on
Christ, as Priest (which is the truth, we say, and own with the Scriptures)
but also on Christ, as a King, and as a Prophet, and as a judge; and yet gives
us us not one passage of Scripture to confirm this, but thinks we must be
satisfied with his assertions, subtle distinctions, vain and curious
expressions, answering his own Philosophical Notions, with which he seems to
be much taken, and we very little. What follows there, I have nothing to do
with.

He has a large discourse of various Receivings (n. 114. 115.) to what
purpose, as to the business, we are now upon, I do not well see; yet let us
see, how he ends it, God's Covenant (says he) does give us Christ and life,
that is, Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification, in title or right,
in one gift, to be accepted by one entire faith, as the Condition; not making
at all, the order of the gifts and faiths respect to them in that order, to be
any of the Ratio Proprietatis. Ans. (1) Will he not distinguish betwixt having
of these benefits in Title or Right, and having them in possession? He must,
sure, or he must say, that believers are already perfectly Sanctified, and
Glorified. (2) Will he say, that there is no more required to the actual
Possession of Glory and full Sanctification, than here he says is required
unto the Title? But it is like, he will comprehend under this Faith, all after
Gospel-obedience; But then, all this must preceed to justification etc. as well
as to actual Glorification, and so none shall be justified, till they be
Glorified, or he must admit of differences here. (3) As notwithstanding of what
he says here, he will, I suppose, grant that Faith has a Further and special
acting or manner of acting on Christ, in order to obtaining of Light, Life,
Strength, and other things necessary in and for grouth in Sanctification; so he
may suffer us to say, that notwithstanding of this, Faith in a special manner
eyeth and acts upon Christ, as a Priest, in order to justification; for there
is no more inconsistency in the one, than in the other.

The humane instances, whereby he thinks to make this plainer (n. 116.) do not
help here. A wifes relation (says he) is founded in her marriage consent. Now
if he be a noble man, a rich man, a wise man, a good man, and they knew all
this, and by knowing it were induced to consent, and are to have their
proportionable benefits by his Nobility, Riches etc. Yet their Title to these
benefits arises not from the act of their consent, as it respects these
benefits distinctly, but merely by consent unto their Relation. Ans.
Notwithstanding hereof, when the woman is charged by her Creditors to pay her
debt, her running to her husbands Wisdom, Nobility, and Goodness will not avail
her; but she must in a special manner run to his Riches and must from thence
bring a Satisfactory payment unto her Creditors: And if he, whom she has taken
for her husband, has already satisfied the debt, she is to instruct that
before the judges, before whom her alleidging, that her now-husband is a great
Noble man, and a most Wise man etc. will not avail. We grant also, that by
Faith the Believer is united and married unto Christ and has thereby a Right,
unto Him, and to all his Benefits, according to their necessity: Yet will the
Lord have, that, in order to their actual justification, they shall apply his
Merits, lay hold thereon, and as it were, produce the same in face of Court,
as the only ground of their Discharge: as in order to their actual
Glorification, he will have them doing many other things.

In end (n. 117.) he tells us, that to say [ faith justifies me, as it is the
receiving of Christ's Righteousness, and not as it is the receiving of Christ,
as a Teacher, Ruler] etc. is a confounding or seducing saying. But as yet we
have seen no strong reasons evinceing this to be such a seducing or confounding
saying: but the contrary is apparent from what is said. Let us see why he
judges thus. For (says he) if it intimate, that faith justifies us as an
efficient cause, [ principal or instrumental] it is false. But we have seen
before, that faith may be considered here as an Instrument, and to say this, is
neither to confound nor seduce: otherwise all the Reformed, yea and his friend
John Goodwine have been Confounders and deceivers, and none but Mr. Baxter,
with Papists and Socinians and some Arminians, are free of this charge. 2.
(says he) If it mean, that faith is the condition of justification, as it
receives Christ's Righteousness only, it has either one or two falsehoods. We
only say, that in order to the obtaining of justification, Faith acts in a
peculiar manner on Christ's Righteousness and Merits, and conceive that in
this, there is neither one, nor two falsehoods, 1. (says he) if it mean that
faiths receiving act is the formalis ratio conditionis, or that it justifies
not qua conditio donationis, but qua receptio justitiae Christ, it is false.
Ans. We are not here speaking precisely of the formalis ratio conditionis, in
such a Philosophical Notion: for we say, that Faith in order to Justification,
receives Christ's Righteousness; and that the Lord has so appointed. Let
Philosophers break their heads on these rations formales, and the qua's and
quae's; we speak of this matter, so as every soul concerned may understand it.
And then (says he) 2. that [only the Accepting of Righteousness justifies us,
that is, is the condition of justification] is a falsehood. This he should have
proved to have been a falsehood: but in all this discourse of this, we have had
nothing like a proof, only confident Assertions, and that in great number.

But in his Confession page 35. where he has the same discourse for substance,
he cites several passages of Scripture, on the margin, as if they were
confirmations of what he says: And yet not one of them comes home to the
point in hand, as a short view may discover. For Col. 2: 6. proves what we
deny not, to wit, that Believers receive Christ Jesus the Lord: We have shown
above, that whole Christ belongs to the Object of Faith that is Justifying:
but we are here speaking of the special acting of that faith, in order to
Justification. Psalm. 2: 12. only proves, that such shall perish, as do not
kiss and submit, to the Son and that kissing and submitting unto him, is
required in order to being saved. Mat. 11: 28, 29. says, that such as would
have rest and ease, that is freedom from sin and misery here and hereafter,
must come to Christ, and take his yoke upon them, and Learn of him: And in
order to that particular rest and ease, had in Justification, we say also, that
they must come to Christ, and take on his Righ^eousness, which is easy, though
it seem a yoke to unrenewed Nature. Luke 19: 27. Proves indeed, that such as
will not have Christ to reign over them, shall perish; but does* does not
prove, that in order to Justification, Christ must be received, as a King Romans
10: 9, 10. proves, that faith eyeth Christ, as raised from the dead by God,
(which respects his Death and Sacrifice) and that for a Righteousness, in
order to the life of Justification; which is what we say, Mat. 17: 5. and Mark.
9: 7. prove, what is not denied, to wit, that it is the will of God, that
Christ his only beloved Son should be heard and obeyed, in all things. And Ioh.
10: 3, 4, 9, 27. only proves, that Christ's sheep know and hear his voice: And
who denies this? Ioh. 12: 46, 47, 48. shows, what benefits believers shall
receive, and what shall be fall unbeleevers: but touch nor the point now in
hand. Act. 2: 30, 33, 34, 36, 38. Proves, that Christ is indeed a King, and
that all such, as would be saved, must receive him, as the exalted King. Act.
3: 22, 23, 26. Proves, that he is that Prophet, that was spoken of by Moses,
and that he Died, Rose again and sent forth the Gospel. to the end, that poor
sinners might be turned from their iniquities: But there is nothing here to
prove, that Faith, in its special acting, in order to justification, receives
and lays hold on Christ, as well as a Prophet, as on Christ, as a Priest.
Act. 5: 31. says, that Christ is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, for to
give Repentance to Israel and Remission of sins: but what is this to the
question now in hand? Ioh. 13: 35. and 15: 8. and 8: 31. shows the genius,
disposition, and kindly work of his disciples, to wit, to love one another, to
bear fruit, and to continue in his word; all which we willingly grant: Luke
14: 26, 27, 33. Evinceth, that right coming to Christ is inconsistent with a
predominant Love to any terrene thing, how near and dear so ever: But touches
not the question now in hand. These are all the passages, he adduceth there,
and none of them come near the question.

CHAP. XXXV.
Faith is the only Condition on our part, of the continuance of justification.
HAving spoken of Justification, as to its beginning, or as to a Believers
entering into that State of Life: and having spoken to some Questions for
further clearing of the truth: We come to speak a word or two of the
Continuance of this Privilege and State: That it is a continueing and permanent
State, we have seen above. The Question then, that we have to discuss, is, Upon
what terms and Conditions is this State continued? or what is it, which the
Lord requires in order thereunto? or whether any thing more be required of us
for continueing this Relation than was at first required to the making of it?
that is, whether Faith alone, or Faith together with Works of sincere
obedience, Mr. Baxter in his Confess, p. 47, n. 40. tells us, that there is much
more goes to the continuing and consummating our Justification, then does at
first to justify us as to the condition on our parts, to be performed to that
end: This Continueing of our State of Justification, and Not-losing of it, he
makes one and the same, and that, which he requires, as necessary unto the
Not-losing or Continueing of this State, he makes to be Sincere obedience, and
many particular materials of that obedience, as to be humble, to forgive
others, to confess Christ, and suffer for him, if called to it.

That we may know both the State of the difference, and the Consequence
thereof, we would premit these things.

1. It is readily and on all hands granted and yielded unto, that there is an
Holiness and Personal Obedience and Conformity to the Law, called for at the
hands of all Justified persons, that are come to age: The denial therefore of
what Mr. Baxter and others, that join with him, do here assert, cannot, with
any show of reason, be loaded with this foul inference, that hereby we cry
down, or lay aside all necessity of Holiness, and of sincere obedience: for we
still affirm that the Law is in force, and obliges unto obedience, and that
all such as are justified, have received a new frame and disposition of soul,
inclineing them to obedience; Yea and that they have now both peculiar
Obligations unto Holiness, and also Advantages and Helps thereunto: They are
his wormanship created in Christ Jesus unto Good Works, which God has before
ordained, that they should walk in them Ephesians. 2: 10.

2. Mr. Baxter tells us Confess. p. 102. that it is his strong opinion, and that
he is confident of it, that no justified person shall ever lose his
justification; and that God has promised to cause them persevere. This State
then is not to be compared with other States, which are losable and changeable
among men: nor can we with such freedom speak of Conditions of not loseing
that, which is fully secured from all loseing; as we may speak of the
Conditions of keeping and Not-loseing that, which may be and often is lost. We
can not then speak of the State of Justification, as we do of Marriage betwixt
man and woman: here there may be and are indeed Conditions required of each
part, in order to the keeping up of the Relation, and they may be called
Conditions of not loseing that Relation or Privilege: But as to justification,
which is not so loseable, to speak of Conditions of not loseing it, may
occasion Apprehensions in the minds of men of its being losable. It were
saifer then, in my apprehension, to enquire how or what way is this State and
Relation continued? or what is required on our part, in order thereunto? then
to enquire? what are the Conditions of Not-loseing this State?

3. Seeing Mr. Baxter grants Confess. p. 109. that no new sin destroys their
State of Justification, nor makes them cease to be God's reconciled Children,
seeing they are still united unto Christ, and have his Spirit, and have Faith
and Repentance, (at least as to the habit) and ( page 129.) That the habit of
Faith and Repentance, which is ever in them, qualifieth them for present
Remission of ordinary sins of infirmity, at least: And it is undeniable, that
the Lord's Spirit preserves them from such sins as are inconsistent with a
State of Justification, or that make an intercision in that State, and
consequently in their Adoption and Union with Christ: seeing, I say, all this is
granted, to what purpose is such a question as this here moved and stated,
anent the Conditions of Not-loseing this state?

4. The term Condition here is taken in the same sense, that it was understood
in, when the question was about the Condition of our first entry into the State
of Justification: and so they must take it here for a proper legal antecedent
Potestative condition: for if by condition here were meaned no more than a mere
Consequent Evangelick Condition: the question only would be. What is the Lord's
Way, Method and Manner, how and by which he preserves his own, in that State
of Justification? But, according to their acceptance of the word condition,
the question really comes to this, What that is, which believers betake
themselves unto, and which they can, may, and should plead with God upon, for
the continuance of their state, that is, of their Reconciliation unto, and
Acceptance with God, of the Pardon of their sins, and Right to glory?

5. The question is not, what is the Condition, or what is required on our part
for keeping the sense and evidence of our justification in our own*
Consciences: many things may be useful herein, that yet cannot be called*
Conditions of the Continuance, or Not-loseing of Justification: But the
Justification here spoken of, is that which is before God, whereby the Believer
is indeed brought into a State of Peace and Reconciliation with God, and has
obtained a Right unto the Inheritance of Life.

6. When we speak here of the continuance, or Not-loseing of Justification, the
Justification spoken of must be that State or Relation, where into the Believer
is already brought: for that only can be said to be continued, while we are
living, and that only can be said properly to be losed, or Not-losed, which a
man has: These seem then to be two distinct questions, What is the Condition
of our final Absolution in Judgment; and what is the Condition of the
continuance of our justification here; which Mr. Baxter seems to confound
Confess. p. 83. as the Papists do confound their second justification with the
last judgment, when they are pleading for works, being required as the causes
thereof.

7. Though, as we have seen before, Justification imports more than Remission
of sins; Yet in this question of the Condition of the Continuance of
Justification, the matter seems to be brought to this issue; whether works of
Obedience be the Condition of future Remission of sins, in the justified. And
though these may be conceived of, as distinct questions, yet the clearing of
the way of the Remission of future sins, may serve much to clear the present
Question; for if it befound, that the same course is taken for Remission of
future sins, that was taken at first, it will be manifest, that justification
is continued upon the same terms, or in the same manner, that it was at first
obtained, if properly we can speak at all of the Conditions of its Continuance.

Having premitted these things, the Question is, Whether faith alone, or works
alone, or faith with works, are the condition required on our part, for the
Continuance, or not-loseing of the state of justification? And I judge as faith
alone was required at first, in order to justification, so that alone is to be
called the Condition of the continuance of justification: or that the Condition
both of our first installing in that state of justification, and of the
Continuance of the Privilege, or of Believers continueing in that state, is the
same grace of Faith. Yet these two things would be noted. 1. That though the
first act of Faith in Christ, does suffice to the entering of a soul into the
state of justification; Yet we do not mean, that that one first, solitary,
and numerical act suffices for all time coming, albeit it suffices for making
up of the Relation, according to the appointment of God; for the same Faith is
to continue in its habit; Yea and in its actings. So that we state not the
Question so strickly, as Mr. Baxter seems to do, Confess. p. 47. when from
the Continuance of the habit of Faith, and from the renewing acts of that
Faith, required after the first act of Faith, he infers, that much more
goes to the continueing of our justification, than does at first justify us.
But our question is about the addition of sincere Obedience which he there
mentions. 2. When we suppose the Continuance of Faith, not only as to its
habit, but as to its renewed actings; we do not suppose, that the actings and
Effects, or Concomitans of Faith afterward, are every way the same, with what
they were at first; so that we may also yield to this difference, and grant
that some thing more may be requisite afterward, Particularly, in order to the
Remission of some heinous sin, in the acting of Faith, or in the Effects or
Concomitants thereof, at least as to measure, or outward significations, to
wit, in Godly sorrow, Humiliation, Forgiving of others, Restitution, or the
like; and yet it will still remain true, that justification is continued by
Faith, and not by Works.

For the proof of what we conceive to be truth, we lay down these grounds, both
from Scripture and Reason; as

1. The words of the Text, whereupon we are, do evince this: for it is said,
the just lives by Faith: And, as was cleared at the beginning of our
discourse, the words, as used by the Prophet Habbakuk, from whom they are
cited, are spoken of such, as were already Believers and Justified; and pointed
out the way, how they were to have a life, in an evil time; and how they were
to continue, or be kept in that State of Favor with God, whereinto they
were brought; to wit by Faith; for the just shall live by his Faith; and
accordingly the same words are cited by the Apostle Heb. 10: 38, 39. Now the
just shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. But we are not of them, that draw back, unto perdition, but of
them that believe to the saving of the soul. Where living by Faith is opposed
to drawing back, to wit, through unbeleefe; and as drawing back is unto
perdition, so believing is to the saving of the soul; and therefore the
Continuation of this life of justification unto the end, even unto the final
Salvation of the soul, is by Faith. This life of justification, as it is begun
by Faith (as the Apostle evinceth Romans 1: 17. and in our present Text citing in
both places these same words, for that end) so it is continued by Faith, as the
only condition thereof. And to say, that the particle only is not here added;
and therefore, other Works of Obedience must be, or may be adjoined here, in
this matter, notwithstanding it be said, the just lives by Faith, were in
effect to destroy the Apostles Argument, in our Text, where he uses this same
expression, without the addition of only, to prove, that we are not justified
by the works of the Law. Therefore, as this assertion, that the just lives by
faith, proves justification by faith without the works of the Law; so the same
proves the Continuation of Justification, without the works of the Law, as the
Condition thereof.

2. The Grounds and Causes of Justification, mentioned by the Apostle Romans 3:
22, 24, 25, 26. hold good als well in the Continuation, as in the first
beginning of justification; for there, as well as here, the Righteousness of
God without the Law is manifested, even the Righteousness of God, which is by
Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them, that believe; for there is
no difference. Justification first and lastly is free by his grace, through the
Redemption, that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set fort to be a
Propitiation, through faith in his blood. And there is not the least hint
given, that the matter is altered, in the Continuation of justification.

3. As the beginning of justification is so contrived, as all boasting is taken
away, so must the Continnance thereof be conceived to be? But if works be
admitted, as Conditions of the Continuance of Instification, though they be
denied to be the Condition of the Beginning thereof, all boasting shall not be
excluded, contrary to Romans 3: 27. for if a sinner, after that he is Justified
by the merit of Christ, at first, should have it to say, that for the
Continuance of his justification, he were beholden to his own Works, he should
surely have matter of boasting in himself, in so far at least. Papists think to
evite this Argument against their Second Justification by works, by saving that
all these good works are not of themselves, but of the Father of Lights. But
this shift will not help, for all these works are not the Righteousness of
Christ, but are works of Righteousness, which we do, and are excluded in this
matter, as occasioning boasting, or giving ground thereunto; as the next
Argument will more fully clear.

4. Abraham is said to have Righteousness imputed unto him, and Faith imputed
unto Righteousness, and so to be justified by faith, not only when he was first
justified, but many years after, even when he offered up Isaac his son. Romans 4.
and Iam. 2: 21, 23. So was he justified first and last, as, to have no ground
of glorying, and therefore not by works. Romans 4: 1, 3, 4. But it will be said,
that the Apostle James says expressly, in the place cited, that our father
Abraham was justified by works, when he had offered his Son Isaac on the Altar.
I Ans. Not to engage in the whole explication and vindication of that Passage
of Scripture here, which is of late to good purpose, and most satisfyingly done
by the learned Doctor Owen; I only say, that Abraham's being justified by
works, was such, as thereby the Scripture was fulfilled; which says, Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness etc. verse. 23. Now
if Abraham had been justified by works, properly so taken, the Scripture had
not been fulfilled, which said, he was justified by Faith, but the contrary had
been made good, to wit, that works were imputed to him, and he was justified by
them, as by his Righteousness. But the meaning is, that Abraham was justified
by faith, a true faith, that proved itself such, in time of a trial, by works
of obedience, and particularly by obedience to that command, whereby the Lord
tried or tempted him Genesis 22: 1, 2. and by such a Faith as wrought with his
works, and was perfected, or discovered and manifested to be real, after the
trial of the fire. Iam. 2: 22. It is a good direction that the learned Camero
gives here Op. fol. page 83. That we should hold fast the scope of the Apostle
James, and to this end, that we should take notice of the Apostles Proposition,
and of the Conclusion thereof. The Proposition is set down verse. 14. What does
it profit, my brethren, though a man say he, has faith, and have not works,
can faith, (or that faith) save him. Whereby we see, that the Apostles scope is
to prove, that that Faith, which the man supposes he has, who has no works,
is not that Faith, by which we are Justified and saved; and that because it is
unprofitable to poor indigent brethren, in necessity verse. 15. 16. is dead
verse. 17. 20, it can not be shown by works verse. 18. it is a Faith that devils
have verse. 19. All which and what follows is cleared from the Conclusion
verse. 26. for as the body without the Spirit is dead, so faith with works is
dead also.

5. It will always hold true, that God is he who justifies the ungodly and so
justifies him, that works not, but him to whom says is counted for
Righteousness. Romans 4: 5. But if the Continuance of Justification were by
works; and works were counted for Righteoulness, in order to the continuance of
justification; God should not continue to be the justifier of the ungodly: but
should justify the ungodly at first, and thereafter justify the Godly;
whereof the Text gives not the least hint.

6. The Instance of David clears this also Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. for David is
there Psalm. 32. speaking of himself, long after he was first justified, and yet
his words saying, blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven etc. prove
Justification by faith, without the works of the Law (which is the Apostles
scope, and the end, for which he adduceth this prove; and we must not think,
that any of his probations are impertinent) but this they could not prove, if
the ^ontinuance of justification were by works, and not by Faith only; as is
manifest; for who can infer, that the beginning of Justification is by Faith
alone, from this, that the continuance of justification is by works? but when
the Continuance of Justification is by Faith alone, it follows manifestly,
that the beginning of it must be by faith alone. Yea, it is hence also
manifest, that Pardon of sins committed after Justification, is not had by
works, but by the imputation of Righteousness, without works, for says Paul,
David describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
Righteousness, without works: And how did David describe this? When he said,
blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven etc.

6. Paul tells us Romans 5: 2. that as by Christ, we have access by Faith into
grace, so in the same we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.
Access into this grace must import the State of Justification, and as this is
by Faith, so is the standing and abiding therein; and consequently, the
continuance of Justification: and there is no word of works here at all, in
this whole affair.

7. Paul likewise confirms this, in his own Experience Gal. 2: 20. where he
tells us, how, and what way he lived unto God, being dead to the Law, to wit by
the Faith of the Son of God: and as this was true of the life of
Sanctification: so much more of the life of justification, both as begun and as
continued; for the whole life of a Christian, now crucified with Christ, and
living unto God, is here spoke to: And this is in opposition to the works of
the Law, as is clear from verse, 16. and from the following verse. 21.

8. The same is confirmed by the doctrine of the Apostle Ephesians. 2: 8, 9, 10.
for by grace are ye saved, through faith - not of works lest any man should
boast: for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works,
which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. This Salvation
takethin both the Beginning, Continuance and End of our life, of Justification;
and all this is by Faith alone, and expressly it is said, not to be by works,
and that, lest any man should boast (which confirms our third argument) and
these works are works of Gospel-obedience, and he tells us of another end and
use of these, than to be the Condition of the Continuance of our Justification,
even to be the way we should walk in, according to the fore-ordination of God,
and carry as his workmanshipe, created thereunto.

9. We have the Apostles own practice again set before us, to clear this
matter Phil. 3: 9. where he tells us, what was his maine design and work, not
at first only, when he was Justified; but long thereafter, to show what was his
constant design, and should be to the end; even labor to be found in Christ,
renuncing his own Righteousness, and to seek to be hid under and covered with
that Righteousness, which is through the faith of Christ, and which is of God
by Faith: So that, as he believed in Jesus Christ, that he might be justified
by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law. Gal. 2: 16. So here he
shows, that he will continue in this exercise to the end.

10. We may add to these, that passage of Paul. Tit. 3: 5, 6, 7. Not by works
of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us
(and this Salvation, sure, will take-in the Continuation of justification) by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghest; which he shed on
us abundantly, through Jesus Christ, our Lord: that being Justified by his
grace, we should be made heirs, according to the hope of eternal life. And when
he wills Titus in the following verse, to affirm, that they which have
believed in God, may be careful to maintain good works, as being good and
profitable unto men; he adds nothing of their being the Condition of the
Continuance of our justification, as sure, he had a fair occasion to do, if
the matter were so: but he had fully excluded them from all interest therein
verse. 5.

We may add to these a few Reasons.

1. Is it not considerable, in this point, that Paul speaking so frequently and
disputing at such a length of justification and clearing so many things about
it; Yet, in all his discourses thereupon, he never mentions this Condition
(to wit works of obedience) of its continuance. And, which is also
considerable, though he oftentimes press to holiness, and uses many Arguments
to that end; Yet he never makes mention of this place and office it has, in
and about the Continuance of justification; which sure, is supposed by the
Assertors, to be a mighty argument unto the constant exercise of Holiness.

2. We have proved above, that justification at first is by the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, received by faith; and we have shown, that Faith
in Justification specially eyeth the Righteousness of Christ, and rests
thereupon. If then our personal Obedience be brought in to be the Condition of
the Continuance of Justification, Christ's Righteousness is quite laid aside
from having any Further interest therein, and the Believer is never, after the
first time, to act faith upon the Righteousness of Christ; and the reason is,
because works do not act so upon the Righteousness of Christ, as Faith does;
neither have they that capacity to do so. But how absurd is it to think or say,
that the Believer has no more to do with Christ's Righteousness? And how
contrary is it to the fixed resolution of Paul Phil. 3: 9. And how inconsistent
with the whole scope of the Gospel, which is the power of God unto Salvation to
every one that believes, and wherein is the Righteousness of God revealad from
faith to faith, as it is written, the just shall live by faith Romans 1: 16, 17?
If it be said, That this cannot militate against such, as take-in Faith with
works. I Ans. It will militate against such; for works cannot act upon the
Righteousness of Christ, as faith does; and therefore if faith and works
concur as conditions, in one and the same manner, Faith is not here
considered, as acting on the Righteousness of Christ, but only as a work, and
another moral virtue: and so the Righteousness of Christ is quite excluded.

3. Believers by Faith in Christ, are completely justified, as to their state
and have all their bygone iniquities pardoned, and they are accepted as
children in his Favor Ioh. 1: 12, they are made heirs of God and joint heirs
with Christ Romans 8: 17, and are discharged (as Mr. Baxter grants himself
Confess. p. 102. Concl. 9.) from all guilt of Eternal Punishment, yea and of
all destructive Punishment in this life. Yea they are justified from all
things, from which they could not be justified by the Law Act. 13: 39. They are
blessed Romans 4, 5, 6. And all this is so fixed, that none can lay any thing to
their charge Romans 8: 33, 34. Yea they are said to have Everlasting Life, Ioh.
5: 24. Now, seeing all this is by Faith: what necessity is there for another
Condition, beside this same Faith, keeping fast by Christ, unto the Continuance
of this State? If it be said, that notwithstanding hereof, they are liable to
future sins, and these must also be forgiven; and in reference to the Pardon of
these, other Conditions may be required, and in that respect, these may be
called Conditions of the Continuance of Justification.

4. The answer to this will furnish us with another Argument; for answer
therefore I say. That works are not the Condition of Pardon of after sins, but
faith going to Christ, and washing in his blood 1. Ioh. 2: 1, 2. If any man
sin, we have an advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is
the propitiation for our sins. Christ is here proposed to sinning believers, in
his Priestly office, as the object of their Faith, in order to Pardon: And
Mr.Baxter, in the forecited place Concl. 11 says, that when ever the Justified
do commit any sin, they have a present and effectual certain remedy at hand
for their pardon, that is, the merit of Christ's blood, and his Intercession,
the Love of God, the Promise of Pardon, in which they have interest, and the
Spirit to excite them to Faith and Repentance. No word of works of obedience,
as Condition here. David in order to the obtaining of the pardon of his sin,
did betake himself to the free mercy of God, that he might get his sin covered,
his iniquities forgiven, and his sin not imputed unto him; Psalm. 32: 1, 2. and
this was, in Paul's judgment Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. a betaking himself to imputed
Righteousness without works. So he betook himself to mercy, and withal he
desired to be purged with hysope, Psalm. 51: 1, 7. which looked to the blood of
Christ, that only sprinkleth consciences. Heb. 9: 13, 14, 22.

5. If Justification be continued upon Condition of works, we enquire what
these works are? Are herein comprehended all commanded duties? or all that is
required of justified persons by way of duty? then a faloure in any of these,
whether by Omission, or Commission, should cause an intercision of that State,
and a breach of that Relation: But this is utterly false; Yea, if so, the
justified should become Unjustified every day, for no man lives and sins
not. The reason of the Consequence is, because the nonperformance of the
Condition, upon which the State and Relation of the justified is continued,
must make a breach in that State. If it be said, That not every sin, but only
such sins as are inconsistent with the State of Justification, will make an
Intercision. Then it must consequently be said, that upon these alone, or on
the nonperformance of these alone does the Continuance of Justification
depend, as on a Condition. And what be these? David's sin, I hope, nor Peter's
sin, were none of these. And whatever they be, I suppose it will be granted,
(except by Arminians) that there is sufficient provision against these laid-in
in the New Covenant of Grace; and that such, as are justified indeed, shall
never fall into such sins. And then, what need it be said, that the State of
Justification is continued upon such terms?

6. By this way, Proud Nature should have occasion to boast, and say. It was of
God's Grace and Mercy, that I was brought into a justified State, and had all
my former sins pardoned; but for my abiding and continueing therein; and for
the pardon of all my sins, that I have committed, or do commit since, I am
beholden to my own Gospel-obedience immediately; for Remission is granted, and
my Justification continued, upon Condition of my personal and Gospel-obedience.
But how inconsistent this is with the whole strain of the Gospel, cannot be
unknown. We no where read, that our sins are pardoned, or not imputed to us,
in or by our Evangelick Obedience; but as we are justified freely by grace,
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3: 24. so it is in and
through Him, and his blood, that we are washen, and our sins purged away Mat.
26: 28. Revel. 1: 5. Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14.

7. The daily experience of the people of God, may clear to us, what that is,
upon which their State is continued; and upon which they seek and obtain new
Remission of their new Transgressions, and show us, that it is not their own
personal Obedience; but the Grace and Mercy of God, in Jesus Christ: for it is
to this they betake themselves daily, both in reference to their being kept
in the favor of God, and in reference to their getting new extracts of Pardon;
It is to the blood of sprinkling they go daily, that there they may be washen,
and cleansed from all their sins and sailings. It is to this fountain opened
to the house of David and to the Inhabitans of Jerusalem, that they run with
their sins and uncleanness. Zach. 13: 1. For it is his blood alone, that
cleanses from all sin. 1. Ioh. 1: 7. And so they find by experience, that
they stand only by Faith, and that it is through Faith in this blood, that they
are keept in the favor of God, and get their sins pardoned.

These proofs may serve for confirmation of what we say; Let us now see what
Mr. Baxter says for the contrary.

In his Confess. p.47. he adduceth three Arguments. The first is this. The word
expressly constituteth these Conditions of our not-loseing our State of
Justification, or of Continueing it. And this he tells us, he has formerly
showed in many Scriptures, meaning, I suppose, the passages he had immediately
before cited on the margin. But to these I Answer in general. That not one of
them makes mention of the continuance of our justification, or of our not
loseing of it: And therefore it cannot be said from these, that the word
expressly constituteth these Conditions of our not-losing Justification. But we
shall consider them particularly.

Mat. 12: 36, 37. speaks not of justification, whereof we are now treating,
but of the last judgment, and we see no cause of confounding this
Justification, whereof we speak, or its Continuance, with the last Judgment, as
Papists do confound their second justification with this judgment; and abuse
the same Scriptures here adduced by Mr. Baxter and the like, to prove their
second justification to be by works.

Jam. 2: 24. speaks not of the Continuance or not losing of justification;
but of the very beginning of justification, which is not by a dead faith or by
a faith, that cannot produce works of Obedience, or by such a faith, as devils
have; but by a faith that is working, and making the soul prompt and ready to
yield all Obedience unto the Lord: and this is the true meaning of the words,
as was shown above, and the whole scope of the place evidenceth. Will Mr.
Baxter say, that by a dead Faith, and by a Faith that cannot save, and by a
Faith that is in devils and is attended with no Christian Love, we are brought
into a justified state at first? No sure: and yet this is the faith, that James
opposes unto works, or rather unto a working faith, whereby we are justified
first and last, as was Abraham verse. 21. whose faith was such, as it wrought
with his works, and by the same was manifest to be what it was, the true and
saving faith of God's Elect. And sure, this Faith of Abraham, and the faith
that wrought in Rahab, was another sort of Faith, than is the Faith of devils,
or that Faith, that is but a dead carcass.

Mat. 6: 14, 15. speaks of Remission of sins: And I suppose, it will not be
said, that every one, who forgiveth his neighbor, does thereby and thereupon
obtain Remission of his own sins, at the hands of God; otherwise Heathens,
and wicked persons may be said to have their sins Pardoned before God, because
they may forgive others, some wrongs done unto themselves. If it besaid, that
such cannot forgive others a right, not having a principle of grace, and not
being in Christ. True, but then we see, that it is not this forgiving
abstractly considered, that is spoken of here, but a Forgiving, flowing from
faith and principled thereby; and so the meaning of the place is, That without
such a Faith in Christ, as principleth and prompteth to Pardoning of others, we
can expect no pardon of our own sins from God; not have ground to suppose that
we are indeed pardoned of God: our forgiving of others then is here mentioned
as the native Effect, and evident Sign of Faith; as our Commentators manifest
upon the place, speaking against the Papists. See Pareus, Gualter and others.
Pareus particularly disproveth the Papist's gloss; and says, that our
pardoning of others must follow upon God's pardoning of us, as he clears from
Mat. 18. and will not have our forgiving of others said to be the causa sine
qua non of our obtaining Remission from God. This place then says, That while
we cannot find in our heart, a readiness cheerfully and heartily to forgive
others, we have no ground to imagine, that our sins are pardoned; for all
such as are pardoned of God, have this Christian disposition flowing from faith
in Christ: They may have this, as to the seed and root; but till it grow up to
yield this fruit, they want the evidence of their faith and consequently of
pardon.

1. Ioh. 1: 9. means such a Confession of sins, as is accompanied with the
making use by faith of the blood of Christ, that cleanses from all sin verse.
7. and with a running to the Advocat with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, who is a Propitiation for sins Chap. 2: 1, 2. Most wicked persons,
as Saul may make confession of their sins; but not so as to run to the
fountain, the blood of sprinkling: And by a Confession, that is not
accompanied with this acting, they can attain to no Remission before God: And
therefore faith only acting in humble Confession to the glory of God, and to
the taking of shame to themselves, is the condition of Pardon, and of
Continuance of Justification, as to this.

Revel. 22: 14. is also abused by the Papists. to prove their second
justification to be by works. The word (...), hereused, does not always denote
right, or jus: for it sometimes signifies mere freedom, liberty and power to
do such or such a thing, as 1. Cor. 9: 4, 5, 6. And so here the words import
that such as do his commandments, are blessed; for thereby they have free
access unto the tree of life, unto Christ, their objective blessedness, which
is the same with that, which is commonly said, viz. that Works of Obedience are
the way of the Kingdom, but not the cause of reigning. It will not suite with
the Gospel, to say, that by our works of obedience we buy a right to the tree
of life, even in part, or in subordination to Christ's blood; for Christ has
purchased the whole Right: and nothing of ours must be joined, as a part of
that price, otherwise must we have a proportionable share of the glory to
ourselves. Nor can it be said, that by our works of Obedience we obtain a
Right to Christ and to his Merits; for before we have a Right to Christ, we
can do no works of Christian Obedience, and Christ alone has bought to us both
Grace, and Glory: But our works of Christian Obedience, though they cannot
precede our Right to, yet they may go before our Possession of the Inheritance
purchased; now Right and Possession are different things. But in fine we say,
that this place, speaking of the possession of glory, is not apposite to the
purpose now in hand, for Justification is different from Glorification. Romans 8:
30. And of justification, as continued are we here speaking.

Ioh. 15: 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10. Verse. 3. and 9. can prove nothing, in
reference to what we are upon. Verse. 4. shows that there is no fruitfulness
in Grace, but by a constant abiding in, and sucking of sap by faith from Christ
the true Vine, which none denies. Verse 8. shows that by fruitfulness in
good, the Father is Glorified, and thereby a demonstration is given to the
world, who are indeed the true disciples of Christ, verse. 6. holds forth the
dreadful punishment that attends Apostates; but we hope, true believers are
secured against full and final Apostasy. Verse. 10. proves indeed, that
keeping of Christ's commands, is a mean to keep the sense of our being beloved
of Christ fresh in our souls, and to enjoy the fruits of his Love of
Beneficence: but says nothing of good works being the Condition of our
Continuance in the state of justification: unless we will also say, that
Christ's obedience was the Condition of his Continueing in the State of
Justification.

1. Ioh. 2: 24. etc. proves, that full and final Apostasy from the faith and
truth of the Gospel will indeed cut off from all Interest in Christ, and from
benefit by him; But as true believers are secured from this, as verse. 27.
clears. So this will only prove, that continuance in Faith, is the Condition
of continuance of Justification.

Mat. 18: 35. Only proves (and so confirms what was said to Mat. 6: 14.)
that such as do not from their hearts forgive their brethren their trespasses,
can have no ground of Assurance, that God has forgiven them theirs.... our
Cruelty and Unmercifulness toward our Brethren, may give us sufficient ground
to doubt of our Pardon, whatever seeming assurance we had formerly. So that
this place speaks nothing of the Condition of our pardon, but of the
condition rather of our Sense, Feeling and grounded Assurance of Pardon; which
is a far different thing.

These are the Scriptures, whereby he would prove his first argument. His 2.
Arg. is this. Our first faith having the nue nature of a Covenanting with
Christ, and giving ourselves to him, and taking him for our Lord and Redeemer:
therefore it follows, that as the Covenant making and accepting was of
necessity, as the condition of our first right and remission; so is our
Covenant keeping of the same necessity to our continued right. And that God is,
as it were, disobliged, if we should not keep Covenant. And the keeping has
more in it, than the bare making. No Covenant-relations usually are entered
among men, but the Covenant keeping is more than the making; and the conditions
of their continued right more then of their first right. So it is with a
Subject to his Prince, wife to a husband, Soldier to a commander, Scholar to
his Teacher. Servant to his Master etc. Promising will give them the first
right, but performing (in the essentials) must continue it, it or will cease:
for the end of the promise was its performance: And in that respect faith,
which is the Covenant, is inferior to obedience, which is promised, though in
other respect it may be superior.

Ans. (1) Though Justifying Faith be also a Covenanting faith, and of uniteth
he soul with Christ; Yet in order to Justification, it has not (to use his
words) the true Nature of a Covenanting with Christ, nor a giving up ourselves
to Him: but rather it is a receiving and resting on Him, and his Righteousness,
and a fleeing to his Merits for refuge. (2) Nor does faith, in order to
Justification, (as we cleared above) receive Christ, or go to him, as Lord and
King, but rather as Priest. (3) Nor does the receiving of Christ at first, as
King, formally include Obedience, or a promise of obedience; as was also
manifested above. (4) Therefore, from this first acting of faith in order to
justification, it can no way follow, that Obedience, or Covenant keeping (as he
speaks) is the condition of our continued Right, or of our continued
justification. (5) What God has promised upon Covenant-keeping, he is, it is
true, disobliged from giving to speak so, when the Covenant is not kept: But
we find not, that he has promised Justification, or the continuance thereof
upon these terms. (6) There is no Covenants among men, that can fully
quadrate, either with God's Covenanting with us, or with the matter of
Justification, about which we are now speaking. The sentences of judges
absolving the debtor, upon the payment of the Cautioner instructed, agrees
more with this; and we find not in such sentences, any suchlike Conditions,
mentioned of their Continuance in force. (7) Some of these Relations or
Covenants mentioned are purely aliene, being betwixt a Master and his servant,
and the Captain and the Soldier; these are mere mercenary contracts, having
Obedience and service for their only end, and promiseing a reward upon that
Condition. Our justification has no likeness to this. (8) Even in these
Relations, every act of disobedience, or nonperformance of the duties
required, does not dissolve the Relation; and therefore it cannot be said, that
upon the contrare performance, as a condition, the continueing of the Relation
depends, Mr. Baxter seeing this, adds a restriction, ( in the essentials.)
And in our case, I would require, what he will account Essential? It must be
that, sure, the contrary whereof is inconsistent with a Justified state: and
what can this be, but a total Apostasy? From which there is full security
laid-in, in the New Covenant, (which is not in any of the Covenants among men,
which he has mentioned.) And this total Apostasy must include a full
renuncing of Christ, and his Righteousness, as to Justification: And this
rather would say, that the continuance of Justification depends on the
continuance of Faith, adhereing to Christ and his Righteousness: and to this I
shall willingly assent. And this takes away the force of the 3. Arg. which he
adduceth, saying.

3. Arg. If there were no more necessary to the continueing of our
Justification, but only the same thing, which did constitute it, then we should
be justified by no none act of faith, to our lives end, but only the first
instantaneous act; and so our faith, after that instant, should never more be
justifying faith. But that is false, etc. Ans. This whole argument, I yield
unto; for I plead not against the interest of faith here; but against our works
being the condition of continued Justification; as was said above.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Interest of Repentance in the Pardon of after-sinnes.
WE spoke before Chap. 29. of Repentance in order to the first pardon of
sins, or to justification; and in the foregoing Chapter we show that the
continuance of Justification did not depend on our works, as the Condition
thereof: But now the question will be moved touching Repentance; Whether it may
not be said to be required, as a Condition of the Continuance of Justification;
or at least, as a Condition of the Pardon of sins committed after
justification. Concerning which we would premit these things.

1. It is granted, that Repentance is not only necessary, at the first
Conversion of a sinner, but is a Grace, that is constantly to be exercised, by
a Believer, so long, as he lives; both in respect of its terminus a quo, and
of its terminus ad quem, or both in respect of its aversive, and of its
conversive part; for he is still more and more to depart from sin, and to turn
unto God, and to all the ways of his Commandments Psalm. 119: 59. The very
body of death is constant matter of groaning and mourning unto him Romans 7: 24.
and his daily iniquities and transgressions ought to keep him low, and to put
him to this exercise. Beside what at extraordinary times of public wrath or
judgment against the Land, Church, or Place he lives in, or judgments upon his
own near Relations, Family etc. or upon occasion of his own more heinous out
breakings: as in David. Psalm. 51.

2. It is also granted. That where is no Repentance, or no true Repentance, for
sins committed, there is no ground for that man to suppose, that his sin is
pardoned: I do not here speak of the measure or expressions of Repentance; for
there may be mistakes on both hands; some thinking their Repentance is naught,
because not in such a sensible measure, as they think is required; may
therefore infer that their case is worse, than indeed it is, others, upon the
other hand, may suppose they have repented, when it is not so; and so infer
pardon, when they have no ground. But this is granted, that where true and
sincere Repentance is not, there is no Pardon from God of sins, whereof such
are guilty: for to such, as he minds to Pardon, he gives also a Spirit of
Repentance, as both Scripture and Experience proves:

3. Yet notwithstanding of this, it is true, that an outward Repentance; where
there is no inward, real and sanctified change wrought, may hold off for a
time, or prorogue the inflicting of temporal strokes; as we see in Aabh,
Nineveth and others.

4. It will be granted also by all the orthodox, that Repentance is no proper,
meritorious cause of pardon; not does it make any Satisfaction to God, or
appease his wrath and anger.

4. I shall also grant, that where there is true and unfeigned Repentance,
after some sin committed, there that person may saifly infer that his sin is
pardoned: Repentance is a good sign of Remission; because it is a good
evidence, that the man has run to the fountain, to the blood of Jesus, and
there has washen himself, and made himself clean. See Esai. 1: 16, 17, 18.

5. The Exercise of Repentance is very useful, to make sin become bitter,
mercy welcome, and to make the soul more careful and watchful in time to come.

But the Question is, whether Repentance be a proper Condition of Pardon of
sins, committed after Justification: or not? And when we speak of Repentance
here, we consider it by itself, and not as being the sensible signification and
expression of Faith; for the Question is not, whether Faith acting in and
through Repentance, or working the soul up unto unfaigned Repentance, be the
Condition of Remission; for that is not Repentance, but Faith, accompanied
with, and acting the soul to Repentance; but the Question is of Repentance
considered in itself, and as a distinct grace from Faith: And speaking of
Repentance, as such, and considered in itself, I say, that it is not the
Condition of Remission of after sins; but faith only, acting in a Gospel
manner, on Jesus Christ, and his Blood and Merits.

And the reasons are. 1. Because it is Faith and not Repentance, that carries
the sinner away to the Blood of Jesus Christ, and to his Merits, through whom,
and by which alone Remission is had Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14. Zach. 13. 1. Heb.
9: 14, 22. Revel. 1: 5. Repentance as such, lays not hold on Christ, grippeth
not his Merits, makes no application of these; but is wholly exercised about
another object, about sin.

2. This would give man too great ground of boasting in himself: if upon his
Mourning, Sorrow and Repentance, Pardon were to be had; and would give occasion
to think, that there were some merit and worth, in that work, and some thing
satisfying or appeasing to God: for the man hereby is kept within himself:
and upon the account of something within himself, or done by himself, is he
pardoned, as he might suppose.

3. This should be derogatorie to the Blood and Merits of Christ, by which
alone we have pardon first and last; and the Gospel is so contrived, as that
Christ must have all the Glory; and all the methodes, means and order of the
Gospel, and new Covenant, are in like manner framed, so that man may be abased,
free grace exalted, Christ acknowledged the only Redeemer; But if our
Repentance were made such a Condition, there should be no application made of
Christ and of his blood by the sinner; No acting on him, and on his merits, in
order to the obtaining of Pardon; and so, no occasion of exalting free grace,
and Love in Christ; no occasion of wondering at the wise contrivance of the
Covenant of Grace, in all points: If it be said, There is no derogating from
Christ and his Merits here; because it is by virtue of his Merits, that
Repentance is made such a Condition: I Ans. This is not cleared from the
Scripture; nor is it suitable to the frame of the Gospel Covenant; for the whole
of it is so contrived, as that Christ is immediately to be made use of: But this
way keeps the soul off all immediate going to, applying of, and resting upon
Christ, in order to Remission of new sins; and sets them only upon the
exercise of Sorrow and Repentance within themselves.

4. The Apostle John points out the way to believers of obtaining
Remission-of sins 1. Ioh. 2: 1, 2. - And if any man sin, we have an Advocat
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And he is the Propitiation for our
sins. Now, Repentance does not make use of Christ, as an Advocat, and as a
Propitiation; but Faith does. And it is the proper work of Faith, in order to
Remission, to make use of Christ, in his Priestly office, and to carry the soul
away to his Propitiation and Intercession.

5. The daily experience of the Saints evidence this, when upon conviction of
sin, they betake themselves to the free Mercy of God, in Christ, to the Blood
of sprinkling, crying out for Pardon for the Lord's sake, and seeking to be
washen, in his blood. It is not their Repentance, or Sorrow, that they flee to,
as the ground of their hope of Pardon; but the merits of Christ, held forth in
the new Covenant, is that fountain, wherein they must wash and be clean. See
Psalm. 25: 11. and 51: 7.

6. This was sufficiently held forth under the Law, when for their Errors,
Failings and daily Transgressions, the people were to bring their Sacrifices to
the Priest, which were to be offered up, as types of Christ and they were to
lay their hands upon the head of the Sacrifice, in sign of their resting upon
the Sacrifice typified, and of rolling their sins upon that only Sacrifice, and
of expecting Acceptance and Pardon, through it alone. See Levit. 4: 20, 26, 31,
35. and 5: 10, 13, 16, 18. and 6: 7, 19, 22.

7. If Repentance be the Condition, then this must either be said of that part
of Repentance, which preceedeth the acting of faith, or of that which
follows: This last cannot be said; for then it would follow, that upon the
acting of faith, that preceedeth, there were no Remission; and so faith laying
hold on Christ and his Merits, should be utterly excluded from having any
Interest in the pardon of sins. Nor can the first be said, for then there
should be Remission, before and without all application made of Christ by
Faith: Yea and the very imperfect beginnings of Repentance should be judged
sufficient for Remission: which cannot be said. If it be said, that this is
meaned of complete Repentance. I Ans. Compleet Repentance cannot be without
Faith: and it is against what is said, to make Repentance, considered alone and
by itself, or as abstracted from Faith, the only Condition; seeing this would be
a manifest exclusion of Faith altogether. If it be said, that Repentance and
Faith may be considered together, and as joined together called the Condition
of Pardon. I Ans. Seeing it is manifest, that both do not, neither can act one
and the same way on Christ; they cannot be considered as equally sharing in the
place and interest of a condition: And therefore, I judge it saifest to say,
That faith, acting in and by Repentance, or so discovering itself to be true
and lively, is the sole Condition of Pardon.

8. As at first, so always that holds true, which Peter says Act. 10: 43.
To him (i. e. to Jesus) give all the Prophets witness, that through his name
whosoever believes in him, shall receive Remission of sins. As the stung
Israelit was always, in order to his cure, to look to the brazen serpent: so
is the Believer, that would be cured of the guilt of new transgressions, to
have his recourse by Faith unto the Mediator, crucified and lifted up Ioh. 3:
14, 15.

Obj. 1. It is said, that Repentance is necessary both as commanded, and as a
mean appointed for attaining Remission of sins: And therefore must be the
Condition of Remission. Ans. The consequence is not good; for this same may be
said of Prayer, and other Duties; which yet cannot be called proper Conditions
of Pardon. That prayer is a commanded duty, none will deny; That a praying
sinner may be said to be using the means to attain unto Pardon, and to be in
the way of obtaining of it, will also be granted: and so in that respect,
prayer may be accounted a mean: and yet it cannot be called the Condition; for
then every one that prays should have pardon, though he act not faith: And if
it be said, that it must be prayer in faith Iam. 5: 15. I Ans. True, but then
the Condition is not Prayer, but Faith exerting itself, and acting in and
through Prayer: And the same we say of Repentance, and so keep it in its due
place, and press it in the Gospel way and method.

Obj. 2. It is said. That there is a kind of congruity and sutablness, in this
order, by subjoining the promise of pardon to it; for it is more suitable that a
penitent sinner should have Pardon, than an impenitent. Ans. So this same may
be said of Prayer; for it is also more suitable, that a praying sinner, be
pardoned, than a sinner that nev^ once asks pardon: And this tends more
also to the exalting of free grace. But the truth is, in pardon there is not
only a declaration and exalting of Grace and Mercy; but also of divine Justice
Romans 3: 25, 26. and unto this, Faith is singularly fitted, because it layyeth
hold on the Propitiation, and on blood, for the declaration of God's
Righteousness for Remission of sins; and hereby is the Lord declared to be
just, when he is the Justifier and Pardoner of the believer. So that neither
prayer, nor Repentance, nor Self-searching etc. can be properly called the
Condition, but Faith acting in and by these.

Obj. 3. It is said, that Repentance qualifieth the sinner, in reference to the
promise of pardon, or puts him within the reach of the promise; so that he
may take hold of the promise of pardon: And it disposes him to accept the
offered Salvation freely, and to rest upon Christ alone, for that end. Ans. (1)
What disposes to accept of Salvation etc. cannot for that cause be called the
Condition of Pardon, unless we speak improperly; as felt poverty in a beggar,
though it disposes him to receive an offered alms thankfully, Yet it is not
the proper Condition: No more self conviction, in our case, a Condition of
Pardon. (2) If it qualifieth for the receiving of the offered Salvation; then
it qualifieth immediately for Faith, and but mediatly and remotly for Pardon.
(3) The promise of Pardon is not made to the penitent properly, and as such;
but to the Penitent believer; that is, to faith acting and exerting itself in
and by Repentance.

Obj. 4. Esai. 1: 15, 16. put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evil,
etc. this is Repentance: and then verse. 18. full pardon is promised, though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white, as snow etc. Ans. Yet with all
he bids them wash and make clean; which could only be, by the blood of the
Messiah, for that only cleanses. 1. Ioh. 1: 7. and this they had neglected, in
going about their Sacrifices, which therefore were abominable in the eyes of
the Lord verse. 11, 12, 13. because not accompanied with Faith, that purifieth
the heart Act. 15: 9.

Obj. 5. 2. Chron. 7: 14. the Lord promises to forgive sin, if his people
would turn from their wicked ways. Ans. But with all it is required there,
that they seek the face of God, and that was in and through the Messiah,
typified by the Temple, to which their prayers were to be directed, as we see
Chap. 6: 20, 24, 26, 29, 31, 34, 38.

Obj. 6. Prove. 28: 13. - He that confesses his sin and forsakes it shall
find mercy. Ans. True, because none will do that a right, but the believer;
who laith hold on the Merits of Christ. And so this and the like places, are
not exclusively to be taken, but principally to be understood of Faith so
acting, and evidencing itself to be true and lively, and of the right stamp, by
its acting so.

FINIS.
CHAP. I.
Imputation both of Christ's Active and Passive Obedience necessary.
MR. John Goodwine in his Treatise of justification part. 2. Chapter 2. laith down
several conclusions, whereby he might overturne this Truth: and what he says
must be examined.

His 1. Conclusion in this. He, for whose sins a plenary satisfaction has been
made (either by himself, or another for him) and has been accepted by him,
against whom the transgression was committed, is as just and righteous, as he
that never sinned, but had done all things, that were requisite and meet for
him to do. Ans. If by just and righteous be meaned one, who only has not
deserved the punishment threatened; then his Conclusion is true: but if by just
and righteous be meaned one, who not only has not deserved the punishment, but
has also deserved the reward promised; then his Conclusion is false; for the
Satisfaction, if it respect only the transgression committed, can only put the
man, for whom it is given and accepted, in the state of one, that is under no
obligation to be punished: but it cannot put him in the state of one, who not
only is not to be punished, but is also to be rewarded. He adds. This is
evident; because there is as much justice and righteousness in repairing the
the wrongs and injuries done to any, as there is in abstaining from doing
wrong. Ans. True, in reference to the wrong done; and therefore such an one is
rightly and justly delivered from the obligation to punishment; but is not made
so righteous, as to challenge the reward, till a more compleet satisfaction be
made, to wit, such as may comprehend also perfect conformity unto the Law in
all points, to the end, he, for whom this is done, may be looked upon as a
fulfiller of the Law, and therefore to have right to the reward, as he would
have had, if he had in his own person perfectly kept it. He that simply
repaireth the wrong done, does not that, which deserves the reward. The simile
he annexeth confirms this, and demonstrateth how far out he is, as to our
case. He that by his cattle, or otherwise, has made spoil in his nieghbours
Corn, and has given him full satisfaction for the spoil done, to his
contentment, is as good a Nieghbour, and deals as justly and honestly with him,
as he that never trespassed in that kind upon him. How impertinent this is, as
to our case, any may see; or he must say, that there was no reward promised to
Adam, upon his perfect obedience; and that that word, do this and live, had no
place, in the Covenant made with him. The Satisfying Nieghbour deserves no
reward, nor was there any reward promised to him, upon Condition of his being a
good Nieghbour. He adds. The essence and nature of justice or righteousness
is suum cuique tribuere, to give to every man his own. i. e. that which is his
own in a way of equity and right, is due from us unto them. Ans. But that which
Adam was obliged to give to God, as his own, was glory, by faithful and
constant obedience, that he might receive the reward to the glory of God's
faithfulness, and goodness. Now when Adam dishonored the Lord by disobedience.
and robbed him (as it were) of his Authority, as just and righteous Governor,
a satisfaction for the wrong done, excluding positive and full obedience unto
the Law, is not a giving to God all that is due to him. Now (says he) when we
have enjured or damnified any man, in any of his rights, or things belonging to
him, there is nothing more due to him, than that which is his own, i. e. that
which is fully valuable to the injury we have done unto him. Therefore he that
tenders a valuable consideration or satisfaction for an injury done to
another, is just, according to the height and utmost exigency of justice; and
consequently as just, as he that never was injurious or did wrong. Ans. All
this is to no purpose, as to our question; for it is not betwixt God and us:
no^ was it betwixt God and Adam, as it is betwixt one man and another. God is
to be considered, as a supreme Lawgiver and Ruler, enjoining obedience to his
Laws, under penalties, and promising rewards unto the obedient: Now when his
Laws are broken, he is doubly enjured, and the breaker, is obliged unto
punishment, and also forfeited of his expectation of the reward. When
satisfaction is made, and withal no compleet obedience to the Law, the person
is by the satisfaction made, only exeemed from the obligation to punishment,
but has thereby no right to the reward promised, until the Law be compleetly
obeyed.

His 2. Conclusion is. There is no medium between a perfect absolution and
freedom from all sin; and a perfect and compleet righteousness: But he that is
fully discharged and freed from sin, ipso facto, is made perfectly and
compleetly righteous. Ans. The same distinction, which we made use of in the
other Conclusion, will help us here. If by perfectly and compleetly Righteous
be meaned one, that is liable to no punishment, it is true, that he, who is
fully discharged and freed from sin, is made perfectly righteous, but if by
perfectly and compleetly Righteous be meaned one, that moreover has a right to
the recompense of reward, that is promised, than it is false: freedom and
absolution from sin respects only the guilt, and dissolveth the obligation to
punishment, and in that respect, is a perfect and compleet Righteousness; i. e.
the person, so absolved, is as free of punishment, or of obligation thereunto,
as if he had never sinned; but having sinned, he cannot by this dissolution of
the obligation to punishment be ipso facto made as perfectly and compleetly
Righteous, as he would have been, if he had never transgressed, but had
perfectly kept the Law; for if he had perfectly kept the Law, he had
obtained full right to the reward, which now he has not, and which no pardon,
or discharge, as such, can restore him unto. Let us hear his reason. Nothing
(says he) can any way diminish, or prejudice the perfection of Righteousness,
but only sin, as no thing can hinder the perfection of light, but darkness in
one degree, or other. So that as the air, when it is free from all degrees of
darkness, must of necessity be fully light; so he that is perfectly freed from
all sin, must of necessity be fully and perfectly Righteous. Ans. This would
make us believe, that he is here speaking of sin itself, and not of its guilt
and demerite, and so the opposite hereunto, must be holiness; which expels
sin (in a manner) as light does darkness, or as one quality does its contrary.
But then he is fighting, all this while, against his own shadow, for we are
speaking of the guilt of sin, which also must be properly understood, (and
nothing else can) when he spoke of absolution and freedom from sin, in the
Conclu^on. If he speak here of sin in respect of guilt and demerite, his simile
does not quadrate; and opposite to this guilt he should set Righteousness or
obedience with its merit: and if any will do this, they shall easily see the
mistake, for though a man has not transgressed, yet he has not eo ipso right
to the premium, for in order to this, more days work may be required, than one
or half of one days work; far less can the Pardon of or satisfaction for this
transgression, give a man right to the reward.

He adds. It is impossible to conceive a man defective in any part of
Righteousness, and yet withal to conceive him free from all sin: sin and
Righteousness being in subjecto capaci, contraria immediata, as Logicians
speak. Ans. Defective in Righteousness may be either understood in respect of
the mere duty or command, or in respect of full right to the reward. In the
first sense, such an one cannot be free of all sin; but taking it in the second
sense, he may: as for example, when one is to work eight days in dressing a
garden, and then to receive the reward promised, and if he fail in his work any
of the days, to be punished; this man, so long as he works 2, 3, 4. 5. days
cannot be charged with sin, nor said to be defective, as to his duty; and yeth
he has not full right to the reward until he has wrought Eight days, but is
defective in some part of his Righteousness, as to this reward. And according
to this may we understand that logical axiom.

Further he says, The Scriptures themselves still make an immediate opposition,
between sin and Righteousness. - To find out a third estate between sin and
Righteousness, we must find out a third Adam, from whom it should be derived.
Ans. The state of sin and of Righteousness, whereof the Scripture speaks,
admits indeed of no medium, or third betwixt them, and the reason is
because, we are all now borne in a state of sin, and are obnoxipus to wrath;
and remain so, until we be translated into a state of Righteousness, which is
not by mere pardon of sins, but also by the imputation of a Righteousness; for
being in this State of Righteousness, we have not only the Obligation to wrath
and eternal punishment removed, which is done by Remission upon the account of
the Satisfaction of Christ imputed; but we have also a right to the reward, the
crown of life, which is had by imputation of Righteousness, or of obedience,
though it were better to say, we have both by both; or we have both by the
imputation of that compleet Satisfaction and merit, which comprehends, or
consists of both.

His 3. Conclusion is this, Adam, whilst his innocence stood with him, and till
his fall by sin, was compleetly Righteous, and in an estate of justification
before God: Yea, for the truth and substance of Righteousness, as Righteous, as
he could or should have been, if he had lived to this day, in the most entire
and absolute obedience to the Law. Ans. Adam, while he remained innocent, was
completely Righteous, that is, was changable with no transgression, it is true:
That he was completely Righteous, that is, had full right to the reward, as
having done all his duty, and completed his work, it is most false. Therefore
(2) it is false to say, he was in a state of justification, unless nothing else
be hereby meaned, than that he was not in a state of condemnation. Though there
be no mids betwixt these two now, as to us, but either we must be in a state of
justification, or in a state of condemnation; Yet Adam while he stood, was in
neither; Not in a state of condemnation, because he had not yet transgressed
the Law; Nor yet in a state of justification, because he had not yet done all
his duty; for he was to persevere in obedience to the end: And if he had been
justified, he had full right to the reward, and so had been glorified, for whom
the Lord justifies, he glorifieth: But Adam was not glorified upon his
Law-obedience, and consequently was not justified by his Law-obedience. (3) The
truth and substance of Righteousness (unto which he would restrick all) is not
the thing enquired after, nor is it at all to the point; for upon Adam's having
of that simply he could not expect the reward of life, that was promised,
because, the Covenant, he was under, required continuance and perseverance in
all the several duties, called for by the Law, even to the end, ere he could
challenge a right to the reward: And further Adam had this truth and substance
of Righteousness at the first, and it was concreated with him; Yet he could
not, upon that account, have challenged glory, as his due.

He adds. Even as the second Adam was as completely and perfectly Righteous
from the womb, and so from his first entrance upon his public ministry, as he
was at last, when he suffered death. Ans. If we speak of our Lord Jesus, as the
second Adam, that is, as standing in the room of sinners, as the Head and
public Person, engadging in their behalf, whom he did represent, to pay all
their debt; though he knew no sin, and upon that account was perfectly
Righteous, and separat from sinners; Yet he was to finish the work laid upon
him, and to perform the whole debt, both of duty and suffering, which he had
undertaken; and till the last penny of that debt was paid, his work was not
finished, and until his work was finished, he could not challenge his reward:
And so this confirms what we have said of the first Adam.

To say (he adds) that Adam was not perfectly Righteous, and consequently in
a justified estate or condition before God, until his fall by sin, is to place
him into an estate of condemnation before his sin, there being no middle or
third estate betwixt these two. Ans. This was obviated before. Adam's state
before his fall, was a state of Innocence, wherein he enjoyed the favor and
presence of God, he being perfectly Righteous, in reference to that state; and
to what was required of him; but justified he was not; for the reward was not
adjudged unto him. So that, as to him, there was a middle state betwixt a State
of Justification and a State of Condemnation; though, as to us, there is not,
as the places, which he cites afterward namely Romans 5: 18. and 8: 1, 2, show,
and the whole Scriptures evince.

He closes this matter thus. Therefore to grant, that forgiveness of sins puts
a man into the same estate and condition, wherein Adam stood before his fall
(which is generally granted by men of opposite judgment in this controversy;
and nothing granted neither, in this, but the unquestionable truth) is to grant
the point in question, and to acknowledge the truth labored for, throughout
this whole discourse. Ans. It is not granted that remission of sins, as such,
puts a man every way into the same Condition, wherein Adam stood before his
fall; for it puts not a man in the same estate of inherent holiness, wherein
Adam was; but it puts a man into the same estate of freedom from any
obligation to punishment, for it takes away the reatus poenae, so that a
pardoned man, as such, is no more under the actual obligation unto the curse
and wrath of God, threatened for transgression, than was Adam, before he fell:
and this is all, that is confessed. Which is far, yea very far from granting
the point, that he goes about to establish: for he would have remission, as
such, put a man in the state of full right to the reward, to the end he might
exclude the imputation of the obedience or Righteousness of Christ, as not
being necessary unto this end, contrary to the Scriptures of truth. Adam,
before he fell, had not right unto the promised reward, because he was to
finish his course of obedience, before he could obtain that: And therefore the
granting, that remission puts a man into the same Condition, wherein Adam
stood, will contribute nothing to his end.

His 4. Conclusion is. That perfect remissien of sins includes the Imputation
or acknowledgment of the observation of the whole Law; even as the imputation
of the Law fulfilled, necessarily includes the non imputation of sin, or the
forgiveness of all sin, in case any has been committed. Ans. The conclusion is
manifestly false, if we speak of remission simply, and abstractivly as such;
And the ground here alleiged for it, is ambiguous; for the imputation of the
Law fulfilled, may either be to sach, as never broke it, and then it does not
include remission, but takes away all necessity of it; or to transgressors,
and then indeed it may presuppose remission, but does not include it, as such.
But to remove ambiguities, we shall distinguish, and say, that perfect
Remission of sins includes the acknowledgment of the observation of the whole
Law, in respect of Punishment; but not in respect of the Reward; that is,
perfect Remission of sins exeemeth a man from Punishment, as well as if he had
perfectly kept the Law; but does not give him right to the Reward; for unto
this was requisite the perfect observation of the Law: Now perfect observation
of the Law says, there was no transgression; but remission says, and
supposes, that the Law was not perfectly observed. So the imputation of the
Law fulfilled either says, the Law was not broken, or that now satisfaction is
made for the breach thereof, and therefore the person, unto whom this
imputation is made. has a right unto the reward, which this imputation does
directly and immediately respect, as such. But in our case, both these go
together, perfect remission, and the imputation of the Law fulfilled, because
freedom from the obligation to punishment, and right to the reward, go also
together inseparably.

For how can he be said (says he) to have all his sins fully forgiven, who is
yet looked upon, or intended to be dealt with all, as one that has
transgressed either by way of omission, or commission, any part of the Law?
Ans. He that has his sins fully forgiven, may well be looked upon, as one that
has transgressed, either by omission, or by commission, or by both; because he
must be so looked upon: for pardon presupposes sin; no man can be pardoned,
but a sinner, and no man can think or dream of a remission, but withal he
must suppose, that the person pardoned has sinned. But it is true, he who is
said to have all his sins fully forgiven, cannot be intended to be dealt
withal, as one that has transgressed: for pardon destroys that obligation
to punishment, but does not so destroy sin, as to cause that it never was; for
that is impossible. What more? And he that is looked upon as one, that never
transgressed any part of the Law, must needs be conceived or looked upon as
one, that has fulfilled or kept the Law. Ans. This is very true: But what
then? Which is nothing else (says he) but to have a perfect Righteousness, or
(which is the same) a perfect fulfilling of the Law imputed to him. Ans. This
is also true, taking this imputation of a perfect fulfilling of the Law, to be
to one, who never broke the Law by sin; but it is not true, in our case, who
are transgressors, all the imputation of Righteousness in the world can not
make us to have been no sinners.

Yet he infers. So that besides that perfect remission of sins, which has
been purchased by the blood of Christ, there is no need of (indeed no place
for) the imputation of any Righteousness, performed by Christ unto the Law.
Ans. The inconsequence of this is manifest from what is said: But he adds a
reason. Because (says he) in that very act of remission of sins, there is
included an imputation of a perfect Righteousness. Ans. This is but the same
thing, which was said, and is manifestly false. Remission regairdeth only the
punishment, or the obligation thereunto, and dissolveth it, but, as such gives
no right to the reward, which was promised only to obedience to the Law.

But then he tells us more properly, and with Scripture-exactness (as he says)
that that act of God, whereby heremitteth and pardons sin, is interpretativly
nothing else, but an imputation of a perfect righteousness or of a fulfilling
of the Law: compare Romans 4: 6 with verse. 7. and 11. Ans. This is but the same
thing, and needs no new answer; for it is denied, that that act of God,
whereby he pardons sin, considered in itself, and as such, is interpretativly
an imputation of perfect Righteousness. But it is true, in our case, it may be
called so interpretativly, in this respect, that there is such an in dissoluble
connection betwixt the two, that the one infers the other, necessitate
consequentis. And this is all that can be proved from Romans 4: 6, 7, 11.

He adds, Even as the act of the Physician, by which he recovereth his
patient from his sickness, may, withfull propriety of speech, be called that
act, whereby he restores him to his health. Ans. The Physician purging away
the humors, the causes of the distemper, is the cause of health, by being the
causa removens prohibens; because ex natura rei, health follows upon the
removal of that, which caused the distemper; but the connection of pardon and of
imputation of Righteousness is not ex natura rei, but ex libera Dei
constitutione: connecting the causes of both together. His next similitude of
the sun, dispelling darkness, and filling the air with light, is as little to
the purpose; because here is a natural necessary consequence, light necessarily
expelling darkness; which is denied in our case. Hence there is no ground for
what he adds, when he says. In like manner, God does not heal sin, that is
forgive sin, by one act, and restore the life of righteousness, that is impute
righteousness, by another act at all differing from it, but in and by one and
the same punctual and precise act he does the one and the other. For we are not
here enquiring, after the oneness or diversity of God's acts in a
Philosophical manner: God can do many things by one Physical act: but we are
enquireing concerning the Effects, whether they be one precise thing, flowing
from one moral cause; or so diverse, as to require diverse moral causes, and
grounds, or whether the one does naturally and essentially include the other,
as being both but one thing.

His following words would seem to speak to this, when he says, forgiveness of
sins, and imputation of Righteousness are but two different names, expressions,
or considerations of one and the same thing one and the same act of God is
sometimes called forgiveness of sins, and sometimes an imputing of
Righteousness; and the forgiveness of sins is sometimes called an imputing of
righteousness, to show and signify that a man needs nothing to a compleet
Righteousness, or Justification, but the forgiveness of his sins: And again the
Imputing of Righteousness is sometimes called the forgiveness of sins, to show
that God has no other Righteousness to confer upon a sinner, but that which
stands in forgiveness of sins. Ans. This is but gratis dictum; nothing at all
is proved: These two, pardon of sins and imputation of Righteousness, are two
distinct parts of one compleet favor, and blessing granted of God, in order to
one compleet blessedness, consisting likewise in two parts, to wit, in freedom
from punishment, which was deserved, and in right to the promised inheritance,
which was lost: And because these two, both in the cause, and in the effect,
are inseparable conjoined by the Lord; therefore, the mentioning of the one may
and does import and signify both, by a Synecdoche: And hence no man, with
reason, can infer, that they are both one and the same precise thing, flowing
from one and the same precise cause, and import only the different names,
expressio^s or considerations of one and the same thing, Christ's obedience to
the Law, and his suffering for sin, were not one and the same thing under
various considerations, or names, but distinct parts of one compleet
Surety-Righteousness: no more can the effects, that flow therefrom, be
accounted one and the same thing, but two distinct parts of one compleet
effect: And therefore the mentioning of the one, in stead of the whole, proves
no confusion, or sameness, but rather an inseparablness, which is yielded.

He move ^in an objection against himself ^*5. thus. How can God be said to
impute a Righteousness to a man, which never was, nor ever had a being, no
Righteousness (at least of that kind, whereof we now speak) having ever been,
but that perfect obedience, which Christ performed to the Law? This indeed is a
very rational question; for our Author talks much of an imputed
Righteousness, and never does, nor yet can tell us, what that is, that can
deserve the name of a Righteousness. Let us hear, what he answers. 1. says
he. There is as express and compleet a Righteousness in the Law, as ever Christ
himself performed. Ans. But what Righteousness is or can be in a Law, but what
is there, by way of prescription? And who doubts (...) the perfection of this,
that acknowledges the perfection of the Law? This is utterly impertinent to
the purpose in hand, where the question is of a Righteousness consisting in
conformity to the Law, and which must be attribute to man, to whom the Law is
given? And what if it be said (says he) that God, in remission of sins,
through Christ, from and out of the Law, imputes to every man, that believes,
such a Righteousness, as is proper to him? Ans. To say this, is to speak plain
nonsense: for what is that to furnish a man with a Righteousness out of the
Law? Can a man be changed into a Law? or can a man have any Righteousness,
prescribed by a Law, but by thoughts, words, and deeds, bearing a conformity to
the commands of the Law? And how can (...) pardon cause this transformation?
can the pardon of murder, or of any prohibited act, make that act conform to
the Law? Pardon thus should be a self destroyer; for an act, that is no
transgression of a Law, can need no pardon: and thus pardon should make itself
no pardon. What he subjoineth, has bin spoken to elsewhere.

He gives a 2. answer, saying. To say, God cannot impute a Righteousness,
which never had a being i.e. which never was really and actually performed by
any man, is to deny that he has power to forgive sin^. Ans. This has been and
is full denied; it never has been, nor never shall be proved, that forgiveness
of sin is the imputation of a Righteousness. Though he adds from Romans 4: 6.
and 3: 28. etc. that it is the imputation of such a Righteousness, as
consists not, no^es made up of any works performed to the Law by any man,
which is but a Righteousness, that never had a being. Ans. This is but a plain
perverting of the Scriptures, which speak only of works (in that exclusion)
done and performed by us, as the whole scope, and all the circumstances of the
passages, demonstrate to any man, who will not willingly put out his own eyes:
and it were a mere imposing upon the Understandings of the most ordinary
Reader, and a miserable mispending of time, to go about the evincing of this,
which is so obvious. But what desperate shifts will not a wrong cause put men to
use, who will not be truths captives?

His 5. Conclusion comes here also to be considered: It is this. He that is
fully discharged from his sins, needs no other R^ghteousness, to give
him-Right (...) unto life. This is as false as the rest; for the Law is; do
this and live: and pardon for transgressions is not the same with doing of the
Law. What is his reason? death is the wages of sin, is of sin only, being due
to no creature in any other respect, nor upon any other term whatsomever. But
what then? Now he that it free of death, and no ways obnoxious thereunto,
cannot but be conceived to have a right unto life, there being neither any
middle condition between death and life, wherein it is possible for a
reasonable creature to subsist, nor again any capacity of life, but by some
right and ^itle thereunto. Ans. Though this be true, as to us now, that he who
is no ways obnoxious unto death, has a right unto life; Yet the consequence
that he would draw from it, is not good: to wit, that that only, which takes
away the obnoxiousness unto death, gives also a right to life: because God
has inseparably joined these effects together, as also their distinct causes
together, and gives them inseparably; so that he who is pardoned has also a
right to life, not merely upon the account, that he is pardoned, but because
together with the imputation of the Satisfaction of Christ, whence flows
pardon, he imputes also Christ's Righteousness, upon which follows the right
to life. And howbeit now, as to us, there is no middle state betwixt these two;
Yet in Adam there was; for while he stood, he was not obnoxious unto death; and
yet he had not right unto life: but was to work out and perfect his rask, to
that end. But he tells us, That while Adam stood, he was already in possession
and fruition of life; else he could not be threatened with death. Ans. This is
not the life, whereof we are speaking; we are speaking of the life, promised by
that Covenant, unto perfect obedience: But it seems, that he joyneth with the
(...), in this, granting no life promised to Adam, but a Continuance of what he
was already in possession of.

He enquireth. If he had not a right unto life by his freedom from sin, but
was to purchase this right, by an ctlual fulfilling of the Law, it would be
known, what quantit^e^ of obedience to the Law he must have paid, before he had
made this purchase; and how long he must have obeyed and keept the Law? Ans.
There is no necessity of any exact knowledge of these things; our maine
question does not ^^and or ^all with the knowledge or ignorance of them: Yet,
we may say (and that is sufficient) that that Law, or Covenant, requiring
perfect obedience, and perpetual, without the least omission or commission, he
must have paid all that obedience, which the Law required of him, to the day of
his trans^^^gration, or change to glory, before the (...) had been made. He
adds; for had he lived a two years in his integrity and uprightness, without
the least touch of any transgression, he h^d still but a debtor of obedience to
the Law, upon the same terms, that he was, at the beginning, and the least
interruption or breach in the course of his obedience, had even now been the
forfeiture of that life he enjoyed. Ans. How long Adam should have lived upon
earth, before his translation to glory, we know not; nor is it of use for us to
enquire; it is sufficient to know, that he was to finish his course, and to
persevere in obedience to the end, if he would not both forfeit the life he
had, and the expectation of the life of glory, which was promised upon his
compleeting his work of obedience.

He adds. Notwithstanding, the Scriptures of the New. Test. seem to place the
immediate right, or capacity, which believers have to the Kingdom of heaven and
eternal glory, rather in the grace of Adoption, than in any Righteousness
whatsoever, even Remission of sins itself not excepted. Ans. I have spoken to
this elsewhere, and shall only say here, That hereby he has destroyed his
Conclusion; for hereby we see, that in order to the attaining of right to life,
more is requisite, than mere Remission, for he cannot say, that Remission of
sins and Adoption, is all one, having clearly hinted the contrary here, and
having also denied Righteousness to be the ground of Adoption, while as before
he made Righteousness and Remission of sins all one. He shall never prove that
Adoption is without the Imputation of Righteousness. Let us hear his reason.
The reason whereof may (happily) be this, because the life and blessedness, which
come by Jesus Christ, are of far higher nature, excellency and worth, than that
which was Covenanted to Adam, by way of wages for his work, or obedience to the
Law, and therefore require an higher and fuller and richer capacity, or title
in the creature, to interesse him therein, than that did: work faithfully
performed is enough, to entitle a man to his wages, but the gift of an
inheritance requirtth a special grace or favor. Ans. As this is but dubiously
asserted; so it is to no purpose; for though some difference may be granted
betwixt the glory, now had by the Gospel and that promised to Adam, in several
respects; Yet it was a life of glory, that was promised to Adam, and our
Adoption is not without the imputation of a Righteousness. Nor was Adam's
obedience such a work, as in strick justice called for wages, without a
Covenant. The Imputation of Righteousness is indeed a special grace and Favor
and therefore fit enough to found Adoption.

His 6. Conclusion is this. That Satisfaction, which Christ made to the justice
of God for sin, and whereby he procured Remission of sins (or perfect
Righteousness) and reconciliation with God for those that believe, consists
only in that obedience of his, which he performed to that peculiar and special
Law of Mediation, which God imposed upon him (which we commonly, though perhaps
not altogether so properly, call his passive obedience) and not at all in that
obedience or subjection, which he exhibited to that common Law of nature, which
we call moral. Ans. Though, if we should speak strickly of satisfaction, as
distinguished from obedience, and as relating to the punishment for sin, the
substance of this Conclusion might be granted; Yet taking Satisfaction more
largly, as relative to our whole debt, it must necessarily include his
obedience to the Law moral. (2) Though for explications sake, we may speak of
Christ's Active, and of his Passive obedience distinctly; Yet there was
suffering and satisfaction, in all his Active obedience (as it is commenly
called) and there was action and meriting in all his Passive Obedience (as it
is commonly called.) His supposing Remission of sins, and Perfect
Righteousness, is already discovered to be a mistake, (4) The special Law of
Mediation required of Christ both obedience and suffering, and he speaks
without ground, when he restricteth it to his passive obedience, (as it is
commonly called) only. His reason is. Because nothing can be satisfactory to
divine justice for sin, but that which is penal. Heb. 9: 22. for doubtless,
where there is Satisfaction, there is and may be remission. Ans. This
confirms only what we granted of satisfaction taken strickly. But cannot
prove, that Satisfaction largely taken, may not, or cannot, yea or must not,
include obedience, this being part of our debt to the Law, and to the Lawgiver:
nor will it prove, that there was nothing of Satisfaction in Christ's
obedience, which he performed in his state of humiliation. It is true, where
there is Satisfaction, there is and may be Remission; but Remission is not all,
that we stand in need of. But he will have that obedience, which Christ
exhibited to the moral Law, no way penal: And his reason is, because it was
required of man, in his innocence, and imposed by God upon Adam before his
fall; Yea and still lies and shall lie to the days of eternity upon men and
Angels. Ans. Yet for all this, it might be and was penal unto Christ, who was
not mere man, but God and man in one person: And for Him, who was God, and
above all Law, that man comes under, to subject him self to that Law, which
was imposed upon man, as a Viator, must needs be penal, it being a part of his
subjection, as made under the Law, and a piece of his humiliation, for thus, in
part, he took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of
men; and being found in fashion, as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death. Phil. 2: 7, 8. Gal. 4: 4. What they do, who are in glory,
is not to the purpose; for here we are speaking of the obedience and subjection
of such, as are Viators, and not Comprehensors. And Adam while innocent, was a
Viator; and Christ, to pay that debt, which was required of us all, as Viators,
did humble himself to perform the obedience of a Viator, in our place, and in
our stead, that so he might give full satisfaction, and pay our whole debt.

From hence, there is no ground for his Inference, to wit, that. Therefore man
was punished, and that by order and appointment of God, before his fall, and
that now the glorified Saints and Angels, yea and Jesus Christ himself, are now
punished in heaven. For (1) it might be and was penal to him, who was God,
which was duty unto man in innocence, as is cleared, and (2) The Obedience of
Saints and Angels, now in glory, and far less that of Jesus Christ himself, (if
it can properly be called obedience) is not the duty of Viators, and therefore
utterly impertinent to our purpose: We do not say, that Adam's obedience was
penal, it being his duty: but Christ's was, seeing no Law required such
obedience of him, who was God; nor was it necessary even to his humane Nature,
in order to life for himself: for the hypostatical union fully removed that
necessity, and either made him, as to himself, in respect of his humane nature,
a comprehensor, or in the nearest capacity to it, even when he was subjecting
himself to the obedience of a Viator, for us, and as standing in our room.

But he says, the Scriptures themselves no where ascribe this satisfaction to
Christ's Active obedience; but still to his passive. And here he cites many
passages of Scripture, to no purpose, seeing none of these give any hint of the
exclusion of his active obedience; but rather do include it; or else he may as
well say, that all Christ's active obedience was no way necessary, or
requisite, unto the work of Redemption; because these passages do not expressly
say so; and yet this he will not say, seeing he grants, that his obedience was
an essential requisite, and absolutely necessary, to the constitution of him our
Priest, and his Sacrifice propitiatory: But we read of his being made under the
Law, to redeem these, that were under the Law. Gal. 4: 4, 5. and of his
Righteousness and obedience, as necessary to our Righteousness and
justification, and as having a no less direct influence into the same; than
Adam's offense and disobedience had unto our death and damnation. Romans 5: 17,
18, 19.

CHAP. II.
Christ underwent the Curse of the Law.
MR. Goodwine tells us in his 14. Conclusion. That the sentence or Curse of the
Law was not properly executed upon Christ in his death: But this death of
Christ was a ground or consideration to God, where upon to dispense with his
Law, and to let fall or suspend the execution of the penalty, or curse therein
threatened. Ans. (1) This is directly contrary to what the Apostle says Gal. 3:
13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us; for it is written, cursed is every one, that hangs on a tree. It was the
Curse of the Law, that we were under, and were to be delivered from; and this
Christ has delivered us from, by coming in our stead and bearing it for us,
yea bearing it so, that he is said to have been made it, being made a Curse for
us, which is a most emphatick expression, to hold forth Christ's bearing the
very penalty, threatened in the Law, which cursed every one, that continued not
in all things, which are written in the book of the Law to do them. verse. 10.
Deuteronomy. 27: 26. If Christ underwent the Curse of the Law, he, sure, did suffer
the very sentence, or punishment threatened in the Law; for the Curse of the Law
can import no other thing. (2) If Christ did not bear the sentence or Curse of
the Law, how could he be said to have died or suffered in our place, room or
stead? No man is said to suffer in the place and stead of another, who does not
suffer that same particular kind of punishment, that the other is obnoxious to,
and is obliged to suffer. (3) Why was Christ said to be made sin for us 2. Cor.
5: 21. and to bear our iniquities Esai. 53: 6. 1. Pet. 2: 24. If he did not
undergo the very punishment; that was due to us, because of sin? (4) This is
to give away the cause, in a great measure, unto the Socinians, who will not
yield, that Christ's death was any satisfaction to the justice, or payment of
our criminal debt, or a suffering the punishment of sin, due to us; for if
Christ did not suffer the curse and sentence of the Law, he did not suffer the
punishment, which the Law threatened, and justice required; he did not suffer
any punishment at all, if he suffered not our punishment, or that which was due
to us; he did not stand in our Law-place to answer all the demands of justice
according to what we were liable unto by the Law? nor did he bear our sins in
his own body on the cross. (5) If Christ's death was a ground or consideration
to God, whereupon to dispense with his Law; then it is apparent, that the
consideration of Christ's death was anterior to the dispensing with the Law:
whereas the contrary is rather true, to wit, that the Lord's dispensing with
the Law, was anteriour to his sending of Christ, because the Law properly
knowing no mediator, and requiring none to suffer the penalty for another, must
first, in order of nature, be considered, as dispensed with, before Christ be
substituted in the room of sinners to undergo what they deserved. (6) If it was
only a ground to God, whereupon to let fall, or suspend the execution of the
penalty, then it seems, Christ's death was no full payment, or Satisfaction;
for a full Satisfaction requires more than a suspension of the execution of
the punishment, even a full delivery therefrom.

Let us hear his reason. Because (says he) the threatening and Curse of the
Law was not at all bent or intended against the innocent or Righteous, but
against transgressors only. Therefore God in inflicting death upon Christ
being innocent and Righteous, did not follow the purport or intent of the
Law^but in sparing and forbearing the transgressors (who according to the
(...) of the Law should have bin punished) manifestly dispenses with the Law,
and does not execute it. Ans. All this being granted, yet it will not follow,
that the sentence and Curse of the Law was not executed upon Christ in his
death: for notwithstanding of this dispensing with the Law, as to the persons;
Yet was there no Relaxation of the Law, as to the punishment threatened? Though
the Law did not require, that the innocent should suffer; Yet the Supreme Lord
and Ruler dispensing with his own Law so far, as to substitute an innocent
person, in the room and place of sinners, the Law required, that that innocent
person, taking on that penalty, and thereby making himself nocent, as to the
penalty, should suffer the same that was threatened, and consequently bear the
Curse, threatened in the Law.

As (says he further for explication) when Zaleucus ( the Locrian Lawgiver)
caused one of his own eyes to be put out, that one of his son's eyes might be
spared, who according both to the letter and intent of the Law, should have
lost both, he did not precisely execute the Law, but gave a sufficient account
or consideration, why it should for that time be dispensed with. Ans. This
speaks not home to our case, wherein we pay not the half, nor no part of the
penalty. But Christ pays the whole, as substitute in our room. If Zaleucus
had substituted himself in the room of his son, and suffered both his own eyes
to be put out, though the Law had been dispensed with, as to the persons, yet
the penalty of the loss of both eyes had been paid, and the same punishment,
which the Law required, had been exacted: And so it is in our case, as is
manifest.

Yet he grants, that in some sense, Christ may be said to have suffered the
penalty or Curse of the Law; as 1. It was the Curse or penalty of the Law
(says he) as now hanging over the head of the world, and ready to be executed
upon all men for sin, that occasioned his sufferings. Ans. If this were all,
all the beasts and senseless creatures, may be as well said to have suffered
the penalty and Curse of the Law; and consequently to have suffered for man and
to have born man's sin, in order to his Redemption, as Christ; for the sin, and
penalty of sin, whereunto man was liable, did occasion their suffering, or
being subjected to vanity Romans 8: 20, 21. Thus our whole Redemption is
subverted, and the cause yielded unto the wicked Socinians, for if this be so,
Christ had not our sins laid upon him, he did not bear our sins in his body on
the tree, he was not wounded for our transgressions, the chastisement of our
peace was not on him; He was not made sin for us. He was not our Cautioner and
High Priest; He died not in our room and stead.

Again 2. (says he) ( and some what more properly) Christ may be said to have
suffered the Curse of the Law, because the things, which he suffered were of
the same nature and kind (at least in part) with these things, which God
intended by the Curse of the Law. Ans. Though this seems to come nigher to
the truth, than the former; Yet it cannot give full satisfaction, until it be
explained, what that part, is in respect of which, only Christ's sufferings
were of the same Nature and kind, with what the Law threatened. Let us hear
therefore what follows; and see if thence satisfaction can come. But if by
the Curse (says he) of the Law, we understand either that entire systeme and
historical body (as it were) of penalties and evils, which the Law itself
intends in the term; or else include and take-in the intent of the Law, as
touching the quality of the persons, upon whom is was to be executed; in
neither of these senses, did Christ suffer the Curse of the Law. Ans. (1) This
does not explain to us, what that part is, in which Christ sufferings are of
the same Nature and kind, with what was intended by the Curse of the Law. (2)
There is need of explication here, to make us understand, what is that entire
Systeme and historical body of penalties and evils, which the Law itself
intends in the term Curse, or death: for this is but to explain one dark
thing by what is more dark; and so can give no Satisfaction. (3) But if the
alternative added be explicative, and so the two particulars here mentioned be
one and the same; then we deny, that that does properly belong to the essence
of the penalty, as threatened in the Law: that is, every thing that necessarily
attended the punishment, as inflicted on man, did not directly and essentially
belong thereunto, as threatened by the Law, such as the everlastingness of
death, despair, and the like necessarily accompanying this punishment
inflicted on sinners; so that notwithstanding Christ did not, neither could,
endure these accidental and consequential evils; Yet he both did and might be
said to suffer the Curse and death threatened by the Law, which is to be
abstracted from what flows not from the Law itself, but merely from the
Nature of the subject, or Condition of the sinner punished. But it may be,
these words of his, the intent of the Law, as touching the quality of the
persons, upon whom it was to be executed, have some other import, and that he
means, hereby no more but this, that the intent of the Law was, that the
sinner should suffer: And indeed if so, it was impossible, that Christ's
sufferings could answer the intent of the Law: But we have said above, that as
to this, the Law was dispensed with; and yet notwithstanding Christ the
substitute Sufferer did suffer the same kind of punishment, that the Law
threatened under the terms of Death and Curse. What he adds Further can give
no Satisfaction. So that God (says he) required the death and sufferings of
Christ, not that the Law properly, either in the letter or intention of it,
might be executed; but on the contrary, that it might not be executed, I mean
upon those, who being otherwise ohnoxious unto it should believe. Ans. Though
it be true, that God required the death and sufferings of Christ, not that the
Law either in the letter or intention of it might be executed, as to that,
wherein it was dispensed with: Yet God required the death and sufferings of
Christ, that the letter and intent of the Law might be executed, as to that
wherein it was not dispensed with: that is, as to the punishment therein
threatened; And unless the Law, as to this, had been executed, no man obnoxious
to it, should have escaped, and that because of the Veracity of God, yea and
because of his justice, which he had determined to have Satisfied, ere sinful
man should escape the punishment.

In the next place he tells us, that God did not require the death and
sufferings of Christ, as a valuable consideration, where on to dispense with
his Law toward those that believe, more (if so much) in a way of Satisfaction
to his justice, than to his wisdom. Ans. This savoureth rankly of Socinianisme.
It is not for us to make such comparisons, as if God's Wisdom and justice were
not at full agreement, and were not one. The Scripture tells us, that God set
forth Jesus Christ ts be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare
his Righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, To declare, I say,
at this time his Righteousness, that he might be just and the justifier of him,
which believes in Jesus. Romans 3: 25, 26. And so it is manifest, that
Satisfaction to justice was hereby intended: And this is enough to us, who know
also, that in the whole contrivance of the business, the Infinite Wisdom of God
is eminently relucent; And Love not to make any such comparisons: only we
think, that a Propitiation, and Satisfaction, and the like terms, used in
Scripture, in the expressing of this matter, have a direct aspect, and bear a
manifest relation unto justice, and correspond di^ectly there with, yea clearly
enough infer the same, though there were no other mention made expressly of
the justice of God, in this matter.

What says he next to prove this. for (doubtless) God might (says he) with as
much justice, as wisdom (if not much more) have passed by the er ansgression of
his Law, without consideration of satisfaction. Ans. What God might have done
by his absolute Soveraignity, antecedent to his design and purpose, as to the
punishment, or the reatus poenae (which must not be extended to the reatus
culpae) is not to the question. But now, the Lord, having declared his
determination and purpose to rule and govern the world thus, and to have the
glory of his relative justice manifested in the Salvation of lost man, could
not according to justice, pass by transgressions, without a satisfaction. He
adds. No man will say, that in case a man has bin injured and wronged, that
therefore he is absolutely bound in justice, to seek satisfaction, though he be
never so eminent in the grace and practice of justice: but in many cases of
injuries sustained, a man may be bound, in point of wisdom, and discretion, to
seek satisfaction in one kind or other. Ans. This is the Socinian way of
argueing: and nothing to the point; for we are to look upon the Lord in this
matter, not as a private man, who may dispense with injuries done him; but as a
Righteous Governor, who is resolved to demonstrate his justice and equity,
and who therefore cannot suffer sin to go unpunished without a due satisfaction
had, for the violation of his Laws.

Nor is it to the point to tell us, that some hold, that God, if it had pleased
him, might have pardoned Adam's transgression, without the Atonement made by
the death of Christ: for they speak not of what God may now do, having
determined to manifest the glory of his justice; but what he might have done in
signorationis ante decretum. And as for that word Heb. 2: 11. It became him.
etc. it will as well respect the justice of God as his wisdom, seeing it became
him upon the account of justice, which he would have glorified.

Mr. Baxter in his Confess. Chap. IX. Sect. 5. page 289. thinks that to say,
that Christ paid the same thing, that the Law required of us, and not only
satisfied for our not payment, is to subvert the substance of Religion: But
this is only in his apprehension, and as he takes up their meaning, who say
so; And others possibly may have no lower thoughts of some, who hold, that
Christ only gave such a sacrifice to God, as might be a valuable consideration,
on which he might grant us the benefits, on such conditions as are most
suitable to his ends and honor; and that he did not suffer the same, which the
Law threatened. The screwing up of differences to such an hight, as to make
either the one, or the other, subversive of the substance of Religion, had need
to be upon clear and undeniable grounds, and not founded on mere sandy and
loose consequences, such as those seem to me, by which Mr. Baxter makes out
this Charge.

For he tells us. The Idem is the perfect obedience, or the full punishment that
the Law requires. It is supplicium ipsius delinquentis. Ans. But now, seeing
such as say, that Christ paid the Idem, will say as well as he, that when
Christ suffered that, which they call the Idem, the person himself that sinned,
did not suffer: And I would enquire at Mr. Baxter, whether paid Christ the
Idem, as to all other respects beside; that is, whether Christ suffered all
that penalty, which the Law did threaten to transgressors only this excepted
(which must be excepted) that he did it in another person, and that he was not
the person himself, that sinned, or not? If he say, Not, then the difference
goes deeper; but why does he not then, to make out this heavy charge, Instance
some particulars, threatened in the Law, which Christ did not undergo? And why
does he insist only on this one, that he was not ipse delinquens. but another
person? If he grant that in all other respects, Christ paid the Idem; no man,
sure, can see such difference here, as shall make the one side subvert the
Substance of Religion: for it is a mere s^^ife about a word; and it comes all
to this, whether when one man lays down his life, to save another condemned
to death, after all satisfaction in money, lands, rents service, or what else,
has been rejected, he can be said to pay the Idem, which the Law required, or
not? Some Lawyers would possibly say, he did pay, or suffer the Idem; Mr.
Baxter would say not, because he was not ipsa persona delinquens, was not the
very person, that was condemned, but another. And yet death, unto which the
other man was condemned, was inflicted upon him, and no less would be accepted
as satisfaction, at his hands; which would make some say, that all that debate,
whether it was the same, or the equivalent, were a mere needless contest about
a word. And if it be but just so here, in our present debate, every one will
judge it very hard, to call that a subversion of Religion, which, after
examination and trial, is found to be but a strife about a word. Now, how will
Mr. Baxter prove that the suffering of the Idem, is only, when it is supplicium
ipsius delinquentis? And not also, when the same punishment, in all its
essential ingredients, is undergone and suffered by another? When the Law
imposes the penalty of death, or of such a great sum of money, on a person
transgressing such a Law; common discourse would say, and I suppose the Law
give allowance thereto, that, when another came, and paid the same penalty for
him, without the least abatement, he paid the same penalty, which he Law
impofed, and not another; and not merely a valuable consideration. It is true,
the Law threatened only the transgressour, and obliged him to suffer; but
notwithstanding, another might pay the very same thing, which the Law threatened
and requires.

He says next (p. 290.) the Law never threatened a Surety: nor grants any
liberty of substitution: that was an act of God above the Law? If therefore the
thing due were paid, it was we ourselves morally or legally, that suffered.
Ans. Sure, some Laws of men will threaten Sureties, and grant liberty of
substitution too: But if he speak here only of the Law of God, we grant; that
it threatened only the transgressour; and that it was an act of God above the
Law, and dispensing therewith, that granted a substitution; Yet notwithstanding
of this it is not proved, that that Substitute did not, or could not, suffer
the same punishment, which the Law threatened. And if Mr. Baxter think, that the
laws not threatening a Surety, nor granting liberty of a substitution, will
prove it; it is denied. Next His other consequence is as uncleare, viz. That if
the thing due were paid, it was we ourselves that suffered personally: all
these consequences run upon the first false ground, that no man can pay the
Idem, but the very transgressour. What he means by, we ourselves morally, he
would do well to explicate. And as for legally, we ourselves may be said to do
legally, what our Surety and undertaker does for us. And if this be all he
means, viz. that if the thing due (to wit by Law, as threatened there) be
paid, either we in our own persons, or our Surety for us, and in our room and
Law place, paid it, it is true, but subversive of his hypothesis: It must then
be some other thing that he means by morally or legally and it must be the
same with, or equivalent to personally: or the like; but his next words clear
his meaning; for he adds; And it would not be ourselves legally, because it
was not ourselves naturally. And what lawyer, I pray, will yield to this
reason? I suppose, they will tell us, that we are said to do that legally,
which our Cautioner, or Surety does for us. But if he think otherwise here
also, that nothing can be accounted to be done by us legally, but what is done
by our selves Naturally (which is a word of many significations, and might
occasion much discourse) that is, personally; Yet it will not follow, that no
other can suffer the Idem, that was threatened, but the delinquent himself.

At length he tells us, That if it had been ourselves legally, then the
strickest justice could not have denied us a present and perfect deliverance
ipso facto, seeing no justice can demand more, than the idem quod dehitur
(rather debetur) the whole debt of obedience or punishment. Ans. But what if
ourselves, in our own natural persons, had undergone the penalty, had we
therefore ipso facto attained a perfect deliverance? It will be confessed, I
suppose, that all that underlye this punishment, underlye it for ever: how then
does their legal suffering the idem help them? If it be said, that they must
eternally suffer, because never able to suffer so, as to make satisfaction: Yet
still it is obvious, that their undergoing the idem in their own persons
naturally, does not advantage them, as to a present and perfect deliverance
ipso facto, or ever at all. And where is then the truth of this axiom? Or
where is its pertinency to our purpose? When a man is punished with death,
according to the Law, is he ipso facto presently and perfectly delivered? It
seems then, that the paying of the Idem, yea, or the tantund^m by another
person, is more effectual for their liberation, than their paying of the Idem
in their own persons. And again the Law, in many cases grants liberation,
even when the Idem in Mr. Baxters sense is paid, that is, when another pays
down the same: Yea and likewise if the Creditor be satisfied, when another
thing is paid: So that neither part of this assertion holds true,
universally.

But yet some may say; That if the Idem or the very same, were paid by Christ,
our liberation should immediately follow. I Ans. It will not follow; so if we,
in our own persons, had made full payment of that debt of suffering (which is
impossible to be done in time) it might be granted, that actual liberation
would immediately follow: but when we did not this, in our own persons; but
Christ made full payment of what the Law could demand by way of punishment, or
threatened, for us, it will not follow, that our deliverance should immediately
follow thereupon: and the reason is because it was such a paying of the Idem,
as was refusable, and as God himself provided out of wonderful love and free
grace; and was accorded unto by a mutual compact, according to the free and
wise Conditions of which the benefits were to be given out.

Mr. Baxter in his Cath. Theol. part. 2. n. 48. says, the Very nature and
Reason of the Satisfactoriness of Christ's sufferings was not in being the very
same either in kind, or in degree, which were due to all for whom he suffered.
Whence we see, that he denies, that Christ suffered the same, either in kind,
or in degree, that was due by the Law to those for whom he suffered. His
reason, why they could not be the same, which was due by the Law, he gives (n.
49.) is the same we heard before viz. The Law made it due to the sinner
himself. Which notwithstanding, it might be the same both as to kind and
degree, which Christ suffered, that the Law made due; the substitution of a new
person, that the Law did not provide, alters not the punishment either as to
kind, or as to degree. He adds: and another suffering for him ful^illeth not
the Law (which never said either thou, or another for thee shall die) but only
satisfyeth the Lawgiver, as he is above his own Law, and could dispense with
is, his justice being satisfied and saved, dum alius solvit, aliud solvitur.
Ans. Though the Law intend only the punishment of the transgressour; Yet when
the Lawgiver dispenses with the Law, and accepts of the punishment and
suffering of another, the punishment and suffering of another, does not eo
spso, that it is the punishment and suffering of another, become different in
kind and degree from the punishment enjoined by the Law; as is obvious; when
^ne man suffers death for another, the Law being dispensed with, that made
death due to the transgressour himself: his death does not become eoipso, that
it is the death of another, than of him that transgressed, another kind of
death, ar distinct as to degrees; it may be the same as to both: And yet this
is all the force of Mr. Baxter argument, dum alius solvit, aliud solvitur;
which whether it be a certain and universal rule in the Law, I much doubt: but
though it were: Yet no man can hence infer, that aliud quoad genus and
gradus, eo ipso solvitur: for it is a rule in logic, that a genere ad speciem
non sequitur affirmativ^, so that though, when the Law requires, that he who
sins shall suffer, and die, and another suffers and dies, in the room and
stead of him who sinned, it may be said, that in so far aliud solvitu^; Yet it
cannot be hence inferred, that the death or suffering of him, who sinned not,
is quite of another kind, and differs in degrees from that death, which the
Law made due to the sinner.

He mentions afterward in the 2, 3, 4. and 5. places some particulars, which
were not in Christ's sufferings, and yet would have been in the sufferings of
sinners themselves: But all this is to no purpose; for the question is not,
whether Christ's sufferings were the same every way with the sufferings of the
damned, as to all circumstances, and consequents, flowing from the Condition of
sinners suffering; But whether they were the same, as to kind, with that death
and Curse, which was threatened in the Law, by way of punishment, and which was
therefore due by Law unto the transgressour. Let us now see the particulars. 2.
And sin (says he) itself (though not as sin) was the greatest part of the
sinners punishment. To be alienated from God, and not to Love him and delight
in him, but to be corrupted and deluded and tormented by concupiscence. Ans.
These are indeed necessary consequents of sin in the person, who is a sinner,
and are consequently punishment; but not directly such; neither were they
threatened as punishments by the Law, and so do not belong to the essence and
substance of that punishment, which the Law threatened, and which Christ was
called to undertake. 3. Says he. And the immediate unavoidable consequents
resulting from sin itself, were punishments, which Christ did never undergo,
(as to be hateful and displeasing to God, as contrary to his holy nature, to be
related as criminal, to lose right to God's Favor and Kingdom. Ans. To be
hateful and displeasing unto God ^ agrees only to a creature (which God does
not hate, as such) as a sinner inherently: and though Christ did not feel God's
hatred and anger against his own person, yet he felt his anger and hatred
against sin, and sinners. And Christ was also related as Criminal, not
inherently, but by imputation, when he was made sin for ^s. 2. Cor. 5: 21. The
sinner that is such inherently only, loses right to God's Favor, and Christ
missed the sense thereof, when he cried out, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? And 4. (says he) none of the further punishment, which supposed
real faultiness, could fall on Christ, as the torment of an accusing
conscience, for rejecting and offending God, for casting away our own felicity
and running into hell etc. the sense of God's hatred of us, as real sinners.
Ans. All this is granted, but these belonged only to the punishment as
inflicted on the sinner and transgressour himself, but did not belong to its
essence and substance abstractly confidered, and so could not accompany the
same, as inflicted upon one, who was in himself wholly free of all sin. And
this is yet more manifest in that which he mentions. 5. Saying much less the
Desertions of the Spirit of holiness, to be left without goodness, in a state
of sin, and to hate God for his justice and holiness, which will be the damneds
case; for these did not belong to the essence and substance of the punishment,
threatened in the Law; but were only consequents thereof, as inflicted on
sinners inherently. We do not say, that Christ suffered, what the damned do
suffer, or that he was in the damneds case. Thus, though we make them not of
the same kind, with all that the damned do suffer; Yet without any blind zeal
(as he is pleased to censure) we may say, that Christ suffered the same curse
and death, that was threatened in the Law properly, as a punishments, as to
substance; and yet no way be guilty of intolerable blaspheming of our Savior.

The same answer may serve to that, which he says (n. 50.) Nor could Christ's
sufferings be equal in degree, intensively and extensivly, to all that was
deserved by the world, as is easily discernable by perusing what is now said,
seeing our deserved suffering lay in things of such a nature, as to be left in
sin itself, destitute of God's image and love and communion, under his hatred,
tormented in conscience, besides the ever-lasting torments in hell, which are
more than these, upon all the millions of sinners, which were redeemed. This is
already answered: and it is not demonstrated, that all these consequents and
concomitants of the punishment, as inflicted on such as were sinners
inherently, did properly belong to the essence and substance of the punishment
threatened, in itself considered; And of this we only speak, for as to this, we
only say, that Christ suffered the same. If two men be condemned to pay, each a
thousand pounds, which none of them are well able to do, and a rich man
undertaketh to pay the sum for one of the two, that rich man may well be said
to have paid the same sum, that the poor man was obliged to pay, though his
paying of that sum be not attended with such consequents and circumstances,
as it would have been, if the poor man himself had been put to pay it, or as
the other poor man finds it, who is made to pay it; in the poor man it is
necessarily attended with poverty to himself and all his family, and possibly
he and all his must be sold for slaves to make up the sum; but the rich man
can pay it without any such concomitants, or consequents, and yet be said to
have paid the same sum.

It is to be observed, that Papists and some others use all these same
arguments to prove, that Christ did not suffer any thing of the penalty of sin
in his soul, as may be particularly seen in Parker de descensu lib. 3. But Mr.
Baxter grants (n. 51.) that Christ did suffer more in soul, than in body: And
yet what answers are made by Parker and other reformed divines, in this matter,
against Papist's, may also serve our turn against Mr. Baxter and others:
Socinians also, (as may be seen in Smalci^ Refut. lib. de Satisf. Christ Chap.
6. and 7.) upon these same grounds, deny, that Christ's sufferings were a
proper satisfaction, he thereby not paying the Idem, the same, that man should
have suffered. And Socinus Prael. Theol. Cap. 18. fol. 205. says in plain
terms, That Christ did no way satishe the justice of God by his sufferings,
unless it be said, that he suffered the same things, which we should have
suffered because of our sins. Therefore there is a necessity, to hold that
Christ suffered the same for substance, that the Elect were liable to suffer,
that it may the more clearly appear, that his sufferings were indeed a
Satisfaction.

But Mr. Baxter tells us, in the same book (n. 149.) that Solution of the debt
and satisfaction, strickly taken, thus differ, that Satisfaction is solutio
tantidem, vel aequivalentis, alias indebiti. And if Christ be said to have paid
the very same duty and punishment, which the Law required, he is denied to have
satisfied, for our non-payment; for a Law that is fully performed can require
no more, nor the Lawgiver neither: And therefore both Satisfaction and Pardon
are shut out. Ans. Thus we seem to be hardly straightened, for if we say, that
Christ paid the Idem, the Same, Mr. Baxter thinks we destroy thereby all
Satisfiction and all Pardon, and so yield the cause to the Socinians: If upon
the other hand, we say, that Christ did not suffer the Idem, we yield the cause
unto the Socinians, and deny all Satisfaction, in t^er judgment; and their
consequence seems to be as rational, as Mr. Baxter's. But truth may be
affirmed, without all hazard: And to make such a difference betwixt Solution
and Satisfaction, is to play needlessly upon words, and at length will but
recurre unto this, Sialius solvit, aliud solvitur; and so by saying that
Christ's Satisfaction was also a solutio ejusdem, we shall deny both
Satisfaction and Pardon; or by calling it so: But, as was said above, it is not
fit to lay so much weight upon the simple use of a term or word; and sure it
is most unfit for Mr. Baxter to do so, who on all occasions, venteth his
displeasure so much against others, who lay so much weight on meet terms of
art, or words. But, as to the thing, sure, the creditor will think himself
satisfied, when the same sum, which was oweing by one, is paid by another
for the debtor, and that in the same species of Silver, or of Gold. And if
that hold, that sialius solvit, aliud solvitur, Mr. Baxter may see, that if
another pay, his payment may become a Satisfaction, because it is so far aliud
another thing, though really and upon the matter, it be the same. And here
lies the truth, that we assert, Christ paid the very same suffering, that we
were obliged to pay; but he being another, and not the persons guilty
themselves, his sufferings were not only a solutio debiti, a payment of our
debt, but also, as being performed by him, they were a Satisfaction to justice,
and so much the rather a compleet Satisfaction, that they were the same
sufferings, we were liable to, and not strickly equivalent. And this appears
to me the more clear from what Mr. Baxter said before (n. 5^. and 53.) where he
has these words. [ The true reason of the Satisfactorieness of Christ's
suffering was, that they were a most apt means for the demonstration of the
Governing justice, holiness, Wisdom and Mercy of God, by which God could
attain to the ends of the Law and Government, better than by executing the Law
on the world in its destruction.] Where we hear no word of its being solutio
equivalentis alias indebiti. and next, all this is more clear by Christ's
suffering the very same, that we were to suffer, than by saying that he
suffered some other thing; The most clear demonstration of the Governing
justice of God was in exacting of Christ the full penalty, and the very same
punishment both in Soul and Body, that the Law of God made due unto
transgressors; No other thing could give such a demonstration hereof, justice
could not have required more; and justice had not fully been demonstrated by
exacting less: and the exacting of the very same, both as to Kind, and as to
degrees kept a just correspondence with the requisite demonstration of the
Governing justice of God. Hereby also was his Holiness Wisdom and Mercy,
whereby he attained the ends of the Law and Government, most clearly
manifested, when he did not execute the Law upon the sinful world, but upon the
substituted Cautioner, that the Elect world might be saved: This, I am sure,
was evidently a full salvo to Gods justice, when the same punishment was paid
down, that Law and justice called for. Not that God might give pardon and life
to sinners, upon the new terms of the Covenant of Grace (as he speaks n.
53.) for that looks too like the Arminian Satisfaction: as if nothing but a
possibility and freedom were here obtained for God to bestow pardon and life,
upon such conditions; whereby notwithstanding of this Satisfaction, it might
come to pass, that not one should be saved. See Colloq. Hag. p. 172.
Impetratio salutis pro^omnibus, est acquisiti^ possibilitatis, ut nimirum Deus,
illaesa sua justitia, hominem peccatorem possit recipere in gratiam. See also
Grevinch. ad Ames. fol. 9. Posita and praestita Christi morte and
Satisfactione, fieri potest, ut, nemine novi foederis conditionem praestante,
nemo salvaretur. Therefore I judge it saifest to say. That justice was so
satisfied, as that all such, for whom the Satisfaction was given, shall in due
time, and according to God's own method, certainly receive both pardon and
life, both grace and glory, both grace to believe in Christ, and all the other
graces that follow thereupon, with life everlasting.

CHAP. III.
We must not lean to any Righteousness within us, whereby to be justified.
Mr. Baxter in his Cathol. Theol. part. 2. n. 176. speaks thus. It is
ordinary (says he) with some writers and preachers, to tell men, that no part
of their Righteousness is in themselves, and with others, that at least, none
which they are justified, by in any part is in them; And that it is all in
Christ only: And that nature is loath to yield to this, but thinks it a fine
thing, to have some little part of the honor to itself: And as to the honor
of a good Action, if it be but 999. parts, that it ascribes to God, and takes
one part of a thousand to ourselves, it is a dangerous arrogation: We must have
none. And it might be thought, that such as ever understood the Gospel,
considered the particular expressions, used in Scripture, to abase man, yea and
the whole Contrivance of the Gospel Salvation, through a Crucified Cautioner,
and that such as ever understood and were acquanted with the Natural Pride,
deceit, and Treachery of their own heart; and had any experience in the
devices of Satan, in and about wakened consciences, to keep them from an hearty
closing with and willing accepting of, and cleanly resting upon the way of
Salvation, revealed in the Gospel, should be far from condemning this saying,
and from making exceptions against it. But indeed, the grounds, that Papists,
Socinians and Arminians lay down, as the Basis of their antievangelick Fabric,
and Contrivance of the way of Salvation, are more favorable to Self, and are
therefore the more cordially embraced by many, and more stiffly maintained. Mr.
Baxter seems to say here, that these are different things, to say, That no
part of our Righteousness is in ourselves, and that no part of our
Righteousness, by which we are justified, is in ourselves, where with the
Orthodox, these are but different expressions of the same thing; for when they
deny a Righteousness within ourselves, it is not a denying of begun Holiness
and Sanctification; but a denying of a Righteousness as the ground of
justification, for all this they acknowledge to be wholly and only in Christ,
the Lord our Righteousness. And to adjoine to this, the Question about the
honor of a good Action, as whether that should be wholly ascribed to God, or
one part of a Thousand may not be ascribed to ourselves; is neither very
savourie in itself, nor pertinent to the clearing of the other.

But what answers Mr. Baxter? This (says he) well explained may be made
sound: But thus grossly delivered, it is but a popular cheat, under the taking
Pretense of self abasement and giving Christ all. Ans. I should readily fear,
that Mr. Baxter's explication should be so far from making the expressions
sounder than they are, that it should rather prove a Commentary corrupting the
text, seeing I find him thus dissatisfied with expressions so consonant to the
strain of the Gospel, to the holy genius of all savingly illuminated, and to
the very language of the Saints, in Scripture. But as to his Consure, calling
this no less than a popular cheat, it is sharp, and, more befitting, in my
judgment, a Papist, or a Non-Christian Socinian, than Mr. Baxter.

Yet let us hear the ground of this so sharp and so unseemly censure. The Devil
(says he) is as willing as any one, that you should have nothing honorable or
praiseworthie in you; and be as vile, as he can make you. Ans. If it would not
be displeasing, I would say, that this answer is a plain cheat: for the
question is not, whether we should have any thing in us, truly honorable and
praise worthy, or whether we should be as vile, as the devil would make us; No
protestant ever spoke so; But the question is. Whether for any thing in us
truly honorable and praise worthy, we should Sacrifice to our own net, and
burn incense to our own drag; or give the glory unto God, who works all our
works in us; and works in us both to will, and to do Esai. 26: 12. Phil. 2:
13. The question is not, whether we should have good in us, or not? but whether
we should not say, with Paul 1. Cor. 4: 4. Even when we know nothing by
ourselves, yet are we not hereby justified? and whether we should not say with
him Phil, 3: 8, 9. that we count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus, our Lord, and count them dung, that we may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having our own Righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is
of God by Faith. The question is not, whether Christ be made Sanctification to
us; but whether that Sanctification, be any part of that Righteousness, which
Christ is made of God to be unto us? What more?

He adds. It is God, who honors these, that honor him, and praises his
Saints, as the excellent on the Earth, and his Jewels and peculiar Treasure,
adorneth with his own lovely image, and partakers of the divine Nature, and
members of Christ, as his own flesh. And it is Satan and wicked men that
vilify and dishonor them. Ans. This is but a Continuance of the same cheat:
for it is no part of the question, whether the Saints should be vilified, or
honored? But the question is, whether the Saints should rob God of his glory,
and ascribe that unto themselves, which is due unto him, be it in less, or in
more? We know, the Saints are God's excellent ones, his Jewels and his peculiar
treasure; but all this is through the free underserved grace of God, making
them beautiful and lovely with his own graces, and partakers of his divine
Nature: And therefore we say, that for all that they ought to be humble,
knowing what their birth and ^ativity was, and whence all this is come; and who
ought to have the glory of all this; and notwithstanding of this, what is the
sole ground of their justification before God, and what is that Righteousness,
upon the account whereof they are justified in the sight of God.

And I have often lamented it (says he further) that these very men, that hold
this kind of doctrine of self-abosement, as having no part of Righteousness,
nor share at all in any good work, are yet too often so proudly conceited of
their own goodness ( even for holding, that they have none for which they are
praise worthy) as that their pride is no small trouble to the Churches and all
about them. Ans. I shall not plead for pride, or proud conceits in any: but
whether such as lay down doctrinal grounds of pride, and teach men to be proud,
or such as lay down contrary grounds, but do not practice accordingly, be most
blame worthy; I leave Mr. Baxter to judge. One thing I would ask: How Mr.
Baxter came to know, that such, as he opposes here, were proudly conceited of
their own goodness? Pride and a proud conceit lies most within, and is not
obvious to the view of every one, especially being upon such a ground. I hope
Mr. Baxter will not take upon him to judge of hearts: And if it be by their
contendings for that, which they conceive to be truth: If this be an infallible
mark, no man can be judged more proud, than is Mr. Baxter, none having in this
matter contended by so many and so great volumnes, as he has, since his
Aphorisms come abroad, and that indeed to the no small trouble of the
Churches. And further, some might think, that if Mr. Baxter did aright lament,
that any were proudly conceited of their own goodness, he should not have laid
doctrinal grounds for fomenting of this pride; nor moved such an objection
against himself, as he does here; for no man can rightly lament at the practice
of that doctrine, which himself embraces and teaches.

He proceeds (^. 177.) Whatever is of God is good: and whatever is good is
la^dable or praise-worthie, and meriteth to be esteemed as it is. Ans. True,
and therefore God, who is the Author thereof, should have the glory, and it
should be esteemed, as it is, to the glory of God, and not to puff us up with
proud conceits, or to be the ground we lean to, in order to be justified and
accepted of God. He adds (n. 178.) All the Sanctified are inherently
righteous, but with an imperfect Righteousness, which will no further justify
them in judgment, save only against this Accusation, that they are unholy. Ans.
Mr. Baxter then is much to blame, who will have this Imperfect Righteousness to
be a perfect Righteousness, as being our Gospel Righteousness, and the
Po^estative condition of our Justification and absolution at judgment, and so
the immediate and sole formal ground of our Justification before God. But this
answer is also impertinent; for these he here writteth against, speak not of a
particular justification, from this or that false Accusation; but of that
justification before God, whereof Paul treats, in his Epistles to the Romans
and Galatians, and which is a justification of the ungodly. Romans 4: 5.

He adds (n. 179.) There is no Righteousness, which will not justify him,
that has it in tantum, so far as he is Righteous: for the contrary is a
contradiction: for to be just, is to be justifiable. Ans. This is sick of the
same impertinency with what went before: for the question is not concerning a
particular Righteousness, and a particular justification, upon that account;
but of a general justification, as to our state and that from the just
accusation of Law and justice, under which we stand by Nature, in reference to
which, all our inherent Righteo^sness, how great so ever it be, is no ground,
nor part of the merit, or formalis ratio of that. Paul had no small share of
this Righteousness, when he said, he knew nothing by himself: And yet he
adds* Yet am I not hereby justified 1. Cor. 4: 4. and we would say the same,
and speak after this manner, if Mr. Baxter would suffer us.

Next (n. 181. for 180.) he says. All the Righteousness, which formally
justifies us, is our own, or on ourselves, where it justifies us: for to be
made just or justified, in the first sense constitutivly, is nothing else, but
to be made such, as are personally themselves just. Pardon of sin is made our
own, Right to Christ and glory is made our own; though Christ's Righteousness
was the only meritorious cause of all this; which therefore is and may be
called our Material Righteousness, as that, which meriteth it, is the matter.
Ans. There seems to be nothing here, but confusion: for (1) he speaks
ambiguously, when he says, that all that Righteousness, which formally
justifies us, is our own, or on ourselves; for this may be true, whether by
that Righteousness, he mean the Surety-Righteousness of Christ (which he does
not mean, for he is too much against the imputation of that, as we have seen)
beeause we say, that is made ours by imputation, in order to our justification
upon the account thereof: or whether he mean our own inherent Righteousness;
but then if this be his meaning, it is false, that we are hereby formally
justified, unless he mean, as before, only a particular justification, which is
nothing to the point, as was said. (2) To be made just and to be justified, are
not formally the same, but to such only, who Love confusion. (3) He who is made
just, is but constituted justifiable, and is not eo ipso constitutive
justified: But Mr. Baxter loves his own Expressions and Explications of them.
(4) When he says that to be justified constitutively is nothing else but to be
made such, as are personally themselves just, he speaks very indistinctly;
not only as confounding, being made just and being justified, as if they were
formally the same; but also as not giving us to understand, what he means by
these words personally th^mselves just: Hereby he would seem to say, that only
by something inherent in our persons, we are constituted Righteous, and are
justified; and not by any thing imputed to us: And if so, the ground of all
Anti-evangelick boasting and glorying in ourselves is laid. (5) Pardon of sin,
as such, is neither a making a just, nor a justifying: and the same we say of
Right to Christ and to Glory. (6) Christ's Righteousness, according to Mr.
Baxter, can not be called the meritorious cause of our pardon, justification,
and Right to Glory etc. because it is only made by him the meritorious cause of
the New Covenant, wherein pardon, Right to Christ and to Glory are promised
upon New Conditions, and so is made the meritorious Cause of the connection
betwixt the performance of these New Conditions, and the obtaining of Pardon
and that Right; so that by virtue of Christ's Merits, these New Conditions are
made the proper and immediate meritorious cause ex pacto of these favors: And
by this way, Man can not but boast and glory in himself immediately, and give
Christ only some remote far-off thanks, for procuring the New terms. (7)
Christ's Righteousness cannot be called our Material Righteousness, any other
way, than as it has purchased the New Covenant, according to Mr. Baxter; and
this being equally for all, Christ's Righteousness shall be the Material
Righteousness of the Reprobat, as well as of Believers: And how can that be
called ours, which is not ours, nor our own, nor are we by it made personally
just ourselves? as he spoke before (8) According to this doctrine, Christ
Righteousness meriteth to us another Righteousness, which is our own and on
ourselves and by this we are formally justified: that is, according to what
went before, and to what follows, we are formally justified by our own
personal inherent holiness (for of this, he is speaking only) and yet that
which he here mentions, as the Righteousness, which formally justifies us,
is said to be pardon of sin, and a Right to Christ and to Glory, which formally
is no Righteousness at all, nor no where so called in Scripture, and is but a
consequent of that, which elsewhere he calls our Gospel Righteousness, and
the Condition of Justification.

He goes on (n. 182.) He that is no cause of any good work, is no Christian,
but a damnable wretch, and worfe than any wicked man I know in the world: And
he that is a cause of it, must not be denied falsely to be a cause of it. Nor a
Saint denied to be a Saint, upon a false pretense of self-denial. Ans. Of such
a cause of any good work, he knows the objection speaks, that should have
the glory and praise thereof; and and of good works, as the ground and formal
Cause of justification; which these against whom Mr. Baxter here disputes, do
deny. But we may see here, what Mr. Baxter accounts good works; even such as
the most damnable wretch, and possibly the devil himself may do; that is a
work materially good, though far different from the good works described to us
in Scripture. And thus the Justification upon good works, which Mr. Baxter here
means, must be a Justification, that all Heathens, damnable wretches, yea and
devils themselves are capable of: But this is not the justification we speak
of, of which who ever are partakers shall be glorified Romans 8: 30. We say
nothing, that gives him ground to think, that our thoughts are, that a Saint
should be denied to be a Saint, upon pretense of Self-denial. Only we say that
such as are Saints indeed will be loath to rob God of his glory, or take any of
that to themselves, which is due to him alone, in so far as they act as Saints;
And they should not, because Saints, glory and boast, as if their justification
before God, were by their Sanctity and good works; and not of mere grace,
through the imputation of the Surety-Righteousness of Christ. One thing I would
ask. Does Mr. Baxter think, that Christ's Righteousness has merited that
justification, which those damnable wretches and devils may partake of, by any
good work, which they do? himself told us in the foregoing (n. 81.) that all
Righteousnuss which formally justifies, is our own, and that to be made just
and to be justified are the same, or equipollent; and to be Justified
constitutively is nothing else, then to be made such as are personally
themselves just. Now, when devils and damnable wretches may be the causes of
some good work, that good work cannot but formally justify them, and they
thereby become constitutively justified, I would enquire, whether this
Justification be purchased by Christ or not? And again I would enquire,
whether this Justification be accompanied with pardon of sin, and with Right to
Christ and to glory, or not? If not, how can it be called a justification? and
if it be not a justification, how can they be hereby formally justified, and
constitutively justified?

He tells us next (n. 183) As God is seen here in the glass of his works, so he
is to be loved and praised, as so appearing. This is, say I, good and
reasonable. What then? Therefore (says he, he that dishonors his work,
dishonors God, and hinders his due love and praise. This consequence, I
grant, is good; but what is it to the point in hand? And his most lovely and
honorable work (says he) on earth is his holy image on his Saints; and as
Christ will come to be admired and glorified in them at last, so God must be
seen and glorified in them here in some degree* Neither, say I, is any thing of
this to the purpose in hand. He adds. And to deny the glory of his image is
the malignants way of injuring him, and that in which the worst will serve you.
And what then? He that will praise God (says he further) as Creator and
Redeemer must praise his works, of Creation and Redemption: And is it the way
of praising him, as our Sanctifier, to dispraise his work of Sanctification?
Ans. What makes all this to the purpose? Must all such be guilty of this
malignant wickedness, who tell men, that no part of their Righteousness is in
themselves, by which they are to be justified, but that it is all in Christ
only: or that say, that God must have all the glory of what good action they
do? This is hard, that either we must be wicked Malignants, or Sacrilegious
robbers of God of the Glory, due unto him, But I see no connection, and Mr.
Baxter has not yet demonstrated the same. He must then prove the Consequence
of this argueing.

He adds (n. 184.) Those poor sinners of my acquantance, who lived in the
grossest sins against Conscience (as Drunkeness, and horedome etc.) have been
glad enough of such doctrine, and forward enough to believe, that there is
nothing in man, that in any part can justify him, or that is any part of
Righteousness, but it is all out of us in Christ, and therefore they are as
justifiable, as any. But Conscience will not let them believe it, as they
desire, Ans. To this cannot answer, not knowing, nor having acquaintance with
those poor sinners; Yet this I may say, (and others will say the same with me)
that Mr. Baxter's way is that, which I find more relishing unto carnal Souls,
than the self denying way of the Gospel, which we use to preach: And that the
way, which Mr. Baxter is not satisfied with, is the way, that is most pleasant
and acceptable unto the truly gracious, and rightly exercised Souls. But
surder, what of all this? Knows not Mr. Baxter that some can turn the grace
of God into lasciviousness? Must therefore the mountains be removed for them?

He says Moreover (n. 185.) It is arrogant folly to divide tho praise of any
good act between God and man, and to say God is to have so many parts and man
so many: for the whole is due to God; and yet some is due to man: for man
holds his honor only in Subordination to God, and not dividedly in
Co-ordination. And therefore all is due to God: for that which is Man's is
God's; because we have nothing; but what we have received. But he that
arrogateth any of the honor due to God or Christ, ^ffendeth. Ans. If it be
thus, Mr. Baxter is the more to blame, in being dissatisfied with such, as are
but expressing their care, that God have all his due, and that man do not
proudly arrogat to himself any of that honor and glory, which is due to God
alone: And if Mr. Baxter knows not, that there is a strong propension in
corrupt nature, to spoil God of his glory, he knows nothing: And woe to such,
as would indulge nature in this Sacrilege. Them that honor God, He will
honor. What honor is justly due unto man, in subordination unto God, none of
those, I suppose, whom Mr. Baxter here opposes, will grudge him of; but all
their care is, to have God's due kept for himself, and that is all; and it is
not commendable in any, to oppose them in this.

But next he says (n. 186.) If all had been taken from God's honor, which had
been given to the creature, God would have made nothing, or made nothing good;
heaven and earth and all the world would derogate from his honor; and none of
his works should be praised. And the better any man is, the more he would
dishonor God, and the wickeder the less. But he made all good, and is glorious
in the glory, and honorable in the honor of all: and to justify the holiness
of his servants, is to justify him. Ans. All this is little or nothing to the
purpose: for such as are careful that man rob not God of his glory, do not
deny the honor due to the creature, knowing that when honor is given to the
creature, upon a right ground, and in the right manner, it redounded unto the
honor of the Creator: But who knows not, how ready the Creature is to steal
into the throne of God; and how ready men are to transcend^, and transgress all
due limits? And is it not saifest to keep far from such a dangerous precipice?
Is it to edification thus to gratify with our pleadings proud Nature, and to
blow at this fire of corruption, that the Saints have dailyhard work about to
suppress and exstinguish? Must we thus, on so small occasions, plead so stoutly
for man, and pretend to plead for God too?

He adds next (n. 187.) If these Teachers mean, that no man has any power
freely to specify the acts of his own will by any other help of God, besides
necessitating predetermining premotion; and so that every man does all that he
can do, and no man can do more than he does; They di honor God by denying him
to be the Creator of that f^ee power, which is essential to man, and which God
himself accounts it his honor to creat. And they feign God to damn and
blame all, that are damned and blamed, for as great impossibilities, as if they
were damned and blamed for not making a world, or for not being Angels. Ans.
This is not a fit place to treat of that Question of Predetermination, though
Mr. Baxter pull it in here by the ears; It is enough for us, that we see now,
whither all that Mr. Baxter has here been saying, tends, even to give unto
Man, the glory of all the good he does, of his Faith, Repentance, Love of God,
obedience and perseverance, in the first, chief and immediate ^^ace; for by his
own Natural Power he did freely specify the acts of his own will, and so
believed, when he might have rejected the Gospel, Loved God and Christ, when he
might have hated both, Repented, when he might have remained impenitent,
Converted himself, when he might have remained in his former state (and Mr.
Baxter makes no difference of acts here, and so his words must be looked on as
meaned of supernatural acts, as well as of Natural) and that without any
predetermining grace or motion of God. This glory shall we never yield to be
due unto man, Let Mr. Baxter load the Doctrine of Predetermining grace, with
all the reproaches, and absurdities, he can invent. He needs not think now to
restrick his opinion of denying Predetermination unto natural acts, for as the
good spoken of by those he here opposes, is supernatural good, as such; so his
discourse here is expressive enough of this: And thus the cause is yielded unto
Pelagians, Jesuits and Arminians, and the crown is put upon the head of man,
and he is to honor and praise himself for what good he does, for all began at
his own self-determining power and will; and the Almighty himself could not
have bowed and predetermined his will, except he had overturned the course of
Nature, and destroyed that free power, which is essential to man. And thus it
is made to be to the honor of God, to creat a Creature, that is absolute Lord
and Master of all his own actions, and so must be the first Cause of his own
actions, as to their specific moral nature, and what is this, but to make man
an independent Creature, as to his actions, and consequently a God to himself:
Mr. Baxter hinteth some other help of God besides Predetermination; but what
that is, he tells us not; is it his Concourse? From this the same
inconveniences will flow, that flow from Predetermination. And beside Mr.
Baxter seems to incline more to Durandus's his opinion, and A dola's, which
even the Jesuits are ashamed to own, and his friend D. Strange does directly
confute; as loving to set man yet higher up, than they dar do. Does Mr. Baxter
think that it is essential to man to have such a free power, as that of himself
he can specify the acts of his own will, without any predetermining Motion of
God? Can he then believe in Christ. Hope savingly in God, yield Christian
Obedience to all the commands of God, without God's Predetermining motion upon
his heart? And is that Common General influx, whereby he is preserved in his
being, and his faculties and power not taken away, enough to make a man turn
from Nature unto Grace, if he will be so good natured as to bow his own will,
and determine himself, as he may? Why do we then condemn the Pelagians? What
did or could Pelagius say more? But enough of this here.

In the following, Paragraph (n. 188.) He tells us, that some men teach, that
Christ strippeth a Christian of two things, his Sins, and his Righteousness. Or
that two Things must be cast away for Christ, Sins and Righteousness. And he is
not satisfied with such speeches, though they be consonant to, yea upon the
matter, the very same with the speeches of Paul Phil. 3: 8, 9. He faith they
should speak better, if they would not deceive. And why says he not so of the
Apostle Paul also? May it serve him, that we speak, as Paul did? Nothing (says
he) is to be cast away, as evil, but sin. True; and yet the Apostle desired to
be found in Christ, not having his own Righteousness; and what was a
Righteousness in his eyes before; and was a Righteousness, which is in the Law,
and wherein he was blameless, he now accounted loss for Christ, yea he
accounted them but dung; which includes a rejecting and casting of it away
with detestation. He adds, Righteousness truly such is good, and never to be
cast away. If it be no Righteousn^ss, why do they falsely say, that we must cast
away our Righteousness? Ans. Let the Apostle Paul answer this, whom it
concerns as much, as us: And let Mr. Baxter in soberness consider how this
reflecteth upon the Spirit of the Lord, inspiring the Apostle to speak so. As
for us, we are not very anxious in this matter, but can freely tell Mr. Baxter,
that though our personal Righteousness be good; Yet in the matter of
justification before God, and absolution from the condemnatory sentence of the
Law, and adjudication to life, we must lay it aside, and betake ourselves
solely to the Righteousness of Christ, and seek to be found in him alone, after
the example of the Apostle, and according to the clear doctrine of the Gospel;
And this we are resolved to do, how displeased soever Mr. Baxter be with us
upon that account.

He adds. To cast away a false conceit of Righteousness, is not to cast away
Righteousness, but Sin only; indeed beside sin, we are said justly to cast away
that, which would be the object and matter of sin: And the phrase is fitlier
applied to a thing Indifferent; than to a thing necessary, lest it seduce. Ans.
To account our Righteousness, consisting in our obedience to the Law, to be
dung, as Paul did, in the business of justification, is all we played for, let
Mr. Baxter call it a casting away of a false conceit of Righteousness, if that
will satisfy him, but even in this we cast away our Righteousness, when we
will not trust to it, as our Righteousness, in order to justification; or as
that Righteousness, upon the account of which we expect to be justified in the
sight of God. And if Mr. Baxter be afraid of Seducing here, he may know where
we ground our expressions: I suppose Paul was far from seducing, when he spoke,
as he did Phil. 3: 8, 9.

There is nothing so good (says he) which may not be made the object of sin;
not Christ, or his Righteousness, or God himself excepted; But we must not thus
objectivly abuse them. Ans. And what is all this to the purpose? Does he think
that those teachers, he here opposes, were enemies to holiness; or would have
men laying aside all thoughts of it, and care about it when they spoke so? He
may as well infer such things from the Apostles speeches. But what is meaned
secundum quid, should not be understood as spoken simpliciter. His reasoning
here then is impertinent, as also is that which follows, when he says. So
holiness and true Righteousness (inherent or imputed) may be objects of sinful
pride and boasting; But it is not edifying doctrine therefore to say, that we
must cast away inherent and imputed Righteousness. For we plead not for casting
away every thing that may be abused, but for casting away our own
Righteousness, in the matter of justification, that impured Righteousness may
only take place. But how imputed Righteousness can be the object of sinful
pride and boasting, he would do well to teach us; that Inherent Righteousuess
may be so, we know; and to plead for justification upon that account, is to lay
the foundation of sinful pride and boasting, as the Scriptures teach us.

He adds. But yet true self deny^l requires that we deny our Righteousness (
inherent or Imputed) to be that which indeed it is not. Ans. And therefore we
deny, that our inherent Righteousness is the ground, or formalis ratio
objectiva of our justification: But what way Self-denial teaches us to deny
our imputed Righteousness to be what it is not, he must be pleased to inform
us; and to speak thus alike of both our inherent and imputed Righteousness, is
not very fair; as if there were no difference.

Further he tells us. And so when men accounted the jewish observations to be a
justifying Righteousness, in competition with, and in opposition to Christ,
Paul counts it as loss and dung, and nothing in that respect: when yet
elsewhere he says, I have lived in all good conscience to this day: And Christ
himself fulfilled that Law and Righteousness. Ans. What means Mr. Baxter by
these jewish observations? Means he nothing but their observance of the
Ceremonial Law? But did Paul mean nothing but his conscientious observance of
this Law, when he said, I have lived in all good conscience to this day? And
did he mean nothing else, by that Righteousness, which he counted loss and
dung. Phil. 3? The Apostle himself distinguishes betwixt the Law, touching
which he was a Pharisee; and that Law touching the Righteousness whereof, he
had been blameless: And sure before the writting of this Epistle, he had
preached down the observation of the Ceremonial Law, and was far from the
observation thereof, and yet now, he accounted that same Righteousness, which
formerly was gain to him, now to be loss and dung, so that this could not be,
his Ceremonial Observances; for it had been a small demonstration of his
excessive desire to win Christ, to count tha^loss now, which he had before
comdemned as unnecessary. Yea as unlawful, and had laid aside, as such. So
that he means all that, which could be called his own Righteousness, and
which is of the Law, and was not that Righteousness, which is through the Faith
of Christ, and of God by Faith. And it is also observable, that the Apostle
uses a very comprehensive term beside, saying, And I count all things but
loss etc. Moreover, the jewish observances, while that Law stood in force,
were useful and good, and a Righteousness, as well as the observation of the
moral Law, to which they were also reducible, being enjoined by virtue of the
Second Command. And if these observances could be brought (through men's
corruption,) in competition, with and set in opposition to Christ, and
therefore were justly accounted as loss and dung and nothing, in that respect:
why ought not also moral observances be ^o accounted, seeing they through man's
corruption, can be and are too often brought in competition with, and set in
opposition against Christ, and his Righteousness? If Mr. Baxter will yield to
this, he needs disput no more at this rate.

He adds. So if a man will conceit, that his common grace will justify
without holiness; or his holiness without pardon, and the Righteousness of
Christ, he must deny this Righteousness; that is, he must deny it to be what it
is not, and must cast away (not it, but) the false conc^its of it. Ans. We
think them in an error, who conceit, that either common grace will justify
without holiness, or holiness with or without pardon and the Righteousness of
Christ: and it is not proper for him, who will not hear others saying, that
Faith justifies, to say, that holiness justifies. And it is as improper to
say, that pardon justifies: Let him tell me, how holiness with pardon can
justify? And as for the Righteousness of Christ, all men (with Mr. Baxter) are
justified by it alike, for it only purchased the New Covenant, and that it did
to all alike, and is no other way imputed unto any whatsomever. And so,
according to his judgment it must be denied, that Christ's Righteousness
becomes the believers through God's imputation, and that believers are there
with clothed, and thereupon made juridically Righteous, and then justified, or
pronunced Righteous, through that imputed Surety Righteousness of Christ: this
is the self-denial that Mr. Baxter will teach us; and stead of this
Surety-Righteousness of Christ, we must be clothed (according to him) with our
own Gospel Righteousness, Faith and New Obedience, and upon that ground, as the
only nearest formal reason; or meritorious cause, expect to be justified;
because Christ's Righteousness has purchased this Covenant, and connection. Mr.
Baxter must not be offended, that I mention the word Merit here, remembering
what he says himself (n. 194.) where his friendliness to Papists, and his
displeasure at Protestants is so remarkable, in these words. [And those that
reject the saying of some Papists, who in this sense say, that Christ merited
that we might merit, placing our Evangelical merit in a mere subordination to
Christ's, do but show, what prejudice and partiality can do, and harden those,
who perceive their errors.]

Finally he says here. And so if any Libertine will say, that Christ's
Righteousness imputed to him, will justify him without Faith, or be in stead
to holiness to him, he must deny imputed Righteousness thus to be, what indeed
it is not. Ans. Though I know, the Lord has thought good to ordain Faith, as
a mean, whereby we may be made partaker of Christ's Surety-Righteousness, and
so be justified; Yet I may say, that Christ's Righteousness imputed, as being
the sole meritorious cause and Ratie formali^ objectiva of our justification,
will justify without Faith, as any part of that Righteousness, which we are
considered as clothed with, when declared and pronunced Righteous. And though
it be not in stead of holiness, as if holiness were no more required of us; Yet
it is and must be in stead of that holiness and Righteousness, which was
required of us in the Old Covenant and by the Law, in order to our being
accepted and justified thereupon.

He tells us in the margin, that none deny. That all that are saved have
inherent Righteousness; and that in tantum we are Righteous by it; That a man
accused, as being an Insidel, Atheist, Impenitent, Ungodly, a Hypocrite etc.
must be justified by pleading all the contraries in himself; or else perish;
And that this inherent Righteousness is imperfect, and in us found with sin,
and that therefore no man can be justified by it without pardon of sin, nor at
all against the charge of being a sinner, and condemnable by the Law of
innocence. But what is all this to the point? Must we not therefore say with
Paul, that in the business of justification, we must account our own
Righteousness to be but dung, and only lean to the Righteousness of Christ?
What would he hence conclude? And what remains then (says he) but to trouble
the world with contending de nomine, whether this Imperfect Righteousness,
shall be called Righteousness, and the giving of it, called justifying, or
making us Righteous so far. Ans. And who, I pray, more guilty of troubling the
world with these contendings, than he? But to the matter, it is no mere
contending de nomine, that he has caused, when in stead of the
Surety-Righteousness of Christ, with which the Orthodox Asserted believers to
be clothed, as the immediate ground of their justification before God, and which
they by Faith were to lean to, and rest upon in order to justification, he
substituteth, in its place, our imperfect holiness, and makes that to merit
justification and Salvation, as a subordinat Righteousness (so called, though
indeed in this case the principal.) advanced to that dignity by the merits of
Christ's Righteousness; and as all that Righteousness, which can properly be
said to be ours, and to be imputed to us, as the only Potestative Condition of
our Justification and Salvation, according to the New Covenant, purchased by
Christ. This is something more, and a great something more, than a mere contest
about a word, or a name. This touches the foundation of the Gospel, let Mr.
Baxter think as little of it, as he will. I need not take notice of his making
these two one thing, justifying and making us Righteous, and of his calling the
giving of Righteousness or holiness a justifying of us, for this is but suitable
to him, who would confound all.

This is all he speaks to this matter in this place: But thereafter Sect. 5.
of merit (n. 196.) he tells us, It is a great question, whether a man may trust
to his own Faith, Repentance or Holiness. And I should think, that no orthodox
man should once make a question about it; but should reject the very
insinuation of such a thing with detestation: seeing Trusting to these things is
the native consequent of the Popish, Socinian and Arminian error about
justification; or of all, who speak of the Imputation of Faith etc. as our
Righteousness, in stead of the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. What
answer gives he? But some men (says he) will trouble the world with
unexplained words, where no sober men differ. Ans. The words are plain enough,
and need no explication, and every ordinary Christian understand their meaning;
but against such, as will seek knots in rushes, and raise dust in the most
clear air, for their own ends, there is no remedy. I am afraied the point of
difference shall be found such here, as that our agreement shall not be
expected in ^haste, unless our sobriety be such, as well make us embrace
inconsistences.

Let us hear what he says. No wise man can dream, that we may trust to those
for more than their proper part, as that we may trust them to do anything
proper to God, to Christ, to the Spirit, to the promise etc. And to use the
phrase of Trusting to our own Faith, or holiness, when it sounds absolutely,
or may tempt the hearers to think, that they may trust them for God's part, or
Christ's part, and not only for their own, is a dangerous deceiving course.
Ans. It is true, no wise man will say, that we may trust to these for more than
their proper part, but when we are mistaken about their proper part, and
conceive them to have that place and part, which they have not, and accordingly
trust unto them, do we not amiss? And Mr. Baxter makes it their part to be
the immediate meritorious cause expacto (which he otherwise expresses to be
the Potestative Condition) of Justification and Salvation: which we say is the
part of Christ and his Righteousness alone: And sure, who ever shall trust unto
them for this part, which according to the Gospel is Christ's part, trust unto
them for more than their proper part. Neither is it any dangerous or deceiving
course, to speak thus, when the meaning is obviously known (except to such as
have wit enough to darken things) to be this, that we must not Trust to Faith
etc. as the price, the merit, ex pacto (as perfect obedience was under the
first Covenant) of our Justification, Adoption, and Salvation. But it is a most
dangerous and deceiving course to call them only Conditions, or cause fine
quibus non, when in the mean time, they are made to have the same place in the
New Covenant, that perfect obedience had in the old; and are made our
Gospel-Righteousness, for which we are justified, yea and put in the same
place, that the Orthodox put Christ and his Surety- Righteousness, that is, to
be the immediate ground, formal cause, Ratio formalis objectiva of our
Justification.

What more? But that really they may be trusted, for their own part, and must
be so, no sober person will deny: for so to believe, obey, pray to God etc. and
not to trust to them in their place, that is not to think, that we shall be
ever the better for them, is unbeleefe and indeed distrusting God, and saying,
it is in vain to seek him, and what profit is it that we call upon him and
such diffidence and despair will end all endeavors. Let every man prove his
own work etc. This is our Rejoicing etc. If we are justified by Faith, we may
trust to be justified by it. But the rare use of such a phrase in Scripture,
and the danger of it, must make us never use it without need. Ans. As I said,
all the question is concerning what is their own part: And by saying that they
are not to be trusted unto, we deny them to have that part, or place in the
matter of our Justification and Salvation, that others give unto them: And if
there were no more, this is a shreud ground of presumption to us, that Mr.
Baxter, owneth not the Orthodox doctrine in this matter, viz. That he cannot
with patience hear it said, That we must not trust to our own Faith,
Repentance or Holiness, but accounts such expressions dangerous, and
deceiving. (2) It is but a wrong gloss put upon this expression, We must not
trust to our own Faith etc. to make the meaning of it to be, we must not think,
that we shall be ever the better for our Faith. etc. And therefore his
following words are vain, and to no purpose. (3) It is one thing to trust to
be justified by Faith, which is but believe God, and trust in his word; and a
far other, to trust in our Faith; For this is to lay our stress, and lean our
weight, and found our hopes of Justification and Salvation on our weak and
feckless Faith, in stead of trusting to, and relying upon Jesus Christ and his
Surety Righteousness, as the only immediate ground, and as that Righteousness by
and upon consideration of which, we are justified, and have a Right to Glory:
And if Mr. Baxter do not see a difference betwixt these two, it is not because
he cannot, but because he will not, as some may suppose. (4) He talks of the
rare use of such a phrase in Scripture; but I would know, where he finds it
used at all iu Scripture? And it is well, that he confesses there is danger in
it: which two, me thinks, should be enough to make him, as great an enemy to
this expression, as we are: But the truth is, according to his principles, we
are as much now to Trust to our Faith Repentance and Holiness, in order to
Justification and Salvation, as Adam was to trust to his perfect obedience,
according to the Covenant of works; and as much, as, according to our doctrine,
we are to trust to Christ and his Surety-Righteousness.

CHAP. IV.
The Law, by the works whereof Paul denies that we are justified, is not the
jewish Law.
WE find the Apostle Paul directly and pro^essedly proving and concluding,
that we are not justified by the Law, nor by the works of the Law: Yet such as
differ from us, about the interest of works, in justification, not being
willing to yield and submit unto the truth, do seek what Evasions they can, to
evite the force of the Apostles a gueings and peremptour Conclusions; and
therefore say, that Paul is to be understood, as speaking only of such, or such
a Law; and excludes only such and such works, in which they think they may
yield unto, what the Apostle says, the same being limited and restricted,
according to their own mind, and yet do no prejudice to their own Hypothesis:
But yet what this Law in particular is, and what are the works thereof, our
Adversaries are not at all agreed among themselves; but some imagine one thing,
and some another, as we shall hear.

Some by the Law, and the works thereof, which Paul excludes from
justification, do mean the Ceremonial Law, and the Observances thereof; or as
others express it, the Jewish Law, including their judaical Law, and so
understanding hereby all that Law, which is called Moses's Law: this is owned
by some Papist's, as Bellarmine shows us. De justif. Lib. 1. Cap. 19. but he
himself rejects it, upon this ground, that the Apostle Romans 4. Ephesians. 2. Tit.
3. does simply exclude works, making no mention of the Law of Moses: The
Socinians do choose this way of interpreting the Apostle, as perticularly may be
seen in the Author of a book, in^^^^led Consensus Pauli and Iacobi etc.
printed. An. 1620.

But this opinion does not correspond with truth, as may be manifest from these
particulars.

1. If Paul disput only against Justification by Ceremonial Observances, he had
a far shorter cut, to confute that conceit, than the way he took, to wit, to
tell them: that shortly that Law, with all its observances, was to be laid
aside and no more to be observed, by virtue of the Gospel Administration, and
because the end of all these observances, and He, who was typified thereby, was
come, and had put an end to that dispensation. But we find not the Apostle
making any use of this One and Only Argument, which had sured that purpose;
but on the contrary he uses such Mediums and Arguments, as suite no less, if
not more, other Laws, beside the Ceremonial.

2. Yea before the writting of these Epistles, wherein the Apostle did disput
against Justification by the Law, at least, before he wrote that to the
Galatians, he had by his preaching and practice, opposed the observation of the
Ceremonial Law, as himself tells us Gal. 2. And in that same Epistle Chap. 3.
and 4. he condemns the observation of that Law, in most peremptory terms, as
being no less, than a falling from grace: And yet when he is treating of
Justification not by the works of the Law Chap. 3. he mentions not this
ground, which would have taken away the very subject of the debate. Shall we
think, that the Apostle would have disproved Justification, only by the works
of the Ceremonial Law by such Arguments and Tipicks, out of Scripture, when he
was within a little by forcible reasons to remove the very Law itself, and
condemn all observation thereof?

3. It is strange, that Paul in writting to the Gentiles, should deny
Justification to be by the works of the Law, meaning the Ceremonial Law only;
and James writting to the Jews, should cry up the observation of that Law, and
plead for justification thereby: This would say, that Jews and Gentiles were
not both to be justified one way: or that James and Paul do clearly contradict
other; neither of which must be said. That James speaks of another Law, than
Paul speaks of, cannot be made good. And therefore when our Adversaries will
prove from James, that we are justified by works, their meaning is, that we are
justified by the Observation of the Ceremonial Law.

4. The several things mentioned of this Law, whereof the Apostle speaks,
shows, that he is not speaking of the Ceremonial Law only: as (1) Romans 3: 19.
It is a Law that stops all mouths, and whereby all the world becomes
guilty before God: But this is not the Ceremonial Law, or the jewish, or Moses
Law, under which the Gentiles were not, nor yet are. (2) Romans 3: 20. It is that
Law, by which is the knowledge of sin: but this is not by the mere Ceremonial
Law, as we see Paul himself professing Romans 7: 7 (3) Romans 2: 13. It is that
Law, the doers whereof shall be justified: But this can not be asserted of the
mere Ceremonial Law, or of Moses's Law. (4) Romans 3: 27. It is that Law, which
does not exclude boasting: but it cannot be said, that the Law of Moses is only
that Law. (5) Romans 3: 31. It is that Law, that is not made void, through Faith.
But this is not the Ceremonial Law; The Ceremonial Law is not established by
Faith. (6) Romans 3: 28. It is that Law, justification by which is inconsistent
with and opposite to justification by Faith: but this is not the Ceremonial Law
only. (7) Romans 4: 1, 2. It is that Law, by the works whereof Abraham, was not
justified. But the Apostles argument from the Instance of Abraham had not been
pertinent, if no Law had here been understood, but Moses's Law; which was not
in being in Abraham's days. (8) Romans 4: 2. It is that Law, and works of
obedience to it, that would give ground to man of glorying: But this is not
true only of the Ceremonial Law. (9) Romans 4: 4. It is that Law, obedience to
which is a working, and makes the reward of debt: But this cannot be said only
of the Ceremonial Law. (10) Romans 4: 15. It is that Law that works wrath: But
other Laws do this, than the Ceremonial Law, (11) Romans 8: 3, 4. It is that
Law, that was weak through the flesh, and the Righteousness of which was to be
fulfilled in us: but this cannot be applied to the Ceremonial Law only. (12)
Gal. 3: 10. It is that Law^, of the works of which as many as are, are under
the Curse, and of which it is said, cursed is every one, that continues not in
all things, which are written in the Law to do them. But this agrees not to
the Ceremonial Law only. (13) Gal. 3: 12. It is that Law, by the doing of
which, man should live: But by perfect obedience to the Law of Moses alone life
was not to be had. (14) It is that Law, that cursed all transgressors, and
under the Curse whereof all thoselay, for whom Christ died. Gal. 3: 13. But
that is not the Ceremonial Law, which laid no Curse upon the Gentiles. (15)
Ephesians. 2: 9* 10. It is that Law, that enjoineth those good works, which God
has before ordained, that we (even Gentiles) should walk in them: But that is
not the Ceremonial Law. (16. It is that Law, the works whereof are inconsistent
with grace, as the ground of Election: Romans 11: 6. But this is not Ceremonial
Law only, else we must say, that Election is for works of the Moral Law, and
yet is for grace. (17) Phil. 3: 9. It is that Law, obedience to which can be
called our Righteousness: But this is not the Ceremonial Law only.

5. If Paul's mind had been only to disput against Justification by Mosaical
Observances; after he had stated the question, and proposed the Truth, he was
minded to confirm Romans 1: 17. to what purpose did he insist so much, to show,
how guilty the Gentiles were, who were never under Moses's precepts, and
thereby clear, what need they had of a justification by free grace through
faith without the works of the Law? This seems not to have a clear tendency
unto the clearing of justification to be by Faith, and not by Mosaical
Observances; for what had the Gentiles to do with these?

6. We find like wise the Apostle to convince the Jews themselves to be under
sin, in order to the necessity they had of being justified by faith, holding
forth their breaches of the Moral Law Romans 2: 21, 22. and speaks of a Law
distinct from that, to which Circumcision belonged, saying verse. 25. etc. for
Circumcision verily profits if thou keep the Law; but if thou be a breaker of
the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision: And this Law, is a Law, that
he, by supposition, says, one not circumcised, might observe, and so could not
be the Law of Ceremonies. See also Romans 3: 9* 19.

7. The Arguments, which the Apostle adduceth to disprove justification by the
Law, cannot conclude against the Ceremonial Law only: for (1) all the world are
not guilty of transgressing only the Ceremonial Law: and yet because all the
world are become guilty before God, the Apostle infers Romans 3: 20. Therefore
by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified. (2) So that other
Argument ibid. for by the Law is the knowledge of sin, cannot conclude against
the Ceremonial Law only. (3) Justifieation by the deeds of the Ceremonial Law
only, repugneth not to the justification through the Righteousness of God
without the Law, and which is by Faith of Jesus Christ; and through the
Redemption, that is in Christ. (4) The Law of Ceremonies alone does not exclude
boasting. (5) Abraham's works were not works of the Ceremonial Law only (6)
works of the Ceremonial Law only do not exclude glorying, nor make the reward
of debt and not of grace. (7) Believing on him, that justifies the ungodly, is
opposed as well to him that works according to other Laws, as to him, that
works according to the Ceremonial Law Romans 4: 5. (8) Imputed Righteousness,
mentions Romans 4: 7, 11. is as much opposite, in the matter of justification,
to other observances, as to Mosaical Observances. (9) Forgiveness of sins,
mentioned Romans 4: 7, 8. is as inconsistent with the observation of other Laws,
as of the Ceremonial Law. (10) Justification by the Faith of Christ is as
opposite to the Moral Law, as to the Ceremonial Law: And thus reasons the
Apostle Gal. 2: 16. (11) That Curse denounced Deuteronomy. 27: 26. by which the
Apostle proves Gal. 3: 10. that justification can not be by the works of the
Law, is not against transgressors only of the Ceremonial Law. (12) Obedience,
to the moral commands, is as little a living by faith, as was obedience to the
Ceremonial Law: And by this Argument Paul proves Gal. 3: 11. that no man is
justified by the Law, in the sight of God, because the just shall live by
faith. (13) This is clear also from verse. 12. and 13. to mentione no more. And
the Law is not of faith (which holds not true only of the Ceremonial Law) but
the man that does them shall live in them (which was the Tenor of the Old
Covenant Romans 10: 5. Levit. 18: 5.) Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of
the Law (And sure this is from the Curse of other Laws, than of the Ceremonial
Law.)

8. Though it were true, that Paul's conclusion was only against Justification
by Mosaical Observances: Yet by good consequence it might hence be inferred,
that there is no Justification by the works of the Moral Law. Partly because
the Apostle's Mediums and Arguments are general, and, as we saw, reach further
than to the Ceremonial Law: Partly because if it were not thus, all the
Apostles disput should be of no use or value unto us, now the subject of that
controversy being quite removed: Partly because the Ceremonial Law belonged to
the first table, being God's institute worshipe, and obedience thereunto
required by the Second Command: Partly because so long as that Law was not
abrogated, obedience thereunto was their Gospel Righteousness, as well as
obedience to other Law's is now called our Gospel-Righteousness: And if that
could not then justify them, no more can this now justify us.

We do not by all this say, that the Ceremonial Law had no place or interest in
this disput; for the Jews being pertinacious adherers unto this, and the false
Teachers urging the observation of this, even upon the Gentile Churches, gave
occasion and first rise unto this Question; for they alleiged, there was no
Justification, or Salvation without the observation hereof: But as they did not
restrict the Law and the works thereof, purely unto the Mosaical Rites and
Typical Ceremonies; but urged the observation of the whole Law, which
comprehended moral precepts, as well as Ceremonial Injunctions; so the Apostle
argues against Justification by the works of the Law in general, without any
particular limitation (expressed or hinted) unto the Ceremonial Observances.

Mr. Baxter, in his Cathol. Theol. part. 2. Sect. 26. where he would tell us,
how Paul and James agree, about justification by works (n. 362.) says that,
The key of understanding Paul's discourses of justification is, to know 1. That
the grand question, which he first manageth, is, whether the Gentiles may not
be saved, without keeping the Jewish Law, as well as the Jews with it? Ans.
(1) But our Principal difficulty here is to understand, what Mr. Baxter means
by the Jewish Law? for if he mean all that, which was prescriscribed unto the
Jews, as a Rule of their obedience, we assent; but then the Moral Law is as
much concerned here, as the Ceremonial, or judicial: And these, as such being
abrogated, the disput concerns us, as well as them, in respect of the Moral
Law: But if he mean hereby, only the Law of Ceremonies, we have shown, that
howbeit this might have given the first rise unto the disput, yet the disput
was not wholly and purely restricted thereunto; Nor does the Apostle only speak
to that abstracted or restricted consideration of the Law, in his pleading
against a justification by the works of the Law; as we have seen; This he does,
when he pleads for the Abrogation of that Law, and against the observation of
it. (2) Mr. Baxter, as it would seem, supposes, that Paul made no question
concerning the Jews themselves, but yielded that they were justified and saved
by their Law: for the question was, says he, whether the Gentiles might not as
well be saved thereby, as the Jews? But where finds he this, either
asserted, or granted by the Apostle, or the Question thus stated by the Apostle?

2. Says he. To prove the Affirmative, he proves, that the Jews themselves
cannot be saved or justified merely or primarily by the Law, notwithstanding
the divinity and great excellency of it; But must be justified by a Savior,
and free given Pardon and Right to life, and to which the sincere keeping of
Moses Law was intended to be but subservient. Ans. (1) Then the Question
concerned the Jews, as well as the Gentiles, and Paul did no more grant
justification by the Law to the one, than to the other. (2) Where finds Mr.
Baxter these restrictions, Merely or Primarily, in all the Apostles disput?
This is not fair, to pervert the Apostles plain peremptour, and absolute
Conclusions, and restrick them to a certain limited sense, that they may the
better be subservient to our designs, and our Hypotheses. Do the Apostles
Mediums only serve to prove, that justification is not by the Law Merely or
Primarily? Which of them all, I pray, has only this force? (3) Though the
keeping of Moses's Law be here said to be but subservient; Yet, according to
Mr. Baxter, it was all their Righteousness, no other was properly imputed to
them, and upon it immediately they received Pardon and Right to life, as merited
thereby ex pacto, the Savior only procuring the New Covenant: that is, that
all, who work well and keep the Law of Moses, shall have free Pardon and Right
to life. And thus they were as well justified by the works of the Law, as by
faith: for faith was also required of them: And then the meaning of the
Apostles Conclusion Romans 3: 28. is, therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by faith, and by the deeds of the Law: for both faith and works with
Mr. Baxter, belong to this Subservient Righteousness, as he calls it. If this
be consonant to the Apostles doctrine, which does so contradict it, let the
Reader judge.

3. Says he. That therefore it appears, that the Jews did so fondly admire
the Law, and their National Privileges under it, that they thought the exact
keeping of it was necessary and sufficient to Justification and Salvation. And
they thought the Messiah was not to be their Righteousness, as a Sacrifice for
sin, and meriter of free Pardon, and the Gift of life, but only a great King
and Deliver, to redeem them by Power from all their Enemies and Bondage. Ans.
This mistake of the Jews, concerning the Messiah, speaks nothing to the
point, whereupon we are; that is, that Paul denies justification to be by the
Law: And their error and mistake about the Law, is not to be limited and
restricted to the Ceremonial Law; and so the thing, that we say, is confirmed
hereby. (2) They thought the Messiah was not to be their Righteousness: And Mr.
Baxter will not have him to be our Righteousness, save only, in that he has
purchased the New Covenant, wherein our faith and obedience to the Law, is to
be looked upon as all our proper and immediate Righteousness, upon the account
of which we are to receive Pardon and Right to life.

4. He says. That is was not Adam's Covenant of Innocence, or persection,
which the Jews thus trusted to, or Paul does speak against, as to
justification (though a minore ad majus, that is also excluded) for the Jews
knew, that they were sinners, and that God pardoned sin, as a Merciful God, and
that their Law had Sacrifices for Pardon and Expiation with Confessions etc.
But they thought that so far as God had made that Law sufficient to Political
ends, and to Temporal Rewards and Punishments, it had been sufficient to
Eternal Rewards and Punishments, and that of it self, and not in mere
subordination to the typified Messiah. Ans. Though the jews knew, that they
were sinners, yet they did also suppose, that by their works of obedience to
the Law Moral, as well as Ceremonial, they might make amends, and so think to
be justified and pardoned thereby, and that God would accept of them, and grant
them life for their own Righteousness sake, and therefore did they labor so
much to establish their own Righteousness, and followed after the Law of
Righteousness, and sought Righteousness, as it were by the works of the Law.
What Mr. Baxter talks here of the jews not using of that Law, in subordination
to the Typified Messiah, has need of Explication: for as to his sense of it,
we see no ground thereof in all the Apostles discourse.

5. He says, That the thing, which Paul disproveth them by, is. 1. That the
Law was never made for such an End. Ans. Yet he said, that the man, which does
those things shall live by them. Romans 10: 5. Levit. 18: 5. Gal. 3: 12. and that
the doers of the Law are justified Romans 2: 13. And therefore speaks of that
Law, which according to its primitive institution, was made for such an end 2.
says he. That even then it stood in subordination to Redemption and free given
life. Ans. This we cannot yield to, in Mr. Baxters sense, often mentioned, for
Paul no where gives us to understand, that their obedience to this was their
immediate Righteousness, and Condition of Justification, and the meritorious
cause ( ex pacto) of their Right to Christ, and to life etc. 3. says he. That
the free Gift or Covenant of Grace, containing the promise of the Messiah, and
Pardon and life by him, was before the Law, and justified Abraham and others
without it. Ans. It is true, this Argument did particularly militate against
the Ceremonial Law; Yet, this not being the Apostles only Argument, and other
Arguments reaching the Moral Law, as well as the Ceremonial, we must not limite
the Apostles disput only to the Ceremonial Law. 4. says he. That their Law was
so strick, that no man could perfectly keep it all. Ans. Add also, that they
could not perfectly keep any one command thereof. 5. says he. That every sin
deserves death indeed, though their Law punished not every sin with death by
the Magistrate. Ans. And this holds true of the Moral, as of the Ceremonial
Law. 6. says he. That their Law was never obligatory to the Gentile world, who
had a Law written in their hearts; and therefore not the common way of
justification. Ans. The Apostle makes no such conclusion, that therefore it
was not the common way of justification, for this would suppose, that it were
the way of justification unto them, which is directly against the Apostles
disput. 7. says he. That their Law, as such, discovered sin, but gave not the
Spirit of Grace to overcome it: in so much, as though he himself desired
perfectly to fulfill it without sin, yet he could not, but was under a
Captivity, that is, a moral necessity of Imperfection, or sins of infirmity,
from which only the grace of Christ could, as to guilt and power, deliver him.
Ans. Therefore the Moral Law is as well here to be understood, as the
Ceremonial; as is manifest. 8. says he. That no man ever come to heaven by
that way of merit, which they dreamed of, but all by the way of Redemption,
Grace, free Gift, and Pardoning Mercy. Ans. But that way of merit attends
all works, in the matter of justification; as the Apostle assures us Romans 4:
4. Ephesians. 2: 8, 9. and is opposed to the way of Redemption, Grace, free Gift,
and Pardoning Mercy. Romans 11: 6. and 3; 21, 24. Tit. 3: 5, 7.

From these things Mr. Baxter draws this Conclusion. Therefore their
conceit, that they were just in the maine and forgiven their sins; and so
justifiable by the mere dignity of Moses Law, which they keept, and by the
works of the Law, and not by the free Gift, Pardon and Grace of a Redeemer, and
by the Faith and Practical Belief of that Gift, and acceptance of it, with
thankful penitent obedient hearts, was a Pernicioue Error. Ans. 1. Nothing is
here said to ground a restriction of this erroneous conceit of theirs unto the
Ceremonial Law: for this conceit of being justifiable by the Law, and the
works thereof, in opposition to the free Gift, Pardon and Grace of a Redeemer,
is as applicable to the Moral, as to the Ceremonial Law. (2) The Apostle does
not ground his disput upon the Jews their express rejecting of a free Gift,
and of Pardon etc. But from justification by Faith, laying hold on the free
Grace and Merits of a Mediator, he argues against justification by the Law
and the works thereof: And according to the Apostle's Method do we argue. (3)
To cover Justification by our own inherent Righteousness, having the same place
in the New Covenant, which inherent Righteousness and Obedience had in the old,
by these fine words, Faith, and a Practical belief of the Gift, and acceptance
of it, with thankful penitent and obedient hearts, is not such ingenuous
dealing, as the Importance of the matter requires: But this will be clearer by
what follows.

But (says he) the true way of Righteousness was to become true Christians,
that is, with such a penitent, thankful accepting, practical belief, or
affiance to believe in God, as the giver of Salvation, in Christ as the
Redeemer, and his Spirit, as our life and Sanctifier; and to accept Christ, and
all his procured Benefits, Justification and Life, as purchased by his
Sacrifice and Meritorious Righteousness, and given in the New Covenant on this
Condition, and so to give up ourselves to his whole saving work, as to the
Physician of our souls, and only Mediator with God. This is the sum of Paul's
doctrine on this point. Ans. Not to speak of this matter here, which is
elsewhere done, I shall only say, that we are not enquiring after the true way
of Righteousness, but after the true way of Justification before God; And
enquire where the Apostle teaches, that all the Righteousness, required unto
justification, must be within us, and none at all imputed; as this Sum
holds forth? Where he teaches that this faith, including works and all
obedience, is the only mean of justification? Where he teaches, that this
inherent imperfect Righteousness of ours, is the immediate ground, and
meritorious Cause ( ex pacto) of our justification and Salvation? Where he
teaches, that Christ's Righteousness is no otherwise ours, than as purchasing
the New Covenant, wherein our own personal Righteousness is made the
Potestative Condition of our Justification and Salvation? And yet these and
several other Particulars of this alloy does Mr. Baxter hold forth, as taught,
in Scripture; as has been seen elsewhere.

CHAP. V.
Works excluded in Justification are not works only done before Faith, nor
perfect works required in the Law of Innocence, nor outward works only.
THe other Evasion, which such, as plead for the Interest of Works in
Justification, fall upon, to evite the dint of the Apostle's argueing and
concludings against Works, is, That by the works of the Law, which Paul
excludes from justification, works are meant, which are done before Conversion
and Faith, by the strength of Nature; and not the works of grace done after.
This is the Evasion of Bellarmine and others.

But against this we have these Reasons to propose.

1. When the Scripture says, we are justified by faith, the meaning is that so
soon as a soul believes in Christ, by a true Faith, he is justified before
God: But this opinion says, That a man is not justified when he believes in
Christ; No not until he perform Works of Righteousness after he has
believed: And thus, we may conceive a man to be a believer, and yet not to be
justified; which is contrary to the Gospel.

2. If we were justified by the Works of Regenerat persons, we should be
justified by works, that are imperfect; and consequently by an imperfect
Righteousness: for these works being made our Righteousness, if we be justified
by them, as our Righteousness, we must be justified by an imperfect
Righteousness; for they are not perfect, neither as to parts, nor as to
degrees. Esai. 64: 5. 1. Ioh. 1: 8, 10. 1. King. 8: 46. 2. Chron. 6: 36.
Eceles. 7: 20.

3. Regenerat persons have renunced their own Righteousness, in the matter of
justification before God; therefore they judged, that they were not justified
thereby: And this is registrate in the word for our Instruction and example;
that we may learn also to renunce our own works in this business. The
Antecedent is clear from these Instances (1) David saying Psalm. 130: 3. If thou
Lord should mark iniquity, o Lord, who shall stand: And in opposition to
this, he betakes himself to free Remission, saying verse. 4. But there is
forgiveness with thoe. So Psalm. 143: 2. And enter not into judgment with thy
servant; for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. So that if God
should enter in judgment with the best, even with his servants; they could not
expect to be justified by their works, even by their best works. So when he
says Psalm. 32: 1, 2. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin
is covered etc. he renunceth all justification by the best of his works; for
Paul Romans 4: 6, 7. gives the meaning hereof to be, that David describes the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes Righteousness without works. (2)
Paul also renunceth his Righteousness in this matter, and that several times?
for he says 1. Cor. 4: 4. for I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby
justified. And he speaks of himself, while in the State of Regeneration. So
Gal. 2: 16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by
the Faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might
be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law. And Phil.
3: 9. he desired to be found in Christ, not having his own Righteousness, which
is of the Law. No man can think, that by his own Righteousness here he means
only works, done before he was regenerate.

4. The Instances, whereby Paul proves Justification by Faith, without the
works of the Law, confirms this, that works after regeneration are excluded
as well as works before: for (1) Abraham was a regenerat man when his says was
said to be imputed to him Romans 4: 1, 2, 3. compared with Genesis 15. for before
this time Genesis 12: 1. he obeyed the call of God by faith. Heb. 11: 8. See also
Romans 4: 9, 10, 11. (2) David (another Instance of Justification by Faith) was
also regenerat when he was justified, as Paul clears Romans 4: 6, 7. by the
imputation of a Righteousness, without the works of the Law.

5. The Apostle excludes simply the works of the Law, from being the
Righteousness of any, in point of justification: And we have no warrant to
except or distinguish, where the Law excepteth not, nor distinguishes. The
works of Regenerat persons are works, and works of the Law, as well, as any
other: And Paul does absolutely and simply exclude works and the works of the
Law, from being the ground of justification.

6. By what reason can it be evinced, that the Law, or the Works of the Law
signify works before Regeneration, or works done before faith, more than other
works? Do these words carry this sense, where ever they are used? Or can it be
demonstrated, that they carry this express sense any where?

7. Are only regenerat persons said to be under the Law? Now the Apostle
speaks of all the works of those, who are under the Law, that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God. Romans 3: 19.

8. The Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, is as much
without the Law, or the works of the Law, done by Regenerat persons, as without
the Works of the Law, done before Regeneration: And justification by these
works after Regeneration, is as much inconsistent with justification by faith
without the works of the Law, as justification by the works of the Law, done
before regeneration; as is manifest, from the true sense of justification by
faith.

9. Paul excludes all works of the Law from justification, that gives any
ground of boasting: and of glorying, as we see Romans 3: 27. and 4: 2. But if
justification were by works of the Law, done after Faith and Regeneration, all
boasting and glorying should not be excluded Ephesians. 2: 9. Not of works lest any
many should boast: And what these works were, the next Argument will show.

10. Even works are excluded, unto which we are created and which God has
before ordained, that we should walk in them Ephesians. 2: 8, 9, 10. for by grace
are ye saved, through Faith, and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God.
Not of works lest any man should boast: for we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should
walk in them. Now these works are works done after regeneration, as is manifest.

11. All works are excluded in this matter, which make justification not be of
mercy or of grace. Romans 3: 24. Ephesians. 2: 8. Tit. 3: 5, 7. But this do works
after Regeneration, as well, as before, as Paul clears Ephesians. 2: 8, 9, 10.
and works and grace cannot consist, in being the ground of justification, no
more, than in being the ground of Election. Romans 11: 6.

12. Works done after regeneration belong to that Righteousness, which is of
the Law, which Paul describes Romans 10: 5. from Levit. 18: 5. to be, that the
man, which does those things shall live in them. But the Righteousness of the
Law, and the Righteousness of Faith are opposite and inconsistent, as the
Apostle clears there Romans 10.

13. Works done after regeneration, if made the ground of justification, will
made the reward of debt and not of grace Romans 4: 4. as well as works done
before regeneration; for the Scripture holds forth no ground of difference,
in this matter.

14. If works done by Faith, and after Regeneration, be admitted, as the ground
of justification, God should not be said to justify the ungodly; for a
Regenerat believer, working works of Righteousness, is no where in Scripture
called an ungodly man. But the Scripture speaks this expressly Romans 4: 5.

15. Paul tells us Romans 4: 16. that the promise was of Faith, that it might be
by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, not to that
only which is of the Law, but to that also, which is of the Faith of Abraham,
who is the Father of ut all. Now this seed which is of the Faith of Abraham are
believers or Regenerat persons; And yet as to these the Law is excluded, and
the works thereof; because if they which are of the Law be heirs, Faith is made
void, and the promise made of none effect verse. 14.

16. If Justification were by the works of the Law, done after Regeneration, we
could not, upon first believing, be justified, and have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ; nor could we rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and
glory in tribulation etc. And yet this the Apostle expressly affirms Romans 5:
1, 2, 3. etc. If justification did depend upon our after works, we could not as
yet have peace and reconciliation, or assurance, or joy etc. because of the
uncertainty of our obedience.

17. If Paul had not excluded works done after Faith and Regeneration, from
being the Cause and ground of our justification, what seeming ground or
occasion had there been for that objection Romans 6: 1. What shall we say then?
Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? What ground could any have to
say. We are justified by our works done after Regeneration; therefore we may
continue in sin, that grace may abound? Any might see at first, how ridiculous
this was.

18. And if we are justified by works done after Regeneration, is it not
strange, that in all Paul's answers unto this objection, he never once says,
nor hinteth, that by these works we shall be justified, and no other way, and
yet this had been the shortest and clearest solution of the objection, if it
been according to the doctrine of justification, delivered by Paul.

19. The false Apostles, who were corrupting the doctrine of the Gospel and of
Justification, did not urge works done before Faith in the Gospel, as the
ground of justification, for they were corrupting such, as had already embraced
the Gospel and believed in Christ? as is clear out of the Epistle to the
Galatians. Therefore when Paul is confuting their error, and opposing himself
unto them, he must deny that we are justified by works done after Faith in
Christ.

20. Justification by works done after regeneration, is as opposite to faith,
and to living the life of justification by faith, as justification by works
done before Regeneration for the Law is never of faith, so reasons Paul Gal.
3. 11, 12. But that no man is justified by the Law, in the sight of God, it is
evident: For the just shall live by Faith: And the Law is not of Faith.

21. All the works of the Law are excluded: But works wrought after believing
and after Regeneration, are works of the Law, being required thereby Psalm. 119:
35. Romans 7: 22. Therefore even these works are excluded.

22. When the Apostle excludes works from being causes of justification he
must mean good works, for no man was ever so mad, as to imagine, that he could
be justified by bad works. But no works can be called good works but such as
flow from faith, and from the Spirit of grace, granted in Regeneration.
Therefore while good works are excluded, these done after Regeneration are
excluded.

What is said by Bellarmine, in confirmation of his sense of these works of the
Law, which are excluded from justification, is abundantly answered by all, that
write against him; and therefore we need not take any notice thereof.

There is another Evasion, found out by our Adversaries in this matter, and
another gloss put upon these works. By the works of the Law there shall no
flesh be justified. For some say, that hereby the Apostle only excludes those
works, that are perfect, which were required by the Law in Innocence. This
Evasion grants, that the Law here spoken of is not the Ceremonial Law, for
that was not required in Innocence; but the Moral Law. The end why they invent
this Evasion is not, to exclude works in the matter of justification; but to
establish their own fancy of asserting justification by other works, than
perfect works, required by the Covenant of works, to wit by imperfect works,
which they say, are required in the Gospel: And therefore their meaning is, we
are not justified by perfect sinless obedience; but by imperfect obedience to
the Law. This is the Evasion of the Socinians, who say, the Apostle speaks of
the works of the Law, to show, that he speaks of those works, which are
enjoined by the Law, to wit of perpetual and perfect obedience required by the
Law: And they say, that by Faith he means that confidence and obedience,
which every one is able to perform, and which is endeavored after and studied.

That this cannot be the meaning of the Apostles conclusion, we suppose will be
clear from these Considerations.

1. This supposes, that they against whom the Apostle is here disputing, were
of opinion, that men could yet be justified, and must be justified by perfect
obedience to the Moral Law: But it is hardly imaginable, that men in their wits
did ever so dream, or think, that they were innocent, and could expect to be
justified before God by their own perfection, or perfect obedience to the Law
in all points: for this were to say, they never had sinned:

2. When the Apostle, in the beginning of his disput, in his Epistle to the
Romans proves, that all have sinned, and are guilty before God, both jew and
Gentile, he thence infers, that by the works of the Law, no flesh shall be
justified in God's sight Romans 3: 20. Whereby he gives us to understand, that
there is no justification by the Law, unless it be perfectly kept: And
because no mere man did ever keep it perfectly, or can so keep it; therefore he
concludes, that no man can be justified thereby. There is no justification by
works, unless the works be perfect; and consequently that such as expect
justification thereby, be wholly sinless.

3. If the Apostle had so disputed against justification by perfect works, as
to have granted, or established justification by imperfect works; he needed not
have used any more arguments to that end, than what was mentioned and cleared
Romans 1. and 2. and in the beginning of the 3. Chapter: for his evincing that
all had sinned and come short of the Glory of God, had been sufficient to this
end, without the addition of any one argument more, seeing it is impossible,
that sinners can be perfect obeyers. And we must not think, that all the
Apostles further argueings are merely superfluous, for this would reflect upon
the Spirit of God, who acted Paul in this.

4. How strange is it to imagine, that the Apostle should disput against
perfect works, that he might establish imperfect works in the matter of
justification: and to think that the Apostle is proving, that we are not
justified by the perfect works of the Law, but by the imperfect works thereof;
that is, we are not justified by such works, as keep a conformity with the Law,
but by such works, as are violations of the Law; as all works are, which are
not conform thereunto, in all points?

5. Imperfect works, as to the ground of justification, are not that
Righteousness of God without the Law, and which is by Faith of Jesus Christ,
but opposite the^eunto, and inconsistent therewith, as well as perfect works:
for as he, that perfectly keeps the Law, needs not another Righteousness,
in order to his justification; so neither needs he, who has an imperfect
obedience if that be made the formal objective and merit cause of
justification. But Gospel-justification is by the Righteousness of God, which
is without the Law, and which Faith laith hold on Romans 3: 21, 22.

6. Gospel justification is by Faith, as the whole Gospel clears; but faith
and imperfect works are not one and the same: Yea they are as repugnant in this
affair, as faith and perfect works are. We are justified by faith, without the
deeds of the Law. Romans 3: 28. Gal. 2: 16. Living by faith and living by works,
are opposite. Gal. 3: 11, 12.

7. Justification by imperfect works, is not free justification by his grace
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood: as is manifest: But this is the
Gospel-justification Romans 3: 24, 25.

8. Imperfect works, exclude grace, and are as inconsistent therewith, as
perfect works are. But Gospel-justification is by grace without works Romans 3:
24. Ephesians. 2: 8, 9. Tit. 3: 5, 6, 7. The Major is clear from the places cited,
as also from Romans 11: 6. If by grace, then it is no more of works otherwise
grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more grace,
otherwise work is no more work. Now if it be said, that perfect works are here
understood, and not imperfect works: it must be said also, that Election (of
which the Apostle here speaks) is upon foresight of imperfect works.

9. Imperfect works if made the Cause of Justification, can give ground of
boasting and of glorying, as we see in the Pharisee Luke 18. But Gospel
justification removes all ground of boasting. Romans 3: 27 and 4: 2.

10. Imperfect works can not be accounted a perfect Righteousness, by the Lord,
whose judgment is according to truth Romans 2: 2. But there is no justification
without a perfect Righteousness, either inherent, or imputed. God will
pronounce no man Righteous, who is not so, nor justify any as Righteous, who
is not so indeed: But upon the account of an imperfect Righteousness, can no
man be justified as Righteous.

11. Even this imperfect Righteousness, when made the ground of justification,
will make the reward of debt, and not of grace: As Abraham's works, if he had
been justified by them, would have done: for Abraham's works were not perfect
works, but imperfect works, as is manifest.

12. If justification were not by perfect works, but by imperfect works, then
through faith, or through Gospel justification, the Law should be made void,
contrary to Romans 3: 31. The reason of the consequence is, because hereby the
Law, that requires perfect obedience, is laid aside and another Law that
requires imperfect obedience admitted in its place: or rather the same Law is
pretended, but it is made void, as to its requireing perfect obedience; and
must now be satisfied with an imperfect obedience. But this is not to establish
the Law, but to destroy it, when many Jotes and titles are taken away from it
Mat. 5: 17, 18.

13. The Jews did not imagine, that they were perfect and without sin, but
followed after the Law of Righteousness, and that, as it were ( ^s) by the
works of the Law Romans 9: 31, 32: And this of necessity must have been mixed
with much imperfection: And yet the Apostle plainly says in the place cited,
that they did not attain to a Righteousness, nor to the Law of Righteousness,
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law, so
that seeking after Righteousness as it were by the works of the Law, is
opposite to a seeking of it by Faith. And again Romans 10: 3. they went about to
establish their own Righteousness, and did not submit themselves unto the
Righteousness of God; which two are opposite and inconsistent; And this their
own Righteousness, was but an imperfect Righteousness, which they were
laboring to cause stand, (...).

14. We cannot imagine, that when the Apostle did exclude his own
Righteousness, and desired not to be found therein, he only excluded, that
which was not; and desired not to be found in that, which he had not, and which
he knew he had not, to wit, a perfect sinless obedience. Romans 7: 24. 1. Tim. 1:
13, 15. He confessed he had been a blasphemer, and the chief of sinners, and
so was far from imagineing, that his obedience was perfect and sinless. This
then could not be the Righteousness, whereof he speaks Phil. 3: 9. but his
imperfect Righteousness, being that only which he could call his own, is that
only, which he desired not to be found in, in the day of his appearing before
his judge, in order to his justification.

15. If Paul had disputed only against perfect obedience and had yielded
justification by imperfect obedience. What ground was there for that objection.
Romans 6: 1. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound: seeing justification
by imperfect obedience does of it self engadge to all endeavoure after
obedience, and against the allowance of sin?

16. And the Apostles answer to this objection may fournish us with another
Argument against this; for if Paul had allowed of, or pleaded for justification
by our imperfect works, he had used this, a^ least, as one argument to persuade
unto an absteaning from sin, by saying, there is no justification but by
endeavoring after obedience; But we hear of no such think in all the Apostles
Arguments, whereby he presses unto holiness and obedience, whether there, or
elsewhere.

17. We are not justified by works done after Faith and Regeneration, as was
proved before. Therefore we are not justified by imperfect works; for works
after faith are imperfect, and again, they cannot but be so, as presupposing
sin and guilt going before.

There is yet another Evasion, wherewith some satisfy themselves, for they
say, that when Paul says, we are not justified by the works of the Law, by
these works, he means only outward works of the Law, performed without an
inward Principle of Grace, of faith, or fear or Love of God. But we need not
insist in the discovery of the vanity of this Evasion, having before at large
proved, that the works, whereof Paul speaks, are not works done before Faith
and Regeneration; For all these works, that are done before Faith and
Regeneration, are done without any inward Principle of Grace, and are only
outward works, such as Heathens may perform: a few reasons will serve he^e: as

1. When Paul denies justification to be by the Law, or by the works thereof;
he must mean such works, as are enjoined and commanded by the Law: But the Law
commands other works, than those outward works, for it condemns all works,
that flow not from a principle of grace: because the Law is holy and spiritual,
and the first and chief command thereof is, that we, Love the Lord our God,
with all our heart; with all our soul with all our strength etc. Romans 7: 12,
14. Mat. 22: 37. Mark. 12: 30. Luke 10: 27. Deuteronomy* 13: 3. and 30: 6. If then
Paul exclude only such works, as flow not from a principle of grace, he shall
not exclude the works of the Law, but works prohibited by the Law; and his
meaning should be, we are not justified by works, which the Law commands not,
but we are justified by works, which the Law commands: which is contradictory
to the whole scope and design of the Apostle.

2. The Apostle does manifestly exclude the works of Abraham Romans 4: 1, 2. But
the works of Abraham were other than such servile works or such outward works,
performed from no principle of grace or Love to God; Therefore such cannot be
here understood.

3. Outward works, done without any principle of grace, could with no face or
show of a pretense, lay a ground, or be any occasion of boasting or of
glorying, because they were no other, but manifest sins, being prohibited and
condemned by the Law, and not commanded or approven: But the Apostle excludes
such works, as could do this. Therefore he excludes good works, which were
done in conformity to the Law, and not such outward lifeless works only, as
were mere servile works, and no better.

4. Such lifeless, servile, and outward works could give no show of a ground of
making the reward of debt: But Paul excludes such works as would make the
reward of debt. Romans 4: 4.

5. If Paul had meaned here only such outward, servile works, which are not
conform to the Law; what occasion had there been, for Paul's proposeing of
that objection. Romans 3: 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? for to
lay aside these works, which are not conform to the Law, gives no probable
ground of supposal, that thereby the Law is made void.

6. Israel could not have been said to have followed after the Law of
Righteousness, by doing of works merely ourward and lifeless: And yet this is
said of them, and it is also said, that by all their following of the Law of
Righteousness they could not be justified. Romans 9: 31, 32.

7. Mere performance of outward servile works, cannot be called a
Righteousness: But the jews went about to establish their own Righteousness,
and therefore missed justification. Romans 10: 4.

8. There was never any life had by these outward and servile works alone; But
by the works, which Paul excludes, there was life to be had, if they had been
perfect. The man, which does those things, shall live by them. Romans 2: 13. and
10: 5. Levit. 18: 5. Gal. 3: 12.

9. These outward servile works are not good works; but even good works are
here excluded. Ephesians. 2: 9, 10.

10. Paul did not mean such works only, when he excluded his own
Righteousness. Phil. 3: 9. Nor can such works be called works of Righteousness;
which yet are expressly excluded in this matter. Tit. 3: 5.

CHAP. VI.
By works, which Paul excludes, is not meant the Merit of Works.
THere is one other Evasion, thought upon to shift by all the Apostles
argueings, and yet to maintain the Interest of Works, as the Cause and ground
of justification before God, to wit. That Paul only disputs against a
groundless conceit of merit in works; not against the works themselves, but
against a Pharisaical sense of merit and worth in their works, whereby they
conceived and conceited, that thereby they could satisfy for their sins, and
buy and purchase to themselves Justification and Salvation. But against this
Evasion, we have these things to say.

1. By merit here must either be understood, that which is called meritum ex
condigno, that is, that merit, which arises from the due proportion of worth,
that one thing has unto another, in the balance of equity and justice. And
who ever imagine this merit in their works, must dream of an intrinsic worth
in their works, which God, if he do according to justice, cannot but reward
with eternal life: or that which is called meritum ex congruo, which flows
not from any inward Condignity in the work, but from a Promise or Covenant, and
so it is meritum ex pacto, whereby the reward is not absolutely of grace, but of
debt, because of a congruity in the thing, in respect of the Promise and
Compact made. Our Adversaries cannot understand this last, when they say, that
Paul disputes against merit, because themselves own it, when they make works
the Condition of the Covenant, and God to have promised justification and life
unto our works. Neither are they shy of the word merit it self, as we saw
lately from Mr. Baxter. But now, that Paul is not disputing against the merit
of works, in the first sense, is manifest from these. (1) The very works
required of Adam in the first Covenant, had not in them this intrinsic worth
and merit ex condigno, and so the Apostle shall be disputing against that,
which never was nor never will be nay, nor cannot be. (2) Then the Apostle
says nothing to disprove justification by the Old Covenant of Works made with
Adam, but establishes that, which who can believe? (3) No man, that is right
in his wits, can imagine such a thing. And shall we think that the Apostle is
disputing against that, which none, but such as are transported with mere
ignorance and vanity, will own, or stand to, in their more sedate and composed
thoughts. (4) Even the most proud and vain person, that is, will join the free
mercy of God, with all the conceit of merit they have; but this merit ex
condigno leaves no imaginable room for the free mercy of God, in less, or
more. (5) Paul disputes not against the merit ex congruo, as separated from
the works themselves, whereupon it is founded. As the following Arguments will
evince. Therefore far less does he dispute only against the fond and foolish
conceit of the merit ex condigno.

2. It is strange, that the Apostle should dispute against that, which he does
never once mentione, in his dispute, or in his Conclusions. He every where
mentions works and the Law, and the works of the Law; but no where mentions
he this merit of works, as the thing he disputes against, as abstracted and
distinguished from the works themselves.

3. And that place, which they think, gives some countenance unto their
imaginations, viz. Romans 4: 4. Now to him that works is the rewasd not
reckoned of grace, but of debt, is directly against them: for, there the
Apostle shows that works are excluded, and all works (for there is no
distinction made) are excluded; because, then the reward should be of debt:
showing, that if works have any place, in the matter of justification, debt
must have place also; but because debt has no place, but grace (which two are
inconsistent and incompatible) therefore all works are excluded. And to think,
that the meaning of the Apostle is, now to him, that works, with a conceit
of merit, attending his work, the reward is reckoned of debt; is to add to
the word of God, to pervert the Apostles Argument, and to contradict the scope
and cohesion of the words; as has been shown elsewhere, far less can any hence
infer a restriction of works to such only as make the reward of debt: for
then the reward might be reckoned to him, that works, and yet be reckoned of
grace and not of debt, and thus the Apostles Argument, should be manifestly
false, and a plain Paralogisme: which were wickedness and blasphemy to assert.

4. The Apostle excludes, in as plain terms, as can be, all the works of the
Law: but even such works, as are performed without this fond and groundless
conceit of mer^te, are works of the Law, being required and commanded by the
Law. Yea the Law never commanded any works with this conceit of merit: And
therefore by this opinion none of the works of the Law are excluded.

5. Adam was obliged to give perfect obedience to the Law, without the least
thought of meriteing ex condigno thereby: And if no merit or works with a
conceit of merit be now excluded, but the merit ex condigno, then is the
Covenant of works established by the Gospel. Nay thus, our imperfect works, are
made to merit as well ex congruo and ex pacto, justification and life, as
Adam's perfect and sinless obedience could have done.

6. The man that has works, without this conceit of merit, can not be called
an ungodly man, no more than Adam could have been called so, while he stood in
his integrity: But the justification under the Gospel is of the ungodly, God
justifies the ungodly. Romans 4: 5. Nor can the worker without this conceit of
meriting, be said to be one that works not, but believes on him, that
justifies the ungodly: as is manifest.

7. Either the Apostle establishes works of justification by them, and only
condemns the apprehension of merit in our works: or he excludes all works,
in which men may conceit some merit to lie. If the first be said, then I
conceive, the Apostle would have once mentioned this in argueings and
conclusions, and not always have mentioned the Law and the works of the Law;
for with our adversaries these are separable, and from the one the other can
not be inferred: but we see not the least appearance of any such thing in all
the Apostles argueings. And if the last be said. We have all we desire, for
thus all works shall be excluded, because men can and ignorant persons too often
do imagine and conceit a merit in what they do, though not that merit, which
is ex condigno, Yet that which is ex congruo.

8. If the Apostle disput not against works, but against a conceit of merit
in works, why does he not oppose works without this conceit unto this
conceit, or to works with this conceit? Why does he always oppose Faith unto
works, and say, we are justified by faith without the deeds of the Law? Is
works the same with conceit of merit, or with works having this conceit
adjointed? and is faith the same with works, or with works without this
conceit of merit? Then Adam should have been justified by faith, if he had
stood in his state of innocence; for he should have been justified by works
without this conceit. But what palpable and manifest perverting of the
Scripture and of the works thereof, is this? To take this liberty of expounding
the words of the Scripture, is plainly to make nothing of the Scripture, but
what we please.

9. Are there no mediums to prove, that there is no merit in our works in
reference to justification and Salvation, but such as the Apostle here uses,
to exclude works from this Interest? If this had been all, which the Apostle
had intended, his saying with Christ. Luke 17: 10. So lilkewise ye, when ye
shall have done all those things, which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants; we have done that, which was our duty to do, had
sufficiently confuted that mistake: But the long series of Arguments, with
their variety, which the Apostle here uses, manifestly declare, there was some
other thing in his eye; and he levelled at some other mark, even that, which he
plainly declares, in his repeated conclusions, viz. That we are justified by
faith in Jesus Christ, without the works of the Law.

10. Gospel Justification is of Grace. And therefore is not of works: Romans 4:
4. Ephesians. 2: 9* 10. And the Apostle clears the consequence, because all works
have a ground of merit with them, and make the reward of debt and give ground
to the worker to boast and to glory before men: thought not before God: for
upon these grounds does the Apostle reject all works, in this affair; as we
see Romans 3: 27. and 4: 2. Now to say, that the Apostle rejects only such
works, as men conceit to be meritorious for their intrinsic worth, and not
other works, that merit only ex pacto; is to destroy the Apostles Arguments,
and to enervat all his discourse; for even works meritorious ex congruo, or ex
pacto, will give ground of boasting before men, and make the reward of debt, as
we know it would have been, if Adam's Covenant had stood: But whatever works
lay the foundation of due debt, they stand in opposition to the way of grace;
for grace and debt are not compatible.

11. If any were puffed up with this conceit of the meritoriousness of their
works, ex condigno, it could be none beside the proud fantastic Pharisees; nor
is there any ground to suspect any other. And if so, why, may we suppose, would
the Apostle state a needless controversy, a controversy concerning all both
Jews and Gentiles, when none of the Gentiles, and few, if any of the Jews,
were concerned therein? And why, may we enquire, would the Apostle so
laboriously prove both Jews and Gentiles to be guilty of sin? and why does he
speak of them all, without exception, seeing the question did only concern a
few, and a very few, and such, as are never once named in all the dispute?
These things look not very probable like.

12. Can we think, that the Galatians, who were seduced by false Teachers, to
adjoine to their Christianity, the practice of some jewish Ceremonies, were
also carried away with this absurd Phancie, that there was a meritoriousness ex
condigno, in all their works? Though there be ground to imagine such a thing;
Yet we see the Apostle follows the same disput against them, that he did, in
writting to the Romans, of which no reason could be assigned if this merit was
all, he disputed down.

13. We find it said of the Jews Romans 9: 31. that they followed after the Law
of Righteousness; and yet by so doing did not attain unto the Law of
Righteousness; because ( verse. 32.) it was not by Faith, but as it were by the
works of the Law. Now neither were these works of the Law, nor that Law of
Righteousness which they were following after, a mere irrational conceit and
groundless fancy of a merit in what they did, or of an intrinsic worth,
meriting ex condigno the reward they expected. But a groundless apprehension,
that their works themselves was the way of their attaining unto life, and
therefore they followed that way of works, and would not take the way of faith,
but stumbled at that stumbling stone.

14. Then, according to this interpretation, works performed without this
conceit of merit, must be God's Righteousness, as works together with this
conceit of merit must be our own: for these two are opposite. Romans 10: 3.
But there is no ground to imagine; that our works performed without this fond
conceit of merit in them, are the Righteousness, for these are not Christ, or
his Righteousness: And it is there added verse. 4. for explication of the
Righteousdess of God, for Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, to
every one that believes.

15. The Righteousness of the Law is, that the man, which does these things
shall live by them. Romans 10: 5. Gal. 3: 12. Levit. 18: 5. So that this
Righteousness consists in man's own doing: and not in a mere irrational
apprehension of a merit in what he does: So that it is not this groundless
phancie, that the Apostle is disputing against, but this Righteousness, which
is of the Law, because he is laboring to establish by his doctrine, the
Righteousness of Faith, which is opposite to and inconsistent with the
Righteousness of the Law. And this Righteousness of Faith is not our own
personal Righteousness, or obedience performed to the Law without this
apprehension and conceit of merit, as is clear from verse. 8, 9, 10, 11.
following, and from the whole Gospel.

16. If this be all that the Apostle is disputing down, to wit, justification
by works, which we conceit to be meritorious, and not all justification hy
works, why did the Apostle adduce the Instance of Abraham, and insist so much
upon it, as he does Romans 4? Shall we think, that Abraham that holy Patriarch
and friend of God, did obey with any such conceit of intrinsic worth, in his
obedience? Was he infected with that leaven of Pharisaical pride? And if not,
where is the consequence of the Apostles argueing from his practice? Is it a
good consequence to say, Abraham was not justified by works performed in
sincerity, without pharisaical pride and conceit of merits; therefore we
cannot be justified by works, which we conceit to have merit in them: but by
such works we can and must be justified, when we conceit no merit in them,
but a simple merit ex congruo, or ex pacto? The like may be said of David, who
had no conceit of merit in his works, and yet expected not to be justified by
them, but looked for free pardon, and for justification through imputed
Righteousness. Romans 4: 6, 7, 8.

17. If the Apostle had been establishing justification by works performed
without such a fond conceit of merit in them; what ground was there for that
objection which he preoccupieth Romans 6: 1. saying. Shall we sin, that grace may
abound? The urging of justification by works, could give no show or apparent
ground for this. Neither can any such purpose be in the least seen and
observed, in all the answer at large prosecuted Chapters 6. and 7. which is
given hereunto. There is not the least hint given of his rectifying of the
misapprehensions, that any might have about works, as if they were or could be
supposed to be meritorious ex condigno: Nor is there the least ground of
surmise laid down, of their being meritorious of justification or of life
eternal ex congruo, or ex pacto: but all things sound the contrary way: and
life eternal is expressly said to be the free gift of God.

18. Then all that Paul meaned, when he desired to be found of his judge, not
having his own Righteousness, which is of the Law, was that he desired not to
be found puffed up with a pharisaical conceit of the perfection and
meritoriousness of his works, as meriteing his justification and life ex
condigno, by their intrinsic value and worth. But no such thing appears
Phil. 3. 9. where he utterly renunceth his own Righteousness, which is of the
Law; that is, a Righteousness consisting in his obedience and conformity to the
Law: for in opposition to this, he desires to be found in that Righteousness,
which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness, which is of God by
faith; and this is some other thing, than his own works, performed without that
pharisaical opinion.

19. We are saved by grace, through faith, not of works, lest any man should
boast, Ephesians. 2: 8, 9. and consequently not of any works, seeing all works give
ground of boasting. And he means such works, unto which we are created in
Christ Jesus, as his workmanship: and which God has before ordained, that we
should walk in them verse. 10. Now these works are certainly works done without
any vain conceit of merit: and yet we see, that by these works we are not
brought into a state of Salvation.

20. The Apostle excludes works of Righteousness, which we have done, as
opposed to Mercy and grace. Tit. 3: 5, 7. Now grace stands in opposition to
all works, even to works performed without this conceit of merit, as we see
Romans 11: 6. else we must say, that the Apostle there grants Election to be
for foreseen works, performed without a conceit of merit, and nothing must be
called works, but what is done with a Pharisaical conceit of merit and
intrinsic worth in them, which is absurd.

CHAP. VII.
James 2: 14. etc. cleared and Vindicated.
ALI, who have been of old, and are this day Adversaries to the way of
justification before God, which the Orthodox own from the Scriptures, have
thought to shelter themselves, under the wings of of some expressions of the
Apostle James; and have therefore labored so to explain and streatch forth
the same expressions, as they with their corrupt Notions about justification
may seem at least to have some countenance therefrom, yea and warrandise to
hold fast the same: And for this cause they have labored so much, and do still
labor, so to expound the words of Paul, as that they may carry no seeming
difference unto the words of James: for it is received as a known truth, and it
is willingly granted, that there is no real Contradiction betwixt the two
Apostles, but what ever apparent or seeming disagreement there be betwixt their
words; yet all that difficulty is removable; and their words, how contradictory
soever they seem to be, are yet capable of such an interpretation, as shall
manifest their harmonious agreement in the truth: so that James saying Chapter 2:
24, Ye see then, how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only,
dot not contradict the Apostle Paul, who says and concludes, that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. Romans 3: 28.

But a question is here made, whether we should interpret James's words by
Paul's, or Paul's by James's. Our Adversaries are much for this later, to wit,
that we must interpret Paul's words by the words of James, because, as they
allege, Paul is obscure in his doctrine, and many were beginning to
misinterpret and pervert the same and that therefore James was necessitate to
clear up that doctrine of justification, so as Paul's words might be better
understood. But how unreasonable this is, the leamed D. Owen has lately
manifested, and his grounds are indeed irrefragable; for (1) It is a received
way of interpreting Scriptures, that when two places seem to be repugnant unto
other, that place, which treats of the matter directly, designedly, expressly
and largely, is to regulate our interpretation of the other place, where the
matter is only touched obiter, on the bye, and upon some other occasion, and in
order to some other ends. And that therefore accordingly, we must interpret
James by Paul, and not Paul by James; seeing it is undenible, that Paul wrote of
this Subject of Justification, directly and on purpose to clear up the same,
and that with all expresness and fullness, on several occasions, disputing the
same, in a clear and formal manner, with all sorts of Arguments, Artificial and
Inartificial, and answers objections, that might be moved against the same,
at large, and with a special accuracie: But on the other hand, it is as
certain, that James has not this for his scope to open up the Nature of
Justification; but only touches there-upon, in order to the other end, which
he was prosecuting. (2) There is no ground to suppose, that it was the design
of James to explain the meaning of Paul, no footstep of any such purpose
appears. For then his maine business should be to explain and clear up the
doctrine of justification, which neither is apparent from this part of the
Epistle, nor from any part of it at all; his design being quite another thing,
as is obvious. (3) Nor was there any necessity for James, to Vindicate the
doctrine of Paul, from such corrupt inferences, as Adversaries suppose, were
made therefrom: for as to any such, as might be made, to wit, as if he had
given any countenance unto such, as were willing to lay aside good works; he
himself did fully and sufficiently Vindicate his own doctrine, by showing, on
all occasions, the necessity of good works, and particularly when he is
speaking of Justification, not only in his Epistles to the Romans, and to the
Galatians, where he largly and professedly treats of that matter, but even
when he is but mentioning the same on other occasions; as we see Ephesians. 2: 8,
9, 10. Phil. 3: 9, 10, 11, etc. and Tit. 3: 5, 6, 7, 8. So that to imagine that
James asserteth another interest of works in our justification, than Paul does,
and that to explain Paul's meaning, is not to reconcile these Apostles, but to
set them at further varience and enmity. And it cannot comport with sobriety,
to think or say, that James, to clear the Apostle Paul's doctrine, and to
vindicate it from objections, should speak to the same objections, which Paul
himself had spoken to and fully removed, and that James should give such
answers unto these objections, as Paul would not give, but rather rejected: And
yet this must be said by our Adversaries here.

It will be of great use to us here, to understand aright, what is the plain
scope and drift of the Apostle James; for as for the design and scope of Paul,
in his discourses of justification, it is so obviously manifest unto all that
read the same, that no doubt can be made thereof, to wit. To clear up fully
and plainly the Nature and Causes of this great privilege of justification,
which is the hinge and ground work (as it were) of his doctrine of the Gospel,
and to show how poor sinners, standing under the Curse for sin, come to be
justified before God; as in his Epistle to the Romans: And to Vindicate the
same doctrine of the Gospel from the corrupt pervesions of false teachers, as
in his Epistle to the Galatians; as also to commend the free grace of God, in
that noble contrivance, both in the places mentioned, and Ephesians. 2. Phil. 3.
Tit. 3. and elsewhere, when he mentions the same.

Now as to the scope of the Apostle James, there is nothing to declare unto us,
that it was his Intent, or design to explain and make known the way* how poor
convinced sinners, standing under the sentence of the Law, come to be justified
before God, and to receive pardon of their sins. No such question proposes he
to be discussed; No such point of truth does he lay down to be cleared, or
Vindicated. But his whole scope and drift is to press the real study of
holiness, in several points particularly spoken to through the Epistle. And in
that second Chapt. from verse. 14. and forward (as will appear more fully in the
explication and vindication of the several verses in particular) he is
particularly obviating that gross mistake of some, who thought that a bare
outward profession of the Gospel Faith, or of Christian Religion, was
sufficient to save them, and evidence them to be in a justified state, and that
therefore they needed not trouble themselves with any study of holiness: And
therefore shows, that all such hopes of Salvation were built on the sand, for
they had no ground to suppose, that they were truly justified, and so were in
any fair way unto salvation, so long as all their faith was no other, than a
general assent unto the doctrine of the Gospel, and to truths revealed, and
not that true lively faith, hold forth in the Gospel, whereby sinners become
justified before God.

Mr. Baxter tells Cath. Theol. part. 2. n. 364. that St. James having to do with
some, who thought that the bare profession of Christianity, was Christianity;
and that faith was a mere assent to the Truth; and that to believe that the
Gospel is true, and trust to be justified by Christ was enough to
justification, without Holiness and fruitful Lives; and that their sin and
barrenness hindered not their justification: so that they thus believed
(perhaps misunderstanding Paul's Epistles) does convince them, that they were
mistaken; and that when God spoke of justification by faith, without the works
of the Law, he never meaned a faith that contains not a resolution to obey
him in whom we believe, nor that is separate from actual obedience in the
prosecution: But that as we must be justified by our Faith against the charge
of being Insidels; so must we be justified by our Gospel personal holiness, and
sincere obedience, against the charge, that we are unholy and wicked, or
impenitent, or hypocrites, or else we shall never be adjudged to Salvation,
that is justified by God.

Ans. (1) It is true, for it is manifest, and undeniable, that James had to do
with some, who thought that the bare profession of Christianity was enough, and
that an assent unto the truth, was that faith that would prove justifying and
saving. But (2) it is not so manifest that James had to do with such, as
thought that to trust to be justified by Christ, was enough to justification
without holiness and fruitful lives, and that their sin and barrenness hindered
not their justification: for whatever Mr. Baxter imagine, we find not in
Scripture, that justification follows lives, that is, that there is no
justification, before this fruitfulness of life appear: And himself uses to
say, that in order to the first justification, this holiness of life is not
requisite: And beside this, which he calls the first, we know no other;
unless he mean glorification. But then (3) as to glorification and final
Salvation, we grant, that James has to do with such, as thought a mere assent
to the truth, without holiness, was sufficient hereunto; but that their
believing thus could flow from their misunderstanding of Paul's Epistles, is
not any way probable, seeing Paul in all his Epistles, even where he speaks most
of justification by Faith without the deeds of the Law, presses the necessity
of holiness in order to Salvation, so as no imaginable ground hereof can with
the least of shows be pretended. (4) That when Paul said, justification was by
Faith, without the works of the Law, he meant a true and lively faith, which
only is to be found in that soul, in which the seed of grace is sown, and which
is made partaker of the holy Ghost, and of the divine Nature, is true; but yet
justifying faith, does not formally contain in it a resolution to obey him, in
whom we believe, as was shown elsewhere. (5) Then we see, that the faith,
whereof James speaks, is not the same with that Faith, whereby Paul said, we
are just^fied: And seeing both do not speak of the same Faith, there can be no
appearance of discrepance. (6) When he says, we must be justified by our
Faith, against the charge of being infidels. I would know, what he means, by
this charge of infidelity; If he mean, the charge of not believing the Gospel,
he knows that a mere assent to the truth, will ^ustifie from that Charge. If
he mean the charge of not receiving and resting upon Christ, according to the
Gospel, even that will be but a particular justification from that particular
charge; and is not that justification from the sentence of the Law, whereof
Paul speaks. (7) That we must be justified (as he says) by our Gospel
personal holiness and sincere obedience, against the charge, that we are unholy
and wicked, or impenitent and hypocrites, is true; but what can all this say,
for a justification from the sentence of the Law, under which we are all lying
by Nature; and of which the Apostle Paul speaks? And if James speak of
justification by works, in reference to this accusation, he speaks of no
other kind of justification, than that which the most wicked wreatch, yea and
the devils are capable of, when, to wit, they are falsely accused of having
done some evil, which they have not done. And how can Mr. Baxter infer from
what James says, (if he speak of no other kind of justification) that works
are required unto our justification, as to state, or unto our general
justification from the sentence of the Law, adjudging us to death because of
transgression? (8) But he adds, or else we shall never be adjudged to
Salvation, that is, justified by God. Then the Justification, that James
speaks of, and that Mr. Baxter means, is final Salvation: And we willingly
grant, that there must be personal holiness and sincere obedience before this,
and that no wicked or impenitent person, or hypocrite shall be adjudged to
Salvation. But the justification, which Paul treats of, is different from
this, though it be the sure way to this, seeing all who are justified, shall be
thus saved. Thus we see, that according to Mr. Baxter, the meaning of James is,
the same with Paul's, when he says Heb. 12: 14. Follow peace with all men and
holinoss, without which no man shall see the Lord. And then, James speaks
nothing of that justification, whereof Paul treatch and this is, what we say;
whence it is manifest, that there is no appearance of contradiction betwixt the
two holy writers.

But that we may come to some further clearness in this matter, we must see,
whether Paul and James mean and speak of one and the same Faith: for if it be
found, that they speak of diverse Faiths, all appearance of Contradiction is
removed. Now that the Apostle Paul means of a true, lively, saving Faith,
which is a saving fruit of the Spirit of God and the special Gift of God, is
easily granted on all hands: All the question is of that faith, which James
speaks of, Papist's say, that it is true justifying, that James speaks of:
for justifying. Faith, with them, is nothing but a real assent unto the
Catholic Doctrine, or to divine Revelation: And indeed if Justifying. Faith be
nothing else, it can not be well denied, that James means here a justifying
faith. But the folly of this ground is obvious to all, that understand the
Gospel: and we need not here insist in confuting the same. That which James
here says of this Faith, is enough to demonstrate of what Nature it is; and
the Epithets he gives it, do sufficiently manifest, that it is not Faith of
the Right stamp, nor that true and lively Faith, by which Paul says, that we
are justified: and the discovery of this will be enough to our purpose; and
every verse of his discourse hereanent will help us herein for (1) verse. 14. it
is a profitless Faith, which cannot be said of justifying Faith, as the whole
Scripture clears. (2) Ibid. it is a Faith, that has no ground or reality,
but a man's saying, nor no other evidenee, or proof, What does it profit, my
Brethren, though a man say, he has Faith? There is no other proof adducable
but his say so; which cannot be justifying Faith. (3) Ibid^can Faith save him;
so that, it is a Faith, that has no sure connection with, nor tendency to
Salvation; which cannot be supposed of the true, lively justifying Faith, as is
known. (4) verse. 15, 16. It is no more true Faith, than that is true charity,
which says to the naked and destitute brother, depart in peace, be thou warmed
and filled and notwithstanding gives not those things, which are needful to
the body. (5) verse. 17. It is expressly called a dead Faith. But the precious
Faith of God's elect is a lively Faith. (6) ibid. It is a Faith without works,
having no connection therewith, nor being any ground thereunto; but the true
Faith, that justifies, works by Love, and is a living principle, and flows
from the infusion of life. (7) So verse. 18. It is a Faith incapable of any true
evidence, or demonstration, as to its being, from works of holiness* and so is
not accompanied with any real change of soul: But it is not thus with true and
saving Faith. (8) verse. 19. It is such a Faith; as devils may have: But devils
are not capable of justifying Faith. (9) verse. 20. It is the Faith, that a
Vain man* never humbled in the sense of his own lost Condition, nor driven out
of himself to seek reliese elsewhere, in the free mercy and grace of God,
through Jesus Christ, may have: But that is not the Faith of the humbled, hear
broken man, that is sleeing to Christ for refuge, (10) verse. 21, 22, 23. It is
not such a Faith, as Abraham had, that made him willing to offer up his son
Isaac, when commanded, and so wrought with and was evidenced and demonstrated
by works. (11) verse. 25. Nor is it like the Faith of Rahab, which prompted her
to receive the Messengers, and send them out another way. (12) verse. 26. It is
such a Faith, that is no better than a carcass without breath, which is no
essential part of a living man. But the Faith that justifies, is a far other
thing. By these particulars, it is manifest, that this Faith, whereof James
speaks so much, and which he opposes unto works, and denies justification,
and salvation unto, is not the precious faith that Paul speaks of.

We have seen, that Paul and James speak not of one and the same faith, we
shall now enquire, whether they speak of One and the same Justification: And if
it be found, that therein they differ, all ground of imaginable difference will
be further removed. What that justification is, whereof Paul speaks, is
manifest, and needs not here be declared, for it is plain, that he treats
of that justification, whereby a poor sinner, convinced of his sin and misery,
in lying under guilt, and under the Curse of God because of sin, is absolved
before God from the sentence of the Law, and accepted of Him, and brought into
an estate of Favor and reconciliation, having a right unto Salvation, through
Faith in Jesus Christ. Upon the other hand, it is as obvious and clear, that
James is not treating of this justification, whereby a change of state is made
in the man. But of a justification of a far other nature, even such a
justification, whereby the Man's Faith, the reality of his Christianity, and his
justification before God, is evidenced, or may be evidenced to himself, or to
others. So that, whether we take justification here, as mentioned by James, for
the evidence and demonstration of justification, or for a justification of the
truth of the Man's Faith and Christianity, it comes all to one; for where true
faith and true Christianity is, there is justification, and there only; so that
what demonstrats the one, will demonstrat the other; and a justification, or
manifestation of the one will be a justification of the other. Nor is this
sense of the word justify, or justification alien from the Scriptures, as we
see Psalm. 51: 4. Romans 3: 4. for God can not other ways be justified, but by
being declared, avowed, and proclaimed to be Righteous. So Ier. 3: 11. Ezekiel. 16:
51, 52. Mat. 11: 19. Luke 7: 35, 29. 1. Tim. 3: 16.

Now that this is the justification, whereof James speaks, may be further
cleared by these particulars. (1) The scope, that James here levelleth at,
being not to clear up the way and manner, how, or the causes by which, this
change of Relation and State is wrought and brought about, but to discover the
groundlesness of the vain pretenses of such, as supposed they were justified,
and in a sure way to be saved, who had no more for their ground, but a loose
and verbal outward profession of the preached truth, without any real fruit of
godliness: So that this Inquiry is, what can truly evidence a person to be
justified indeed before God? And he shows that an empty fruitless profession
will not do it, but works of Faith, or Faith proving it self lively by works.
(2) The very Instance of Abraham, which he adduceth, clears this; for he
says verse. 21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when he had
offered his Son upon the altar? Now twenty five years, or as some compute,
Thirty years, or thereby before this time the Scriptures say, that Abraham
believed God, and it was reckoned to him unto Righteousness. Genesis 15. and hence
Paul proves Romans 4. that he was justified by Faith. Therefore if now he was
justified, when he offered, his Son, he must have been twice justified and that
in the same sense, with the same kind of justification, which can not be said.
Nor will it avail to say, That Genesis 15. he was justified by the first
justification, which was by Faith, of which Paul speaks Romans 4. But Genesis 22.
he was justified with the second justification, which is by works; and of this
James speaks: for this distinction of justification into First and Second, is
but a mere device of the Papist's, having no ground in, nor countenance from
the Scriptures: and beside, it would follow, that a mere historical, dead Faith
is sufficient unto the first justification, and that Paul understands such a
faith only, when he said Romans 4. that Abraham believed God, and it was counted
to him unto Righteousness, the contrary whereof is manifest. Nor will it serve
here to say, that Paul speaks of justification as begun: but James speaks
of justification as continued: for then it would follow, that justification at
first, or as begun, is by a dead faith, and by such a kind of faith, as devils
may have, and consequently, that of such a faith, as this, Paul speaks;
because of such a faith James speaks, as we have seen: But this cannot be
said, for it was a true and lively faith, that Abraham had, when he believed
the promise of the Messiah and a dead faith is not the faith, that justifies,
first, or last. Yea because James makes an opposition betwixt faith and works,
in reference to justification, in the sense, wherein he speaks of it, it will
follow, that faith should not be requisite unto the Continuance of
justification. (3) James said verse. 20. that Faith without works was dead: and
to confirm this, he adds verse. 21. was not Abraham our Father justified by
works etc. As if he had said. The faith by which Abraham was brought into an
estate of justification and life, was a lively faith, having works of obedience
attending it, and his obedience declared that his faith was lively, and that he
was truly justified by faith, Ergo a faith, that is lifeless, and wholly
without works of obedience, is but dead, and can give no ground to conclude one
justified, and in the way to life; So that what mention he makes of
justification by works is but to prove the reality of lively faith; and by
works true justification by faith is evidenced and demonstrated, and not by a
bare idle and vain fruitless profession. (4) When Abraham was justified by his
works, the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed unto him for Righteousness, as is manifest from verse. 22, 23. Now
by this mentioned of Abraham in the Scripture Genesis 15: 6. Paul proves Romans 4.
that he was justified by faith. But if James were here speaking of the way of
our becoming justified, before God, as Paul does, there could be no connection
here, yea the proof should contradict the thing to be proved; for to say, that
Abraham was justified by faith, will not prove, that he was justified by works:
nor could his being justified by works, be a fulfilling, a clearing and
confirming of that truth, that faith, he was justified by faith; for faith and
works, in the matter of justification, are inconsistent, and perfectly
opposite, as Paul teaches us, and as here James also teaches us. But taking
justification here for its declaration and manifestation, it can be by works,
and a declaration of justification by works can be and is a very signal
confirmation and clearing of that Testimony, which says, that Abraham was
justified by faith. (5) By that work of offering up his son, at a the command
of God, Abraham declared, that he was no hypocrite, but a true believer, and
thus was he justified (as Mr. Baxter will have it, as we heard lately) from any
such accusation. But a Justification from this accusation, is but a
justification of the truth and sincerity of faith, and so a confirmation and
evidence of justification; or justification as evidenced and declared; and not
justification as produced by its causes. (6) When James says verse. 23. That
the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God and it was
imputed to him unto Righteousness, when he was justified by offering up his son
verse. 21. this fulfilling of the Scripture-testimony was, either because at
that time, when he offered up his Son, Righteousness was imputed unto him, and
he was justified, or because it was then manifest, to be a truth, that he was
justified indeed: But the former can not be said, because Righteousness was
imputed unto him, and he was justified long before this. Therefore it can be
only understood, as to its manifestation. (7) This is also clear from what the
Lord spoke at that time, Genesis 22: 12. Now I know, that thou fear God, seeing
thou have not witheld thy Son, thine only Son from me. No word here of imputing
Righteousness unto him, or of his being brought into a justified state; but
only God's solemn declaration, that he was a true fearer of God, and so one,
that had true faith, and was really justified. (8) Verse. 22. he says See
thou, how faith wrought with his works and by works was faith made perfect. But
how could this follow upon what he had said verse. 21? Justification by works
(if justification be taken absolutely here and not for its declaration and
manifestation,) will not prove faith's working with works. But if justification
be here taken for justification declared and manifested, the sense is plain:
for such works as do evidence and declare, that a person is justified, will
manifestly prove, that faith is working with these works, because justification
presupposes always a true and lively faith, that will work with works of
obedience. (9) Far less could it follow from justification (taken absolutely) by
works, that faith was made perfect by works: but from such a work as will
evidence a man to be justified, it is manifest to every one, that that work is
a clear evidence of a true and lively faith, and by it faith is perfected, that
is declared, evidenced and demonstrated, to be faith indeed, as the word
perfected is used 2. Cor. 12: 9. for my strength is made perfect in weakness.
(10) That other Inference verse. 24. ye see then, how that by works a man is
justified and not by Faith only: will not follow from what went before, if
justification be here taken absolutely: for the command so Abraham to offer up
his son was no promise, and to did not call for faith, but for ready obedience,
though upon another account he believed that God was able to raise him up from
the dead Heb. 11: 17, 18, 19. But Genesis 15. promises were made unto him, and he
is said to have believed, and upon this Righteousness was imputed unto him. So
that Genesis 15. he was justified by faith only, as the Apostle proves Romans 4.
for thereby he confirms his Conclusion set down Romans 3: 28. that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. And from that other place Genesis
22. James could not infer, that Justification is by faith and works together,
for then he could not infer therefrom that the Scripture was fulfilled, which
said, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness,
because Paul does hence infer Romans 4. that justification is by faith without
works: And what is a ground for justification by faith without works, cannot
also be a ground for justification by works and not by faith only; And thus the
Apostles are made in plain terms to contradict other: by inferring contrary
or contradictory conclusions from the same premises: which ought not to be
thought, let be said. But it will be said, that Paul speaks of the beginning
of justification, which is by faith without works; but James speaks of
justification, as continued, which is by works, and not by faith only. This
cannot satisfy: for beside what is said, it must first be granted hereby, that
this faith, which James mentions, when he says and not by says only, must
be the same faith, that Paul faith, we are justified by, without the deeds of
the Law: but this cannot be, for the faith, that James speaks of is, as we
saw above, a dead, useless, fruitless carcass and no saving Faith, as that is,
whereof Paul speaks, and whereby we are justified. But now taking
justification for its manifestation and declaration, the words of James are
most clear, and carry no appearance of contradiction, unto what Paul taught;
For his meaning is, ye see then, how that by works, a man evidenceth, proves
and declares his Justification, or makes it manif^st, that he is a justified
person; and not by that faith only, which is but a naked fruitless, and dead
profession. (11) The same may be said of the other Instance of Rahab verse. 25.
She was justified by works, when ^he had received the messengers; not that she
was brought into a justified state by that act; for she received the Spies by
faith Heb. 11: 31. and declared her faith unto them Ios. 2: 10, 11. And so was
a believer and consequently justified, before she received the Spies, or they
came to her. Yet by this deed, accompanied with so much hazard, unto her self
and all her families, she proved and evidenced her faith and justification.
(12) The Conclusion of his discourse verse. 26. for as the body without the
Spirit is dead, fo faith without works is dead also, declares manitestly, what
he would be at, to wit, to show, that works can only demonstrate true faith and
consequently prove justification; for a naked profession of faith, that wants
works, is dead, and like a body wanting breath and soul, which is but a dead
carcass. This cannot be said of that faith, whereby Paul says and proves,
that we are justified, for it is true and lively, flowing from the Spirit of
life, although it be not as yet proved by outward works of obedience, whereof
there may be, as yet, no opportunity or call.

What is brought against this sense, of the word justify and justification,
which we have now confirmed, by the Socinian Author of the book, entitled
Consensus Paul^ and Iacobi etc. page 2. etc. and by the Remonstrants in their
Apology Cap. 10. is of no great weight. When they say. That the proposition
set down verse. 14. is subordinat to what is said verse. 12. where the judgment
of God is spoken of, and therefore saving justification must be here
understood. Ans. We grant, that It is saving justification, but yet it is
justification that is distinct from Final Salvation. We grant, that James
speaks here of saving justification; Yet he handles not that question, how
and by what Causes this justification is brought about; but how it is evidenced
and proven to be true, and not a mere presumptuous conjecture. They say next.
It is said verse. 25. that the Scripture was fulfilled; not, that it was shown
to be fulfilled. A^s. That saying of Scripture was a truth before this time,
even when Abraham first believed; which was before he was circumcised as we see
Genesis 15. comp. with Genesis 17. and Romans 4: 9, 10, 11. And therefore was not now
first fulfilled, or verified. And to talk of the increase of imputation
according to the increase of Faith, and to measure the excellency of faith, by
the excellency of that obedience which it produces, as that Socinian Author
does, is to give us nothing but the Popish justification; for Relations (of
which Nature we hold Justification to be) are not intended and remitted in
themselves, but only as to their evidence: We esteem it a Socinian dream, to
say, that the first Narration of Faith and Justification, which is Genesis 15. was
but a rude draught of that, which was afterward Genesis 22. Abraham's faith was
afterward said to be perfected by that special work, of offering up his son,
no^ in it self, for he had a strong faith before Romans 4: 19, 20, 21. but in its
manifestation after that signal trial, It is said further. Man's justification
cannot be here understood, for that is not necessary to salvation, nor
universally true, seeing men may justify other, upon vain grounds. Ans. No^ do
we understand any such justification pronunced by men here, but a true
justification before God, yet as evidenced, proven and declared by effects,
unto all, that will judge understandingly and spiritually, so that works here
are mentioned as the Effects, and yet as the Causes of justification. But then
they object further. Thas, as the Apostle from that Faith, which the vain man
boasted of denies the man to be justified, so from works he proves
justification, and that as antecedent. Ans. The Apostle shows, that the vain
man, who had no more, but a vain dead empty faith, had no ground to conclude
himself a justified Man: for this is no Cause or Condition of Justification:
And hence it will not follow, that works, by which both the reality of saying
Faith, and of Justification thereupon, may be evidenced, are antecedent Causes,
or Conditions of Justification. It is objected again by the foresaid Socinian
Author. That if the meaning of these words, the Scripture was fulfilled, be,
that the Scripture was shown to be fulfilled: then the meaning should be, that
it was demonstrated to Abraham's two servants, who went with him to the
mountain, and by them to others; But then it must be supposed, that before
this time, that which passed Genesis 15. was known unto them: and it must he said,
that by a work done long afterward, men may see, that the worker was justified.
But that should not sutte James's scope, seeing by this means they might think
to delay for a long time their good works, and yet suppose themselves presently
justified. Ans. All this is but vain language; for it is all one to the scope
of James, whether this come to the actual knowledge of few, or of many, and who
they were to whose knowledge it came; He is only showing, that such, as had but
a dead faith, that brought forth no works of obedience, when called for, had no
evidence, or clear ground to assert their own justification, seeing Abraham's
justification was thus declared by his signal obedience, to all that came or
ever should come to the knowledge of that act of obedience of his, to the end
of the world: Yea, had it been unknown to any, yet hereby he had a sure proof,
to ascertaine his own heart and conscience of his justification. But say the
Arminians, Good works cannot be such a proof and demonstration, because it
cannot be known to others, whether these good works proceed from faith, or not.
Ans. Nor is any infallible judgment here necessary, or requisite; nor does the
scope of James require any such thing, who is only showing, that such as
wrought not works of obedience, when called for, could not conclude themselves
justified, and in a saife estate, notwithstanding of all their fair
profession. Notwithstanding we cannot judge infallibly of principles, motives
and ends of the good works of others, yet by what may be seen of these, God may
be glorified Mat. 5: 16. 1. Pet. 2: 12.

Thus we have seen, that neither is that faith, whereof Paul speaks, when he
says. We are justified by faith without the deeds of the Law; and whereof
James speaks, when he says. Ye see then, how a man is justified by works and
not by faith only, is not one and the same. Nor is it the same justification,
or justification in the same sense and consideration, that both the Apostles
speak of. And therefore how ever, as to their words, they seem to speak
contrary to other: Yet in their true sense and meaning, there is nothing but a
sweet harmony and agreement. But now as to works, whereof both make mentione,
the question remains, whether they be one and the same? The forenamed
Socinian Author says, that both do not speak of the same works* and that Paul
excludes from justification only legal works, and not Evangelical. And
consequently, that James must speak of Evangelical works only: But sure we are,
James cannot be supposed to speak of Evangelical works, in their sense; seeing,
they cannot say, that Abraham's offering up Isaac or Rahab her receiving and
sending away the spies, were Evangelical works. James speaks of works
commanded by the Moral Law, which he mentions both in general, and in its
particular commands Iam. 2: 9, 10, 11. And all the duties, which he presses
them unto, and the sins, which he disswadeth them from, relate unto the Moral
Law. And what these works are, whereof Paul speaks, we have seen before.
Others think, that James by Works here means a working faith: and so that his
meaning, when he says, that by works a man is justified, is, that by a working
faith, such as Abraham had, a man is justified. But though it be a truth, that
justifying faith is a working lively faith? And that we are justified only by
such a faith, as is lively, and prompteth to obedience, in every duty called
for; and though this truth will follow by consequent, from what the Apostle
James here says; Yet I judge, that both Paul and James understand the same
thing by works, even duties of obedience, performed to the Law of God, and that
by Works here in James, is not meant a working faith, this not being the scope
and design of James to clear up justification in its Causes, or to show by
what means it is brought about; but only to show, what way it is or may be
evidenced proved and demonstrated to ourselves or others, so as we may not be
deceived thereanent; And real works of obedience, as they evidence a true and
lively faith, so they prove the reality of justification: And the Apostles
intention being, to show the vanity of that pretense, whereby many deceived
themselves, thinking that their profession of the truth of the Gospel was
enough to secure their Salvation, and to prove them to be in a justified saife
state, though they indulged themselves a liberty to walk loosly, according to
the flesh; this acception of the word works, in a proper sense, is most
contributive unto that design, and no other acception, how consonant so ever
unto the Analogy of Faith, does so directly and clearly contribute assistence
thereunto. Therefore he opposes faith and works, and denies that to faith,
which he ascribed unto works: though by consequence he put hereby a difference
betwixt a dead faith, and a working faith; Yet his principale Thesis verse. 14.
is, that by works, and not by a bare profession of the truth, we come to
Salvation. And the inquiry prosecuted is, whether we have that faith, that
will indeed prove saving, and this can only be evidenced by works, as his whole
following discourse evinceth, especially when he says verse. 18. show me thy
faith without thy works, and I will show my faith by my works. And verse. 20.
when he says, faith without works is dead and verse. 26. that it is as dead, as
a body is without breath or Spirit. And this he fully confirms by the
following instances of Abraham and Rahab.

From what is said, it is apparent, how little ground there is to think, that
there is any real appearance of contradiction betwixt Paul and James; and how
needless it is, in order to a reconciliation, to say with Papists, that Paul
speaks of a first justification and James of a second; or with others, that
Paul speaks of justification, as begun, and James of justification as
continued, or with Socinians, that Paul denies justification by the works of
the Law, James affirms justification by the works of the Gospel.

CHAP. VIII.
No countenance given to Justification by Works, from Jam. 2: 14. etc.
BEcause all, who ascribe our justification in one sense or other (all are not
agreed in one and the same sense) unto our works, seek countenance unto the
same from these words of James Chapt. 2: 14, and forward: notwithstanding that
what was said concerning this passage, in the fore going Chapter, might be
sufficient, to discover the groundlesness of any such pretense, where it was
showen, that the whole face of this place looked toward another airth, and had
not the least aspect unto any such conclusion; Yet for a fuller Vindication of
this place from this too ordinary abuse and perversion, we shall examine every
part thereof, and see, what ground there is; for any to alleige the same, for
confirmation of their particular opinions.

The Papists generally say, that this place speaks of the Second
Justification: But their opinion of a first and second justification is vain,
having no ground in the word, and the whole of their fabric is sufficiently
demolished by the Reformed, writting against them; so that we need not insist
thereupon. Others there are, who suppose that James is here showing, how
justification is continued, and therefore say, though faith alone be the
Condition of Justification, as begun; Yet unto the continuance thereof works
are required, as the Condition. But all that speak thus, and think that James
points forth the Condition of Justification as continued, must say, that
those persons, who had this faith, whereof James speaks, were really
justified, and that James does presuppose them to be justified, and speaks to
them and of them, as such* But then it must be granted, that the Popish faith,
consisting in a mere assent unto the truth revealed, is justifying faith; and
that that faith, which is no more true and saving faith, than that is true and
Christian Charity, which says to a brother or sister, that is naked and
destitute of daily food, depart in peace, and gives not those things, which
are needful to the body, is sufficient to bring one into a justified state; and
that a dead faith, and a faith of the same nature and kind, with the faith of
devils and a faith, which a vain man, puffed up with a vain conceit and a
fleshly mind may have, and a faith, that cannot and will not work with works,
is a justifying faith: which if true, it would follow, that all men, who
believe that God is, and Devils also, who believe this, should be justified.
But none, who understand the Gospel can think or speak thus. And therefore this
place carries no show of proof, that works are the Condition of Justification*
as continued.

Nor can this place give any countenance to such, as say that Faith and Works
together are the Condition of Justification, making no difference betwixt
justification, as begun, and as continued. For (1) James'^ scope (as we
manifested above) is not to clear up and explain the way, how justification
is brought about, or to show, what are the Causes, or Conditions thereof: but
to discover the vanity of that ground, whereupon some professors, who indulged
their Lusts, deceived themselves and supposed that they were in a state of
justification, and salvation, notwithstanding they neglected all duties of
holiness. (2) James opposes a faith here unto works, a faith, which he called
unprofitable, dead etc. and does not ascribe justification hereunto, as to a
Condition, in whole, or in part: But such, as speak thus, include faith and
works, as making up one full and complete Condition. (3) The Instances, which
James here adduceth, should not then serve his design, if his purpose was to
prove faith and works to be the Condition of Justification; for Abraham was
long justified before that particular act of obedience in offering up his son
Isaac, was called for: And so was Rab^^ justified before she sent away the
spies. (4) This work, by which Abraham is said to have been justified, was a
work, that seemed contrary unto the Moral Law: And therefore if this be urged,
as a ground of justification by works, it will rather prove justification by
other works, then by works commanded in the Moral Law of God. (5) The works,
mentioned in both the Instances, are outward external works, obvious to the
eyes and ears of others: And hence it may as well be proved, that only
external works, are required unto justification, and no other. And indeed, if
it had been James's design to prove justification by works, he had named other
works, then merely external, that he might have prevented a mistake.

But more fully to discover the vanity of this supposition, let us see, what
can be alleiged from the several parts of this passage, for justification by
works, from verse. 14. it is said. Faith alone cannot save, but is unprofitable;
but yet faith and works is profitable and will save. Ans. This makes nothing
for justification by works; because it is denied, that whatever is requisite
before Salvation, is requisite also before justification, for if so, no man
could be said to be justified, as long as he lived. But next, the faith,
whereof James here speaks, avails not to Salvation, because it is not of
the right kind, and we say also, that this faith avails not to
justification, because it is but mere empty profession, deceiving and puffing
up and it is but a faith, that a man says he has.

From verse. 15, 16, 17. It is said As charitable wishes, joined with real acts
of Love and Alms deeds is, profitable and no other charitable wishes; so Faith
with works, is available to justification, but not without them. Ans. These
charitable wishes, not accompanied with Alms deeds, as they are not profitable
unto the indigent brother and sister, so they are far from that Christian
charity, that is called for in the Gospel: and as that charity is not true,
Christian and saving charity; so neither is the Faith, which he proves to be
dead, true, saving or justifying Faith. Nor does the Apostle say, that faith
with works is available unto justification; but that that faith, which has not
works, is dead, and not available to prove and evidence, that the man that has
it, is in a saife and in a justified state.

But the maine ground of this apprehension is verse. 21, 22, 23, etc. for it is
objected that it is expressly said, that Abraham was justified by works. Ans.
That it is so said, we grant; but the difference is about the sense and
meaning, in which it is said so. We have shown, that the meaning is. That by
works Abraham was declared, proved and manifested to be a justified person, and
one that had a true and lively faith; for it is added, that hereby the
Scripture was fulfilled declaring him to have been justified by faith, or that
he believed God, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness. And this is it,
which others have called justification before men, in opposition to
justification before God, that is, a justification declared and manifested to
the man's own conscience and to others, and not the justification before God in
its causes. And this Mr. Baxter seems to have mistaken in his Aphorisms,
when he argued against this justification before men, as if it had been merely
a justification from Men's Accusation, and not the true justification before
God, as evidenced and proved to men: And when we speak of justification in this
sense, we do not make the world lawful judges of our Righteousness before God,
or in reference to the Law of God, or say, that they are competent, or capable
judges: But we only say, that by works of obedience Faith and Justification by
Faith is evidenced. And where as he says. That works are no certain medium,
or evidence, whereby the world can know us to be Righteous: for there is no
outward work, which an hypocrite may not perform, and inward works they cannot
discern: nor yet the principles from which, nor the ends to which our works
proceed and are intended. There is as much need of a divine heart-searching
knowledge, to discern the sincerity of works, as of faith it self. He may see,
that all this will make as much against Christ's saying Mat. 5: 16. Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father, which is in heaven. And that Ioh. 13: 35. By this shall all men know,
that ye are my disciples: if ye love one another: and that 1. Pet. 2: 12.
Having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles -- they may by your good
works, which they shall behold, glorify God, in the day of Visitation. Nor is
it to the purpose to say, that he was the justifier, who was the imputer of
Righteousness, that is, God; for works of obedience may declare, that God has
imputed Righteousness unto the person, and has justified him; and this is all;
we say that Abraham was in this sense justified by his works, that he was
declared to be justified indeed before God, by his works.

Some were pleased to express their sense of James's words thus, That James
speaks of works as justifying our faith, and not as justifying our persons,
meaning only, that the Apostle did not consider works here, as the Cause, or
Condition of the persons being justified before God, but as the effect and
evidence proving the man's faith to be sound and saving, and consequently the
man thereby to have been justified: which sense is the same with what we have
given: but Mr. Baxter, says, it is as plain, as can be, that it is the person
and not his Faith, which is here said to be justified. Ans. The person, it is
true, is said here to be justified, but not causatively, but declaratively,
that is, It is not said, that by works his justification is effectuated, but
that it is declared, and that because it is hereby declared, that the man is a
true believer, and thus his faith is manifested to be of the right kind, which
is all that was intended by that expression.

Yet Mr. Baxter will not say, that works do effectually produce our
justification (for Faith does not so.) But yet he will have both to justify,
as Conditions, or as parts of one Condition: Only he adds, that they do not
justifio, as equal parts of the Condition; for Faith is the principal; but as
the secondary less principal part of the Condition. Ans. Yet, James hinteth at
no such thing, but gives the preference to works: Yea excludes the faith,
whereof he speaks; altogether from having any interest in justification, as
being nothing but a dead, carcass, a vain, fruitless and unprofitable thing,
and so has no kind of causality or procurement in justification. But he adds
as a reason. 1. That when it is said we are justified by works, the word by
implies more than an idle concomitanoy. Ans. I shall easily grant this, but
withal say, that this will not give unto works any causality in justification;
but only evince works to be an evidence of justification, as the cause is said
to be manifested by the effect.

He adds 2. When the Apostle says. By works and not by faith only, he
plainly makes them concomitant in procurement, or in that kind of causality,
which they have. Especially seeing he says not, as he is commonly interpreted,
not by faith, which is alone; but by faith only (...) Ans. Then has fruitless
dead faith, which devils may have, a kind of causality in justification; which
is expressly contrary to the scope and all the reasonings of the Apostle: And
therefore the common interpretation must be admitted; But he adds. 3.
Therefore he says, that faith is dead being alone, beca^se it is dead, as to
the use and purpose of justifying; -- This appears from his comparison in the
former verse. 16. that this is the death he speaks of; and so works make faith
alive, as to the attainment of its end of justification. Ans. If it be thus,
how could he then say before, that faith was the principal part of the
Condition? can that be the principal part of the Condition, which is dead and
useless without the other, and must be quickened, in order to its usefulness by
the other: I would think, that other looked rather like the principal part, and
most considerable and necessary, seeing this were but a dead Cipher without it.
But the truth is, the Apostle, as is said, has a far other design, and
shows, that that faith, which they pretended unto, as sufficient to ground
their concl^sion of their justification, and hope of Salvation, was no true
saving faith at all, but a dead thing and so no works could make it of any use
as to justification; because it behoved first to flow from another principle,
even from a principle of saving grace; and then it would evidence and prove
itself to be of the right kind, by good works, that would flow from it.

But says he. When the Apostle says, that faith did work in and with his
works, it clearly aims at such a working in and with, as makes them conjunct
in the work of justifying. Ans. No such matter; for the Apostle is only there
showing (as the whole context clears) that Abraham's faith was another sort
of faith, than that, whereupon they relied; even a faith that did prompt to the
most difficulte duties, when the call of God came, and so did work in and with
his performances; but not in order to justification, for he was justified
already, many years before this.

He adds. And when he says, that Faith was made perfect with works, it is
not only a manifesting to be perfect, But as the habit is perfected in its
acts, because they are the end to which it tends: and as marriage is
perfected per congressum and procreationem; or any Covenant, when its
Conditions are performed. Ans. The whole of the context shows, that faith was
perfected purely, as to its manifestation, as by the like expression is clear
2. Cor. 12: 9. Col. 4: 12. Mat. 5: 48. Nay, though It were granted, that faith
were perfected by works as the end to which it tends, that would say nothing
for the interest of faith in justification, but in Salvation; let is be
granted, that justification is perfected by faith without works, as marriage is
by consent, without what he adds, and we have what we desire. That works are
a Condition of entering into Covenant, or of the Covenant, in order to
justification, as required before justification, is still denied. He says
further elsewhere, against Mr. Cartwright p. 212. That by works faith was made
perfect, as is has naturam medii viz. conditionis to the continuation and
consummation of justification. Ans. That the continuation of justification has
other media or Conditions, than the beginning has, is not yet made apparent:
far less can any such thing be drewn from this passage to continuance the same,
the Apostles scope not being to speak to any such thing; nor can it be
supposed, that he looks on such, whose proud conceits he was here depressing,
as already justified, as to the beginning of justification, seeing a dead faith,
(which was all the faith they had) is no Condition of justification at all. And
as to consummation of justification (as he speaks) Abraham's says was not
yet perfected, neither could be before his death. He adds finally. That
obedience perfecteth faith, as it is part of that necessary matter (not
necessary, at the first moment of believing, but necessary afterward, when he
is called to it) whereby he is to be justified against the charge of
nonperformance of the New Covenants Condition, even against the Accusation of
being an unbeleever or hypocrite. Ans. If obedience perfect faith thus, it is
only as evidenceing and proving the man a true believer, and no hypocrite, or
one that has only a mere profession; which is the thing we say? if it be
looked on as the Condition of the Covenant, and so as the ground of justifying
the man from the charge of nonperformance of that Condition, it stands only
for itself, and for its own part, and cannot not be said upon that account, to
perfect faith; as when both abstaining from murder, and from stealing is
called for; the absteaning from stealing cannot be said to perfect the other,
though it ground a Man's justification from the charge of stealing. And therefore
by this assertion, faith can as well be said to perfect works, as works be said
to perfect faith.

Mr. Baxter gives this ground of Agreement betwixt Paul and James; that Paul
is about this question, What is the Righteousness, which we must pload, against
the Accusation of the Law? or by which we are justified as the proper
Righteousness of that Law? And this he well concludes is neither works, nor
faith: But the Righteousness which is by faith, that is, Christ's
Righteousness, Ans. Paul speaks to this question, how sinners come to be
justified before God, and therefore clears up the matter of justification, in
all its causes; and not only shows what that Righteousness is, which must be
pleaded against the accusation of the Law; but also what way we come to be
partakers of that Righteousness in order to our being justified before God, to
wit, by faith, without the deeds of the Law. If faith be not that
Righteousness, why did Mr. Baxter say* that Romans 4. where it is said, that
faith is imputed unto Righteousness, faith is taken for our act, and not for
the object of faith, or Christ's Righteousness laid hold on by faith. But now,
what question handles James? His question is, says he. What is the Condition
of our ^ustification by this Righteousness of Christ, whether faith only, or
works also? Ans. And does not Paul also speak to this question, when he says.
We are justified by faith? Will not Mr. Baxter grant, that faith is the
Condition of our justification by this Righteousness? If James then handle this
question, there shall be no agreement betwixt him and Paul, but a manifest
contradiction, for Paul says that we are justified by faith without the deeds
of the Law, that is upon Condition of Faith, as Mr. Baxter will grant, and
James says, that we are justified not by faith only, but by works, as the
Condition: and here is a perfect contradiction, both speaking ad idem and the
one saying we are justified by faith without works, and the other saying by
faith and works. What the true question is, whereof James speaks, we have
shown above; and the ^eby manifested a clear harmony betwixt the Apostles,
and left no ground of suspicion of any contradiction.

He says, next that Paul does either in express words, or in the sense, and
scope of his speech, exclude only the works of the Law, that is, the fulfilling
of the Conditions of the Law ourselves. But never the fulfilling of the Gospel
Conditions, that we may have part in Christ. Ans. Whether the works of the Law,
which Paul excludes, be so to be understood, or not, we have seen above: only
I say, now, that both speak of the same Law, that is, the Moral Law, and both
consequently, speak of the same obedience, that is obedience to the same Law:
And nothing can be alleged to prove that Paul means works as taken for the
fulfilling of the Conditions of the Law ourselves and James means the same
works as taken for the fulfilling of the Conditions of the Gospel ourselves.
And further, the faith that James speaks so much of, is none of the Gospel
Conditions of justification, for it is but a dead carcass, and an unprofitable
thing. But his following words, saying. Indeed if a man should obey the
commands of the Gospel with a legal intent that obedience should be but legal
show that by the works of the Law he means some thing in opposition to the
commands of the Gospel, wherein he joineth with Socinians. But we own no
commands of the Gospel, but such as are enjoined by the Law of God, even the
Moral Law, of which James speaks expressly verse. 10, 11.

He tells us 3. for clearing of this agreement, That Paul does by the word Faith
especially direct our thoughts to Christ believed in: for to be justified by
Christ, and to be justified by receiving Christ, is with him all one. Ans. This
is all very true, and sure, he must also say, that to be justified by Christ,
and to be justified by works, is not all one, for all obedience or works is not
receiving of Christ. But now, what does James direct us to by the word Faith,
which he mentions? does he not direct our thoughts to Christ believed in? If
not, it cannot be justifying Faith, he speaks of, as Mr. Baxter supposes. If
yea, why does he add works more than Paul does? Shall Paul's directing our
thoughts to Christ believed in, exclude works, and James's directing our
thoughts the same way include them? Where is then the agreement?

But 4. he adds, that when Paul does mentione Faith, as the Condition, he
always implies obedience to Christ. Ans. It is denied, that he implies
obedience, as the Condition of Justification: And Mr. Baxter himself will grant
this, I suppose, as to justification begun, or as to our first justification as
he speaks, in replying to Mr. Cartwright: which is enough for us, for we know
no second justification, distinct from the first, whereof either of the
Apostles do speak. And I like not that which he adds, saying. He i.e. Paul)
implies obedience in requiring Faith, as truly, as he that subjecteth himself
to a Prince, does imply future obedience, in his engagement to obey: for this
makes justifying faith a plain engagment to obey. And thus to be justified by
faith is to be justified by a formal engagment to obey, and a formal engagment
to obey, is a receiving of Christ: for to be justified by faith, and to be
justified by receiving Christ is all one.

Mr. Baxter in his Catholic Theol. part. 2. n. 365. gives us five particulars
of justification by works, that James stands for, and that he accounts
undeniable by any thing but prejudice, Ignorance, and siding peevishness. So
that it must be unquestionable, that James speaks of all those particulars,
and that he speaks of justification by works, in no other sense, the contrary
whereof we have seen already: Yet let us see what these particular respects
are, wherein (as he says) works are not excluded from being Conditions of our
justification, or the matter of it.

1. Says he. That faith itself, which is our act, and an act of obedience to
God, and is the fiducial accepting belief in God the Father Son and Holy
Ghost, for the benefits of the Covenant, is the Condition of our first
Cevenant-Right to these benefits. Ans. To speak of Saving Faith in its full
latitude, or of that faith, whereby the Covenant is first made up, as such, is
not to the present purpose; but of faith only, or of its acting, in order to
justification: and as to this, himself lately told us, that Paul by the word
Faith does especially direct our thoughts to Christ believed in: so that faith
in this matter is not considered as our work, or as an act of obedience in us,
and as our personal Righteousness; but as the Mean, Hand, or Instrument laying
hold on Christ and his Righteousness. And if this be the meaning of James, when
he says, we are justified by works, that, we are justified by faith, we shall
not contend, as to the thing; though we conceive James handles another
purpose, as is said.

2. Says he, That this faith is not actual obedience to Christ, as Christ ( at
first, but only to God, as God) But it is the souls subjection to Christ, as
Christ, which is our Covenant-consent, to our future obedience, and virtually,
though not actually, contains our future obedience in it. Ans. This upon the
matter, is but the same with the former, and needs no further answer, as to
our present question, concerning the meaning of James, when he says we are
justified by works; for if this faith be not actual obedience, James does not
mean actual obedience by the word works, but only that Faith, which is a
consent to future obedience. But what the Faith is, whereby we are justified,
and what is its peculiar acting, in order to justification, we have shown
elsewhere. And to distinguish betwixt obedience to Christ, as Christ, and to
God as God, is to be unnecessarily critical: and by Mr. Baxeer we see, that all
the after obedience of believers is obedience to God, as God, though their
first Faith be said to be a fiducial accepting belief in God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and this be said virtually to contain after obedience, which
therefore must be obedience, to God Father, Son and Holy Ghost; And their first
Faith is no obedience to Christ, as Christ, though Christ, as Christ call and
invite, yea and command sinners to come unto him, and believe in him.

3. He says. That there is somewhat of Love Consent or willingness, of Desire,
of Hop, of Repentance, which goes to make up this Moral work of Faith, as it
is the Condition, even our first Christianity itself. Ans. All this somewhat of
Love, Consent etc. which necessarily attends Faith (for that they make up
this moral work of Faith, as integral parts thereof, I see no ground to assert)
only show the true nature and genius of that Faith, whereby we are justified,
for it is no where said, that we are justified by Love, Hop, or Repentance (as
for Consent or willingness and desire, they are included in Faith.) But all
this yet says nothing for the Interest of Works (as it is pleaded) in our
justification: And if James mean no other thing by works he shall give little
ground to any to assert justification by works, as is done this day, by too
many.

4. He says, That at the making of a Covenant, is for the performing of it;
and subjection is for obedience; and Marriag for conjugal duties; so our said
first Covenanting-faith is for our future faith, Hop, Comfort, and grateful
obedience and Holiness. And these are the secondary parts of the Condition of
Salvation. And so are the secondary parts of our justifications Condition, as
continued, or not lost and consummat. For to justify us is to justify our
Right to Impunity and Glory. Ans. How different Faith as justifying, or in its
acting in order to justification, is from this Covenant making, Subjection and
Marriage, as explained and applied to this purpose by Mr. Baxter, is elsewhere
shown. (2) That these graces are required in order to Salvation, we grant, and
shall not stand to call them secondary parts of the Condition of Salvation, as
to its possession. But (3) we are here speaking of justification, and not of
Salvation, which two differ, as we conceive, much more being required to the
one, in case persons live after their first Faith, than to the other. (4) We
have shown elsewhere, that justification, as continued has the same
Conditions, that justification as begun has, and of loseing of justification
we read not in the Scriptures, nor yet consummat justification: these are Mr.
Baxters new Notions, with which we are not satisfied. (5) Our Right to Impunity
and Glory is had by Christ alone, when we are possessed of his
Surety-Righteousness, through Faith; and thus are justified by Faith: And how
justification is a justification of that Right, Mr. Baxter would do well to
explain.

In the last place he says. That our own performance of the Condition of the
free Gift of Impunity and Glory, by the New Covenant, purchased by Christ's
Righteousness is the thing to be tried and judged in God's judgment. And
therefore we must so far be then justified from the charge of not performing
that Condition of being Infidels, unsanctified, Impenitent, hypocrites,
Apostats; and so of having no part in Christ and the free gift, even by our
personal, Evangelical Faith, Holiness, Repentance, Sincerity and Perseverance,
Ans. Then, it seems, James speaks only of works, in order to final
Salvation, or our justification; at the day of judgment, and not in order to
our justification here, when first brought out of nature into the State of
Grace: And if so, what ground can any hence have, to infer our present
justification to be by works, unless they think, that whatever is required
antecedent unto our Final Salvation, is required also antecedent to our first
justification? which I know Mr. Baxter will not say. And if this be all that
James says, why did not Mr. Baxter give this as a ground of reconciling James
with Paul, that James speaks of works, in order to Final Salvation, but Paul,
excludes them, in reference to justification? This would have had greater
agreement with what the Orthodox say, than to tell us of works being the
secondary parts of the Condition of our Justification, and that James includes
them as such, when he says, we are justified by works, and not by Faith only.

CHAP. IX.
John Forbes his Arguments, against the Imputation of Christ's active
obedience, examined. With a View of Wendelin's reasonings against it.
John Forbes in his Treatise tending to clear the doctrine of justification
Chap. 24. page 93. etc. comes to speak of the matter of our Righteousness,
that is, that, wherein Christ is made of God Righteousness unto us; And tells
us, that this in one word, in the Scripture, is said to be his obedience Romans
5: 19. But this obedience he restricteth page 94. unto the passive Obedience of
Christ only in his death: And by this restriction, not only excludes all his
obedience to the Law, but even all his suffering, in his state of humiliation;
Yea and his soul-sufferings also, for any thing that appears.

He mentions a distinction betwixt those things, wherein the Righteousness
itself stands, which is imputed to us, and those things, which are requis^^e
in Christ, to the end, that in the other he may be Righteousness unto us. And
this distinction is good in itself; but not rightly applied, when he refers
all to this last head, which Christ did and suffered, except only in his death.

He grants page 95. that the word obedience is often times in the Scripture
referred to the whole work of Christ's humiliation: But we do not take it so
largely here, as to comprehend even his Incarnation; but as comprehending that,
which belonged to his work of Mediation, as our Sponsor, in satisfying the Law
and the Lawgiver, for what we were owing, and were not able to pay: Nor can we
so restrict it, as he does: Let us therefore see his grounds.

His first ground is this. We are not to esteem Christ to be our Righteousness,
in any thing, but in that only, wherein God has purposed, and according to his
purpose ordained, and according to his ordinance set forth Christ to be our
Righteousness and Propitiation. For the purpose of God, he cites Col. 1: 19,
20. for the Ordinance 1. Pet. 1: 18, 19, 20. For his setting forth Romans 3: 25.
Ans. We are not to esteem Christ to be our Righteousness in any thing, but in
that only where in the Scriptures hold him forth to be so: And in that, wherein
the Scripture holds him forth to be so, God purposed, ordained and set him
forth to be so: But we must not restrict the whole Seripture to these three or
four places cited: If the Scriptures elsewhere point forth Christ to be our
Righteousness in other acts, than in his death, all this argueing is to no
purpose. Sure the Scriptures speak of his sufferings in soul, and of his being
made a curse for us, and of his being obedient even to the death, of his being
made under the Law to redeem them, that were under the Law: And that what the
Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh,
that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. See Phil. 2: 7, 8.
Gal. 4: 4. Romans 8: 3, 4. (2) There is nothing in these texts exclusive of
Christ's obedience: And it is loose argueing to say, Christ's death only is
mentioned in three or four places of Scripture. Ergo nothing else is
mentioned, or to be understood, any where else: the particle Only is not here
to be found, neither expressly, nor tacitly. (3) Beside that in all these
passages, there is not one word of a Righteousness, no expression, signifying
the matter of imputed Righteousness to consist therein; or that Christ was our
Righteousness, upon the account thereof: Nay, neither here, nor nowhere find
we Christ called our Righteousness, because he died for us. Nor does the
Apostle attribute our Righteousness unto his blood only Romans 5: 9. Ephesians. 1: 7.
Col. 1: 14. No such thing appears there. Neither Pardon, nor Justification,
which only are there spoken of, are a Righteousness, or our Righteousness, but
the consequences, fruits or effects thereof.

His argueing, That without shedding of blood, there is no remission, and from
Heb. 6. and 10. That Christ dies no more. Therefore Christ is appointed our
Righteousness and peace, in nothing, but in his death and blood of his cross,
is most loose, and can only conclude against those (if there be any such, that
say, By Christ's obedience active only, and not at all by his death and
sufferings have we peace and remission of sins. We willingly grant, that
without shedding of blood there is no remission; But this says not, that
shedding of blood alone is all our Righteousness. We conjoine both his active
and his passive obedience, and so we take in his whole Mediatory work, which
makes up his complete Surety-Righteousness: and say that this must be imputed
to us, in order to our Justification, Peace, Pardon and Acceptance.

He* argues next from Adam, as the Type Romans 5. and says, that this Type
teaches us four things. 1. That our Righteousness should proceed from one man
Jesus Christ. 2. That our Righteousness should consist in the obedience of that
one man. 3. That our Righteousness should consist in one obedience only of that
one man. 4. That our Righteousness should consist in the only one obedience of
that one man, once only performed. Ans. (1) If our Righteousness consist in the
obedience of Christ, and that in opposition to Adam's disobedience to the Law;
then it must not consist in his sufferings alone; for sufferings, as such, are
no obedience to the Law: And further Christ's obedience is called his
Righteousness Romans 5: 18. but suffering and dying is no Righteousness. (2)
There is no ground to assert either of the two last, much less both: for though
Adam's act of disobedience was one, and that done at once; Yet it will not
follow that therein he was a Typ of Christ; or that therefore Christ's
obedience must be one act only, and that performed at one time only: for Paul
hinteth no such comparison, and we must not make typical similitudes without
warrant. And again, one act of disobedience, once committed, is a violation of
the Law, and enough to constitute one unrighteous; but one act of obedience,
howbeit frequently performed, far less once only performed, cannot be a
compleet Righteousness, which requires conformity to the whole Law, in all
points, and that all the days of our life. Wherefore Christ's obedience, being
a Righteousness (which consists in full conformity to the Law) must be
perfect, and correspond with the whole Law, and cannot be one only act, once
only performed; and that such an act too, is no formal act of obedience to the
Law at all.

His Second ground is taken from the signs and seals of the Righteousness,
which is by faith, that is Baptism and the Lord's supper, and tells us, that
they signify and represent to us, what is the Righteousness it self, whereby
we are justified, and seal and confirm unto us, that that Righteousness is
ours. Ans. I should rather think, that they represent and exhibit whole
Christ, and seal to believers, or the worthy receivers their interest in Him,
and Right to Him, and to all his Spiritual benefits. And though these
Sacraments, do in a more special manner, represent Christ, as suffering, or as
dying; Yet it is no good consequence hence to infer, that his dying alone and
shedding his blood is our Righteousness; for his death is principally and
specially there held forth, as being the last and compleeting act of his
Mediatory obedience, in his state of humiliation, unto which all his former
acts of obedience had a special respect; and in which they did all ultimatly
terminate. And by what reason, will it be proved, that nothing done or suffered
by Christ, can be any part or portion of our Righteousness in him, but what is
distinctly and expressly represented and pointed forth by these seals; What
shall then become of his soul sufferings in the Garden, and on the Cross?
these were not his blood, nor his broken body: and therefore, according to him,
make no part of our Righteousness in Christ. But we dar not say this.

His Third ground is from Heb. 10: 5, 6, 7. etc. cited out of Psalm. 40. And
thus he argues. The obedience of Christ, in the matter of our Righteousness,
is of no larger extent, than is the will of God, which he did obey and by which
we are sanctified. But this is restrained only to the offering of Christ. Ans.
The minor is here denied, there being no such restraint made, as is alleiged:
for he came to do all the will of God and therefore was baptized, that he might
fulfill all Righteousness: It was not se^ving to the Apostles scope, to
mentione any other act of obedience, than his offering up of himself; but his
mentioning no other there, will not exclude all, mentioned elsewhere: Sure, the
Adversary will not exclude the promptitude and readiness of mind, that Christ
had unto the offering up of himself, long before the appointed time, as being
no part of that obedience, that he performed; It cannot then be said, that by
his once offering up of himself, at the last, alone, we are sanctified, and by
nothing going before in conjunction with this. But he tells us, that our
Justification, Reconciliation, etc. are ever attributed unto the blood, death
and Cross of Christ. Ans. Never exclusively as to his preceding obedience:
Yea we are to be saved by his life Romans 5: 10. and justification is upon
Christ's Righteousness verse. 18. And all this will as well conclude for the
exclusion of his foregoing obedience from being requisite in Christ (as he said
above) to the end he may be Righteousness to us, as for excluding of it from
being any part of our Righteousness: as also the next thing he says,
concerning Paul's respecting in his preaching only the cross of Christ: for
the Apostle is not there speaking merely of the matter of our Righteousness,
but of the Gospel way of Salvation, through a crucified Mediator, which the
wisdom of this world despised; And to this, sure, our Author will willingly
acknowledge that more belongs, than his death abstractivly considered.

His fourth ground is from Heb. 10: 18. whence it follows, says he, that i^
nothing, which is in Christ himself, before his death, consists the remission
of our sins, and so consequently our righteousness. Ans. We willingly grant,
that in nothing, that Christ did before his death, considered abstractly from
his death, and separatly by it self, did remission of sins consist, or to speak
more properly, was satisfaction made, in order to remission; Yet hence it will
not follow, that all his preceding obedience was no part of his Righteousness,
or of that, whereof we are made partakers in him; more than it will follow,
that it was not requisite in him, to the end, he might become Righteousness to
us: If any said (as he seems to alleige) that all our iniquities both
original and actual were pardoned in his preceding actual obedience, (which I
shall be loath to say, nor know I who speaks so) then his argueing were good,
that then Christ should be made to dye without a cause. If any say, (as he
insinuates also page 104.) that Christ was offered only to remove the
punishment of our sin, and not the sin, or guilt thereof, I shall not approve
of it. Yet I cannot assent to what he says. Ibid. That the very offering of
Christ for sin, secludes all things preceding whatsoever, from all virtue or
efficacy of removing iniquity; for then it should seclude his soul sufferings,
which, sure, were no small part of the Satisfaction made by him for sin.
Neither will it hence follow, that all his foregoing acts of obedience made no
integral part of that Surety-Righteousness, which he undertook to perform. He
cites for his first ground 1. Ioh. 1: 7. To which we say, That it is true, the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin, because it was the blood of him,
who had fulfilled all Righteousness, and in his death had compleeted that
Satisfaction he undertook to do: He tells us again page 105. from Romans 4. That
unto eternal blessedness it is sufficient to have remission of sins. But he
remembereth not, that all such as have remission of sins, there, have
Righteousness also imputed without works: and we deny, that Righteousness
consists, in remission of sins alone: But in all this, he is disputing only
against such, who say, that remission of sins is had by the imputation of
Christ's actual obedience, and by his death, freedom from punishment is
obtained; and with such, I have nothing to do. To what he here adds of the
difference betwixt an innocent man, and a just man, enough has been said
already elsewhere.

His sixth and last ground page 108. is builded upon the Law of the Priesthood,
which says he, was ordained of God, for this end to make expiation of our
sins, and to bring us unto God, which two were shadowed in two actions, in the
day of Expiation viz. in offering sacrifice etc. and in carrylng the names of
the tribes, engraven in the stones on his shoulder and breast plate. And this is
so far from making against us, that it consirmeth rather our opinion: for that
carrying of the names of the Tribes, on the Ephod, which was upon the other
holy garments, together with that plate of pure gold, that was upon the mitre,
on the forefront having engraven upon it HOLINESS TO THE LORD Exodus 28. was
sufficient to typifie and hold forth Christ's holy obedience and Righteousnest,
and could not typifie his death and sacrifice. And without a Righteousness,
there is no coming or approaching unto God, and this Righteousness is some
other thing, than mere remission of sins. His argueing from the Priests first
entry on their office at 30. Years of age, and Christ's doing the like Luke 3:
21. to infer, that no action performed by Christ before that time, can be
accounted the action of expiation of sin, or of reconciliation of us to God, is
most vain; for (1) we make no limitation or restriction of his expiatory work
to what he did before he was 30 years of age. (2) This will make against
himself, and nothing for limiting and restricking all to his last act of death.
Therefore he adds. That no action done after by Christ, can be accounted a
Priestly action of expiation except only the offering of himself, and entering
with his own blood into the heavens for us. But then (1) what will he do with
his prayer and intercession before his death, specially Ioh. 17? (2) There was
more than expiation of sins requisite to bring us unto God; Therefore the High
Priest was to carry that memorial on the front of his Mitre.

The learned Wendeline, in his Great Systeme of Theology lib. 1. c. 25. These.
7. page 1116. etc. disputes against the imputation of the Active obedience of
Christ together with the Passive, making it only a Condition requisite in the
Mediator, so as without it, he could not be our Mediator, and merit any thing
to us, by his death: So that in his judgment, Christ's active obedience,
whereby his obedience to the Law of God is understood, and that no doubt,
moral, Ceremonial and Judicial, did only contribute to qualify him, to be a fit
Mediator, which it seems then, according to him, he was not by his
hypostatical union; and to put a value upon his passive obedience, (by which he
understands his suffering and dying, so undergoing the Curse of the Law, and
paying the penalty in our room) which his being God did not, as it would seem,
sufficiently do: And thus all his acts of obedience, while under the Law, and
in the state of humiliation, howbeit in all he may be conceived as a sufferer,
are excluded from being any part of the Satisfaction, he was to make unto
justice, and to the Lawgiver, for us and in our room, or any part of that
Righteousness, which is imputed to us, in order to Justification.

He first proposes his Arguments and Vindicateth them, and then proposes,
some, used for the contrary opinion, adding his Answers.

His 1. Arg. is, Christ, as man, was bound to give active obedience to the Law,
for himself; every Creature is bound to obey his Creator. Therefore it is not
imputed unto us. Ans. The Antecedent is denied; neither does the proof adduced
confirm it; for the humane Nature of Christ, now in the state of glory, is and
will be a creature for ever; Yea the consirmed angels, and Saints made perfect
are Creatures, yet not subject to any Law as Viatores, but as Comprehensores;
such was not the obedience of Christ, while in the flesh. He was obedient, as a
Viator, but in respect of himself, he cannot be looked upon as a mere Viator,
his Humane Nature being personally united unto the divine, and subsisting
therein, in respect whereof he became heir of all things, and Lord of life; and
therefore stood in no need of working out a life of obedience for a crown to
himself: wherefore, what he did as a Viator was for us, for whom he subjected
himself, and became obedient, even to the death: And moreover all his acts of
obedience were not the acts of obedience of a mere creature, out of one who was
God-man; for his humane Nature did not subsist of it self, and so did not of it
self as a nature not subsisting, perform acts of obedience, but in the
Godhead, and performed acts of obedience, as so subsisting. We have said enough
to this at several occasions before.

It was Answered Christ was made man, not for himself, but for us; Therefore he
obeyed not for himself, but for us, that is, in our place. He Replyeth. 1. The
Anteced. is ambiguous: If you say Christ was made man for us, that is, for our
good, it is granted, if for us, that is in our room, it is denied: for what
Christ was made, in our place, that we are not bound to do and to be, as he was
made a curse for us, that we might not be an eternal curse. But Christ by his
Incarnation did not obtain, that we should no more be men, or be bound to do
things congruous to humane Nature. Ans. We grant that he was made man for us,
not in our room, but for our good: Yet do hence gather, that he being made man
for our good, to the end he might come under the Law, both as to its duty, and
as to its curse, under both which we were lying, what he did, as well as what
he suffered, while in that Condition, in order to the ends of his being made
man, for our good, was in our room and stead; because this was our debt and he
became man for our good, that in our stead, he might pay our debt. The reply is
not grounded upon that word alone, he was made of a woman, but on that, with
what follows. Made of a woman, made under the Law. And if it would have
necessarily followed, from his being made of a woman, that he would have been
under the Law for himself; to what purpose was this added, made under the Law?
And yet we see the maine emphasis lies here, because of what is added to
redeem them, that were under the Law. And why did the same Apostle Phil. 2: 7,
8. after he had said, that he took upon him, the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men, and found in Fashion, as a man, tell us moreover,
that he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, seeing this did
necessarily follow his being man, and that for himself? And may it not hence be
inferred, that the exaltation afterward mentioned verse. 8, 9. was given to him,
not as Mediator, but for himself, as an humble, obedient man?

He R^plieth 2. denying the Conseq. for (says he) albert Christ was made man,
not for his own, but for our good; Yet after he was made man, he was a man by
himself, and therefore subject to the Law by himself, and for himself, as man^
as after he assumed a body subject to corruption of itself, he stood in need
for himself, of meat, drink, rest etc. As it was not necessary for man to be
created, so nor for the Word to be incarnate, and to assume the form of a
servant, but only upon supposition. Yet as man, being created, is necessarily
subject to the Law of his Creator; So the Word being made man, is, as man,
necessarily subject to the Law of God. Ans. (1) Christ, being made man, for our
good, and particularly for this end, that he might come under the Law, and pay
our debt, he was not subject to the Law for himself. (2) Though he was true
man, having man's Nature, yet he was not made man, as other men are; for his
humane Nature had no subsistence of its own, as other men have; and therefore
could not for it self be subject to the Law, as other men are. (3) How or what
way Christ's body was subject to corruption, of it self, we need not here
debate; it is sufficient, to note, that our question here is about moral
actions as such, the performance of which was a part of our debt. (4) What is
added, is but a repetion of what is denied, to wit that the (...) the word,
becoming man, did become, upon that account, necessarily subject to the Law for
himself.

His 2. Arg. is. If Christ did perform active obedience, in our room, so as it
might be imputed to us unto Righteousness, then we should be no longer obliged
to perform active obedience to the Law. The reason of this, he takes from the
like, saying; as we are not obliged to undergo eternal death, because Christ
has sustained that, in our room. Ans. To this enough has been said elsewhere:
I shall only here say, That it will no more hence follow, than from the
Satisfaction of Christ (whatever Socinians alleige) that we are loosed from all
obedience to the Law; but only that we are loosed from that obedience, which
was required, under the Old Covenant of works, to wit, to perfect obedience,
and thereby obtain the prize, as our reward of debt; and fail in the least,
and lose all, which were the Conditions of the Old Covenant; and as to this we
deny the minor.

He replieth by denying, what is now in question, to wit, That Christ performed
active obedience, in our room, to procure eternal life to us, affirming that he
was bound to do it for himself, and so did merit nothing to ut thereby. Ans.
This is but, what was said above; and hence it is clear, that, in his
judgment, Christ wrought for the crown of glory to himself, and did merit it
to himself: and so had no Right thereto before, by virtue of his hypostatical
union, let be possession, albeit all the Angels were to worshipe him, and his
throne was for ever and ever Heb. 1: 6, 8.

He adds. If notwithstanding of Christ's active satisfaction, we be obliged
to satisfy actively; so, notwithstanding of his passive satisfaction we should
be bound to satisfy passively, that is suffer eternal death. Ans. All the
obedience now required, is no satisfaction to the Old Covenant-Conditions:
Christ has satisfied that, and left no part thereof for us to do; And
therefore it will not follow, that we are bound to suffer eternal death, or any
part of the Curse, as such.

To that answer, that some gave, that by Christ's active obedience we have
this advantage, that we are more obliged unto rigide and exact obedience. He
replieth. That then we should not sin by short-coming, or negligence. Ans. But
by that rigide and exact obedience, is not meaned full conformity unto the
Law; but such a conformity, as was the Condition of the Old Covenant, as is
said; that is, we are now freed from obtaining the crown, or right thereto by
perfect conformity (which to us is impossible) and from loseing of the crown
upon the least escape or failing. All obedience runs now in another channel,
though the commands and the Law, as a Law and rule of walk, remain the same.

His 3. Arg. is. The Scripture every where, speaking of our justification and
pardon, mentions Christ's passive, and not his active obedience. As Esai. 53:
5, 6. Romans 3: 24, 25. and 5: 9. Gal. 3: 13. 1. Ioh. 1: 7. Ans. It is denied,
that the Scripture does every where mentione only Christ's passive obedience,
and the contrary has been frequently shown. And as to the places mentioned,
none of them contain any exclusive particle, or hinte the exclusion of his
active obedience: And our Adversaries themselves must understand these and the
like passages, Synecdochically, otherwise they shall exclude Christ's soul
sufferings, as well, as his active obedience, and restrick all to his death and
blood shed on the cross; which yet they will not do.

Now follows his answer to some Arguments for the contrary Arg. 1. Two
things are required unto our Salvation, delivery from death, and the gift of
life; that is had by expiation of sin by his suffering, this by the donation of
Righteousness, or imputation of his active obedience.

He answers. The passive obedience of Christ both expiateth sin, and gives
life, his death gives life 1. Pet. 2: 24, and 3: 18. Ans. True, but the reason
is, because it was the death of one, who had fulfilled all Righteousness: we
need not speak of his obedience and of his sufferings, so distinctly, as to
ascribe to each severally, these several effects; It is better, I judge, to
take both conjunctly, as one compleet Righteousness, for us, and one
meritorious cause of all the benefits procured thereby.

Arg. 3. (for the Arg. 2. I pass, as judging it not cogent.) The actual
disobedience of Adam made us sinners.

He answers. If by actual obedience of Christ, in the Conseq. his active
obedience be understood (for his passive may also be called actual, in that
actually and not potentially only he suffered) and that imputed to us, the
consequens is denied: for Christ's passive obedience imputed has restored unto
us what we lost by Adam's disobedience. Ans. But thus the comparison, that Paul
makes Romans 5. betwixt Adam's disobedience and Christ's obedience is taken
away: He opposes the Righteousness of Christ to the offense of Adam: now
Christ's death and suffering is no where called his Righteousness: So he
opposes obedience to disobedience, and therefore, as the disobedience was the
violation of the Law, obedience must be the keeping of the Law. Christ's death
imputed is no Righteousness answering the commands of the Law; and therefore,
though it did merit the recovery of what we lost in Adam, being the death of
one, that fulfilled all Righteousness; Yet considered abstractly, by it self
without his active obedience, it cannot be our formal Righteousness, with which
we must be covered and as having which we must be considered, when justified of
God, who pronunceth none Righseous, but such as are Righteous indeed.

Arg. 4. With Christ's active obedience, his passive was conjoined.

He ans. Denying the conseq. that therefore the one cannot be imputed without
the other: for things conjunct can be distinguished; and as the one can be
known, so also imputed without the other. Ans. But they are so conjoined, as
being integral parts of one complete Surety-Righteousness and Satisfaction for
our debt; and therefore belong to his Estate of humiliation; during which in
all his obedience there was suffering, for a part of his subjection was, that
he was made under the Law, even under the commanding power thereof; because
otherwise, being God and Man in one person, he was not subject to the Law, as
a Viator, in reference to himself. So in all his sufferings, there was
obedience. And what is thus inseparably conjoined, we ought not to separate,
especially seeing our case and necessity calls for the imputation of both.

Arg. 5. If only Christ's passive obedience were imputed, then only the half
of Christ should be given unto us; contrary to Esai, 9: 6.

He Ans. denying the Conseq. because it is one thing to be given to us, and
another thing to be imputed, even Christ's humanity and deity is given unto us.
Ans. But Christ was so given, as that all he did and suffered, as such a given
and public person and which our case called for, was to be made over to us, in
order to our receiving the grand benefits of pardon and life: Now it was
necessary for us, to have a Righteousness, consisting in perfect obedience to
the Law, because of that Constitution, Do this and live, and Suffering, as
such, is no obedience to the Law.

He adds. Their opinion is hard, who deny that Christ's passive obedience is
imputed to us unto Righteousness, and that it is the cause of the reward, or of
life eternal. How could Christ's blood purge us from all sin, if it were not
the Cause of our Righteousness? how should he give his flesh for the life of
the world, if life were not restored to us thereby; ho^ should we be healed by
his stripes, if we were not sanctified by him? how should Christ's death be our
life, if we got not life thereby? betwixt freedone from the Curse of the Law,
and right to the everlasting inheritance, there is no middle state. Ans. (1) We
deny only, that Christ's passive obedience alone is imputed to us, unto
Righteousness; for alone considered, being only the paying of the penalty, it
is not the Righteousness required in the Law. (2) The paying of a penalty,
though it may deliver from punishment; yet cannot procure a right to the
reward, promised to keeping of the Law; as is manifest; and therefore Christ's
passive obedience, considered alone, cannot procure a right to that reward of
life, that was promised to the fulfilling of the Law by obedience. (3) Christ's
blood, being the blood of one, that fulfilled also the Law; and conjunct with
that obedience, both purges from sin, and meriteth life: And so we say of the
rest following; only I cannot see how pertinently, in the last, sanctification
is mentioned; for we are speaking of right to life eternal. (4) It is true, as
to us now, there is no midd'le state, betwixt freedom from the Curse of the
Law, and Right to the Inheritance ^ because Christ's whole obedience both
active and passive is imputed, as a complete Satisfaction and Righteousness,
whereby we come to obtain both a freedom from the Curse, and a right to the
Inheritance: But in Adam before he fell, there was a middle state, for so long
as he stood, he was free of the Curse, and yet was to finish his course of
obedience, in order to obtaining the right to the promised reward; unless it be
said, that no more was promised, than the continuance of what he possessed.

It was excpted, That the Law is not fulfilled by suffering the punishment: for
the Law and the command is one; but punishment fulfilleth not the commandment,
it only satisfies the threatening. Therefore the suffering of the punishment
can not be the cause of the reward.

He ans. by denying the Antec. and saying, that by suffering of the punishment
the Law is fulfilled by the Mediator, partly formally, in that he suffered the
punishment due to us by the Law, partly efficiently, in that by his sufferings
he not only took away the Curse, but acquired a holiness to us, and with
holiness, life eternal. Ans. This answer is no way satisfying; for suffering
of the punishment, as such, is no obedience to the Law; and of the fulfilling
of the Law by obedience to the commands thereof, did the Exception only speak,
no man will say, that such as are now suffering the punishment in hell, are any
way fulfilling the Law. Neither is that holiness, procured by Christ's death,
any fulfilling of the Law, according to the Old Covenant; and such a fulfilling
is required, in order to the obtaining of a right to the reward of life,
promised in that Covenant.

He answers again, that when the threatening of the Law is satisfied, that is
done, which the Law commands to be done; and so in part the Law is fulfilled.
Ans. Suffering as such is no commanded thing, and the Law constituting a
penalty, makes only suffering to be due, but does not enjoine any suffering:
So that though the Law be satisfied with a Satisfaction laid down by another,
so far as that the other is not to suffer; Yet by this paying of the penalty,
the Laws commands are not fulfilled, in whole, nor in part; And the Law, as to
the commands, must be fulfilled, ere a right to the reward, promised to
obedience^, be obtained.

Arg. 6. is taken, from passages of Scripture, mentioning the active obedience
of Christ, such as Dan. 9: 24. Ier. 23: 6. 1. Cor. 1: 30. Romans 5: 19. Phil. 2:
8.

He Ans. 1. That these places do not prove, that Christ's active obedience is
imputed, so as by it we are accounted observers of the Law. Ans. These passages
sufficiently prove, that his active obedience belongs to that Righteousness
and Satisfaction, which is imputed unto us; and the fruits of the
Righteousness of Christ, imputed, are here as well ascribed to his active, as
to his passive obedience: of the places in particular, we have said enough
elsewhere: our disput here is not about imputation, but about that which is
imputed, or that, which is reckoned to us, as our Righteousness, and this, we
say, cannot be pure suffering of the penalty; for that, as such, is no
Righteousness nor no where is it so called.

He Ans. 2. That it only follows, that the reforming of our corrupt nature
could not be had from Christ and by Christ, without his active obedience. Ans.
The same may as well be said of the passive obedience; and so the cause shall
be yielded unto the Socinians: But the matter is clear. That Christ is our
complete Righteousness, not effectivly: for he works no complete legal
Righteousness in us, that is a Righteousness according, as was required in the
Old Covenant: And beside the expiation of sin, he brought in a Righteousness,
which is called everlasting Dan. 9: 24. which can not be understood of our
imperfect sanctification. And beside that he is our Sanctification, he is our
Righteousness 1. Cor. 1: 30. and therefore must be our Righteousness another
way, than by working it in us; for so is he our Sanctification. And Romans 5. our
justification and life is directly ascribed to his Obedience and Righteousness.

To that Phil. 2: 8. he says. The meaning is, that Christ from his birth to
his death, did so accommodate himself to his Fathers will, that he suffered all
most patiently, that was to suffer, even the cursed death of the cross. Ans.
It was a suffering of what he was to suffer, even to come under the Law, for
that was a part of his humiliation; and the text says, he humbled himself, and
became obedient; and there is no ground to restrick the word Obedient, to his
suffering only.

Arg. 7. Christ was made under the Law for us Gal. 4: 4, 5.

He Ans. He was made under the Law for our good, that he might be a fit
Mediator. Ans. Why may not we as well admit the same sense of Christ's being
said to be made a curse for us, to wit, that it was only for our good; and so
give up the Cause to the Socinians? Then it seems all the Hypostatical union,
and his having the Spirit, without measure, was not sufficient to make him a
fit Redeemer for us. Nor was he a fit Mediator, until he had finished his
whole course of obedience. And yet he was borne a Savior Luke 2: 11. And was
the Lord's Christ verse. 26. and Salvation verse. 50.

Arg. 8. We are made acceptable unto God in the beloved, Christ, Ephesians. 1: 6.

He Ans. We are acceptable to God by inherent obedience, which Christ has
purchased by his sufferings. Ans. But the Text is to be understood of a being
made acceptable, in order to our obtaining the redemption, mentioned verse. 7.
that is, the forgiveness of sins; and so cannot be meaned of that acceptance,
which is upon our inherent holiness, which follows our Justification and
Pardon.

Arg. 9. Christ has purchased his Church, that he might present it to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle Ephesians. 5: 27.

He Ans. That Christ did purchase by his death the churches inherent
Righteousness. Ans. This is granted. But not withstanding* the expressions here
used, and in the foregoing verse, will hold forth a full cleansing, not only
from the stain and power of sin, in Sanctification; but also from the guilt of
sin in justification, the Church must be presented without spot, or wrinkle, or
any such thing, and cleansed with the washing of water, and holy and without
blemish: Now in order to justification, the sinner must be clothed with a
complete Righteousness.

Arg. 10. Believers are found in Christ, having a Righteousness Phil. 3: 9. How
forceable this place proves our point, has been shown elsewhere.

He Ans. The Righteous^ess of Faith is twofold, one is imputed and apprehended
by Faith, which is Christ's passive obedience; the other is inherent, which is
also by Faith. Ans. But Paul here lays by all his inherent Righteousness,
which was his own, and was according to the Law; and only betaketh himself, to
that Righteousness, which is of God by Faith: and this is not to be restricked
to Christ's sufferings only; for these, as such are not a Righteousness, as
has been often said, and the contrary has never yet been proved, though it be
the maine ground of all.

Arg. 11. We are perfect and complete in Christ Col. 2: 10.

He Ans. Christ makes us perfect in justifying, sanctifying and glorifying us,
by the imputation of his passive obedience only. Ans. This is but to assert the
thing, that is a disproving: we say, we cannot be justified, without the
imputation of a complete Righteousness, because in justification we receive a
right to life, and this cannot be had, according to the Constitution of God, do
this and live, till the Law be satisfied by obedience, and because we could not
do it, we must have it in and from Christ, in whom we are complete, and have
all, we need.

Arg. 12. Christ has delivered us from all our debt, both of yielding perfect
obedience, and of suffering for disobedience Col. 2: 14.

He Ans. He denies this, and says; Christ has not delivered us from giving
perfect obedience, for we remain obliged thereunto, and wherein we come short
it is pardoned for his satisfaction imputed to us, and it is piece and piece
made up by begun holiness, which hereafter shall be perfected. Ans. This
loses not the force of the argument; for though we be obliged to keep the Law
in all points, yet we are not under that obligation, by virtue of the Old
Covenant, so that the least breach should frustrate us of heaven, and so as the
reward should be of debt, and of this obligation the Argument is to be
understood: Now because, by virtue of this Covenant, which must be satisfied,
we cannot partake of the prize, because it is violated, therefore, it must be
satisfied by the perfect obedience of another, of our Surety, which must be
imputed unto us, in order to life; for all our begun sanctification will not
avail us; and Christ's satisfying by his suffering, according to that, that day
thou eats, thou shall die, does not withal satisfy that other part of the
Law, do this and live.

Arg. 13. We must not only not be unjust, but we must be just, if we would have
life eternal. Therefore Christ's Righteousness must be imputed, as well as his
death.

He Ans. denying the Conseq. And says. We are freed from the Curse of the Law
by Justification, whereby the Passive Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us:
Purity is begun in us in Sanctification. Ans. By justification we have no
Righteousness imputed to us, for we must be Righteous, before we be justified;
and therefore must have a Righteousness imputed before. (2) Our begun
Sanctification, is no purchase of the reward of life (3) delivery from the
Curse, is but a freeing us from punishment, or from the guilt of punishment,
but this is nothing but a being not unjust, as Adam was before he fell; It is
not a being positivly just, in order to the reward; for to this is required
complete obedience to the Law, and that unto the end, in which respect Adam was
never just, having never finished his course of obedience, that he might have
had a right unto the reward promised, I mean in himself.

CHAP. X.
The Fathers give Countenance to the Doctrine of Imputation; and some Papists
approve it.
THat it may not be thought, that the Doctrine of the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, is a new up-start opinion, I shall here set down some
of their Testimonies unto this truth*

Justin. Martyr. Epist. ad Diognet. p. 386. Quid enim aliud peccata nostra
potuit tegere, quam ejus justitia? in quo alio nos iniqui and impii pro justis
haberi possumus, quam in solo Dei filio? O dulcem permutationem! o
impervestigabile artificium! O beneficia expectationem omnem superentia! ut
iniquitas quidem multorum in justo uno abscondatur; justitia autem unius
faciat, ut multi injusti pro justis habeantur. i. e. for what else could cover
out sins, but his (i. e. Christ's) Righteousness? in whom else, could we, who
are naked and ungodly, be accounted for Righteous persons? than only in the Son
of God? O sweet permutation! O unsearchable Contrivance! O benefits exceeding
all expectation! that the iniquity of many should be hid in one just one, and
the Righteousness of one should make many, who are unrighteous, be accounted
Righteous.

Again in lib. de Expositione fidei. Filius Dei, quatenus homo, vitam ab
crimine remotam traduxit; mortemque voluntariam pertulit; per exactam and
accuratam Conversationem, peccatum obliterans, and per mortem indebitam debitum
delens. i. e. The Son of God, as Man, led a life free of all fault, and
suffered a voluntary death; obliterating sin by his exact and accurat
Conversation, and deleting the debt by an undue death.

Irenaeus Adv Haeres. c. 15. Dominus in Amicitiam nos reduxit per suam
in^arnationem, mediator De^ and hominum factus, propitians quidem pro nobis
Patrem, in quem peccaveramus, and nostram inobedientiam Consolatus: nobis autem
donans eam, quae est ad Factorem nostrum, Conversationem and Subjectionem. i.
e. The Lord brought us into friend shipe by his Incarnation, being made a
Mediator betwixt God and Man, Propitiating the Father for us, against whom we
sinned and comforting us over our disobedience: but freely giving us that
Conversation and Subjection, which is to our Maker.

Athanasius Tom. 2. p. 270. Necessarium est, maximeque necessarium, ^re^dere
Scripturis Sanctis, confiteri ex nostro genere primitias, celebrare singularem^
assumentis in genus humanum amorem, obstu pescere magna oeconomiae atque dispo
sitionis miraculum, non timere execrationem legis (Christus enim nos a
maledictione legis liberavit) impletionem legis a primitiis factam toti massae
asscribere (imputare, in the Greek it is (...)) i. e. It is necessary, yea most
necessary, to believe the holy Scriptures, to confess the first fruits (i. e.
Christ) of our kind, to celebrat that singular love of him that assumed ( viz.
Man's Nature) unto mankind; to be astonished at that miracle of the great
Oeconomie and disposition; not to fear the Curse of the Law (for Christ has
delivered us from the Curse of the Law) ascribe or impute the fulfilling of the
Law, done by the first fruits, unto the whole mass.

The same Author de Incarn. Verbi contra Samosat. Tom. 1. p. 461. Impossible
est puritatem and innoeentiam in humana natura exhiberi, nisi Deus credatur in
carne esse, qui justitiam omni peccato liberam in mundum introduxit, cujus quia
participes redditi sumus, vivemus and salvabimur. Illud enim non est justus in
terra, qui bonum faciat, and non peccet, in commune, ad omnes homines pertinet,
unde ex coelo descendit, qui immaculatam ex se justitiam daturus erat. i. e. It
is impossible that purity and innocence shall be exhibited in man's nature,
unless we believe, that God is in the flesh, who has brought into the world a
Righteousness free of all sin, of which because we are made partakers, we shall
live and be saved: for that there is not a just man upon earth, who does good
and sins not, does appertain to all men in common, wherefore he descended
from heaven, who was to give a pure Righteousness of himself.

Chrysostom. When a Cavilling jew shall object, how can the world be saved by the
Rectitude, or Obedience of one Christ? Answer him again, by asking, how came
the world to be condemned by the disobedience of one Adam?

Greg. Nyssen. Orat. 2. iu Cantic. Christus in se transtatis peccatorum meorum
sordibus, puritatem suam mecum communicavit; meque pulchritudinis ejus, quae in
ipso est, participem fecit. i. e. Christ having translated the filth of my fins
upon himself, did communicate unto me his own purity, and made me a partaker of
that beauty, which is in him.

By these we may see, that even before Augustins days, this Truth was
asserted, though Mr. Baxter, in his book against D. Tully Chapter 1. 3. intimate
the contrary.

Cyrillus Alexandr. in Joan. lib. 11. c. 25. Quemadmodum praevaricatione
primihominis, ut in primitiis generis nostri, morti addicti sumus: eodem modo
per obedient^am and justitiam Christi, in (...) seipsum legi subjec^ quamvis
legis Author esset, benedictio atque vivificatio, quae per Spiritum est, ad
totam nostram penetravit naturam. i. e. As by the transgression of the first
man, as in the first fruits of our kind, we are adjudged unto death; so the
same way by the Obedience and Righteousness of Christ, in as much as he
subjected himself to the Law, though he was the Author of the Law, the blessing
and Vivification, which is by the Spirit, did reach to our whole Nature.

Leo Epist. 72. ad Iuvenalem. Ut autem repararet omnium vitam, recepit omnium
causam, and vim veteris chirographi pro omnibus solvendo vacuavit: ut sicut per
unius reatum omnes facti f^erant peccatores, ita per unius innocentiam, omnes
fierent innocents, inde in homines manante justitia, ubi est humana suscepta
Natura. i. e. But that he might repair the life of all, he undertook the cause
of all, and paying for all made void the force of the Old obligation, to the
end that as by one man's guilt all were made sinners, so by one man's innocence,
all might become innocent; Righteousness coming unto men thence, where the
humane Nature is taken on.

August. ad Laurent. Cap. 41. Ipse peccatum, ut nos justitia; nec nostra, sed
Dei sumus: nee in nobis, sed in ipso; sicut ipse peccatum, non suum, sed
nostrum, nec in se, sed in nobis constitutum, similitudine peccati, in qua
crucifixus est, demonstravit. i. e. He was sin as we were Righteousness, not
our own, but of God, not in ourselves but in him: as he did demonstrat himself
to be sin, not his own, but ours; not in himself, but in us, by the similitude
of sinful flesh, in which he was crucified.

Idem in Psalm. 30. Cone. 1. in tua justitia erue me and exime me, quia non
invenisti in me justitiam meam, erue me in tua, hoc est illud, quod me eruit,
quod me justificat, quod ex impio pium facit, quod ex iniquo justum. i. e.
Deliver me in thy Righteousness. Because thou did not find my Righteousness
in me, deliver me in thine; that is it which delivers me, which justifies
me, that makes me of ungodly godly, and of unrighteous Righteous.

Id. in Psalm. 70. Erue me in justitia tua, non in mea, sed in tua; si enim in
mea, er^ exillis, de quibus ille ait, ignorantes Dei justitiam, and suam
volentes constituere, justitiae Dei non sunt subjecti. i. e. Deliver me in thy
Righteousness. Not in mine, but in thine; for if in mine, I should be of them,
of whom he says, being ignorant of God's Righteousness and willing to
establish their own, they did not subject themselves unto the Righteousness of
God.

Id. Tom. 9. Tract. 3. in Joan. Omnes qui ex Adamo cum peccato, peccatores,
omnes qui per Christum justificati, justi; non in se, sed in illo; nam in se,
si interroges, Adam sunt; in illo si interroges, Christi sunt. i. e. All that
are of Adam with sin are sinners, all who are justified by Christ, are
Righteous; not in themselves, but in him; for if you ask, what they are in
themselves, they are Adam's; if you ask what they are in him, they are Christ's.

Bernard. Sermon. 61. in Cantic. Nunquid justitias meas? Domine, memorabor
justitiae tuae solius: Ipsa est enim and mea; nempe factus es mihi tu justitia
a Deo. Nunquid verendum, ne non una duobus sufficiat? non est pallium breve,
quod secundum Prophetam, non possit operireduos, justitia tua justitia in
aeternum, and te pariter and me opertet larga and aeterna justiti^, and in me
quidem operit multitudinem delictorum. i. e. Shall I make mention of my
Righteousness? Lord, I will make mention of thine only: for that is also mine,
because thou art made of God unto me Righteousness. Is it to be feared that
that one shall not serve two? It is not a short cloak, that according to the
Prophet, cannot cover two; thy Righteousness is an everlasting Righteousness,
and that large and eternal Righteousness shall cover both thee and me, and in
me indeed it shall cover a multitude of sins.

Id. Dom. 1. post Octav. Epiph. Sermon. 1. Veruntamen, ut jam non sit quod
causeris, O homo, contra inobedientiam Adae, datur tibi obedientia Christi, ut
si gratis venundatus es, gratis and redimaris. i. e. But, that thou o man,
should not have whereof to complean, fore against the disobedience of Adam (
which he said before, was imputed) the obedience of Christ is given unto thee,
to the end, that if thou be sold for nothing, thou shall also be redeemed for
nothing.

Idem Epist. 190. ad Innocent. Pont. Romans Quid namque ex se agere poterat, ut
semel amissam justitiam recuperaret homo, servus peccati, vinctus diaboli?
assignata est ei proinde aliena, qui carui^ sua, and ipsa sic est. Venit
Princeps mundi and in Salvatore non invenit quicquam, and cum nihilominus
innocenti manus injecit, justissime quos tenebat amisit; quando is qui morti
nihil debebat, accepta mortis injuria, jure illum qui obnoxious erat and mortis
debito and Diaboli solvit Dominio Qua enim justitia id secundo exigeretur? homo
siquidem qui debuit, homo qui solvit: nam si unus, inquit, pro omnibus mortuus
est, ergo omnes mortui sunt, ut viz sa^ factio unius omnibus imputetur, sicut
omnium peccata unus ille portavit, nec alter jam inveniatur, qui forte fecit,
alter qui satisfecit, quia Caput and Corpus unus est Christus. Satisfecit ergo
Caput pro membris; Christus pro Visceribus suis etc. quod si dixerit, Pater
tuus addixit te, Respondeb^, sed Frater men's redemit me, cur non aliunde
justitia, quia aliunde reatus? alius qui peccatorem constituit, alius qui
justificat a peccato? alter in semine, alter in sanguine. An peccatum in semine
peccatoris, and non justitia in sanguine Christi? - non convenit filium portare
iniquitatem patris, and fratern^ fieri exortem justitiae. i. e. For what could
man, a servant of sin and a bound slave of the devil, do of himself, to recover
the Righteousness, which he had once lost? Therefore another is assigned unto
him, because he wanted his own, and the same is so. The Prince of the world
came, and found nothing in the Savior, and when notwithstanding he put hands
on the Innocent, he lost those most justly, when he held; when he, who owed
nothing to death, having received the injury of death, he did by right loose
him, who was liable to the debt of death, and deliver him from the Dominion of
Satan, for by what Right could he exact that the second time? seeing as it was
man, who owed, so it was man, who paid: for if one, he says, died for all,
then are all dead, that, to wit, the Satisfaction of one, might be imputed to
all, as that one did bear the sins of all; Neither now is it found, that one
did the wrong and another satisfied, for the Head and the body are one Christ:
the Head therefore did satisfy for the members; Christ for his own bowels. But
if he shall say. Thy Father bound thee over; I shall answer, but my Brother
has redeemed me, why should not Righteousness be from another; as guilt was
from another* one who made man a sinner, and another who justifies from sin;
the one in the seed, the other in blood. Was sin in the seed of a sinner; and
shall not Righteousness be in the blood of Christ. It is not right, that the
Son should bear the iniquity of the Father, and be defrauded of the
Righteousness of his Brother.

Idem Sermon. ad Milites Templi c. 1. Qui peccati meritum tulit, suam nobis
donando justitiam; ipse meritis debitum solvit, and reddit vitam; sic namque
mortua morte, revertitur vita, quemadmodum ablato peccato redit justitia; porro
mors in Christi morte fugatur, and Christi nobis justitia imputatur etc. Qui
nostram and induit carnem and subiit mortens, putas suam nobis negabit
justitiam? Voluntary incarnatus, voluntarit passus, voluntary crucifixus,
solam a nobi^ retinebit justitiam; afterward ibid. Unus peccavit and omnes
tenentur rei, and unius innocentia soli reputabitur uni? Unius peccatum omnibus
operatum est mortem, and unius justitia uni vi^am restituet? Haud Dei justitia
magis ad condemn^ndum, quam ad restaurandum valuit? aut plus potutt Adam in
malo, quam Christus in bono? Adae peccatum imputabitur mihi, and Christi
justitia non pertinebit ad me? i. e. He who took away the desert of sin, giving
to us his Righteousness, the same by his merits, paid the debt, and restored
life; for if death be dead, life returns; even as sin being taken away,
Righteousness returns: Moreover death is banished away in Christ's death, and
Christ Righteousness is imputed to us etc. He who took on our flesh, and
underwent death, thinks thou, that he shall deny to us his Righteoysness? He
who willingly was incarnate, willingly suffered, willingly was crucified, shall
he withold his Righteousness from us?-one man sinned and all are guilty, and
shall the innocence of one be accounted only to one? One man's sin has wrought
death unto all, and shall the Righteousness of one restore life only to one?
Shall God's Righteousness be more powerful to condemn, than to restore? Could
Adam do more in sin, than Christ in good? Shall Adam's sin be imputed unto me,
and shall not Christ's Righteousness belong unto me?

Ambros. lib. 3. de Virginit. p. 100. Om^ia Jesus est nobis si volumus. Si
vulnus curari defideras, Medicus est: Si febribus aestuas, sons est: Si
gravaris iniquitate, justitia est: si auxilio indiges, virtus est: Si mortem
times, vita est: si c^lum desideras, via est: si tenebras fugis, luxest: si
cibum quaeris, alimentum est. i. e. Christ is all things to us, if we be
willing, if thou desire to have thy wound cured, he is the chyrurgen: if thou
burn with fevers, he is a fountain: If thou be burdened with sin, he is
Righteousn^ss: If thou want help, he is virtue: If thou fear death, he is the
life: if thou desire heaven, he is the way: If thou fleest from darkness, he
is light: if thou seek meat, he is aliment.

Idem de side lib. 2. c. 4. O sides the sauris omnibus opulentior! O vulnerum
nostrorum peccatorumque medicina praestantior! Consideremus, quia nobis prodest
been credere. Mihi enim prodest scire, quia propter me Christus suscepit
infirmitates meas, mei corporis subiit passiones, pro me peccatum, - pro me
maledictum factus est, pro me atque in me subditus atque subjectus. i. e. O
faith more rich than all treasures! O most excellent medicine for all our
wounds and sins! Let us consider, for it is profitable for us to believe well:
It is profitable for me to know, because Christ for me took on my infirmities,
he underwent the passions of my body, he was made sin for me-for me was he made
a curse, for me and in me, was he made a subject.

Macarius Homil. 20. Quicunque enim in propria sua justitia and redemptione
consistit, in vanum and cassum laborabit; nam omnis opinio de propria justitia
concepta, tanquam pannus menstruat^ mulieris, in novissimo die manifestabitur,
sicut inquit Esaias Propheta-Petamus itaque and obtestemur Deum, ut induat
nobis vestem salutis, Dominum nostrum, Jesum, Christum, ineffabilem lucem, quem
ferentes animae in aeternum non exuentur. i. e. Who ever stands in his own
Righteousness and redemption labors in vain: for all conceived opinion of
our own Righteousness shall be manifest to be a menstruous cloth, in the last
day, as the Prophet Esai says - Let us ask therefore; and beseek the Lord,
that he would cloth us with the garment of Salvation our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ineffable light, whom if our souls put on and wear, they shall never be
denuded thereof.

Even some Papists of old, (though few or none now since the Council at Trent,)
did assent unto this Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ.

In Colon there was a book written an. 1475. directing, how to comfort dying
persons, wherein these words are found. Age ergo dum superest in te anima, in
hac sola morte fiduciam tuam constitue, in nulla re fiduciam habe, huic mortite
totum commit, hac sola tetotum contege, totum immisce te in hac morte, in hac
morte totum te involve; and si Dominus Deus te voluerit judicare, dic Domine,
mortem D.N.I.C. objicio inter me and tuum judicium, aliter ^ecum non contendo.
Et si tibi dixerit, quia peccatores, dic mortem D.N.I.C. pono inter te and
peccata mea. Si dixerit tibi quod meruisti damnationem, dic Domine, mortem
D.N.I.C. obtendo inter te and mala mea merita, ipsiusque merita offero pro
merito, quod ego debuissem habere, nec habeo, Si dixerit, quod tibi est iratus,
dic, Domine, mortem D.N.I.C. oppono inter me and iram tuam. i. e. Go to then,
while thy soul is in thee, put all thy confidence in this death alone, have
confidence in no other thing, commit thy self wholly unto this death, cover thy
self wholly with this death alone, mix thy self wholly in this death, roll thy
self wholly in this death; and if the Lord will judge thee, say, Lord, I cast
up the death of our Lord. J. C. betwixt me and thy judgment; no other way do I
contend with thee. And if he say to thee, that thou art a sinner, say, I put
the death of the Lord Jesus Christ betwixt thee and my sins. If he say, that
thou have deserved damnation, say, Lord, I hold forth the death of our Lord J.
C. betwixt thee and my evil merits; and I offer his merits, for the merit,
which I should have had, and have not. If he say, that he is angry at thee;
say, Lord, I set up the death of our Lord J. C. betwixt me and thine anger.

Isidorus Clarius Orat. 40. in Luc. Nos dicimus neque fide primo, neque
charitate, sed una Dei justitia in Christo nobis impertita justificari. i. e.
We say, we are justified at first neither by faith, neither by charity, but by
the Righteousness of God alone in Christ, bestowed upon us.

Albertus Pighius Controv. 2. de side. Fortassis etiam nostram hanc damnarent
(n. Scholastici) sententiam, qua propriam, and (...) ex suis operibus esset
(...) Deo, justitiam derogamus omnibus Adae filiis, and docuimus una Dei in
Christo niti nos pesse justitid, una illa justos coram Deo, destitutos propria,
nisi hoc ipsum astruxissemus aliquanto diligentius. i. e. It may be they (i. e.
the Scholasticks) would condemn this opinion of ours, whereby we take away
from all the Sons of Adam, their own Righteousness, which is of their own
works, before God, and did teach, that we must lean upon the Righteousness of
God, in Christ, alone, and that by that alone, we are Righteous before God
though destitute of our own, if we had not confirmed it a little more
diligently.

Idem ibid. Nam quod nen operibus nostris, non in justitia nostra, sed in una
ignoscente iniquitates nostras misericordia, benevolenti^ erga nos divinae, and
salutis a Deo assignandae nobis spes sit Davidis Testimonio Apost. ad Romans
comprobans, non alia justiti^ niti nos posse, nisi quam imputari nobis absque
nostris operibus affirmat-non dicit, beati qui ex operibus suis justi coram Deo
sunt, beatus vir, qui non commisit, nec fecit injustitiam, sad beati, quorum a
Deo misericorditer remissae sunt iniquitates quorum ipse, sua justitia tegit
and abscendit peccata. i. e. That our hope of the Lord's good will, and of life
is not by our works, nor in our Righteousness, but only in the mercy of God,
forgiving iniquities, Paul to the Romans confirms by the testimony of David,
proving to us, that we may lean to no other Righteousness, but that, which he
affirms to be imputed to us without our works. -- He says not blessed are
they, who are Righteous before God by their own works; blessed is the man, that
has done no iniquity; but blessed are they, whose iniquities are mercifully
pardoned, whose sins he covers, and hides with his own Righteousness.

Thereafter the same man says. In illo ergo justificamur coram Deo, non in
nobis, non nostra sed illius justitia, quae nobis cum illo jam communicantibus
imputatur. Propriae justitiae inopes extra nos in illo docemur justitiam
quaerere. Cum inquit, qui peccatum non noverat, pro nobis peccatum fecit, hoc
est hostiam pecc^ti expiatricem, ut nos efficeremur justitia Dei in ipso: non
nostra, sed Dei justitia justi efficimur in Christo: quo jure? Amicitiae, quae
communionem omnium inter amicos facit, juxta vetus and celebratissimum
proverbium, Christo insertis, conglutinatis and unitis, and sua nostra facit,
suas divitias nobis communicate, suam justitiam inter Patris judicium and
nostram injustitiam interponito, and sub ea, veluti sub umbone and clypeo, a
divina, quam commeruimus, ira nos abscondit, tuetur ac protegit, imo tandem
nobis impertit, and nostram facit, qua tecti, ornatique audacter and secure jam
divino nos sistamus tribunali and judicio; justique non solum appareamus, sed
etiam simus. i. e. In him (that is, Christ) therefore are we justified before
God, not in ourselves; not by our own but by his Righteousness, which is
imputed to us, when now we communicate with him. Being void of a Righteousness
of our own he teaches us to seek a Righteousness, without ourselves; in him,
when he says he made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that is, he made him a
sacrifice for sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. By
what Law? By that of friendship, which makes a community of all things among
friends, according to the old and well known proverb. Being insert into Christ
glued and united unto him, he makes what is his to be ours, he communicates
unto us his riches, he interposeth his Righteousness betwixt the Fathers
judgment and our unrighteousness, and under it, as under a shield, he hides,
defends, and protecteth us from God's wrath, which we had deserved; Yea at
length gives it to us, and makes it ours; with which being covered and
adorned, we may boldly and saifly sist ourselves before the Tribunal of God,
and we not only appear Righteous, but also are Righteous.

Ruardus Tapperus Tom. 2. Art. 8. p. 36. Sicut Christo nostra scelera a Patre,
ob spontaneam eorum assumptionem, and corporis mystici intimam unionem,
imputantur: ita ejus justitia, quasi capitis, nobis ejus membris, ad justitiam
and via^m aeternam imputatur. i. e. As our iniquities were imputed by God unto
Christ, because of his voluntary assuming of them, and of the near union of the
mystical body: so his Righteousness, as head to us his members, is imputed unto
us unto Righteousness, and life eternal.

Yea Bellarm. grants lib. 2. de justif. C. 10. That Christ may be called our
Righteousness, because he satisfied the Father for us, and did so give and
communicate that Satisfaction to us, when he justifies us, that it may be
called our Satisfaction and Righteousness. And again; this way it were not
absurd to say, that Christ's Righteousness and merits were imputed to us, when
they are given and applied to us, as if we ourselves had satisfied God. So in
Resp. ad 3. Arg. We are said to be the Righteousness of God, not in ourselves,
but in Christ, because he is our head, and what agrees to the head, agrees to
the members, not as they are distinct from the head, but as they are one with
it. So c. 11. in Resp. ad Arg. 2. The similitude of putting on agarment may be
saifly accommodat unto imputed Righteousness; if one say, we must put on
Christ's merits, and some way be covered with them, seek pardon of sins. cap.
7. Arg. 4. he says Christ's merits are imputed to us, because gifted to us,
and we may offer them to the Father for our sins, because Christ took upon him
the burden of satisfying for us, and of reconciling us to God the Father. Thus
he

After Cardinal Bellarmin. we may mention Cardinal Contarenus, who is more
orthodox here, than any of them; and speaks as plain truth, as any of the
orthodox themselves can do: for so does he, in Tract. de Iustif. state the
question. Quoniam ad duplicem justitiam pervenimus, per fidem, justitiam
inharentem nobis and charitatem ac gratiam, qua efficimur consortes divina
naturae; and justitiam Christi nobis donatam and imputatam, quoniam inserti
sumus Christi, and induimus Christum: Praetat inquirere Utra-nam debeamus niti,
and existimare nos justificari coram Deo, id est, justos and Sanctos haberi. i.
e. Because by faith we obtain a twofold Righteousness, one inherent in us,
love and grace, whereby we are made partakers of the divine nature; the other
the Righteousness of Christ, given and imputed to us, because in^ert into
Christ, and because we have put on Christ: It is fittest to Enquire, unto which
of these we ought to lean ourselves, and account ourselves justified before
God, that is looked upon as Righteous and holy.

The question thus proposed he thus determines. Ego prorsus existimo, pi^ and
Christian^egrave, di^i, quod debeamus niti (niti inquimus, tanquam rei stabili,
quae cert^nos sustentet) justitia Christinobis donota, non autem justitia and
sanctitate nobis inhaerente: h^c enim nostra justitia est inch^ata and
imperfecta, quae impedirenon potest, quin assidue pe^cemus; idcirco in
conspectu Dei possumus eb hanc justitiam haberi justi and boni, quemadmedum
deceret filios Dei esse bonos and Sanctos; Sed justitia Christi est vera and
perfecta justitia, quae omnino placet oculis Dei, in qua nihil est quod Deum
offendat, quod Deo non summopere placeat; h^ac ergo sola re certa and stabili
nobis nitendum est; and ob eam solam credere nos justificari coram Deo, id est
haberi justos and dioi justos. Hic est pretiosus Thesaurus, quem qui invenit,
vendit omnia quae habet, and emit illum. i. e. I verily think, that it is
piously and christianly said, that we ought to lean (I say lean, as to a stable
thing, that shall certainly hold us up) unto Christ's Righteousness, given unto
us; but not unto the Righteousness and holiness, that is inherent in us: for
this Righteousness of ours is inchoate and imperfect, that cannot hinder us
from ssinning daily; therefore we cannot for this Righteousness, in the sigt of
God be accounted just and good, as would become the Sons of God to be: but the
Righteousness of Christ is true and perfect Righteousness, which every way
pleases God's eyes, in which is nothing that can displease God, and does not
highly please him: Therefore we must only lean to this certain and stable
thing, and believe, that for it alone we are justified before God; that is,
accounted Righteous, and so called. This is the Precious Treasure, which who
finds, he sells all he has, and buyeth it.

Yea this he confirms afterward by Experience, saying. Inde est, quod pro
experimento videmus viros Sanctos, qui quanto magis in veritato proficiunt,
tanto minus sibi placent; ac propterea tanto magis intelligunt se indigere
Christo and justitia Christi sibi donata; ideoque se relinquunt, and soli
Christo incumbunt: ^^c non obeam accidit causam, quod facti sanctiores minus
videant quam prius; neque quia facti sunt animo dimissiori vel viliori; imo
quanto magis in sanctitate proficiunt, tanto majore sunt animo, tanto sunt
perspicaciores. i. e. Hence it is, that by experience we see, holy men, how
farther they advance in the truth, please themselves the less, and therefore do
more understand, that they have need of Christ, and of his Righteousness given
unto them: wherefore they relinquish themselves; and lean upon Christ alone:
This comes not to pass, because they become of a more base and Law spirit:
Yea the further they advance in holiness, they are of greater spirits, and see
more clearly.

FINIS
Arguments against Universal Redemption.
AS concerning the point of Universal Redemption, we find various sentiments,
or various explications of the matter, given to us by Adversaries; for they do
not all agree in their apprehensions of the thing. Some explain the matter
thus, God sent his only begotten Son to be a Redeemer and Propitiator for Adam
and all his Posterity; who by his death did pacific an angry God, and restore
Mankind to their lost inheritance; so as all, who are now condemned, are not
condemned for their former sins and guilt; for Christ has abundantly satisfied
for these; but for their Unbeleef, for not believing in the Redeemer of the
world, and for rejecting the Reconciliation made, and the grace of God declared
in the word. And thus, they must say, that Christ has died for all sins, but
Unbeleefe; and that salvation does not certainly follow upon this
Reconciliation; and so that it is rather a Reconciliableness, than a
Reconciliation; and they must necessarily maintain, that this matter is
revealed unto all and every son of Adam, who otherwise cannot be guilty of
Rejecting this reconciliation, other ways it shall be of no advantage to them;
unless they say, that the want of the Revelation puts them out of a capacity
of being guilty of Unbeleefe; and so they must necessarily be saved; and thus
their condition shall be undoubtedly better, than is the condition of such, as
hear the Gospel; and then the revelation of the Gospel shall be no Favor, but
a Prejudice rather. And in reference to this, they devise an Universal
Antecedanious Love, whereby God, out of his Infinite Goodness, was inclined to
desire the happiness and salvation of every mothers son; and therefore to send
his Son to die for: as if God had such Natural and Necessary Inclinations; and
as if all his Love to Mankind, and every appointment of his concerning us,
were not the free act of his good pleasure; and as if there were any such
Antecedent and Conditional will in God, that could or might have no issue or
accomplishment, but as Lord Freewil would; and as if the Love that sent Christ,
were only such a Poor Conditional Inclination toward all Mankind, which the
Scripture holds forth, as the greatest of Loves, and as the ground or all the
Effects and Grants, which man's full Salvation calls for. But why could not
this Love effectuat the good of all? Therefore, they tell us, that Justice
being injured by sin, unless it were satisfied, that Love of God, whereby he
wishes well to all sinners, could effectuat nothing, as to the recovery of
any: and upon this ground they imagine, Christ was sent to make an Universal
Atonement; and so, Justice, being satisfied, might not obstruct the salvation
of any, whose Freewill would consent unto terms of new to be proposed.

Others hold forth the matter thus [Christ, according to the eternal Counsel of
God, did properly die for this end, and by his propitiatory sacrifice obtain,
that all and every man, who believe in Him, should for his sake actually
obtain Remission of sins, and Life Eternal; but others, in case they would
Repent and Believe, might obtain it.] But thus we hear no word of Christ's
obtaining any thing to any in particular; no word of his obtaining Faith and
Repentance: and what Counsel of God can this be, to send Christ to die for
persons, upon that condition, which he knew they would not and could not
perform? And what by this means has Christ's Propitiatory Sacrifice obtained
more, than a mere possibility of salvation, to either one or other? Shall we
imagine, that God designeth good to persons, who shall never enjoy it? Or that
God has Conditional Intentions and Designs? By this means, Christ's death was
designed, and no person designed thereby to be saved, yea Christ should be
designed to die, and that for no certain end, unless to procure a mere
possibility, by stopping the mouth of justice, that it should not stand in the
way: but then we can not say, that God sent Christ to die for any man, much
less for all.

Others express the matter thus [Christ, out of the gracious Decree and Purpose
of God, did undergo death, that he might procure and obtain Reconciliation
with God for all sinners whatsomever, without any difference, before that God
would open again the door of salvation, and enter into a new Covenant of Grace
with sinners.] But this Reconciliation has no more force, or import, but that
God might enter again into a Covenant with sinners: and so there is no Actual
Reconciliation of sinners unto God. And all that is obtained, is for God, and
nothing for man, save a Possibility of Salvation by a new Covenant; nor are we
told, whether Christ has satisfied for the breach of the First Covenant, so
that that sin is fully pardoned unto all; or not, until the condition of the
second Covenant be performed: nor are we told, upon what account the sins
against the second Covenant are pardoned; Or if they be unpardonable.

Others explain the matter thus [Christ died for all and every man, not only
that God might, without any violation of Justice, enter into a new Covenant
with sinners, upon what condition he pleased; but that it should be upon this
Condition, that man should be united with Christ the Cautioner: and not only,
that Redemption and Salvation should be possible to all, but that really and
most certainly Salvation should be bestowed on such, as Christ thought good.]
But seeing Christ knew, that his death would profit none, but these few, whom
he had designed, to what purpose should he have laid down his life for the
rest? And how can his death be a price of Redemption for the rest? How can
Christ be said to satisfy for the rest? Did he purchase Faith to these few;
and would he not purchase Faith to the rest, and yet lay down the great price
for them? What was the end obtained for the rest? was it only a Possible Call
of all, Justice bein satisfied? But of what import could that Possible Call be,
if Salvation was not also possible unto them? And whereunto is that Call? They
will not say, it is unto Salvation, but to Faith: But did not Christ know, that
this call would not be obeyed by them? Did he procure Grace unto them, to obey
it? then he procured Faith, and if he procured Faith, than he procured
Salvation. Again, if Justice be satisfied for these others, why are they not
liberat? If they say, the new Condition is not fulfilled. Then it cannot be
simply said, that Christ satisfied Justice on their behalf, for he knew before
hand, that these would not perform the new Condition; how can he then be
supposed to die for them not withstanding?

Thus we see what difference is among men, that hold Universal Redemption,
about the Proper and Immediate End and Aim, of the purpose of God, in sending
Christ to die; and of Christ in comeing to died: and how, for the most part, it
comes all to little, or nothing, for it was, says Arminius, That God might
save sinners, what way it pleased Him, his Justice, which stood in the way,
being satisfied, or as Corvinus: That God might will to save sinners, and That
Christ intended by his death, to make such satisfaction to justice, as that he
might obtain^ to himself power of saving upon what Condition the Father
pleased. And thus Christ is said to have obtained Reconciliation and Redemption
to all, not that they should actually be partakers thereof, but that God, his
justice now being satisfied, might prescribe a Condition, which when they had
performed, he might and would actually make them partakers thereof: Some say,
that all men are put into a new Covenant, in which Adam was a common person, as
well, as in the old, by virtue whereof, none shall be damned that do not sin
actually against the Condition, and fall thereby from that new state, whereunto
they are borne. And this opinion differs not much from that of Iacobus
Andreae at the conference at Mompelgard, which afterward Huberus maintained (as
Kimedoncius shows, in his refutation of the same) which was this in short,
[That Christ suffered and died for all, none excepted, Effectually, and
obtained for all a Reconciliation, without any respect to Faith, or Unbeleefe;
so that all who receive this Reconciliation and continue in it, shall be saved,
but as to those who refuse it by unbeleef, it is made null, and they perish.]
Others say, [That Christ by his satisfaction removed Original sin in all, so
that all Infants, dying in infancy, are undoubtedly saved.] Others [that he
died for all sins alike, but conditionally.] Some say, [that after the price
was paid, it was absolutely undetermined, what condition should be prescribed;
so as God might have re-established the Covenant of works:] Others, [that the
procuring of a new way was part of the fruit of Christ's death.] As for this
condition, some say, [that man can perform it with the help of such means, as
God affords to all] and thus establish the Diana of Freewill. But others
[assert the necessity of grace flowing from election hereunto,] and so destroy
Universal Redemption, which yet they assert. So that some say [Christ died for
all Conditionally, if they beleeve] making the Act the cause of its own object;
for Faith with them is a believing that Christ died for them. Some say [that he
died for all Absolutely; Yet so as they partake not of the benefire, until they
perform the Condition, which was to be prescribed;] and thus they affirm,
that Christ did no more sustain the persons of the Elect, than of the
Reprobat, but of all alike. If we enquire therefore, what was the Immediate
Result and Product of the death of Christ, they agree not to tell us, whether
it was a Power, or a Will, or a Right, to God, to save any he pleased.

However all the Arminians and Camero with them agree in this. That Christ did
not purchase faith for any: and that as to all (say some) or as to the most
part (say others) Christ has only procured a Possibility of Salvation: And
what is this Possibility? Some call it an Exemption from that necessity of
perishing, under which they came by the violation of the former Covenant, if a
satisfaction had not interveened; and by this Exemption, they say, it comes to
pass, that Christ, if he will, justice being now satisfied, may bring all to
life: And hereby also, say they, all may be saved, if they will: But what is
this else then a mere Possibility? What efficacy has it, seeing notwithstanding
thereof, all may perish again? They say, it is really Efficacious as to this
Possibility, which was not, before Justice was satisfied: But yet
notwithstanding of this Efficacious Possibility, it might come to pass, that
not one should have been saved: for how can salvation be possible without
faith? So that if faith be not hereby purchased, it would seem, that Salvation
is not possible. And further, it does hereby appear, that all which is
procured, is but some power to God and to Christ; But what is man's advantage?
They say, That a way to life is opened unto man, that so he may now come to God
by Faith and Repentance. But how can he come, who has no power to Believe or
Repent, without grace? Or is it in corrupt man's power to Believe or Repent?

What that truth is, which we stand for, is plainly and fully enough set down
in several places of Our Confession of Faith: as Chap. 3.. 6. As God has
appointed the elect unto glory; so has he, by the Eternal and most free
purpose of his Will, fore ordained all the means thereunto. Wherefore they who
are Elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ, are effectually
called unto faith in Christ by his Spirit, working in due season; are
Justified, Adopted, Sanctified, and Kept by his power through faith unto
salvation. Neither are other Redeemed by Christ, effectually Called* Justified,
Adopted, Sanctified and Saved; but the Elect only. So Chap. 8.. 1. It pleased
God, in his eternal purpose, to chose and ordain the Lord Jesus, his only
begotten Son, so be the mediator between God and man. ^Unto whom he did from
all eternity give a people to be his seed, and to be by him in time Redeemed,
Called, Justified, Sanctified and Glorified. And ibid.. 5. The Lord Jesus by
his perfect obedience, and sacrifice of himself; which he through the eternal
Spirit, once offered up unto God, has fully satisfied the Justice of his
Father, and purchased, not only Reconciliation, but an Everlasting inheritance
in the Kingdom of heaven, for all those, whom the Father has given unto him.
So ibid.. last, To all those, for whom Christ has purchased Redemption, he
does certanely and effectually apply and communicate the same, making
intercession for them, and revealing unto them, in and by the word, the
mysteries of salvation, effectually persuading them by his Spirit to believe
and obey; and governing their hearts by his word and Spirit, overcoming all
their enemies by his Almighty power and wisdom, in such manner and ways, as
are most cansonant to his wonderful and unsearchable dispensations. Our
judgment is this, in short, That Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
Father, laid down his life a Ransom for the Elect only, who were given to him
to save from Wrath, and Destruction; and by that price purchased Salvation, and
all the Means necessary thereunto, for them only to whom in due time, and
after the method, which he thinks best, does effectually apply the same unto
them, and actually save them.

Though grounds sufficient, considering the places of Scriptures, annexed in
the margin of the Confession, confirming all, are clearly hinted and laid
down, in these passages cited; yet I shall, with what brevity is possible,
point forth our grounds in plain terms. And (1.) The Scripture is full and
plain, in holding forth 2 Covenant betwixt ^ehova, and the Mediator, a
transaction concerning man; or the purposes of God concerning the Salvation of
Man, in way of a mutual Compact; both for our better understa^ding of that
solid ground of our Peace and Hope, and for the confirming of our staggering
and weak Faith. And though the full explication and confirmation hereof, would,
I judge, fully undermine and destroy the rotten grounds of Socinians and
Arminians, and of all, who are for the Diana of Freewill, and enemies to the
Grace of God; yet I cannot digress thereunto here; and shall only refer
such, as would see the same confirmed, unto Mr. Dicksons Therapeutica sacra,
and Mr. Rutherfords book upon the Covenant. Taking it therefore for granted,
till what is by these Worthies said anent it, be confuted; and finding, that
Arminius himself in his Orat. de Sacerdotio Christi, says, there was a
Covenant betwixt the Lord and Christ, I shall but shortly infer therefrom,
That it is repugnant to reason, to say, that the result of that Eternal
Transaction: and the whole intended by it, was only to procure a mere
Possibility of Salvation; and that such a Possibility, as that though it was
equally for all; yet it might so fall out, that not one person should be saved,
among all the sons of Adam. How unreasonable is it to imagine such a bargane
betwixt the Father and the Son, as among men, considering what they are doing,
can have no place? If Christ was to see his seed, by virtue of this Contract,
then certainly God had a special eye and respect unto that seed; and that feed
must be distinguished from all the rest, for it cannot be all, else all should
be saved: and so Christ did not undertake to buy all, nor did the Father give
him all, for his feed: and in reference to that feed, the Redemption purchased
must be an Actual, and not a mere Potential, or Possible Redemption; and the
Lord must have full Power and Dominion over the Will of that Seed, whereby he
may determine their hearts unto a following of the Method, which he was to
prescribe; and all these means, whereby this actual Closeing with the
Conditions was to be effectually wrought, must have been secured: for a
transaction betwixt persons, infinite in Wisdom, must of necessity be, in all
things, contrived in deep Wisdom. So then, if by virtue of this Covenant, a
feed was ensured to Christ, it was these concerning whom the transaction was
made; for what interest could others have in this, or advantage by it? And so
the Rademption was neither Universal; nor yet merely Possible, and no more.

Again (2.) The Scripture every where points out the end of Christ's coming
and dying, to have been, to Procure and Obtain some good to man; it were
endless to cite the Scriptures speaking this out plainly: But if it had been
only to have procured a Possibility, then the proper and immediate end of his
dying, had been only to have procured something to God, viz. a Power to Him,
that he might, without hurt to his Justice, prescribe a possible way of
salvation. Now, not to discuss that question, agitated among Orthodox Divines,
viz. whether it was impossible for God to have pardoned the sins of man,
without a satisfaction made by his Son, or not; meaning antecedently to a
decree, determineing this way of manifestation of the Justice of God; only I
must say, that as yet I can see nothing from Scripture, determineing the
egresses of the Relative Justice of God, to be more essential to God, and less
subject to the free determinations of his good will and pleasure, than are the
egresses of his Mercy; nor do I see any necessity for asserting this against
the Socinians, seeing our ground, walking upon a decree, is proof against all
their Assaults; far less see I any necessity of founding our whole debate with
the Socinians, upon that ground; yea I cannot but judge it the result of great
imprudence so to do, seeing the Socinians may reply, that the sole ground of
that Opposition to them is not only questioned, but plainly denied, by such as
we account Orthodox and learned; and may hence gather, that we have no other
solid ground, whereupon to debate with them, but such as the learned of our
own side overthrow. The depths of God's Counsel are beyond our fathoming; and
it is hard for us to say, hithertil the omnipotent can come, but not one ince
further. I dar not be wise above what is written; and I would gladly see one
passage of Scripture, declareing this to have been in itself utterly
impossible, and inconsistent with God. B^ whatever may be said of this. what
Scripture tells us, that Christ was sen to die, that he might obtain this Power
unto God? And further, what was this power? Was it a mere Power and Liberty,
that should never have any Effect? If it was to have an Effect, what was that?
Was it only to make a new Transaction with man, in order to his salvation? If
that was all, notwithstanding of all this Power and Ability, not one man might
have been saved. Was it certanely to save some? Then, the Redemption cannot be
called Universal, nor yet merely Possible. Nay, if by the death of Christ a
Right and Power only was obtained to God, God was at full liberty to have
exerced that Right and Power, or not, as he pleased; and so notwithstanding
thereof man might have remained in the same Condition, whereinto he was, and
never so much as have had one offer of life, upon any terms whatever; or only
upon the old terms of the Covenant of works; and what then should the
advantage of this have been? The whole Scripture, speaking of the death of
Christ, mentions far other Ends, respecting man.

If we (3.) Consider how the Scripture mentions, ^ number given of the Father
to Christ, to be Redeemed and Saved, we shall see, that there is neither an
Universal, nor yet a mere Possible Redemption: for this gift is utterly
repugnant to, and destructive of both: for if, conform to the Covenant betwixt
the Father and the Son, there were some given to Christ to save and redeem,
these he must actually save and redeem; and for these only, was Christ ordained
and designed of the Father to be a Redeemer; and upon the account of these
only, did he undertake the work, and lay down the ransome-money: for it is not
rational to suppose, that, the design of Father and Son being to save actually
these gifted ones, Christ would shed his blood for others, who were no^ given
to him, and who should receive no salvation by his blood; for cui bono? what
could be the design of Father and Son in this? The matter goes not so in
humane transactions, where the price is considerable. Now, that the Scripture
mentions some given to Christ, and that in distinction from others, is clear
Ioh. 17: 2. -- that he should give eternal life to as many, as thou have given
him. So verse. 12. Those that thou gave we, I have keept, and none of them are
lost, etc. So Ioh. 6: 37. All that the Father has given me, shall come unto
me, and verse. 40. And this is the Fathers will, that has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing Joh. 17: 9. I pray for them, I
pray not for the world, but for them, which thou have given me; for they are
thine. 10. And all thine are mine and mine are thine, and I am glorified in
them. 11. - Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou have given me.
24. Father I will, that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, etc. Whence we see, that Christ had no charge of the rest; was under no tie
to save them, nor would be so much as pray for them: but as for the given ones,
Joh. 10. called his sheep, for these he laid down his life, and prayed; and
for these was ^e to give an account: nay, which is more, these had a special
Interest in God's heart and affection and were thereupon given to Christ. They
were the Father's, and given of the Father to the Son; and so fully
discriminated from all the rest; and both Father and Son stand engadged to
carry these through unto salvation: all which considered, it is most plain,
that the Redemption was Particular and Actual, conform to the Undertaking, and
Transaction.

Nay (4.) If we will consider the fountain love, from whence the sending of
Christ came, we will see how unreasonable it is to imagine an Universal mere
Possible Redemption, as the proper end and effect, of Christ's death and
merits. It is said Ioh. 3: 16. A place, which our Universalists look upon, as
most favorable for them) that God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that all believers in him, might have eternal life. This love is
held forth as unparallelable, a love greater than which cannot be conceived,
and a love demonstrated by the greatest effect imaginable, sending and giving
his only begotten, to give his life a ransom, and to die for sinners; and it
must be contrary to all reason, to imagine, that all this was to procure a
Redemption, by which it was possible, that not one man should be Actually
Redeemed. Christ himself says, Joh. 15: 13. greater love has no man, tha^
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. See also Romans 5: 8. And
shall we think, that the effect of all this Non-such Love, both of the Father,
and of the Son, was only a Possible Salvation, and Redemption? and that all
this love should be outed; and possibly not one man saved? Either the Lord
knew, that some would get good by this fruit of wonderful love, or not? then
he was not omniscient: and then the Father gave his Son, and the Son came, and
both were the effect of the greatest love imaginable, and yet neither of them
knew, that any one soul should be saved for all that. If he knew, that they
would get good by it, either by themselves alone, without his Grace, or not. If
the first, why would he send his Son to die, and why would Christ come to die
for such, as they saw would never have a will to be saved by his death? If the
last be said, then, seeing the greatest expression of of love was to send his
Son, and in the Son to come and die, how can we think, that that was for all,
when the grace to improve that death, and profit by it, was not designed for
all? Says not Paul Romans 8: 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall not with him also freely give us all things?
Importing that that was Impossible. Shall we imagine that that is the greatest
love, which is common to all, and is not able to effectuate the salvation of
those upon whom it is set? and how can this be, that the greatest effect of
this greatest love shall be common to all, and smaller effects not common also?
See also 1. Ioh. 4: 9, 10, 11. where this special love, by which Christ was
sent, is made peculiar unto believers; for John is speaking of none else: So is
this love peculiarly terminated on Christ's Wife and Church Ephesians. 5: 26, 26.
and has gracious and saving effects Gal. 2: 20. Tit. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 2:
4; 5, 6. Romans 8: 36, 37. 2. These. 2: 16, 17. Revel. 1: 5, 6. Beside, that this
love is mentioned as an Old, Everlasting, and Unchangable Love, Ier. 31: 3.
Ephesians. 1: 3, 4. Romans 9: 11. Ioh. 13: 1. Zeph. 3: 17. And is all this nothing
but a General Common thing, that cannot save one soul, if Lord Freewil do not
consent, of his own accord?

Moreover (5.) if we consider the ends assigned to the Death of Christ,
mentioned in Scripture, we shall see that it was some other thing, than a mere
Possible Delivery and Redemption, common to all mankind. Mat. 8: 11. He came
to save that which was lost; and not to make their salvation merely possible;
for if that were all, Christ's argument should have had no strength: So 1. Tim.
1: 15. - Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinner: if it were a mere
possibility, that might never take effect, how should this faithful saying be
worthy of all acception; So Luke 19: 10 where the matter is exemplified in
Zaccheus Mat. 1: 21. the reason of the name Jesus, given to the Redeemer is,
because he shall save his people from their sins, that is, Actually and
Really, and not Potentially or Possibly only: and this cannot be meaned of all;
for he saves not the Reprobat from their sins; at least, not from the sin of
unbeleef, by the confession of Adversaries; But here, no sin is excepted, and
therefore is his death restricted to his people, whom he saves from all their
sins. Heb. 2: 14, 15. there is another end of his death mentioned, viz. that
he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil, and
deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to
bondage. This was no mere Possible Deliverance, but Actual and Effectual; and
it was not common to all; for it is restricted to his Brethren verse. 11, 12,
17. and to sons 13. and to the children which God gave him verse. 13, 14. and
to the Seed of Abraham verse 16. and again verse 17. wherefore in all things it
behoved him to be make like unto his brithren, that he might be a Merciful and
Faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the people. Behoved Christ to be a Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, only to make a Possible Reconciliation, whereby it might be,
that not one person should be reconciled? and are the Reprobate his brethen?
Ephesians. 5: 25, 26. To what end did Christ give himself for his Church? (And all
the world of mankind belong not to his Church.) It was, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word, that he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spotor wrinkle, or any such
thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Is this a mere
Possibility? Then might Christ have died, and have no Church to present to
himself fair and spotless: his Church might have remained full of spots and
wrinkles, unholy and full of blemishes, yea should have been no Church. Tit. 2:
14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Do all the world
belong to his peculiar people? does Christ redeem all the world from all
iniquity? Is all the world purified and made zealous of good works? Or is all
this mere may be, which may not be? 2. Corinthians. 5. verse. 21. He has made him
to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of
God in him. Was Christ made sin, or a sacrifice for sin, that all the world
might possibly be made the Righteousness of God in him? that is, that possibly
not one person might be made the Righteousness of God in him? who can dream
thus, that God's intentions and designs should be so loose and frustrable, and
that God should be so uncertain in his purposes? Gal. 1: 4. why did the Lord
Jesus give himself for our sins? It was, that he might deliver (...) from
this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father. This is
no mere Possible Deliverance; and it is such as was designed not for all the
world, but for the us, there mentioned. So Chap. 4: 4, 5. -- God sent forth his
son, made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. This Real Benefit is
manifestly here restricked. Ioh. 17: 19. for their sakes I sanctify my self,
that they also may be sanctified through the truth, Christ sanctified himself,
to be an ob^ation, not to obtain a mere may be; but (...) they, for whose
sakes he did sanctify himself, that is, they that were given to him verse. 6:
9. and were his own verse. 10. and were in due time to believe in him verse.
20.) might Really and Actually be Sanctified through him. Heb: 13: 12.
wherefore did Jesus suffer without the gate? it was, that ho might sanctify
the people with his own blood; sure, this is more, than a may be. Romans 3: 25,
26. Why did God set forth Christ to be a propitiation? It was to declare his
Righteousness, for the remission of sins that are past, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus: a Certain Real thing.
Many more passages might be added to this purpose, but these may suffice, to
discover the absurd falsehood of this doctrine.

Add (6.) such passages, as mention the Actua^ Accomplishment and Effect of
Christ's death, where it will yet more appear, that this was no mere may be,
or Possible thing, but that which was to have a certain Being and Reality as
to the persons, for whom it was designed; Such as Heb. 1: 3^ -- when he had by
himself purged our sins. Can their sins be said to be purged, who pine a
way in hell for ever, because of their sins? could this be true, if no man
had been saved? and yet, if it had been a mere possible and may be Redemption,
it might have come to pass, that not one person should have been actually
saved. So Heb. 9: 12. - by his own blood he entered in once into the holy
place, having obtained eternal redemption. Is a mere possible Redemption to be
called an eternal Redemption? and was that all that Christ obtained? Then
Christ's blood was more ineffectual in the truth, than the type was, in its
typicalness; for the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an hiefer
sprinkling the unclean, did not obtain a possible and may-besanctification,
and purifying of the flesh; but did actually and really sanctify to the
purifying of the flesh verse. 13. Again verse. 14. (which also confirms what
is now said) how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God. So that all such, for whom he offered himself,
and shed his blood, and none else, have their consciences purged from dead
works, to serve the living God: and who darsay, that this is common to all, or
is a mere may be, which the Apostle both restricteth and asserteth, as a most
certain real thing; Again verse. 26.- but now once in the end of the world,
has he appeared, to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. So that he did
Actually and Really, and not Possibly and Potentially only, put away sin; the
sin viz. of those, for whom he was a sacrifice, even of them, that look for
him, and to whom he shall appear the second time, without sin unto salvation
verse. 28. and sure, no man in his wits will say, that this is the whole world.
Gal. 3: 13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us. 14. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, through
faith. Here are three Ends and Effects of Christ's Redemption mentioned, which
no Man will say, are common to all viz. Redemption from the Curse of the Law;
and this was Really, and not potentially only done, by Christ's being made a
curse for us; the Communication of the blessing of Abraham, and the Promise of
the Spirit, which are ensured to such as are Redeemed from the Curse of the
Law, and to none else. So Ephesians. 2: 13, 14, 15, 16. But now in Christ Jesus,
ye, who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ; for he
is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of
partition between us; having abolished in his flesh the enmity, the Law of
commandments in ordinances; for to make to himself of twain one new man, so
making peace; and that he might reconcile both unto God, in one body, by the
cross, having slain the enmity thereby. To which add the paralled place Col.
1: 21, 22. and 2: 14, 15. was all this delivery from Wrath, Enmity, Law of
commandments and whatever was against us, but a mere Potential thing, and a
may be, common to all, in whose power it was to cause it take effect, or not,
as they pleased? Esai. 53: 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, ^e was
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed with 1. Cor. 15: 3. - Christ died for our sins
and 1. Pet. 2: 24. who his own self bear our sins in his own body, on the
tree - by whose stripes we are healed: How can we then imagine, that all this
was a mere may be, seeing he was so bruised for our iniquities, so died for our
sins, so bear our sins, in his own body; as that thereby all, in whose room
he stood, are healed by his stripes? The Apostle does moreover fully clear this
matter, Romans 5: 6.- Christ died for the ungodly: was this for all? Or was it to
have an uncertain End and effect? No, verse. 9. much more then being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. The ungodly
and the sinners, for whom he died, are such as become justified by his blood,
and shall at length be fully saved from wrath. And again verse. 10. for if when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his son; much more
being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life: Upon his death follows
Reconciliation with God, and then Salvation; and his death is for no more than
his life is for. By him also they receive an atonement verse. 11. As the
consequences and effects of Adam's sin did Certainly, and not by a may be,
redownd to all, that he represented and engadged for; so the fruits and
effects of Christ's death do as certainly come unto such, as are his, as the
Apostle clears, in the following verses, laying the advantage on the side of
Christ and his; verse. 15. -- much more the Grace of God, and the gift by grace,
by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many, verse. 16. -- but the free
gift is of many offenses, unto justification, verse. 17. - much more they, which
receive abundance of grace and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall reign in
life, by one Jesus Christ, verse. 18. -- even so by the Righteousness of one,
the free gift came upon all men to justification of life, verse. 19. -- so by
the obedience of one shall many be made Righteous, verse. 21. -- so might grace
reign, through Righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ, our Lord. Is
all this a Common thing, and a mere may be, or Possibility? Ioh. 10: 11. he
gives his life for his sheep and verse. 15. But may they for all that perish?
No, in no wise verse. 28. and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish. He came that they might have life, and might have it more
abundantly, verse. 10. To the same purpose he says Ioh. 6: 33. that he gives
life unto the world, not such a life, sure, as may never quicken any. Upon
Christ's death does the Apostle infer Romans 8: 32. that the Elect shall have
all things, and verse. 33, 34, 35. that they are free from all Accusations, or
any Hazard therefrom, being justified, and having Christ's Death, Resurrection,
and Intercession to secure them at all hands; and thereupon they have
assurance, that nothing shall separate them from the love of God. Act. 20: 28.
Christ has purchased a Church with his own blood. The whole world is not this
Church; nor is this purchase an uncertane may be; And all this Real and
Certain Effect of Christ's death, was foretold by Daniel Chap. 9: 24, -- to
finish the transgresion, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation
for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness, etc. And who can
imagine, that this is Universal, or Uncertane?

If we will (7.) Consider some other Ends of the death of Christ, which the
Scripture points forth, which are not to be found among Heathens, or any
except the few Chosen ones, Ordained to life, we shall see, how unreasonable
the Adversaries are. Gal. 4: 5. Christ died to redeem them that were under the
Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. Was this end, and fruit left
at an Uncertanty? Shall we thinks, that Christ might have died, and yet one man
receive this Adoption? Was this Adoption purchased upon an uncertain Condition?
Or was this purchased equally for all? Then such as received it, might have
thanked their own well natured Freewill, upon that account. But let us
consider some other fruits. Gal. 1: 4. who gave himself for our sins, that he
might deliver us from this present evil world. So 1. Pet. 2: 24. He bear our
sins, in his own body, on the tree: but for what end: That we being dead to
sin, should live unto Righteousness: and Chap. 3: 18. Christ suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust: To what end and purpose? To bring us to God. Heb. 10:
10. by the which will we are sanctified. How came this to pass? Through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all, So he suffered without the
gate, that he might sanctify the people Chap. 13: 12. Revel. 1: 5, 6. -- he
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood. But was this all? No,
it is added, And has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father. So
Chapter 5: 9, 10. -- thou was ^tain, and have redeemed us to God, by thy blood; and
what more? And have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests, etc. So 2. Cor. 5:
15. He died for all: But for what end and purpose? That they which live, should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him, which died for them, and
rose again. See Col. 1: 22. These and the like passages do clearly point
forth a special end of Christ's Death, which was designed both by the Father,
that sent him, and by himself: and shall we suppose, that this great and chief
design was made to hang upon the lubrick and uncertain will of man? Shall
Christ be beholden to man's good will for the purchase he made, at so dear a
rate? If not, why are not all these ends attained, in all, for whom he died?
Did Christ fail in laying down the Ransom? Or does not the Father keep
condition? Who can say either of these? Then surely, there can be no reason to
say, that Christ made an uncertain bargain, and purchased only a Possibility of
these fruits, which he knew not if ever he should attain, in any one; Nor to
say, that he died for all.

Let us further (8.) take notice: That for whom Christ died, he died to take
away their sins; And that so, as they may be fully Pardoned, and never brought
on reckoning again: that is, that they be Remitted and Pardoned; and that the
poor sinner may not suffer therefore. This sure must be the import of that
prayer, forgive us our trespasses. If then Christ by his death has taken away
sin, and purged it away, making satisfaction to justice therefore, how can we
think, that justice can punish the sinner in hell fire, for these same sins?
But let us see, what the Scripture says, 1. Ioh. 3: 5. -- he was manifested to
take away our sins. Ephesians. 1: 7. we have redemption in his blood: what
Redemption? forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. So
likewise Col. 1: 14. Now when sins are thus taken away, they are blotted out,
and not remembered Esai. 43: 25. Fer. 31: 34. Heb. 8: 12. Yea they are blotted
out as a cloud, and as a thick cloud Esai 44: 22. So they are said to be
subdued, and casten into the depths of the sea. Mica. 7: 19. Shall we now say,
that Christ has died, to purchase this Redemption, the Forgiveness and
blotting-out, as a thick cloud, and casting into the depths of the sea, of sin;
and yet multitudes of those; for whom this was purchased, and that by the blood
of God, should never obtain this benefire, but have all their own score? This
so pincheth the Adversaries, that the best evasion they can fall upon, is to
say, that none shall have Original sin charged upon them: But the Scripture no
where restricteth this Remission to that sin only. Others therefore say, That
no sin now shall be be charged upon any, but the sin of Unbeleef. Then Judas
does not suffer to day, for betraying his master: was it for this sin only,
that the Old World was drowned; or that the Cities of Sodom are suffering the
vengeance of eternal fite? Jude seems to say some other thing verse. 7. so are
there other sins there reckoned up verse. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. to which is reserved
the blakness of darkness for ever, verse. 13. But some say, that these are all
but pardoned upon condition. Then the Redemption is neither Actual and Real,
nor Complete, but a poor may be, and a may not be: and how can such sins be
said to be forgiven or blotted out, and casten behind God's back, and into the
depths of the sea? Did Christ know, whether or not this condition would be
performed? If not, then He is not the omniscient God. If he knew, that it would
not be performed by the greatest part, how can we imagine, that he would
notwithstanding lay down his life to purchase a Remission for them? And how
(...) we think, that He should purchase a Pardon to all, and let the event hang
upon the pendulous tottering will of a sinful creature? But as to that
Condition, we shall.

Propose (9.) this consideration. The not performance of that Condition was no
doubt a sin, and if Christ died for all the sins of the world, he died for
that too: And if he died for that too, that is taken out of the way, or there
must be another Condition imagined, upon performance of which, that is to be
taken our or the way; and the nonperformance of this Condition being also a
sin, our proposition will recurre upon this, and so in infinitum: but if this
sin be taken out of the way, it cannot prejudge them of the pardon of therest:
and thus all their sins being pardoned, they must needs be saved: and yet it is
not so. But it is said, that Christ died not for the sin of Final Unbeleef; yet
it seems, that it will be granted, that he died even for the sin of Unbeleefe
of all the world, and for unbeleefe continued in, until the last hour of a
man's life; but not for that last act; which yet is but the same Unbeleefe
continued in an hour longer; and shall we think, that Christ bare the Unbeleefe
of 20, 40, 60. or more years, in his body, on the cross, and not the same
Unbeleefe for one hour or half hour, yea or quarter of an hour? Who sees
not, how little ground there is for such an imagination? But the thing I would
have mainly here considered, is this. That for whose sins Christ has died,
he has died for all their sins; and therefore, if he died for the sins of
all the world, he died for the Final Unbeleefe of all the world: But this will
not be granted; therefore neither can it be said, that he died for the sins
of all men. Whose sins he took upon him to make satisfaction for, he left
none for them to answer for; for he is a complete Mediator, and is sole
Mediator. If he died for all the rest of the sins of the Reprobat, and of the
whole world, why not for that also? Sure, when the Scripture speaks of
Christ's taking away of sin, and of the Redemption, that is, forgiveness of
sins, which people enjoy through him, there is no sin excepted, He was wounded
for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquity; Esa. 53: 5. the Lord
laid on him the iniquity of us all verse. 6. or made the iniquity of us all to
meet on him; there is no ground for any exception here: when he was stricken
for transgression verse. 9. and his soul was made an offering for sin, verse. 10.
is there any appearance of the exception of any one sin? when he bear their sin
and their iniquities verse. 11, 12. what intimation is given of an exception of
any? Yea, if this exception was to be made, which would null and destroy all,
what consolation could the declaration of this Redemption, remission of sins,
yield unto poor sinners? Col. 1: 14. Ephesians. 1: 7. When the Lord made him to be
sin for us, was it only in part? how then could we be made the Righteousness of
God in Him 2. Cor. 5: 21? was the Lord in Christ reconcileing the world unto
himself, not imputing only part of their trespasses to them? but the imputing
of one sin would mar the reconciliation for ever. Is not final unbeleef a dead
work? Doutbles; yet the blood of Christ purges Consciences from dead works
Heb. 9: 14. Did the blood of bulls and goats so sanctify, as to the purifying of
the flesh, as to leave the most defileing spot of all untaken away? How could
healing come by his stripes, if he bear but part of our sins, in his body on
the tree, seeing final unbeleef alone would mar all? for where that is, there is
no coming to God imaginable. But moreover, the Scripture tells us, that the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son oleanseth us from all sin 1. Ioh. 1: 7. and that
if any man sin, there is an Advocat with the Father, who is a propitiation for
sins, 1. Ioh. 2: verse. 1, 2. and so must be for all sins, otherwise there were
little ground of comfort here: And it was foretold by Daniel Chap. 9: 24. that
he should make an end of sin, and finish the transgression, and so bring-in
everlasting Righteousness. Does this admit of exceptions, and of such an
exception, as would unavoidably make all null? No certanely. But you will ask
of me, if I think, that Christ did die for final unbeleefe? I Answ. Not: for I
judge, it is the sin only of Reprobates, who hear the Gospel: and I judge that
Christ did not die for any sin of Reprobats: But this I hold, and have cleared,
That for whose sins soever Christ has died, he has died for all their sins:
And because he has not died for Final Unbeleef, therefore he has not died for
any sin of such, as shall be guilty of this: and as for his own, he died to
prevent their falling into, and to keep them from this sin; for he died to
bring them unto God, that they might have the Adoption of sons, that they might
be sanctified, and live unto Righteousness, be made Righteous, yea the
Righteousness of God; as is clear 1. Pet. 2: 24. Heb. 10: 10. 2. Cor. 5: 21. 1.
Pet. 3: 18. Romans 5: 19. what then will they say to this? Final unbeleef is
certainly a sin; and Christ either died for it, or not; if he died for it, than
it can be laid to no man's charge; or Christ's death is of no value. If he died
not for it, he died not for all the sins of all men; but at most, for some
sins of all men; and if that was all, no man could thereby be saved, for one
sin is enough to procure damnation.

Moreover (10.) we find the Persons, for whom this price of blood was laid
down, designed more particularly, and the Object of this Redemption restricted;
and so it could not be for all and every one. It is said to be for Many Esai
53: 11. Matthew. 20: 28. and 26: 28. Mark 10: 45. Heb. 9: 28. and what these many
are, is abundantly declared in other Scriptures, where they are called Christ's
Sheep Ioh. 10: 15. Christ's People Mat. 1: 21. His People, whom according to
the predictions of the Prophets, which have been, since the world began, he
should save from their enemies, and from the hand of all, that hate them, to
perform the mercy promised to the Fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant,
the oath, which he swore to Father Abraham; that he would grant unto them, that
being delivered out of the hand of their enemies, they might serve him without
fear, in holiness and Righteousness, before him, all the days of their lifo
Luke 1: 68, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. His Church Ephesians. 5: 25. Act. 20: 28. His
Body Ephesians. 5: 22. The Children of God, that were scattered abroad Ioh. 11: 52.
Sons, Sanctified, Brethren, the Children that God gave him, that Seed of
Abraham Heb. 2: 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. They are the Sheep, that shall
infallibly believe, because sheep Ioh. 10: 26. and Whom Christ knows, and of
whom he is known verse. 14. and such as shall hear his voice verse. 16. and
follow him verse. 27. to whom he will give eternal life, so that they shall
never perish, and who are given to him of his Father verse. 28, 29. and the
Elect 2. Tim. 2: 10. He is bread giving life unto the World, of them, that the
Father has given him, and shall come to him Ioh. 6: 33, 39. They are these,
concerning whom the Fathers will was, as being given of him, that he should
lose nothing, but raise it up again, at the last day ver. 38, 39, 47. The
Redeemed ones that are numbered by God 144000. and are the first fruits unto
God, and the Lamb. Revel. 14: 3, 4, 5. They are such as are the Lords, and whom
the Lord knows for his 2. Tim. 2: 19. and are enrolled in the Lambs book,
Revel. 13: 8. and 20: 15. So are they designed to be these, for whom God is,
and who shall have unquestionably all things; the Elect who shall be justified,
who shall not be separated from the Love of Christ; are in all things more then
Conquerours Romans 8: 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39. These with whom the Covenant
shall be confirmed Dan. 9: 27. The redeemed out of every Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, and Nation; and made Kings and Priests Revel. 5: 9, 10.

Further (11.) if Christ died for the sins of all persons, how comes it that
they are not all actually pardoned? It cannot be said, that Christ's death was
not a satisfactory price, nor that the Father did not accept of it: If then he
shed his blood for the remission of sins, Mat. 26: 28. are not all these sins
pardoned virtually and fundamently? or shall they not all actually be pardoned
in due time? If it be said, they shall be pardoned upon Condition of their
faith. But if the sins of all be equally paid for, and equally in a virtual
manner discharged, in Christ's being actually discharged from that debt, in the
day of his Resurrection; and the actually discharge depending upon the
uncertain Condition of man's Will; man, who willingly performs the Condition,
shall praise himself for the actually pardon, and none else; for Christ did no
more for him, as to the Actual Pardon, than for others, who never shall be
blessed with actual forgiveness: and yet forgiveness is held forth, as a
special act of free grace; forgiveness of sins is according to the riches of
his grace Ephesians. 1: 7. Moreover as to that Condition, whether did Christ
purchase it, or not? If he did not purchase it, than man is not beholden to
Christ, for the Condition; be it faith, or what ye will, it is no purchased
mercy, but man is beholden to his good Lord- Free Will, for it, and so he may
sacrifice to his own net, and sing glory to himself, for making himself to
differ, and for obtaining to himself Actual Remission of all his sins, and
consequently blessedness Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. for had not his own well disposed
Lord- Free Will performed that Condition, all that Christ did, had never more
advantaged him, than it did others that perish.

If it be said, that grace to perform the condition, though it be not
purchased by the blood, of Christ, yet it is freely given by God, to whom he
will. I Answer Not to insist here, on the proof of faith's being purchased by
Christ; because we shall clear it afterward, and there is nothing else
assigned for the condition, I would enquire, whether Christ knew to whom this
grace would be given; or not? if not, then we must deny him to be God: if he
knew, why shall we suppose, that he would lay down his life equally for all,
when he knew before hand, that many should never get grace to perform the
condition, upon which his death should redound to their actual pardon and
justification? what Ends, or what Advantages can we imagine of such an
Universal Redemption?

(12.) If the Condition, upon which actual pardon and justification is granted,
in the blood of Christ, be purchased by Christ; then either all shall certainly
be Pardoned and Justified, or Christ has not purchased an Equal, Common, and
Possible Redemption, to all and every man: But the former is true, and it is
not true that all shall certainly be pardoned and actually justified; for then
all should be glorified. That the condition, to wit, Faith, and Repentance is
purchased by Christ, who can deny, seeing, he is expressly called the Author of
Faith, Heb. 12: 2. and a Prince exalted to give Repentance and forgiveness of
sins Act. 5: 31? So that as forgiveness of sins is founded upon his death, as
the Meritorious cause; so must Repentance be; and Christ, as an exalted Prince
and Savior, has this power to dispose of his own purchased legacy, which he
has left, and ensured by his death, unto the heirs of salvation. Upon his
Death, and Satisfaction made in his death, has he got all power in heaven and
earth, a power to quicken whom he will Matthew. 28: 18. Ioh. 5: 21, 22, 27. Phil.
2: 9, 10. Hence we are said to be complete in him Col. 2: 10. and to be blessed
with all spiritual blessings, in celestials (to which, no doubt, Faith and
Repentance do belong) in him Ephesians. 1: 3. Is it not from hence, that the divine
power has given unto us all things, that pertain unto life and godliness 2.
Pet, 1: 3? Nay Paul tells us expressly Phil, 1: 29. that it is given to us, in
the behalf of Christ, to believe on him. And certainly there is a promise of
Faith and Repentance; and all the promises are yea and amen in Him 2. Cor. 1:
20. all the Blessings contained in the Covenant, are made sure by his death,
who was the surety of this better Testament Heb. 7: 22. and this Testament was
to have force by his death Heb. 9: 15, 16, 17, 18, and the New heart and heart
of flesh, is promised in the Covenant, and comprehends Faith and Repentance,
they being some of his Laws, which he has also promised to write in the heart
Ier. 31: 33, Heb. 8: 10. Ezech. 11: 19, 20, and 36: 26, 27. We have moreover
seen that Sanctification and Holiness, from which, Faith and Repentance cannot
be separated, were purchased by Christ, and intended in his death: whence he is
made of God unto us Sanctification 1. Cor. 1: 30. If it be not purchased by
Christ, how come we by it? is it a thing in our Power, and an act of our own
Free Will? Then, as I said before, we are beholden to ourselves, for Faith and
all that follow upon it, and then farewell all Prayer for Faith and Repentance,
and all Thanksgiving to God for it. This is pure Pelagtanisme. If it be said,
that it is the free gift of God Ephesians. 2: 8. and a Consequent of electing love.
I Answer all the fruits of election, which are to be wrought in us, are
procured by the blood of Christ, for all are conveyed to us in a Covenant,
whereof Christ is the Mediator and Surety, and with Christ he gives us all
things Romans 8: 32. and we are blessed in Him with all spiritual blessings,
according as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world Ephesians.
1: 3, 4. So we are predestinate unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 1: 5. and adoption is not had without Faith Ioh. 1: 12. can we have
Actual Redemption in Christ's blood Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14. even forgiveness
of sins, and not have also in his blood Faith, without which there in no
actual redemption, or forgiveness of sins to be had? when Christ gave himself
for us, that he might purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good
works Tit. 2: 14. did he not purchase Faith, without which we cannot be such?
when the Renewing of the holy Ghost is shed on us abundantly, through I. C.
Tit. 3: 5, 6. have we not Faith also through him? May we not pray for Faith;
and can we pray for any thing, and not in Christ's name? See 2. Tim. 1: 9. 1.
Pet. 1: 3. Romans 8: 32, 39. Luke 22: 32.

Again (13.) All that Christ died for, must certanely be Saved, But all Men
shall not be saved. That all, for whom Christ died, must certanely be saved, is
hence apparent. (1.) That all, who have Saving Faith and Repentance, shall be
saved, will not be denied; and that Christ has purchased Faith and Repentance
to all, for whom he died, we have shown above. (2.) These who shall freely get
all things from God, must get Salvation; for all things else signify nothing
without that; but all they, for whom Christ was delivered, shall get all
things, Romans 8: 32. (3.) They whom nothing shall separate from the Love of
Christ, and from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord, must
certainly be saved: But all they, for whom Christ has died, will in due time
have ground to say this. Romans 8: 34, 35, 39. (4.) All they, to whose charge
nothing can be laid, shall be saved: But this will be true of all that Christ
died for; for Christ's death is held forth as the ground of this, Romans 8: 33,
34. (5.) They, for whom Christ interceedeth, shall undoubtedly by saved: But
Christ interceedeth for all, for whom he died, Romans 8: 33, 34. (6.) All who are
sanctified shall be saved: But all that Christ died for, shall in due time be
sanctified; Sanctification being, as we showed above, one principal intended
end of Christ's death. (7.) All Christ's Elected sheep shall be saved: But such
are they, for whom Christ died, as was shown. (8.) All that God and Christ
love with the greatest love imaginable, shall certainly be saved: But such are
they, for whom Christ died, Ioh. 3: 16. and 15: 13. Act. 20: 28. Ephesians. 5: 25.
(9.) All that become the Righteousness of God in Christ shall be saved. But
that shall be true of all, for whom he died, or was made sin, or a sacrifice
for sin 2. Cor. 5: 21. (10.) All, that shall be blessed in having their sins
pardoned, shall be saved, Romans 4: 6, 7, 8. But all for whom Christ died shall
have this Redemption, Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14. (11.) All they, whom Christ
knows and acnowledgeth, shall be saved, Mat. 7: 23. But he knows all them
for his sheep, Ioh. 10: 14, 17. for whom he died. (12.) All, for whom Christ
rose again, shall be saved, seeing he rose for our justification, Romans 4: 25.
But he rose again for all those, for whom he died, Romans 4: 25. who was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification, Romans
8: 34. (13.) All who shall be planted together with Christ, in the likeness of
his resurrection, shall be saved: But that is true of such as he died for, Romans
6: 5. (14.) All they in whom the old man shall be crucified, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth they should not serve sin, shall be
saved: But that is true of such as he died for, Romans 6: 6, 7, 8. knowing this,
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin: for he that is dead is
freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall also
live with him, etc. (15.) All they, who shall be made Kings and Priests unto
God, shall be saved. But all the redeemed shall be such, Rev. 1: 5, 6. and 5:
10. See worthy Mr. Durham on the Revel. p. 303. (16.) If Christ must see of the
travail of his soul, then these he died for must be saved: But the former is
true, Esai. 53: 11. (17.) All whom Christ shall Justify shall be saved, But he
shall justify all, whose iniquities he bears, Esai. 53: 11. Thus is this
sufficiently proved.

It is also considerable (14.) That no where in Scripture, we find it expressly
said and affirmed, That Christ died for all men; Far less find we it said,
that Christ died for all and every man. Why then is all this trouble made? But
they say, as much as all that is said by consequence. And this we deny: if they
will rationally press this matter, they should evince, that such expressions,
as they make so much work about, can be no otherwise understood, than they
suppose, in the places, where they stand: and this they shall never be able to
do. Though it be said, that Christ gave his life a Ransom for all; yet no
reason can evince, that that is necessarily to be understood of all and every
man: so nor can they conclude any thing rationally from the word world. They
may as well infer from these words all, and the world, that Christ died for
devils, beasts and senseless creatures, as that he died for all and every man;
for they are comprehended under these terms, as well as Men: And if they will
restrict these terms to men, because of other Scriptures; why may not we
restrick them also to the Elect, because of the correspondence of other
passages of Scripture? They cannot deny us the liberty, they take to
themselves. If they say, that there is a vast difference betwixt Devils an Men,
in reference to such favors. We deny it not: but shall add, that in reference
to spiritual favors, amongst which we cannot but reckon, with the good leave
of our Adversaries, the death of Christ, being the fruit and expression of the
greatest Love of God to Man, we find also a great difference in Scripture.
Some are Loved, some Hated Romans 9: 11, 12. Some whom he Knows some whom he
Knows not Ioh. 10: 14. and 13: 18. Mat. 7: 23. 2. Tim. 2: 19. Some Chosen and
Ordained to life, others not, but to Wrath Act. 13: 48. Romans 8: 30. and 9: 18.
etc. Ephesians. 1: 4. 1. These. 5: 9. Some Sheep, others Goats Mat. 25: 32. Some on
whom God has Mercy, others whom he Hardens Romans 9. Some his Church, others
not Act. 20: 28. Ephesians. 5: 25. Some. of the World, others not Ioh. 17: 9, 10.
Some his Brethren, others not Heb. 2: 10, 12, 13. And as plainly read we, that
Christ died for his People Mas. 1: 21. his Sheep Ioh. 10: 11, 12, 14. his
Church Act. 20: 28. Ephesians. 5: 25. his Elect Romans 8: 32, 34. and his Children.
Heb. 2: 12, 13.

If we would consider aright. (15.) What Christ did undergo and suffer, while
he was made sin, or was making satisfaction for sin; we should hardly think it
probable, that Christ Jesus, God-man, who was the brightness of tho Fathers
glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1: 3. and thought it no
robbery to be counted equal with God, Phil. 2: 6. Should have undergone what he
did undergo, and that the Father should have laid all that upon him, which he
did lay upon him, and that to purchase only a mere Possible Redemption from sin
and wrath, whereby not one person should be saved or pardoned, if so it had
seemed good to captain Free will. Not to mention his condescending to be Born
of a woman, and to be made under the Law, Gal. 4: 4. nor his being in the form
of a servant, Phil. 2: 7. nor his Poverty and mean Condition in the world, 2.
Cor. 8: 9. nor his Conflicting with the indignities of the world, Psalm. 22: 6.
Heb. 12: 2, 3. with the temptations of Satan Math. 4: 1-12. Luke 4: 15. and his
being under the infirmities, common to the nature of man, being in all things
like us, except sin Heb. 2: 17. and 4: 15. Esai. 52: 13, 14. Nay, nor his
sufferings in his Body, Name, Honor at death, when he was betrayed by Judas
Mat. 27: 4. forsaken by his disciples Math. 26: 56. Scorned and Reviled by the
world Esai. 53: 2^ 3. Condemned as a malefactor by Pilat, and Tormented by his
persecutors Mat. 27: 26-50. Ioh. 19: 34. and Endured the Painful, Shameful and
Cursed death of the cross Phil. 2: 8. Heb. 12: 2. all which and the like being
endured by Him, who was the Son of God, could be no mean suffering, nor
undergone for an uncertain end, or for the procureing of a mere Possible and
Uncertain good: But that which we would most take notice of here, is, his Soul
sufferings, being persued by divine justice, when that Zach. 13: 7. was
accomplished, awake, O sword, against my shepherd, against the Man, that is my
follow, says the Lord of hosts, smite the shepherd and the sheep shall be
scattered, Mat. 26: 31. and the Lord did bruise him, and put him to griese
Esai. 53: 5, 10. and he began to be sorrowful even unto death Mat. 26: 37, 38.
and was sore amazed and very heavy Mark. 14: 34. and was put to offer up
prayers and supplications, with strong cries and tears to him, that was able
to save him Heb. 5: 7. when; notwithstanding that an angel appeared unto him
from heaven, strengthening him, yet being in an agony, he prayed more
earnestly, and his sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood falling down to
the ground Luke 22: 43, 44. and at length was made to cry out, my God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me Psalm. 22: 1. Mat. 27: 46. Mark. 15: 34. This was no
mean business, when the Rays and Irradiations of Divine Love were drawn-in and
withheld from him, who had such a sharp sense of the happiness in the enjoying
of God's favor, because of the Personal union with the Godhead. But that which
is most of all to be considered, is his being made a Curse Gal. 3: 13. and so
made to wrestle with the Justice and Wrath of a sin revenging God. This was the
gall and the worm wood, that made him cry Ioh. 12: 27. Now is my soul troubled,
and what shall I say? Father save me from this hour. Shall we suppose, that all
this was about an Uncertane Bargane? Shall we think, that he died the cursed
death of the cross, and bore the weight of God's wrath Luke 22: 41. Mat. 27:
46. and so became a sacrifice to satisfy divine justice Heb. 9: 14, 18, and
all to purchase a mere Possibility; or a mere Possible Redemption? Shall we
think, that the Second person of the Trinity should do and suffer all these
things, for to redeem man, when possibly, if Freewill should be so ill natured,
not one man should reap any advantage thereby? Me thinks, the asserting of this
should be a great temptation to cause people turn Socinians, and deny all
these soul sufferings of Christ, and his bearing the wrath of God, and making
any satisfaction to justice.

Add to this (16.) That the Scriptures speak of Christ's Death and Sufferings,
as being not for himself, but for others; and that not only for the good and
advantage of others (and doubtless the advantage of all this should be but
little, if it were nothing else, but a mere Possible Redemption, which Free
will might make actual, or not Actual, as it pleased) but in their Room and
Place: hence it is called the chastisement of our peace Esai. 53: 5. and he is
said to have borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows verse. 4. He was wounded
for our transgressions; and bruised for our iniquities verse. 5. The Lord laid
on him the iniquity of us all verse. 6, -- for the transgression of my people
was he stricken verse. 8. -- for he shall bear their iniquities verse. 11. -- he
bare the sin of many verse. 12. He bear our sins, in his body, on the tree 1.
Pet. 2: 24. the just suffered for the unjust 1. Pet. 3: 18. Hence believers are
said to be crucified with him Gal. 2: 20. - to be baptized into his death Romans
6: 3. buried with him by baptism into death verse. 4. - planted together in the
likeness of his death verse. 5. dead with Christ verse. 8. He was cut off, but
not for himself Dan. 9: 26. See also Heb. 2: 9. 1. Pet. 2: 21. Shall we say,
that this was merely for our good, seeing it was, in some respect for the good
of the whole creation Romans 8: 20, 21, 22, 23. Act. 3: 21. and not in our Place
and Stead? Paul says 2 Cor. 5: 14. If one be dead then were all dead. And it
is manifest, that he paid the Law-debt, having taken on him the seed of
Abraham for this end Heb. 2: 16, and being made a curse for us, he redeemed us
from the curse of the Law Gal. 3: 10. So that it was in our stead Rom 5: 6, 7,
8 Ioh. 11: 50. and 10: 11, 15. And the Preposition (...) has clearly this
import Mat. 5: 38, and 17: 27, Esa. 41: 4. Exodus 21: 23, 24. 1. Chron, 14: 1.
1. King. 3: 7, 2. King. 1: 17, and 11: 43. Prove. 11: 3. Ioh. 16: 4, and 34: 17.
1. Pet. 3: 9. Rom 12: 17. See many other places cited by worihy Mr. Rutherfoord
in his book of the Covenant page 254, 255. where both in the N. T. and in the
LXX. version of the old (...) has this import. And this truth is abundantly
made out by our Orthodox Divines, writting against the Socinians; so that I
need say no more of it; only I think, such as assert the Redemption purchased
by Christ to have been a mere General Possible Redemption, do strengthen the
hands of the Socinians; and join with them against the Orthodox: But to our
purpose, Such as Christ did thus die for, and in their room and place, are
accounted to have died in Him, and so freed: as in Ter. Pro illo te ducam, Ego
pro te molam.

Moreover (17.) If we consider the furniture, which Christ as mediator had
given to him of the Father, we shall see more of the unreasonableness of this
opinion, which the Arminians embrace: Not to speak of what he had as God, the
Fathers Fellow and Equal, let us but take notice of that communicated
furniture, which he had as Mediator between God and man, 1. Tim, 2: 5. and our
Emmanuel, Esai. 7: 14. We see he is called Wonderful, Counselor, etc. Esai.
9: 6, 7. He is that Candlestick, whence the golden pipes do empty the golden
oil, Zeoh 4: 12. He was full of grace and truth Ioh. 1: 14. Was this fullness
for a mere Possible effect? Or had he it so, and for such an end, as none might
possibly be the better thereof? No; and of his fullness have all we received
grace for grace Ioh, 1: 16. He had not the Spirit by measure Ioh, 3: 34. It
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. Col. 1: 9. In him are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge Col. 2: 3. and in him dwells
all the fullness of the godhead bodily verse. 9. And wherefore is all this? Even
that all his might be compleet in him verse. 10. Grace was poured into his lips
Psalm. 45: 2. and he was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows
verse. 7. And Esai. 61: 1. Luke 4: 18, etc. The Spirit of the Lord God was upon
him, because the Lord had anointed him. And for what end? To preach glade
tideings unto the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. See further
verse. 2, 3. Sure, this was no uncertain end, nor left to the discretion of Free
will. So Esai. 11: 2. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the
Spirit of wisdom and understanding, etc. Shall all this be, and further shall
Righteousness be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his
reins verse. 5. And may it notwithstanding so come to pass, that the Wolf
shall not dwell with the Lamb, nor the Leopard lie down with the Kid, etc. nor
the earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea?
Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. How absurd is it to imagine this? All this furniture says,
that it was no Uncertain General End, which he had before his eyes, in
undertaking this work; and the Father in sending him, and granting to him this
fullness.

Add to this (18.) The Titles and Relations, which Christ took upon him: for
they cannot be mere insignificant and empty Names. He is called a Redeemer Esa.
41: 14 and 54: 5. and 49: 26, and 60: 16. and 43: 14 and 44: 6, 24. and 48: 17.
and 49: 7. and 47: 4. and 59: 20. Romans 11: 26. And shall we imagine, that He
shall be a Redeemer and Deliverer, and yet no man Redeemed or delivered? No: He
has a redeemed company, whom he owneth as such Esa. 35: 9. and 43: 1, 23. and
44: 22. and 48: 20. Ier. 31: 11. Esai. 51: 11. and 52: 3. and 63: 4. Zach. 10:
8. Luke 1: 68. and 24: 21. 1. Pet. 1: 18, Revel. 5: 9. and 14: 3. He is called
a Savior Esai. 43. 3. 11. and 45: 15, 21. and 63: 8. Luke 1: 47. and 2: 11.
Ioh. 4: 42. Act. 5: 31. and 13: 23. 2. Tim. 1: 10. Tit. 1: 4. Ephesians 5: 23. Tit
2: 13. and 3: 6. 2. Pet. 1: 1, 11. and 2: 20. and 3: 2, 18, 1. Ioh. 4: 14.
Shall we think, that he was given and sent for a Savior, and took upon him
that title and relation, and notwithstanding no man might be saved? No, there
are also some designed, the Saved 2. Cor. 2: 15. Act 2: 4. 1. Cor. 1: 18. He is
called a King Revel. 15: 3. and 17: 14. and 19: 16. 1. Tim. 6: 15. Ioh. 12: 15.
Luke 19: 38. and 23: 2. Zach. 9: 9. Mat. 21: 5. Now is he an actual King, and
shall have none but potential Subjects? Shall he be a King without a Kingdom?
See Ioh. 18: 36. Col. 1: 13. 1. Cor. 15: 24. He is called an Husband 2. Cor.
11: 2. Ier. 31: 32. And therefore he must have a Wife and a Bride Ioh. 3: 29.
Revel. 18: 23. and 21: 9. and 22: 17. He is called an Head Ephesians 5: 23. 1. Cor.
11: 3. Ephesians. 4: 15. and 1: 22. Col. 1: 18. And so must have a body Ephesians. 1:
23. Romans 12: 5. Ephesians. 4: 4. Col. 3: 15. and 1: 24. and 2: 19. Ephesians. 4: 16.
and 5: 23. and 3: 6. He is called the Vine stock, and shall he have no
Brancnes? Ioh. 15: 1, 2. etc. These things might be further enlairged and
pressed; but we shall haste forward.

(19.) Our Adversaries say, That Christ by his Death and passion did
Absolutely, even according to the Intention of God, purchase Remission of sins
and Reconciliation with God, and that for all and every man: Others say
conditionally: But withal as to the application of this purchase: it is made to
depend upon faith: and so they distinguish betwixt Impetration and Application.
And though it is true, the purchase made is one thing, and the actual enjoyment
of the thing purchased is another thing: Yet we may not say, with our
Adversaries, that the Impetration is for more, than shall have the Application;
But we assert, that both Impetration and Application, in respect of the design
of the Father, which is absolute and certain, and the Intention of Christ the
Mediator, which is fixed and peremptory, are for the same individual persons;
so that for whomsoever God sent Christ, and Christ came to purchase any good,
unto these same shall it actually, in due time, and in the Method and manner
Condescended upon and prescribed, be given; and upon them, and none else, shall
it actually be bestowed: for (1.) No other thing, beside this Application, can
be supposed to have been the end of the Impettation; And sure, Christ was
herein a Rational Agent: Nay, it was the Intention and design of the Father,
that the Application of these good things should be by the means of this
Impetration, as is abundantly cleared above. (2.) We cannot suppose that either
Christ, or his Father, should fail, or come short of their end designed; but
by our Adversaries, the Impetration might have been obtained, and yet no
Application made of the good things impetrated and obtained. (3.) If no
Application was intended by the Father or by Christ, then it must be said, that
both were uncertain, as to what the Event should have been, or at least
Regardless and Unconcerned; either of which to affirm were blasphemy. (4.) The
very word Impetrate, having the same force and import with, Purchase, Procure,
Obtain, Merit, and the like, does say, that such, for whom this Impetration
was made, have a right, upon the Impetration, to the thing Acquired and
Purchased: And if they have a right thereto, that Possession should follow.
(5.) Yea the word imports, the actual conferring of the good, to be the very
end of the Purchaseing and Impetrating; and so, in this case, the very
Impetration is ground of Assurance of the Application, considering, who did
impetrate, and at whose hands, and withal, what was the ground of the Fathers
sending of Christ, and of Christ's coming to impetrate, even inconceiveably
wonderful and great Love. Nor does the intervening of a condition, required
before the actual collation of some of the good things purchased, hinder at
all; for all these Blessings, some whereof are as a condition to others, are
the one good thing Impetrated, and the very conditions are also Impetrated, as
we declared above: and so this points forth only the method of the actual
bestowing of these good things purchased. (6.) How absurd is it to say, a thing
is Impetrated or Obtained, and yet may, or may not be Bestowed; may be
Possessed, or not Possessed? Or to say, that such a good thing is Obtained by
price or petitioning, and yet the same good thing, may never be Bestowed, or
the Bestowing of it hangs and depends upon an Uncertain Condition, which
may never beperformed? (7.) How unreasonable is it, that such should have right
to the Merits, that have no right to the thing Merited? Does not an interest
in the Merits, procureing any thing, include an interest in the thing Merited?
When a ransom is paid for captives, to the end they may be delivered, have
not these Captives a right to the deliverance, upon the payment of that
ransom? (8.) The Scriptures do so connect these two, that it argues contempt
thereof, to imagine such a separation: as Romans 4: 25. Yea the one is assigned
as a certain Effect and Consequent flowing from the Other, as its Moral cause
Esai. 53: 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, this
Justification is the Application; and whence comes it? For he shall bear their
iniquities, there is the Impetration given as the ground hereof: So further
verse. 5. he was wounded for our transgressions, etc. and what follows upon
this Impetration? And by his stripes are we healed. So Romans 5: verse. 18. By the
Righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to justification. So that
the Application reaches an all, that is, all who have interest in the
Righteousness, which is the thing Impetrated see also Heb. 10: 10. (9.) If
Christ's Intercession be for the same persons, for whom he died, then the
Application is to the same; for this Intercession of Christ is in order to the
Application: But that Christ's Intercession is for the same persons, for whom he
died, we shall see hereafter. (10.) If all things be ensured to such, for whom
Christ died, then certanely this Application cannot fail but the former is true
Romans 8: 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not (mark this manner of expression which imports the greated of
absurdities to think otherwise) with him also freely give us all things? (11.)
And in that same place verse. 33, 34. Christ's death is given as the certain
ground of Justification, and Salvation, so that such, as he died for, shall
certanely, in due time, and after the method prescribed, be Justified and
Saved; otherwise, there were no sure ground in the Apostles argueing; for if
all the ground of this certanty, as to Application, were from their Faith, or
fulfilling of the Condition, the Apostle would have mentioned this, as the
maine ground, and not have led them to a ground common to others, who never
should partake of the Application. (12.) This matter is abundantly confirmed
from what we said above, concerning Christ's purchasing of Faith, and dying for
our sanctification, and to bring us to God, etc. so that more needs not be
added here.

(20.) For further confirmation of this, and because our Adversaries think to
salve the fore mentioned separation of Impetration and Application, by telling
us, that where good things are Absolutely purchased, then Application must
follow; But not where good things are purchased only Conditionally, as in our
case: we shall therefore show, how this will not hold, nor advantage their
cause: for (1.) If all be Redeemed Conditsonally, that condition, whatever it
be, must in equity be revealed to all. (2.) Either God and Christ knew, who
would perform this condition, or not: If not, then they were not omniscient:
If they did know; then sure, this death was more particularly and designedly
intended for them, than for the rest: and upon what account, and to what end,
should Christ lay down his life a Ransom for such, as he knew certainly should
never be the better thereof? And why would the Father send him to die for such?
(3.) This Condition is either in man's sole power, without the help of the Grace
of God, to perform, or not: If it be in man's power, from what Scripture shall
this Pelagianisme be confirmed? How shall then the new Covenant of Grace be
distinguished in specie from the Covenant of Works, made with Adam? If this
Condition be not in man's power, but the Grace of God must work it. Then either
God will work it in all, or not: If not, why would God purchase good things to
people upon a Condition, which they could not perform, and which he alone
could work in them, and resolved not to work in them? If he will work it in
all, then all shall certainly be saved. Again, if this Condition be the free
gift of God, then either God will give it Absolutely to all; and so all shall
certainly be saved: or Absolutely to some, and then none but they shall be
saved, and why should Christ die for the rest? Or Conditionally to all: And if
so, the doubt will recurre concerning that Condition, which either must be
Absolutely given, and so we are where we were, or Conditionally, and so still
the doubt recurreth. (4.) This condition is either purchased by Christ, or it
is not. If not, then we owe no thanks to Christ for it, nor for what is
obtained upon that Condition, more then others who perform not the Condition,
and so obtain nothing: but to ourselves only, who make ourselves to differ;
and so may we sing praises to ourselve, and put the crown upon our own heads,
and give no song of praise to the Redeemer, but what such as go to hell are
bound to give, contrary to all Christian Religion: If Christ has purchased
this Condition, then it is done either Absolutely, of Conditionally: If
Absolutely, than all shall Absolutely have it: if Conditionally, we enquire,
what is the Condition? And whatever it be, we may move the same questions
concerning it. (5.) By this means the act should creatits own object; for
Faith in the death of Christ is ordinarily given as the Condition, and this
faith makes the death of Christ valide, which otherwise would not be. (6.)
This makes all the virtue of Christ's death to depend upon man's act; so that if
man will, all shall be saved; if not, no man shall be saved, notwithstanding
that Christ died for them. (7.) This makes Christ but, at most, a half
Mediator, doing one part of the work; and man, coming in to compleete it must
be the other half mediator; and so, at least, must have the half of the
Praise. (8.) where says the Scripture, that if we believe, Christ died for us?
or that Christ died for all, or for any, Conditionally? It is true, some of the
effects of Christ's death are bestowed Conditionally, (taking the word
conditionally not properly, as if the performance of that Condition, did in
proper Law sense procure a right to these mercies; for through the merits of
Christ's blood have we a right properly to all; but improperly as denoteing
nothing but the Method and way of God's bestowing the blessings purchased,
first this, and then, upon the souls acting of that, another; as for example,
first faith, then upon the souls acting of Faith, Justification, then
Sanctification etc. and upon the souls acting of Sanctification, Glorification)
but the death of Christ cannot therefore be called Conditional, more than the
will or purpose of God can be called conditional, because some of the things
willed, may depend upon other, as upon a condition. (9.) Then by performing the
Condition, man should procure to himself a Legal Right, and Title not only to
the death of Christ, but to Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, yea and to
Glorification; yea and that a more near and effectual Title and Right, than
what was had by Christ's death; for the Title had by Christ's death (if it can
be called a Title) was far Remore and Common to such, as shall never have any
profit by it; but the other is Certain, Particular, Proxime, and gives
possession, ^us in re. (10.) Then Christ's blood, as shed upon the cross, was
but a Po^^ntial thing, having no power or virtue in it self to redeem any, it
was but a poor Potential price: and all its virtue of actual purchasing and
procureing is from man's performing the Condition; this, and this only, gives
it Power and Efficacy: and so Christ is beholden to man for giving virtue unto
his Blood, and making it effectual, which before was a deadineffectual thing.
Then let any judge, who should have the greatest share of the Glory of
Redemption, Man or Christ. (11.) was Christ's death Absolute in no respect; or
was it, as to some things, I mean, belonging to Grace and Glory, Absolute? if
in nothing, then Man must certanely have a great share of the glory: if it was
Absolute as to any thing, what was that? and why was it more Absolute as to
that, than as to other things? And why should it then be simply, and without
limitation, said that Christ died for all Conditionally?

For Further confirmation of our 19. Argument, and confutation of our
Adversaries position, we add (21.) That Christ Jesus is heard of the Father in
all that he asks Psalm. 2: 8. Ioh. 11: 41, 42. and as an High Priest he entered
into heaven Heb. 9: 11, 12. now to appear in the presence of God for us verse.
24. to prepare a place Ioh. 14: 2. and to act the part of an Advocat,
interceding with the Father, in the behalf of all such, for whom he died 1.
Ioh. 2: 1, 2. If then Christ, whom his Father hears always, intercedeth in
the behalf all these, for whom he died, either he did not die for all, or all
must certainly be saved. That Christ's Intercession, and Death are for the same
persons, will be, and must be denied by our Adversaries: But to us it is most
manifest from these grounds. (1.) To Intercede and pray are as Essential and
Necessary Acts of the Priestly office, as to offer sacrifice: and the Apostle
Heb. 9. clears up, how Christ did in truth, what the High Priest among the
Jews did in the type; for as the High Priest alone went, once every year, into
the second tabernacle, or holy of holies, not without blood, which he offered
for himself, and the errors of the people verse. 7. So Christ, being come an
High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle,
by his own blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained
eternal Redemption verse. 12. Hence he is said to Live for ever to make
Intercession for us. Heb. 7: 25. and he is an Advocat with the Father 1. Ioh.
2: 1. Hence then it is manifest, that Christ must Intercede for such, as he did
Offer up himself for, or he shall not be a Perfect and Compleet High Priest; or
not faithful to perform all the Offices of the High Priest: neither of which
can be said. (2.) The ground of his Intercession, is held forth to be his
Oblation: as the High Priest went into the holy of holies with the blood of the
sacrifices, which he had offered; so Christ entered into the holy place, having
first obtained by the sacrifice of himself an Eternal Redemption. Heb. 9: 12.
So he is an Advocate with the Father, being first a Propitiation for sins 1.
Ioh. 2: 1, 2. (3.) Both his Death and Intercession make up one Compleet Medium,
and are intended and designed, as one Medium, for the end designed, viz. the
bringing of many sons unto glory, saving to the uttermost all that come to God
through him etc. (4.) How unreasonable is it to think, that Christ would
refuise to Pray for such, whom he loved so dearly, as to lay down his life for?
yet he says expressly, that he prays not for the world, but for others,
distinguished from the world, Ioh. 17: 9. (5.) As His Death was for such as the
Father had given him (is we saw above) so his Intercession and Prayer is
restricted to such Ioh. 17: 9. - I pray not for the world; but for them which
thou have given me, for they are thine. (6.) Christ's end in coming into the
world, was to save his people; Hence he got that name Jesus; but he should not
be able to save them, Perfectly, Compleetly, and to the Utermost, if he did not
join his Intercession, with his Oblation; Yea upon this account he continues
ever a Priest, having an unchangable Priesthood, Heb. 2: 24, 25. But this man,
because he continues ever, has an unchangable Priesthood, wherefore he is
able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them. (7.) The Apostle so joyneth them together
Romans 8: 34. that they must do manifest violence to the Apostles reasoning, who
would pull them asunder, and separate the one from the other. It is (sais he)
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. (8.) Yea, they are so joined
together here, that his death alone considered could not yield that ground of
triumph and boasting, nor security from Accusations: Yea rather, that is risen
again, etc. (9.) So that the separating and taking of these asunder, is
greatly prejudicial to the consolation of his people; for though they should
attain to some apprehensions of Christ's dying for them, as an Advocate with
the Father, upon new sins 1. Ioh. 2: 1, 2. Though Christ died, yet they might
be condemned, for he must also Interceed; and if he do not Intercede for them,
their Hopes, and Comforts are gone: And so there should be no force in that,
who is he that condemns, it is Christ that die^^ Romans 8: 34. And a poor soul
might be hal saved, but not to the uttermust, contrare to Heb. 2: 25. (10.) And
that place Romans 8: 33. restricteth both equally unto the Elect: who shall lay
any thing to the charge of God's elect? (11.) When Christ laid down his life a
Ransom for sinners, he could not but know, that by that Ransom none should be
actually saved, without his Intercession, it being accorded betwixt Father and
Son, that the mediator should mediate both by Price and by Prayer: And he could
not but know, for whom he purposed and intended to Interceed; how shall we then
suppose, that he would lay down his life for those, for whom he was purposed
not to Pray? Or that he would do the most for them, For whom he would not do
the least? (12.) Christ's intercession is really a presenting unto God the
Oblation made: Therefore says the Apostle Heb. 9: 24. that Christ is entered
into heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us: And so by
appearing he Interceedeth: and his appearing is in his own blood, whereby he
obtained Eternal Redemption Heb. 9: 12. and so his Intercession must be for
all, for whom the Oblation was, and the eternal Redemption was obtained. (13.)
Yea both these are so joined together by Esaias Chap. 53: 12. as that they are
made one ground, and procureing cause of God's divideing him a portion with the
great, and of Christ's own divideing the spoil with the strong; Because he has
poured out his soul unto death, and he bare the sin of many, and made
^ntercession for the transgressors. (14.) This is further clear from the
reasons, we gave to confirm that fast connection betwixt Christ's Impetration
and Application, in the foregoing paragraph, for the Actual Application of the
benefit and fruit of his oblation is attributed to his Intercession. (15.)
Nay, that whole Chapter Ioh. 17. confirms this; for there Christ is both
Offering himself, or sanctifying himself thereunto verse. 19. and Interceding*
and these are so lincked together, both in themselves, and as to the persons
for whom, that it must argue, at least, much incogitancy, to imagine a
divulsion, and separation of these two acts of his Priesthood. (16.) If Christ
Intercede not for the same persons, for whom he died, we ask for whom he
Intercedeth? Is it for actual believers? Then we ask a Scripture ground for
this restriction? And then it is manifest hence, that Christ Intercedeth not
for the working of faith in any: And yet Esaias tells us, that he makes
Intercession for transgressors. And we see Ioh. 17: 20. that he prays not
only for those, who were already believers, but for such also, as were not yet
believers. He told us Himself also, that he would pray the Father for the
Spirit, Ioh. 14: verse. 16. And among other things, this is one work of the
Spirit, to cause a sinner believe, 2. Cor. 4: 13. Ephesians. 1: 17, 18, 19.

The point we are upon will be further clear, if we consider. (22.) That
Christ's death was a Redemption, and we are said to be Redeemed thereby Gal. 4:
5. and 3: 13. Romans 3: 24. Ephesians. 1: 7. Col. 1: 14. ^ Pet. 1: 8. Revel. 5: 9.
Tit. 2: 14. And therefore, all such, as he laid down this Redemption, or
Redemptionmoney for, must of necessity be redeemed and saved, and consequently
he died not for all, seeing all are not redeemed and saved. His Ransom, or
Price of Redemption, which he laid down, viz. his blood, which he shed, is
called (...) a ransom Mat. 20: 28. and (...) 1. Tim. 2: 6. That all such, for
whom this Redemption-money was paid, and this Ransom was given, must be
saved, is clear; for (1.) Other ways it were no Redemption, a Ransom given
for Captives does say, that these Captives, in Law and Justice, ought to be set
at liberty. (2.) This Redemption is the same with, (as to the effect,) or has
attending it, forgiveness of sins. Col. 1: 14. Ephesians. 1: 7. and forgiveness of
sins, is with justification, and has blessedness attending it Romans 4: 6, 7, 8.
(3.) Salvation necessarily follows upon this Ransom and Redemption, as is
clear 1. Tim. 2: 4. compared with verse. 6. (4.) This Redemption is from a vain
Conversation 1, Pet. 1: 18. and consequently is attended with Salvation. (5.)
It is attended with justification, Romans 3: 24. being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ. (6.) Hence it is called
the Redemption of the transgressions Heb. 9: 15. that is, either of
Transgressors, by a metonimy, or of us from the evil of transgressions, and
that upon a valuable compensation and satisfaction; for (...) is a Redemption
from evil by the Intervening of a Price, a (...), a Ransom, (7.) This was a
Redemption from the Law, for God sent forth his son -- made under the Law, to
redeem them, who were under the Law Gal 4: 4, 5. and so by this redemption,
there is a liberation had from the Law, and its Curse and Penality. (8.) And it
is a Redemption of such as were under the Law, for this end, that they might
receive the adoption of sons Gal. 4: 5. But this Adoption of sons is not
common to all. (9.) All which receives confirmation from this, that the
Father, who received this ransom, did himself send his Son to lay it down, and
so it was his own Ransom; and therefore must have been paid, upon a certain
design of actually Redeeming and delivering from Sin, Satan, Death and Hell,
those, for whom it was laid down. (10.) So is there an other end of this
Redemption mentioned Gal. 3: 13, 14. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of
the Law -- that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ. (11.) Seeing the Lord Jehovah might have refused to free the
sinner, upon any Redemption or Satisfaction offered, and exacted all of the
sinners themselves, that they lay under by the Law, it was a great
condescendence in love of this great Lord, and a gracious act of Soveraignity,
to accept of a mediation; and of Love and free grace to provide a Redeemer; we
cannot but in reason think, that His good pleasure did regulare this matter, as
to the Persons, who should be Redeemed, and as to the manner and method after
which they should actually partake of the Redemption. And that therefore, the
persons to be redeemed were condescended upon, and the persons condescended
upon were certanely to be Redeemed; the Lord having intended, in the
contrivance of this Redemption, the certain Salvation and Redemption of those,
who were condescended upon, and of none else, and the Intentions, Designs and
Purposes of God are not vain nor frustrable.

Further (23.) Christ's death ha^ a real Merito in it, that is, a worth and
value, to procure the good things, it was given for; so that thereby there was
a Purchase made. Act. 20: 28. And therefore, we cannot suppose, that all that
was Procured and Purchased hereby, was a General, Uncertain, and merely
Possible thing. If it had a value and worth in it, (as no question it had) to
purchase and procure grace and glory, unto all, for whom it was given, and was
accepted as a valuable price of the Father, why should not the thing, hereby
purchased, be given and granted, in due time? To say, that all was suspended
upon a condition, is to made all Uncertain: or we must say, that Christ's
death did procure that Condition also: and then all is right, for that is it,
we say.

(24.) Christ's death is to be considered as the death of a Testator Heb. 9:
15, 16, 17. And for this cause, he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that
by means of death, for the redemption of transgressions, that were under the
first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance: for where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the
death of the Testatour: for a Testament is of force after men are dead,
otherwise it is of no strength, at all, while the Testatour lives. So he said
himself of the cup, in the Sacrament, that it was the blood of the New
Testament Mat. 26: 28. Mark. 14: 24. and that it was the cup of the New
Testament in his blood Luke 22: 20. and Paul calls it, the New Testament in
his blood 1. Cor. 11: 25. So that his Death and Bloodshed was the death of a
Testatour, for the confirmation of the New Testament, and for ascertaneing of
the Legatees, of the good things bequathed to them in legacy, by the Testament.
Now a Testament commonly is a declaration of the Testatours free, Absolute and
Voluntary Purpose of bestowing such and such benefits, to such and such
friends; and so it is the Testatours letter will, whereby he wills that this
legacy be given to this person, and that to another. It is true, men may insert
some Conditions, as to some legacies, because they are but men, and know not
contingent future things, nor have they the wills and dispositions of such, they
appoint legatees, in their own hand and power; But it is otherwise with our
Testatour: and therefore we cannot think, that He left the legacies in his
Testament, at the uncertainty of conditions, to be performed by men; especially
considering, how as he died to ratify the Testament, so he rose again to
administrate the same, as the sole executor thereof by his Spirit, and that
what legacies he left to be bestowed, upon such and such conditions he left not
the matter at an uncertainty; for the condition it self was bequeathed, as the
necessary good of the Testament, without which all would have been to no
purpose. It is unreasonable then to think, that Christ died to give force to
his Testament; and yet it might come to pass, that he should have no heir, to
enjoy the goods left in legacy. Nor is it reasonable to think, that all the
world were equally his heirs, seeing the Inheritance, and Kingdom is for the
little flock Luke 12: 32. and a peculiar select number 1. Pet. 1: 4. Ioh. 17:
24. Col. 1: 12. who are heirs of the promises, of God, of salvation, of the
Grace of God, of the Kingdom etc. Romans 8: 17. Gal. 3: 29. and 4: 7, 30. Ephesians.
3: 6. Heb. 1: 14. and 6: 1. and 11: 7. Iam. 2: 5. 1. Pet. 3: 7. Therefore, all
whom Christ has appointed heirs in his Testament, shall certainly enjoy the
good things tested, in due time, for his Death gave force to his Testament, as
being his Last and Unchangeable will, so that they cannot miss of the
inheritance, and be disappointed; especially considering, that Christ by his
death laid down a valuable and rich price to purchase all these good things,
which he left in legacy to his friends and heirs.

Christ's death moreover (25.) is to be considered, as the death of a Sponsor
and Cautioner, and this will further confirm our point: Hence he is called a
Surety Heb. 7: 22. and is said to die for the ungodly Romans 5: 6. to be made a
curse for us Gal. 3: 13. and to be made sin. 2. Cor. 5: 21. and other
expressions of the like Kind have the same import: From whence it is evident,
that Christ took the debt upon him, that was justly to be charged upon the
account of sinners, that he became one person in Law, with sinners the
principal debtor; that he paid and satisfied for all the debt, and that in
their room and place: and that therefore all these, for whom he died, must
certainly be delivered from the Debt, and from the Charge and Consequences
thereof. These things are manifest of themselves, and need no further
confirmation. Now seeing all are not delivered from the debt of sin, nor from
the punishment due because of sin, we cannot say, that Christ died, as a
Cautioner, for all; for sure his death was a complete payment of all the debt
he undertook to pay, and to satisfy for. Nor can we say, that he died as a
Cautioner for he knew not whom; far less, that he died as a Cautioner, and yet
none might possibly receive advantage thereby. Not yet can we say, that he
died, as a Cautioner, and paid for some sins of all, and not for all their
sins, for whom he died; seeing he was a Compleet Cautioner. So then, as Christ
died in their room and stead, as their Cautioner, and Sponsor, for whom he
died, wrong should be done to Him, if all these, for whom he was a Cautioner,
should not at length actually be delivered out of prison, and freed from the
accusation of the Law: They, for whom he died, being in him legally, when he
died, and morally and virtually dying in him, and with him, must not, in
justice, be made to pay their own debt, and satisfy the Law over again:
Christ's stricking hands (as the phrase is Prove. 22: 26.) and so putting his
name in the obligation, and accordingly making satisfaction, the Principal's
name is blotted out, and he free in the time appointed: for he bare our griefs,
and carried our sorrows etc. Esai. 53: 4, 5. and by means of death, he
delivered them, who through fear of death were all their life time subject to
bondage Heb. 2: 14, 15.

This matter will be further clear, if we consider (26.) How the death of
Christ was a Satisfaction: and none can deny this, but Antichristian Socinian:
Others willingly grant, that Christ did substitute himself, in the room of
sinners, and was willing to undergo the punishment, threatened in the Law
against sin, that the sinners, for whom he undertook satisfaction, might be
freed: So he bare their sins Esai. 53: 11. 1. Pet. 2: 24. And he was made sin
2. Cor. 5: 21. Hence he is called a Propitiation 1. Ioh. 2: 3 and 4: 10. Romans
3: 25. Whereby we see, that Christ took upon him the whole Punishment, that was
due to sin; and that God, whom sinners had offended, was well pleased with what
he did and suffered, according to that undertaking, yea more pleased, than he
was displeased with all the sins of those, for whom he suffered: for hereby
His Authority and Justice was made to appear more glorious and excellent. How
then can we think, that many of those, and it may be all, for whom he gave that
satisfaction, may, notwithstanding, possibly be made to make satisfaction for
themselves, as they may by our Adversaries way? Was not his satisfaction full
and complete? Why should any then, for whom he gave that satisfaction, be
liable to Punishment? Is this consonant to justice? Did not the Lord Jehovah
send Christ and sit him with a body for this end Psalm. 40: 6. Heb. 10: 5. and
laid upon Him the iniquities of us all Esai. 53: 6. that He might make full
satisfaction for them to justice, and suffer for them all that the Law could
demand of them, or they were liable unto by the broken Law? Did not Christ do
and suffer all, which he undertook to do, and suffer for this end? And did not
the Father accept of what he did and suffered, as a full Compensation, and
Satisfaction? And seeing this cannot be denied, and it is manifest that this was
done by Christ as a Cautioner Heb. 7: 22. how can it be imagined, that the
Principal debtor shall not thereupon have a fundamental right to freedom and
pardon, and in due time, after the Gospel method, be actually Discharged, and
delivered from the penalty of the Law, and Redeemed by the Satisfactory Price
paid by the Cautioner, and accepted of the Creditour? Does not the denying of
this certain and infallible Effect, call in question the value and worth of
Christ's satisfaction, and give ground to say, that Jehovah was not Satisfied
with the price; or that Christ made no Satisfaction? Did not Christ make
Reconciliation for the sins of his people? Heb. 2: 17? (...), that is, (...).

Add for a further confirmation of this. (27.) That Christ's death was a
propitiating sacrifice. He gave himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to
God, for a sweet smelling savor Ephesians. 5: 2. He offered up himself once Heb.
7: 27. He is a sacrifice for us, 1. Cor. 5: 7. and the lamb of God, which
bears, or takes away she sin of the world Ioh. 1: 29. He offered up himself
without spot to God Heb. 9: 14. and he was once offered to bear the sins of
many Heb. 9: 28. -- we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all, -- he offered one sacrifice for sin for ever Heb. 10: 10,
12. Now as the sacrifices under the Law, which were a type of this, did not
procure a General, Possible benefit, but did procure a Real favor, only to
the People of God; for they sanctified to the purifying of the flesh Heb. 9:
13. So certainly this Real and Perfect sacrifice must have a Peculiar and Real
Effect and sprinkle consciences from dead works, to serve the living God: Heb.
9: 14. And this is not a thing common to all, nor is it a mere Possible thing:
They must then do a great indignity unto the Sacrifice of Christ, who speak of
an Universal merely Possible Redemption.

Add to this. (28.) How upon this Sacrifice, which Christ offered up, in his
death, we read of a Reconciliation made Ephesians. 2: 16. and that he might
Reconcile both unto God, in one body, by the cross, having s^aine the enmity,
by it, or in himself 2. Cor. 5. 10. when we were enemies we were Recenciled to
God, by the death of his Son. Col. 1: 20. and having made peace, through the
blood of his cross, by him to Reconcile all things unto himself. Therefore is
he called our Peace Ephesians. 2: 14. and he makes Peace verse. 15. we have Peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 5: 1. Now this Reconciliation
being of parties, that are at variance, must be a Reconciliation of both to
other, and so a mutual Reconciliation: and Christ effectuateth both: and both
are purchased by his death: we cannot then imagine with Socinians, that all the
Reconciliation, mentioned in Scripture, is of us to God; as if God's Anger and
Wrath were not appeased and taken out of the way; nor with Arminians, that
Christ obtained an Universal Reconciliation of God to all, but no
Reconciliation of man to God; friendship betwixt enemies must be mutual, if a
Reconciliation be; and our state before this was enmity Romans 5: 10. Col. 1: 20,
21. and God's wrath was against us and upon us, Ephesians. 2: 3. Ioh. 3: 36. But
now, how will this agree with Universal Redemption? Is God Reconciled to all,
when many perish under his wrath, for ever? Can God be said to be, upon the
death of Christ, Reconciled to all, when it may so fall out, that not one soul
shall have peace with God? How comes it to pass, that many, whose
Reconciliation Christ has purchased, live and die enemies to God? Sure the
Apostle tells us 2. Cor. 5: 19. that to whom God is reconciled, to them he does
not impute sin: and he assures us, that all such, as are reconciled to God, by
the death of his Son, shall be saved. Romans 5: 10.

Add (29.) That it seems hard to say, That Christ laid down his life a
Price, a Ransom, a Sacrifice, an Atonement and Propitiation, etc. to Purchase,
Procure, Merit Grace, and Glory, and to make Reconciliation and Peace betwixt
God, and such, as were already suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, and to
satisfy for their sins, who were already condemned to the torments of hell
fire: and yet this must be said by such, as assert Universal Redemption. Was
Christ so prodigal of his blood, as to cast it away, for such as were
irrecoverably gone? If it be said, that this is no more hard, than to say, that
Christ suffered for such, as were already glorified. Any may see, how vast the
difference is, for such as were glorified, were glorified upon the account of
Christ's Death, which was to be, in the time appointed and designed by Father
and Son. When one promises a sum for redeeming of so many slaves, and the
sum, according to mutual agreement, is to be paid at such a day, the slaves
may be presently relieved, in contemplation of the price, which is accepted,
and is to be paid hereafter at the time appointed: But when one comes to lay
down Ransome-money, he cannot be said to lay it down for such are are dead,
and that he knows to be dead many years ago, and so incapable of Redemption.

Further (30.) If Christ died for all, then he intended to die for all; then
the Father also intended, that he should die for all; then he intended that it
should be a Redemption for all, and that thereby all should be Redeemed: for to
what end else should Christ die and redeem, if not that such, as he died for
and Redeemed, be Redeemed and Delivered? Or to what other end should God
intended that Christ should die for all, than to the ends mentioned in
Scripture, of which we have spoken? And how can we say, that God did intend the
Redemption of all, when all are not actually Redeemed? Are his intentions so
fallible, and frustrable? If it be said, that he Intended only a Possible
Salvation, and not Actual. I Ans. The Scripture speaks no such thing as we
have seen: And how unsuteable is it to the wisdom of God, to send his Son,
actually to die, and bear the curse, and only intend thereby a Possible
Redemption, which might never prove Actual to any one soul? If it be said, That
he Intended an Actual Redemption, but Conditionally. I Answer. Redemption upon
a Condition is but a Conditional Redemption, and that is but a Potential,
Possible Redemption, unless you say, that the condition is also purchased: and
then, as to God, it is an Absolute Redemption, and intended as such: does it
suite the wisdom: of God, to intend Redemption to all, and not intend also the
Condition, by which alone it must become Actual, and which he alone can work,
but will not? Must we thus ascribe such intentions to God, as must hang upon
man's will, and be subordinate thereunto? Or if he see, that the Condition will
never be performed, how can we think, that he intends any thing upon a
Condition, that shall never be? But enough of this, at present.

Moreover (31.) This doctrine of Universal Redemption is derogatory to the
solid consolation of the Redeemed, and Weakeneth the grounds of their song;
and therefore it is not to be admitted. This Argument is fully and solidely
prosecuted, and vindicated from what can be allaiged against it, by the learned
and solid divine Mr. Durbam, in his Comment on the Revelation page 304. and
305. And to him shall I refer the Reader: only I shall crave leave to add
this: That by our Adversaries grounds, the song of the Saved shall not run, as
it does Revel. 5: 9, 10. But rather thus, We have saved our selves, out of
every kindred, and tongue; and people, and nation, and have made our selves unto
God, Kings and Priests: For whereas Christ by his blood Redeemed all of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and not some only out of them; we
our selves have, by our own free good will, made a difference betwixt our
selves, and the rest; and we are no more beholden to Christ for all that we
have attained to, then the damned in hell are, for whom Christ shed his blood,
as well as for us, and to whom he purchased by his blood and death, as much, as
for us; as Adversaries say. So that I see not how Arminians, can think to join
in this Song, and have any share of this Consolation, which is solely founded
upon the Redemption of Christ, as a peculiar and no common blessing. Let them
consider it, for it concerns them not a little, seeing all that come to glory
will sing to the honor of their Redeemer, upon other grounds, as we see, then
these are, which our Adversaries lay down, and plead so earnestly for. If any
say, that Christ moreover has purchased faith to some, even to all that are
actually saved. I Answer. As neither the Arminians, nor semi-Arminians, I mean
the followers of Camero will say this, or grant so much; so the granting of it,
will ever the other Universal Conditional Redemption; for the Scripture
speaks but of one kind of Redemption, of one Price laid down, of one Covenant
betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator; and of one Giving unto Christ of Persons to
be redeemed. Shall we think, that Christ would lay down as great a ransom for
such, as he was not to purchase faith unto, as for the rest? Shall we think
that he would lay down his life in vain, and make no purchase thereby? And of
the Reprobat, for whom he was not to purchase thereby? And of the Reprobat, for
whom he was not to purchase faith, he knew he could make no purchase; for
without faith his death would be of no advantage unto them. And where do we
read, that all were given unto him to redeem? Yea, are not the given ones
clearly distinguished from the rest? Ioh. 17: 6, 9, as we cleared above.

Again (32.) If the Redemption of Christ be Universal, and Conditioonal: it
must necessarily follow, that Christ laid down his life, and the price of his
blood, as much for Judas, and all the Reprobate, as he did for John, and all
the Elect: for the Redemption being Conditionally for all, it cannot be more
for one, then for another. And yet this cannot be said, as appears from the
reasons formerly adduced. This would lay, that the Fathers and Christ's love was
equal toward all; and that no more was purchased for the one, than for the
other; and that the Elect have no more benefit by Christ's death, than the
Reprobat have; and that Christ had no more an eye to Redeem the Elect by his
death, than to Redeem the Reprobat; and was no more a Cautioner for the one,
than for the other: all which and the like cannot but be looked upon, as most
absurd. Shall we think, that Christ became sin, as well, or as much, for Judas,
as for Peter? Shall we think, that He redeemed all alike from the Curse of the
Law? These sound ill to Christian ears.

So (33.) we may thus reason: Either Christ's Redemption is Conditional and
Universal, as to the Price laid down and Satisfaction made; or as to the
Application and Actual bestowing of the benefits purchased: But neither can be
said to the advantage of the Adversaries cause; for if the last be said, we
willingly grant that some of the benefits, as Justification, Adoption, and
actual Glorification, are conferred in a manner conditionally: but some, as
faith and the New heart, are given absolutely: and this cannot Help the
Adversaries cause, for they will not say, that either all have faith bestowed
upon them, or that all are by believing Justified and Adopted etc. and so this
is not Universal: and if the first be said, to wit, That Christ laid down his
life Conditionally, it must be said, that Christ did not lay down his life
Absolutely, but upon some condition; and what can that Condition be, upon which
the death of Christ was suspended? If it be said, that the faith of those, to
whom it was to be preached, was the Condition: then it must be said, that
christ did not die until these believed, or that his death was no satisfaction
or price, until they actually believed: and then the Father could not be well
pleased with the price as a satisfaction, until men's Faith came to make it an
Actual price: which is both absurd, and contrary to Scripture. If it be said,
That Christ did absolutely lay down his life a satisfactory Ransom, and that
for all, yet so as none, that would not fulfill the Condition, should be
redeemed. I Answer. If it was an Absolute satisfactory Ransom, and accepted as
such, something must have been purchased thereby, and all behoved actually and
really to be delivered from the Law and from the curse, or from something, by
virtue of that Absolute Price; and they could not be made to pay over again
what was paid by the price of his blood; for Justice could not call for two
satisfactions. And if all were, upon this Absolute Price paid, Redeemed from
the Law, the Curse, and the Sentence of the first Covenant, no man shall now
die for that broken Covenant. If it be said, No man was Absolutely delivered
even from that, but only Conditionally. I Ans. How then was it an Absolute
Price? Or what was purchased thereby? If it be said, That a possibility of
Freedom was absolutely purchased. Ans. This was rejected above: and the
Scripture infers Actual Redemption from Christ's purchase, He shall justify
many, for he shall bear their iniquities Esai. 53: 11. which says, That all
whose iniquities he did bear, shall be Actually and Really Justified by him,
and not have a mere Possibility of Justification.

Further (34.) We may thus argue, If Christ died for all and every one, He
either died for all Absolutely or Conditionally, The first cannot be said, for
the reasons already adduced militate against that. Nor can it be said, that He
died for all Conditionally: for then either he died to purchase Life and
Salvation to all upon Condition of their performance of something proposed as a
Condition; or to purchase salvation, and all the means thereunto or Conditions
thereof, Conditionally, But neither of these can be said. Therefore etc. The
major is clear from this; that the enumeration is full, and noother way can
this Conditional Redemption be conceived or explained. The minor may be thus
confirmed, The first way cannot be said, to wit, that life and salvation was
purchased to all, upon a Condition to be by them performed, that is, upon
Condition of their believing: for either this Condition is in the power of
every son of Adam, or not: if it be not in their power (as all but Pelagians
will confess) then this Redemption is no Redemption; for a Redemption of
Captives upon a Condition impossible to them, is as good as no Redemption. Nor
can the last way be said, to wit, that Redemption, and all the Conditions and
Means thereof were Conditionally purchased; for what can be assigned as the
Condition of these Conditions? And though there were a Condition of the Lords
working of Faith assigned, (which yet we find not in Scripture) yet that would
not help the matter; for that Condition of Faith would it self be a mean to
salvation, and so purchased Conditionally, upon another Condition, and that
other Condition must be purchased upon another Condition, and so in infinitum:
which is absurd.

As also (35.) this is considerable, That the asserting of Universal Redemption
goes not alone; but there are several other Universalities also affirmed, and
maintained, either as Consequences, or Concomitants, or Grounds thereof, which
the Scripture knows not: such as these. (1.) An Universal Love and
Philanthropie, toward all and every one, without any difference: which they
lay down, as the ground of the Sending of Christ to die for all
indiscriminatly. (2.) An Universal Will in God to save all, which they call an
Antecedent Will; and hold forth as a Velleity, or a wish and desire, that all
might be saved; as if God could not effectuat whatever he desired, or could
have a velleity toward any thing, which either he could not, or would not
effectuat. (3.) An Universal Predestination conditional; which expression
Amerald used until the Synods in France did dissuade him therefrom. (4.) An
Universal gift of all to Christ, or an Universal gift of Christ to all; that
is, a Will and purpose that Christ should lay down his life for all, and Redeem
all; at least Conditionally. (5.) An Universal Justification conditional. And
why not also an Universal Salvation conditional? (6.) An Universal Covenant of
Grace made with all mankind in Adam, wherein is a free universal deed of gift
of Christ first, and of Pardon, Spirit and Glory, in and by him, to all
Mankind without exception, upon condition of acceptance; as also an offer of
Faith, Repentance, Conversion, with all the consequences thereof. (7.) An
Universal will in God to call into this Covenant, and unto the Participation of
the benefits thereof, all and every man. (8.) An Universal execution of this
will, or promulgation of this Gospel or New Covenant, unto all and every one,
by common favors and benefits bestowed on all, whereby all are called to
believe in a merciful pardoning God; and all have abundance of Mercies and
Means of Recovery and of life; for the Lord now governs the world, only on
terms of grace. (9.) Upon this follows an Universal Command to all men to
use certain duties and means for their Recovery by Faith and Repentance.
(10.) An Universal pardon of the first Sin, so far, at least, that no man shall
perish for the mere Original sin of Nature alone, unless he add the rejection
of grace. (11.) Hence follows an Universal Judgment and Sentence on all, in
the great day, only according as they have performed the new Gospel Conditions.
(12.) Some also add an Universal Subjective Grace, whereby all are enabled to
perform the conditions of the new Covenant. (13.) Universal proper Fruits and
Effects of this death, whereby all the outward favors, that Heathens enjoy are
said to be purchased for them by Christ: and why not also what Devils enjoy?

Finally (36.) This assertion of Universal Redemption lays the ground of, and
makes way to a new frame of the Covenant of Grace, quite overturning its
Nature, and transforming it into a new Covenant of Works, making it one and the
same with that, as to kind, and only to differ, as to the change of Conditions
to be performed by man: for as, in the first Covenant, Adam was to obtain right
to, and possession of life promised, in, by, for, through and upon the account
of his fulfilling the Condition of perfect obedience, imposed by the Lord; so,
in the New Covenant, man is to obtain and acquire to himself a right to and
possession of the Life promised, in, by, for, through and upon the account of
his performance of the Condition of Faith and new obedience, now imposed in the
Gospel; and all the difference is, that in stead of perfect obedience to the
Law, which was the Condition of the first Covenant, now Faith and sincere
Gospel Obedience is made the Condition: And thus we can no less he said to be
justified by works of the Law, or which we do, then Adam should have been said
to have been so justified, had he stood; and this justification gives as great
ground of boasting unto man, and of making the reward of debt, and not of
grace, as justification by the first Covenant would have done; for though it be
said, that Christ has made satisfaction to justice, for the breach of the
first Law, and thereby purchased to all, upon Condition, Justification and
Salvation; yet this removes not the difficulty; for what is purchased by
Christ's death is made Universal and Common to all; and so can be nothing
(according to our Adversaries) but a putting of all men, in statu quo prius, in
case to run and obtain the prize for themselves; as God's absolute free love
put Adam in that Condition at first: Christ's death (though thereby, as they
say, he purchased the New Covenant, which with them is the chief, if not the
only, effect and fruit of his Death and Merits) can be no more, than a very
remote ground of Right to Life and Salvation, unto any person; for it is made
Universal and Common to all, so that all have equal share therein, and
advantage thereby; man himself, by performing the new Conditions, only making
the difference; so that the immediate ground of the Right to life, which any
have, is their own Faith and Obedience, or performance of the New
Covenant-conditions. Whereby it is manifest, that as to our Particular, and
Immediate Right to Happiness, we are to plead our own works, and lean to them,
as our ground whereupon we may stand and appear before God's Tribunal; and upon
the account thereof plead for the crown, as our due debt, having now run for
it, and performed the Condition, agreed upon, and so sing praises to our
selves, in stead of singing praises to our Redeemer. Hence the Righteousness,
wherein we must appear before God, is not the Righteousness of Christ, but our
own; for the Righteousness of Christ, say they, is only imputed in regard of
its effects, whereof the new Covenant is the All, or the Chief; and so that
does not become the Righteousness of any man, nor can be said to be imputed to
any man properly, (which also they assert) but his own Faith is only imputed
properly (which also they plead for) as his Righteousness; not, as a Way,
Medium, or Method, of Gospel-Righteousness (especially when Gospel-Obedience
is adjoined) The Righteousness of Christ being thereby only accounted to be
imputed, in that it has procured, that our own Gospel Righteousness, Faith and
new Obedience, shall be imputed to us, as our Immediate Righteousness; and the
ground of our Right to Glory. What accord is betwixt this frame of the Covenant
of Grace, and that way of justification held forth by Socinians, Arminians and
Papists, the learned will easily see; and how contrary it is to the Covenant of
Grace held forth in the Gospel, and hitherto professed and maintained by the
orthodox, every one acquainted therewith cannot be ignorant; and it is obvious,
how opposite this is unto what the Apostle says Phil. 3: 8, 9. yea doubtless,
and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung; that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own
Righteousness, which is of the Law; but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. And Tit. 3: 5, 6, 7. Not by
works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved
us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost which he
shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: that being justified
by his grace, we should be made he^rs, according to the hope of eternal life.
And Romans 3: 20, 21, 22, 24. Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no
flesh be justified -- but now the Righteousness of God without the Law is
manifest -- even the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ,
unto all and upon all them that believe -- being justified freely by his grace,
through the Redemption, that is in Jesus Christ. And many other places. It is
no less clear, how hereby the true nature of justifying faith, and Gospel
Obedience is perverted: and withal how dangerous this is, if put into
practice; or if men act and live accordingly, every serious exercised Christian
knows.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction to the Work, and the Text Gal 3. 11. opened up. Page
1 CHAP. II. Naturally we are inclined to cry up Self in Justification. 12 CHAP.
III. The Doctrine of Justification should be kept pure with all diligence, and
what dangerous expressio^s should be shunned. 15 CHAP. IV. Justification is so
contrived in the Gospel, as man may be abased, and have no ground of boasting.
22 CHAP. V. In Justification there is a state of Life. 25 CHAP. VI. What
mysteries are in Justification. 34 CHAP. VII. Justification through the Imputed
Righteousness of Christ, cleared out of the Old Testament, and the passages
vindicated from the exceptions of JOHN GOODWINE. 57 CHAP. VIII. Some passages
out of the New Test. confirming the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
vindicated from the exceptions of JOHN GOODWINE. 66 CHAP. IX. Othen passages of
the New Test* briefly mentioned, which plead for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness. 94 CHAP. X. Some Arguments for the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, vindicated from the exceptions of Mr. JOHN GOODWINE. 98 CHAP.
XI. Objections taken out of Scripture by Mr. GOODWINE against the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ unto Justification, Answered. 118 CHAP. XII. Some
other Objections, proposed by JOHN GOODWINE, examined. 147 CHAP. XIII. Mr.
BAXTER's opinion, concerning Imputation, examined. 182 CHAP. XIV. How Christ is
our Surety, and what Mr. BAXTER says as to this, examined. 202 CHAP. XV. Mr.
BAXTER's Answers to some of our Arguments for Imputation, examined. 209 CHAP.
XVI. Mr. BAXTER's further opposition to the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness examined. 226 CHAP. XVII. Reasons enforcing the practice of the
Truth vindicated. 247 CHAP. XVIII. Some of the Duties of such, as live the life
of Justification, proposed. 254 CHAP. XIX. Of the life of Justification, as to
its continuance. 259 CHAP. XX. The State of Justification remains,
notwithstanding aftersins, and punishments. 273 CHAP. XXI. Justification is by
Faith, what this Faith is? and how it is wrought? 280 CHAP. XXII. Our act of
Faith is not imputed to us as a Righteousness. 296 CHAP. XXIII. Some Argum,
against the Imput* of Faith vindicated from the exceptions of I. G. 303 CHAP.
XXIV. The Imputation of Faith it self is not proved from Romans IV. 5. 314 CHAP.
XXV. Faith is not our Gospel-Righteousness. 327 CHAP. XXVI. Christ did not
procure, by his death, the New Covenant, or the terms thereof. 335 CHAP. XXVII.
How Faith is, and may be called a Condition of the New Cov. and of
Justification, how not? 339 CHAP. XXVIII. How Faith is and may be called an
Instrument? 346 CHAP. XXIX. What interest Repentance has in our Justification:
and that it is no Condition of the same. 357 CHAP. XXX. Whether Love, purpose
of New Obedience, or Perseverance be Conditions of Justification. 374 CHAP.
XXXI. Gospel-Obedience is not the Condition of Justification. 383 CHAP. XXXII.
Of the Object of Justifying Faith. 391 CHAP. XXXIII. The Righteousness of
Christ is the special Object of Faith in Justification. 398 CHAP. XXXIV. Faith
in Justification respects not in a special manner Christ as a King but as a
Priest. 403 CHAP. XXXV. Faith is the only Condition, on our part, of the
continuance of Justification. 414 CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Interest of Repentance in
the pardon of after-sins. 426
The Contents of the Appendix.
CHAP. I. IMputation both of Christ's Active and Passive obedience necessary.
431 CHAP. II. Christ underwent the Curse of the Law. 442 CHAP. III. We must not
lean to any Righteousness within us, whereby to be justified. 452 CHAP. IV. The
Law, by the works whereof Paul denies that we are justified, is not the Jewish
Law. 465 CHAP. V. Works excluded in Justification, are not only works done
before Faith, nor perfect works required in the Law of Innocence, nor outward
works only. 473 CHAP. VI. By works, which Paul excludes, is not meant the
merit of Works. 481 CHAP. VII. James 2. 14. cleared and vindicated. 486 CHAP.
VIII. No countenance given to Justification by works from Iam. 2. 14, etc. 497
CHAP. IX. John (...) Arguments against the Imputation of Christ's a Active
Obedience, examined, with a View of Wende^^n's (...) against it. 506 CHAP. X.
The Fathers give Countenance to the Doctrine of Imputation, some Papists
approve it. 518 Arguments against Universal Redemption. 526
ERRATA.
Page 1. l. 13. for woule read would. p. 2. l. 17. r. Essaies. p. 3. l. 3. r.
Essentials. p. 4. l. 4. r. safeguarded. l. 7. r. to be attacqued. l. 39. r.
Notions. p. 7. l. 36. r. held forth, l. 41. r. out. p. 8. l. 18. r. just p. 9.
l. 11. r. comfort. p. 12. l. 5. r. twig. p. 18. l. 31. r. for in thy sight. p.
20. l. pe^ult. r. laying. p. 21. l. 6. r. expect. p. 24. l. 38. r. oftentimes.
p. 28. l. 17. for this, r. his. p. 31. l. 34. for faisty. r. feasting. p. 33.
l. 2. for possion. r. possession, l. 9. r. stands. p. 37, l. 2. r.
transgressor. l. 17. r. finned. l. ult. r. bare. p. 38. l. 9. r.
notwithstanding. p. 42. l. 8. r. length. l. 31. r. derision. p. 46. l. 6. r.
lays down. l. 18. for of r. if. l. 32. r. Justice. l. 37. r. appears. l.
38. r, people. p. 57. l. 10. r. toil. l. 11. r. wages p. 58, l. 23. r. the
Nature and Native work. p. 59. l. 30. r. made over unto. p. 60. l. 42. r. than
what. p. 69. l. 24. r. Christ's p. 70. l. 33, r. than the Righteousness p. 75.
l. ul^. r. (...). p. 76. l. 1. r. (...). p. 81. l. 26. r. prosecution. p. 82.
lin. 3. a fine. r. Christ. p. 84. l. 20. r. Spirit of the Lord. l. penult. r.
believers. l. 85. l. 9. r. of the Moral. p. 90. l. 12. r. and if we be made. p.
91. l. 6. r. all the iniquities. l. 8. r. head of the goat. p. 92. l. 6. r,
these words. p. 94. l. 22. dele of. p. 95. l. 1. and 8. r. circumcision. p. 97.
l. ^. r. suteablenesse. p. 104. l. 36. r. Nor is it. p. 134. l. 25. r. as faith
it self. p. 159. l. 30. r. evacuateth. p. 187. l. 24. r. immediate imputation
of p. 434. l. 14. r. chargeable. p. 476. l. 37. r. words. p. 501. l. 3. a fine.
r. drawn. ibid. r. countenance. p. 512. l. 8 r. repetition. p. 514. l. 24. for
hoas. r. how. p. 521. l. 12. r. Frater meus. p. 533. l. 22. r. If not, then he
was not. l. 24. r. If he knew, then he knew that they would. l. 28, dele of. l.
32. r. shall he not. p. 537. l. 23. r. not one man. l. 35. r. Priests. p. 538.
l. 22, 23. r. but have all their sins charged upon their own score. p. 539 l.
35. r. trespasses. l. 36. r. doubtless. p. 541. l. 10. r. fundamentally. l.
14. and 16. r. actual. p. 551. l. 17. r. of all these l. penult. for is r. as.


