The Description and Use OF THE CARPENTERS-RULE: Together with the use of the
LINE of NUMBERS Commonly called GUNTERS-LINE. Applied to the Measuring of all
Superficies and Solids, as Board, Glass, Plaistering, Wainscoat, Tyling,
Paving, Flooring, etc. Timber, Stone, Square or Round, Gauging of Vessels, etc.
ALSO Military Orders, Simple and Compound Interest, and Tables of Reduction,
with the way of working by Arithmatick, in most of them. Together with the Use
Of the Glasiers and Mr. White's Sliding-Rules. Rendered plain and easy for
ordinary Capacities. By John Brown.

London, Printed for W. Fisher, and R. Mount, at the Postern on Tower Hill,
1688.

Courteous Reader,
THis Little Book was first written by me several years since, and has been
accepted of among many, that ^ave had the Perusal-thereof. And several
Impressions, in that time, be^^g sold off; and it being now out ^f Print, and
none to be had, I have ^^vised it, and left out what might ^ell be spared; and
added that which ^ight make it more plain, and easier (...) be remembered.

As for Instance, in the using of ^^e Line of Numbers (commonly ^^lled Gunters
Line) for the mea^^ring of Board, or Timber, or Stone, ^^e fixed Points or
Centers is only 10 ^^d 12, for square Timber or Stone.

And in measuring of round Timber or Stone (as round Timber) ^^ere is used only
13. 54 for Inches, ^^d 1. 128 for Foot-measure, being ^e Diameter in Inches,
and Foot^easure of any round solid, when one ^oot in length makes one solid
Foot of 12 Inches every way, or 1728 so* lid Cube Inches, which is a foot (...)
Timber, or Stone.

And if the Circumference, or Gi^^ of the Piece about is given, then t^^ fixed
Point or Center used, is at 4^^ 54 the Inches, and 100 part of ^^ Inch about,
when one Foot, or 1^^ Inches long makes one Foot solid.

Or else at 3.545 the Feet, and 100^ parts about, when one Foot long mak^ one
solid Foot equal to 1728 Cube I^

Also, after every Problem, is t^ brief way of working it by the Pen, (...) a
proof of the truth of every Oper^* tion by the Rule; being more th^^ was before
in the former Impression^

Also, the Line of Pence is a^ ded to the Line of Numbers, and plain way set
forth of the use there by the Line on the Rule. Or the m^ plain description
thereof in a Pr^ of Gunters Line 11 times repeate^ which may be had with the
Book, Tower Hill, or the Minories.

The Use of the Gunters Line ^he Art of Gauging, is here but brief^y hinted,
because there are several Books of Gauging, purposely made for that Employment,
more complete ^han can be expected in this short Discourse. And Lines of Area's
of Circles, in Ale-gallons, at any Diameter given, from 1 Inoh to 200 In^hes;
which may be used for round ^r square Vessels, to give the content ^f every
Inch deep in any taper Vessel, as fast as any one can write it down.

And Directions for the ready measuring the Drip, or stooping Bottoms of round
or square Tuns, and the Liquor about the Crowns of Coppers.

Which Books are to be had at the Postern at Tower Hill, or at the Authors, in
the Minories.

To this Impression is added the Use of the Lines called Diameter,
Circumference, Square-Equal, and Square within a Circle; and to find the
Circles, Area, or Content by them; or, having the Area, to find the Diameter,
or the Circumference or the Square-equal, or Square-within.

Also, to this is added the way b^ the Pen, to multiply Feet, Inche^ and 12
parts of an Inch together whereby any Superficies, as Boar^ Floor, Wall, Yard,
or Field, way ^^ exactly measured by the Pen. Als^ by a second Operation, or
Multipl^ cation, may any Solid, as Timber, (...) Stone, or round Vessel, be
measured the Arithmetical way whereof, (...) worded as plain as in any Bo^^
whatsoever.

Also the Use of the Glasier's* Sl^* ding-Rule, to measure Glass, or a^^
Superficies.

And Mr. White's Sliding-Ru^^ to measure Timber; being as ne^^ and ready a way
as ever was used.

Thus you have a brief Account (...) what is contained in this little Boo^ and
I wish it may be helpful to man a Learner, for whom it is prepare^ So I remain
ready to serve you in the or the like.

John Brown.
From my House at the Sphere an^ Sun-Dial in the Minories, London
^he Description and Use of the Carpenters Rule. CHAP. I.
IT is called a Carpenters Rule, (rather then a Ioyners, Bricklayers, Masons,
Glasiers, or the like) I suppose, because ^^ey find the most absolute necessi^^
of it in their way, for they have (...) much or more occasion to use (...) than
most other Trades, though ^^e same Rule may measure all kind ^f Superficies and
Solids, which ^wo Measures measure every visi^^e substance which is to be
mea^^red. And it is usually made of ^^ox or Holly, 24 Inches in length, and
commonly an Inch and half, or (...) Inch and quarter in breadth; and of
thickness at pleasure; and ^n the one side it is divided into ^4 equal Inches,
according to the ^tandard at Guild Hall, London and every one of those 24
Inches is divided into eight parts, that i^ Halfs, Quarters, and Half-quarter^
or ten parts, as you please and the Half-inches are known from the Quarters,
and Quarters from the Half-quarters, by short, longer and longest strokes, and
at ever^ whole inch is set figures, proceedin^ from 1 to 24, from the right
hand toward the left, and these part^ and figures are on both edges (...) one
side of the Rule both way^ numbered, to the intent that howsoever you hold the
rule you have the right end to measure from, provided you have the right side.

On the other side you have the Lines of Timber and Board measure, the
Timber-measure is tha^ which begins at 8 and a half, tha^ is, when the figures
of the Timber line stand upright to you, then I sa^ it begins at the left end
at 8 and (...) and proceeds to 36 within an Inc^ and of an Inch of the end.
Also a^ the beginning end of the Line o^ Timber measure is a Table of figures,
which contains the quantity of the under-measure from one Inch square to 8
Inches square, for the figure 9 comes upon the Rule, as you may see near to 8
in the Table.

On, or next the other edge, and same side you have the Line of Board-measure,
and when those figures stand upright, you have 6 at the left, or beginning end,
and 36 at the other (or right end) just 4 Inches off the end unless it be
divided up to a 100, then it is nigh an Inch and half off the end. This Line
has also his Table of Under-measure at the beginning end, and begins at 1 and
goes to 6, and then the divisions on the Rule do supply all the rest to 100.
Thus much for Description: Now for Use.

The Inches are to measure the length or breadth of any Superficies or Solid
given, and the manner of doing it were superfluous to speak of, or once to
mention, being not only easy, but even natural to every man, for holding the
Rule in the left hand, and applying it to the board, or any thing to be
measured* you have your desire: But now for the use of the other side, ^ shall
show it in two or three examples in each measure, that is, Superficial or
Solid. And first in Superficial, or Board-measure.

Ex. 1. The breadth of any Superficies (as Board, or Glass, or the like) being
given, to find how much i^ length makes a Square Foot, (or i^ equal to 12
inches broad, and 12 Inches long; for so much is a ^rne Foo^ Superficial.)

To do this, look for the number of Inches your Superficies is broad in the
Line of Board-measure, an^ keep your finger there, and right against it, on the
Inches side, you have the number of Inches that goe^ to make up a Foot of Board
o^ Glass, or any Superficies, Suppose ^ have a piece 8 Inches broad, How many
Inches make a Foot? I look for 8 on the Board-measure, and just against my
finger (being set to 8) on the Inch side, I find 18, and so many Inches long,
at that breadth, goes to make a Foot Superficial.

Again, suppose it had been 18 Inches broad, then I find 8 Inches in length, to
make a Foot superficial; but if 36 Inches broad, then 4 Inches in length makes
a Foot.

Or you may do it more easy thus: Take your Rule and hold it in your left
hand, and apply it to the breadth of your Board or Glass, making the end that
is next 36 even with one edge of the board or glass, and the other edge of the
board shows how many Inches or Quarters of an Inch go to make a foot of the
board or Glass. This is but the converse of the former, and needs no example,
for laying the Rule ^o it, and looking on the Board-measure, you have your
desire.

Or else, you may do thus in all narrow pieces under 6 inches broad. As suppose
3, double 3 it makes 6, then I say, that twice the length from 6 to the end of
the Rule, shall make a Foot Superficial, or so much in length makes a foot.

Ex. 2. Having A Superficies of any length and breadth given, to find the
Content, that is, how many Foot there is in it.

Having found the breadth, and how much makes one Foot, turn that over as many
times as you can, for so many Foot is there in that Superficies: But if it be a
great breadth, then you may turn it over two or three times, and then take that
together, and so say 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, etc. or 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, and till
you come to the end of the Superficies. Note that the three short strokes
between figure and figure, are the Quarters; as thus, 8 and a quarter, 8 and a
half, 8 and three quarters, then 9, etc. till you come to 30, and then 30 and a
half, 31, etc. to 36. And if it be divided any further, it is to whole Inches
only to 100.

The use of the Table at the beginning end of the Board-measure,

First, you have five ranks of figures; the first, or uppermost is the number
of Inches that any Superficies is broad, and the other 4 are Feet, and Inches,
and parts of an Inch that goes to make up a Foot of Superficial measure: As for
example, at 5 Inches broad you must have 2 Foot, 4 Inches, and 4 Fifths of an
Inch more, that is, 4 parts of 5, the Inch being divided into 5 parts; but
where you have but two figures beside the uppermost, and Ciphers in the rest,
you must read it thus, At two Inches broad you must have six Foot in length, no
Inches, no parts.

Thus much for the use of the line of Superficial or Board measure.

The Use of the Line of (Solid) or Timber-measure.

The use of this Line is much like the former: For first, you must learn how
much your piece i^ square, and then look for the same number on the Line of
Timbermeasure, and the space from thence to the end of the Rule, is the tru^
length, at that squareness, to make a Foot of Timber.

Ex. 1. I have a piece that is 9 Inches square, I look for 9 on the Line of
Timber-measure, and ther^ I say, the space from 9 to the end of the Rule, is
the true length to make a Foot of Timber, and it i^ near 21 Inches, 3 eights of
an Inch.

Again, suppose it were 24 Inches square, then I find 3 Inches i^ length makes
a Foot, for so I find 3 Inches on the other side, just against 24: But if it
were small Timber* as under 9 Inches square, then you must seek the square in
the upper rank in the Table, and right under you have the Feet Inches, and
parts that go to make a Foot square, as was in the Table of Board-measure. As
suppose 7 Inches square, ^hen you must seek the square Inches in the upper rank
in the Table, and right under you have the Feet Inches, and parts that go to
make a Foot square, as was in the Table of Board-measure. As suppose 7 Inches
square, right under 7, I find in the Table 2 Foot 11 Inches, and 2 sevenths of
an Inch, divided into 7 parts, and at 8 Inches square you find only 2 Foot, 3
Inches, 0 parts, and so for the rest.

But if a piece be not just square, but broader at one side than the other,
then the usual way is to add them both together, and to take half for the
square, but if they differ much, then this way will be very erroneous, and
therefore I refer you to the following Rules: But if it be round Timber, then
take a string and girt it about, and the fourth part of this is usually allowed
for the side of the square, and then you deal with it as if it were just square.

Thus much for the Use of the Carpenters Plain-rule.

I have also added a Table for the Under-measure for Timber and Board, to
Inches and Quarters; an^ the use is thus: Look on the left side for the number
of Inches an^ Quarters, your Timber is square^ or your Board is broad, and
right against it you have the Feet; Inches tenth part of an Inch, and tenth of*
tenth (or hundredth part of an Inch) that goes to make a Foot o^ Timber or
Board.

Ex. 3. A piece of Timber 3 Inches 1 quarter. F. Inch. 10. 100* square will
have 13 7 5 9 parts to make a Foot. And a Board of 3 Inch* and a quarter broad
must* F. Inc. 10. 100. have 3 8 3 0 in length to make a Foot; and so of the
rest, as is plain by the Table, and needs no further explication, being common
to most Artificers.

A Table for the under Timber-measure, to Inches and quarters.
in qr. feet. in. 10p. 100 1 2304 0 0 0 2 576 0 0 0 3 256 0 0 0 1 1 144 0 0 0 1
92 1 9 7 2 64 0 0 0 3 47 0 2 4 2 2 36 0 0 0 1 28 4 3 3 2 23 0 4 1 3 19 0 3 1 3
3 16 0 0 0 1 13 7 5 9 2 11 9 0 6 3 10 1 8 8 4 4 9 0 0 0 1 7 11 6 6 2 7 1 3 3 3
6 4 5 9 5 5 5 9 1 2 1 5 2 6 9 2 4 9 1 2 3 4 4 2 6 6 6 4 0 0 0 1 3 8 2 3 2 3 4 9
0 3 3 1 9 3 7 7 2 11 2 8 1 2 8 8 6 2 2 6 7 2 3 2 4 7 7 8 8 2 3 0 0 8 2 1 3 9 A
Table for the under Board-measure, to Inches and quarters.
fe. in. 10. 100 48 0 0 0 24 0 0 0 16 0 0 0 1 12 0 0 0 9 7 2 0 8 0 0 0 6 10 2 9
2 6 0 0 0 5 4 0 0 4 9 6 0 4 4 3 6 3 4 0 0 0 3 8 3 0 3 5 1 4 3 2 4 0 4 3 0 0 0 2
9 8 8 2 8 0 0 2 6 3 1 5 2 4 8 0 2 3 4 2 2 2 1 8 2 1 0 4 6 2 0 0 0 1 11 0 5 1 10
1 5 1 9 3 3 7 1 8 5 8 1 7 8 6 1 7 2 0 1 6 5 8 8 1 6 0 0 8 1 5 4 5

Note also, that this Table, or any smaller part of under-measure, may be
supplied by the divisions of the board and timber-measure only as thus; Double
the inches and parts of breadth for boardmeasure, or of squares for
timbermeasure, and seek it in the Lines of board or timber-measure, and count
twice from thence to the rules end, for board, or 4 times for timber, and that
shall be the true length that makes a foot of board or timber.

Ex. 4. At 4 inches and square or broad 4 doubled, is 9. then look for 9 on the
board-measure, and two times from thence to the end, shall make a foot of board.

Or look for 9 on the Line of timber-measure, and 4 times from thence to the
end of the Rule, shall be the true length to make a foot of timber, at 4 inches
square.

But if it be so small a piece, that when it is doubled, the number is not on
the divided part of the rule, then double it again, and count 4 times for
board-measure, and 16 times for timber.

Ex. 5. At 2 inches and a half, a quarter broad, or square, that doubled, is 4,
which is not on the rule, therefore I double it again, saying, 4 and 4 is 8
which, is on the rule; then for board, count 4 times from 8 on the
board-measure, to the upper end by 36, to make a foot of board at 2 broad: And
for timber, count 16 times from 8 near the beginning of timber-measure, which
will be near 32 foot, to make a foot of timber at 2^ square: But if twice
doubling will not do, then double again, and count 8 times for board, and 64
times for timber, as in the Table you may see, which will be very slender
timber.

Also between the two lines of Inches, is set four scales of equal parts,
called Circumference Diameter, Square-equal, and Square-within.

Whose Use may be thus.

The Diameter of any circle being given, to find the circumference or the side
of a Square-equal, o^ the side of the square within.

Example, suppose the Diameter of a circle be 15 inches.

Take 15 from the scale called Diameter, and measure it in the scale called,
circumference and i^ gives 47. 10.

Also the same extent measured in the line called square-within and it gives
10. 55.

For the side of a square-within in that circle of 51 inches Diameter.

Again, the same extent being measured in the scale called square-equal and it
gives 13. 27 for the side of ^ square equal to a circle of 15 inches Diameter.

Lastly, this 13. 27 the side of the square-equall multiplied by it sel^ gives
176, the Area of that Circle in Inches, whose Diameter is 15 Inches.

The same may be done, if the Circumference be first given, then that taken
first from that Line, and measured in the other Lines, you shall have the
respective Answers, as before.

But if the Area be first given, then to find the Square-equal, find the
Square-root of the Area, and that root shall be the side of the Square-equal.

Example. Suppose the Area of a Circle be 288, what is the side of the
Square-equal.

The middle between 1 and 288, is at near 17 the side of the Squareequal, for
17 squared is 289. Then 17 taken from the Scale called square equal, gives you
any of the rest.

These Scales serve to draw any Platform of a House or Field very convenlently,
being of several bignesses.

The Description and Use of the Line of Numbers, (commonly called Gunter's
Line.) CHAP. II.
The definition and description of the Line of Numbers, and Numeration thereon.

THE Line of Numbers is only the Logarithmes contrived on a Ruler, and the
several ranks of figures in the Logarithms are here expressed by short, and
longer, and longest division; and they are so contrived in proportion one to
another, that as the Logarithmes by adding together, and substracting one from
another produce the quesita, so here by turning a pair of Compasses forward or
backward, according to due order, from one point to another, does also bring
out the quesita in like manner.

For the length of this Line of Numbers, know, that the longer it is the better
it is, and for that purpose it has been contrived several ways, as first into
a Rule of two Foot long, and three Foot long by Mr. Gunter, and I suppose it
was therefore called Gunter's Line.

Then that Line doubled or laid so together, that you might work either right
on, or cross from one to another, by Mr. Wingate afterward projected in a
Circle, by Mr. Oughtred, and also to slide one by another by the same Author;
and ^ast of all projected (and that best of all hitherto, for largeness, and
conseqenly for exactness) into a Serpentine, or winding circular Line, of 5, or
10, or 20 turns, or more or less, by Mr. Brown, the uses being in all of them
in a manner the same, only some with Compasses, as Mr. Gunter's and Mr.
Wingat's; and some with flat Compasses, or an opening Index, as Mr. Oughtred's
and Mr. Browne's, and one without either as the sliding Rules; but the Rules or
Precepts that serve for the use of one, will indifferenly serv^ for any: But
the projection that ^ shall chiefly confine my self to, i^ that of Mr.
Gunter's; being the most proper for to be inscribed o^ a Carpenters Rule, for
whose sake^ I undertake this collection of the most useful, convenient, and
proper applications to the uses in Arithmatick and Geometry. Thus much for
definition of what manner of Lines of Numbers there be and of what I intend
chiefly to handle in this place.

The order of the divisions o^ this Line of Numbers, and com^ monly on most
other, is thus, i^ begins with 1, and proceeds wit^ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9; and
then ^ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10; whos^ proper power or order of numeration is
thus: The first 1 dot^ signify one tenth of any whole number or integer; as
one tenth o^ a Foot, Yard, Ell, Perch, or the like; or the tenth of a penny,
shil^^g, pound, or the like, either in ^^eight, or number, or measure; ^^d so
consequently, 2 is 2 tenths three tenths; and all the small ^^termediate
divisions, are 100 ^^rts of an integer, or a tenth, of ^^e of the former
tenths; so that 1 the middle, is one whole integer, ^^d 2 onwards two integers,
10 at ^^e end is 10 integers: Thus the ^^e is in its most proper acception
natural division.

But if you are to deal with a ^^ater number then 10, then 1 at beginning must
signifie^ inte^^, and in the middle 10 integers, 10 at the end 100 integers.

But if you would have it to a fi^^e more, then the first 1 is ten, the ^^nd a
hundred, the last 10 a ^^usand. If you proceed further, ^n the first 1 is a
100. the middle 1000, and the 10. at the end is ^^00, which is as great a
number you can well discover, on this or most ordinary lines of numbers and so
far with convenient car^ you may resolve a question very exactly. Now any
number being given under 100^0, to find the point representing it on the rul^
do thus.

Numeration on the Line of number

PROB. I.
Any whole number being given und^^ four figures, to find the point the Line of
numbers that does r^present the same.

First, Look for the first figure your number, among the long ^^ visions, with
figures at them, a^^ that leads you to the first figure your number: then for
the seco^^ figure count so many tenths from that long divisions onwards, as the
second figure amounts to; th^^ for the third figure, count from (...) last
tenth, so many centesmes the third figure contains; and for the fourth figure,
count fr^^ the last centesme, so many millions, as that fourth figure has
unites, or is in value; and that shall be the point where the number propounded
is on the line of numbers: Take two or three Examples.

First, I would find the point upon the line of numbers representing 12, now
the first figure of this number is one, therefore I take the middle one for the
first figure; then the next figure being 2, I count two tenths from that 1, and
that shall be the point representing 12, where usually there is a brass pin
with a point in i^.

Secondly, To find the point representing 144. First, as before I take for 1,
the first figure of the number 144, the middle Figure 1 then for the second
Figure ( viz. 4.) I count 4, tenths onwards for that: Lastly, for the other 4,
I count 4, centesmes further, and that is the point for 144.

Thirdyl, To find the point representing 1728.

First, As before, for 1000. take the middle 1, on the line

Secondly, For 7, I reckon seventenths onward, and that is 700.

Thirdly, For 2, reckon two centesmes from that 7th. tenth for 20*

And lastly, For 8, you must reasonably estimate that following centesme, to be
divided into 10 parts (if it be not expressed, which in lines of ordinary
length cannot be done) and 8, of that supposed 10. is the precise point for
1728 the number propounded to be found, and the like of any number whatsoever.

But if you were to find a fraction, or broken number, then you must consider,
that properly, or absolutely, the line does express none but decimal fractions:
thus, 1/10 or 1/100 or 1/1000 and more nearer the rule in common acception
cannot express; as one inch, and one tenth or one hundredth or one thousandth
part of an inch, foot, yard, perch, or the like, in weight, number, or time, it
being capable to be applied to any thing in a decimal way: (but if you would
use other fractions, as quarters, half quarters, sixteens, twelves, or the
like, you may reasonably read them, or else reduce them into decimals, from
those fractions, of which more in the following Chapters) for more plainness
sake, take two or three observations:

1. That you may call the 1. at the beginning, either one thousand, one
hundred, or one tenth, or one absolutely, that is, one Integer, or whole
number, or tenintegers, or a hundred, or a thousand integers, and the like may
you call 1, in the middle, or 10 at the end.

2. That whatsoever value or denominations you put on 1 the same value or
denomination all the other figures must have successively, ei^^er increasing
forward, or decreasing backwards, and their intermediate divisions accordingly,
as for example;

If I call 1 at the beginning of the line, one tenth of any integer, then 2
following must be two tenths, 3 three tenths, etc. and 1 in the middle 1
integer, 2 two integers, and 10 at the end must be ^en integers.

But if one at the beginning be one integer, then 1 in the middle must be 10
integers, and 10 at the end 100 integers, and all the intermediate figures 20,
30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 integers, and every longest divsion between the
figures 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26; etc. integers, and the shortest divisions
tenths of those integers, and so in proportion infinitely: as [110 1. 10] [1.
10. 100.] [10. 100. 1000] [100. 1000. 10000.] in all which 4 examples, the
first order of Figutes, viz. 1/10 1. 10. 100. is represented by the first 1. on
the line of of numbers, the second order of figures, viz. 1. 10. 100. 1000. is
represented by the middle 1. on the ^ine of numbers: the last order or Place of
figures, viz. 10. 100. 1000. 10000. is represented by the 10, at the end of the
line of numbers.

3. That I may be plain (yet further) if a number be propounded of 4 figures,
having two cyph^rs in the middle, as 1005, it is expressed on the line between
that prime to which it does belong, and the next centesm or small division next
to it; but if you were to take 5005, where there are not so many divisions, you
must imagine them so to be, and reasonably estimate them accordingly. Thus much
for numeration on the line, or naming any point found on the Rule, in its
proper value and signification.

Note, that since this Book was first written, I have provided a Print of the
Line eleven times repeated, where the Numerator is certainly expressed from
0001 to 10000000; and may be had here, or in the Minories.

CHAP. II.
PROB. I.
Two Numbers being given, to find third Geometrically proportiona^ unto them;
and to three, a fourth* and to four, a fifth, etc.

GEometrical proportion is when diverse numbers being compared together, diffe^
among themselves, increasing o^ decreasing, after the rate or reason of these
numbers, 2. 4. 8. 16. 32* for as 2 is half 4, so is 8 half 16 and as this is
continued, so it may be also discontinued, as 3. 6. 14* 28; for though 3 is
half 6, and 14 half 28, yet 6 is not half 14* nor in proportion to it, as 3 is
to 6. There is also Arithmetical and Musical proportion; but of that in other
more large discourses, being not material to our present purpose (though I may
hint it afterward.)

To find this by the numbers, extend the Compasses upon the ^^ine of numbers,
from one number ^o another; this done, if you ap^ly that extent (upwards or
downwards, as you would either increase ^r diminish) from either of the numbers
propounded, the moveable point will stay on the third proportional number
required. Also, the same extent applied the ^ame way from the third, will give
^ou a fourth, and from the fourth (...) fifth.

Example. Let these two numbers 2 and 4 be propounded to find a third
proportional to them (that is, to find a number that shall bear the same
proportion that 2 does to 4) and then to that third, a fourth, fifth, and
sixth, etc.) Extend the Compasses upon ^he first part of the line of num^ers,
from 2 to 4; this done, if ^ou apply the same extent upwards ^om 4, the
moveable point will fall upon 8, the third proportional required; and then from
8, it will reach to 16, the fourth proportional; and from 16 to 32, the fifth;
and from 32 to 64, the sixth proportional. But if you will continue the
progression further, then remove the Compasses to 64 in the former part of the
line, and the moveable point will stay upon 128, the seventh proportional; and
from 128 to 256, the eighth; and from 256 to 512, the ninth, etc. Contrarily to
this, if you would diminish, as from 4 to 2, extend the Compasses from 4 to 2,
and the moveable point will fall on 1^; and from 1 to 1/10, or 5 of ten, which
is one half (by the second Problem of the first Chapter) and from 5 to 25, or,
and so forward.

But generally in this, and most other work, make use of the small divisions in
the middle of the line, that you may the better estimate the fractions of the
numbers you make use on; for observe, look how much you miss in setting of ^he
Compasses to the first and se^ond terms, so much, or more will ^ou err in the
fourth: therefore ^he middle part will be most use^ul: as for example, as 8 to
11, ^o is 12 to 16, 50, or 5, if you do ^magine one integer to be divided ^ut
into 10 parts, as they are on ^he line on a two foot Rule; but on the other end
you cannot so well express a small fraction, as there you may.

PROB. II.
One number being given, to be multipl^ed by another number given, to find the
Product.

Extend the Compasses from 1 to ^he Multiplicator, and the same ex^ent applied
the same way* from ^he Multiplicand, will cause the moveable point to fall on
the product.

Example* Let 6 be given to be multiplied by 5, here if you extend the
Compasses from 1 to 5^ the same extent will reach from ^ to 30; which number
30, though it be numbered but with 3, yet you^ reason may regulate you, to call
i^ 30, and not 3; for look what proportion the first number bears to 1, the
same must the other number (or Multiplicand) bear to the Product; which in this
place, cannot be 3, but 30.

Another Example, for more plainness*

Let 125 be given to be multiplied by 144; extend the Compasses from 1 to 125,
and the same extent laid the same way from 144, the moveable point will fall on
18000: now to read this number 18000 (so much, and no more) you must consider,
that as in 125 there is two figures more than in 1, so there must be two
figures more in the Product 18000, than in the Multiplicand 144: and as for the
order of reading the numbers, you may consider well the first Problem of the
first Chapter.

Some other Examples for more light.

3. As 1 to 25, so 30 to 750: as 1 to 8, so 16 to 48: as 1 to 9, so 9 to 81: as
to 12, so 20 to 240. One help more I shall add, as to the ^ight computation of
the last figure in 4 figures (for more cannot ^e well expressed, on ordinary
lines, as that on a two foot Rule is) but for the true number of figures in the
Product, note, that for the most part, there is as many as there ^s in the
Multiplicator and Multiplicand put together, when the ^wo first figures of the
lesser of them, do exceed so many of the ^^rst figures of the Product; but ^f
the two first figures of the least of them, do not exceed so many of ^he first
figures of the Product, then ^t shall have one less than the Multiplicator and
Multiplicand put together; as, 92 and 68 multiplied, ^akes 6256, four figures,
because 68 is more than 62; and 12 multiplied by 16, makes but 192, three
figures, for the reason abovesaid, because 19 is more than 16. Now for right
naming the last figure, write them down; as thus, 75 by 63; now you multiply 5
by 3, that is 15, for which you, by vulgar Arithme^ick, set down 5, and carry
1; therefore 5 is the last figure in the Product, and it is 4725.

PROB. III. Of Division.
One number being given to be divided by another, to find the Quotient.

Extend the Compasses from the Divisor to 1, and the same extent will reach,
the same way, from the Dividend to the Quotient; or, extend the Compasses from
the Divisor to the Dividend, the same extent shall reach, the same way, from 1
to the Quotient; as for Example.

Let 750 be a number given to be divided by 25 (the Divisor) I extend the
Compasses from 25 to (...), then applying of that extent the same way from 750,
the other ^oint of the Compasses will fall upon 30, the Quotient sought: or ^ou
may say, as 25 is to 750, so is to 30.

2. Let 1728 be given, to be di^ided by 12, say, as 12 is to 1, so is ^728 to
144. Extend the Compas^es from 12 to 1, and the same ex^ent shall reach the
same way from ^728 to 144: or as before, as 12 to 1728, so is 1 to 144.

3. If the number be a decimal fraction, then you work as if it were an
absolute whole number; ^ut if it be a whole number joined to a decimal
fraction, it is wrought here as properly as a whole number: Example, I would
divide 111.4 by 1.728, extend the Compasses from 1.728 to 1, the same extent
applied from 111.4, shall reach to 64.5: so again, 56.4* being to be divided by
8.75, the Quotient will be found to be 6.45. for the extent from 8.75 to 1
being laid the same way from 56.4, will reach to 6.45, the Quotient, viz. 6,
and a decimal fraction 45. To reduce this decimal fraction to the vulgar
fraction found by the Pen; the same extent of the Compasses laid the contrary
way from 45 the decimal fraction, gives 39/75* the vulgar fraction found by the
Pen, as is more apparent in the next Example.

In Division by the Pen, the fraction remaining is the Numerator, and the
Divisor is the Denominator; to find which by the line, do thus, with the same
extent of the Compasses that wrought the Division, laid the contrary way from
the decimal fraction, gives the usual fraction when you work by the Pen.
Example. To divide 522 by 34. The extent from 34 to 1 reaches from 522 to
15.35; then the same extent laid the contrary way from 35, gives 12.15, as by
the Pen.

Now to know, of how many figures any Quotient ought to consist, it is
necessary to write the Dividend down, and the Divisor under it, and see how
often it may be written under it, for so many figures must there be in the
Quotient; as in dividing this number ^2231 by 27, according to the Rules of
Division, 27 may be written three times under the Dividend, therefore there
must be 3 figures in the Quotient; for if you extend the Compasses from 27 to 1
^t will reach from 12231 to 453, the Quotient sought for.

Note, that in this, and also in ^ll other Questions, it is best to ^rder it
so, as that the Compasses ^ay be at the closest extent; for ^ou may take a
close extent more easily and exactly than you can a ^rge extent, as by
experience you will find.

PROB. IV.
To three numbers given to find a fourth in a direct proportion (of the Rule of
Three Direct.

Extend the Compasses from the first number to the second, that done, the same
extent applied the same way from the third, will reach to the fourth
proportional number required.

Example. If the Circumference of a Circle, whose Diameter is 7, ^^ 22, what
Circumference shall a Circle have, whose Diameter is 14?

Extend the Compasses from ^^ in the first part, to 14 in the second, and that
extent applied the same way from 22, shall reach t^ 44, the fourth proportional
required; for so much shall the Circumference of a Circle be, whose Diameter is
14. -- And the contrary, if the Circumference were given again.

Ex. 2. If 8 foot of Timber b^ worth 10 shilling, how much is 1^ foot worth?

Extend the Compasses from 8 to ^0 (either in the first part or second) the
same extent applied ^e same way from 12, shall reach ^o 15; which is the answer
to the ^uestion; for so many shillings is ^2 foot worth at that rate.

PROB. V.
Three numbers being given, to find a fourth in an inversed proportion, (or the
Back Rule of Three.)

Extend the Compasses from the first of the numbers given, to the second of the
same denomination, ^^ that distance be applied from the third number backwards,
it shall reach to the fourth number ^ought.

If 60 pence be 5 shillings, how much is 30 pence? facit 2.5. two ^illings, 5
tenths of a shilling, that ^^, being reduced, 2 s. 6 d.

Again, If 60 Men can raise a ^rest-work of a certain length and ^readth, in 48
hours, how long will it ^e ere 40 Men can raise such another?

Extend the Compasses from 60* to 40, numbers of like denomination, viz. of
Men; this done, that extent applied the contrary wa^ from 48, will reach to 72,
the fourth number you look for* Therefore I conclude, that 40* Men will perform
as much in 72 hours, as 60 Men will do in 48 hours.

Note, that this Back Rule o^ Three, may for the most part, b^ wrought by the
Direct Rule of Three.

If you do but duly consider the order of the Question, for you must needs
grant, that fewer Men must have longer time, and the contrary therefore the
Answer must be, in proportion to the Question, which might have been wrought
thus as well: The extent from 40 to 60 will reach the same way, from 48 to 72
in direct proportion; or contrarily, as 60 to 40, so is 72 to 48: which you
see, is but turning the question to ^ts direct operation, according to the true
reason of the question.

Thus you have the way for the Direct and Reverse Rule of Three: for the Double
Rule of Three, and Compound Rule of Three, this is the Rule for it.

Always in the Double Rule of Three 5 terms are propounded, and a sixth is
required, three of which terms are of supposition, and two of demand; now the
difficulty is in pla^^ng them, which is ^^est done thus, as in this Example.

Example. If 5 Scholars spend ^^ l. in 3 months, How many pounds will serve 9
Scholars for 6 months?

Note, here the terms of supposition are the first three, viz. 5, 20, and 3,
and the terms of demand ^^e 9 and 6.

Then next, for the right placing them, observe which of the terms of
supposition is of the same denomination with the term required, as here the 20
l. is of the same denomination with the how many pounds required: set the
always in the second place, and the two terms of supposition o^ above another
in the first place and the terms of demand one above another in the last place,
th^^

5 -- 20 -- 9 3 -- pounds -- 6
Then the work is performed ^^ two single Rules of Three Dir^^ thus:

Extend the Compasses from 5^^* 20, the same extent applied t^^ same way from
9, shall reach 36, a fourth; this is the first o^^ration: Then as 3 to 36, the
4^ so is 6 to 72, the number of pou^^ required. By the Line of Numbers, the
Double Rule is wroug^^ as soon as the Compound: the^^fore I shall wave it now.

Four Questions and their Answe^^ to show the various forms of work^^ on the
Line of Numbers.

Quest. 1. If 12 Men raise a Frame in 10 days, in how many days might 8 Men
raise the like Frame?
Reason tells me, that fewer Men must have longer time; therefore the work is
thus, as 12 is to 8, so is 10 to 15, by the last Rule; or, as 8 to 10, so is 12
to 15.

Quest. 2. If 60 yards of Stuff, at 3 quarters of a yard broad, would hang a
Room about; how many yards of Stuff, of half a yard broad, will serve to hang
about the same Room?
The work is thus; as 5 10th. to 7 10th., so is 60 to 90; or, as 75 to 5, so is
60 to 90, wrought backwards.

Quest. 3. If to make a Foot Superficial 12 Inches in breadth, do require 12
Inches in length, the breadth being 16 Inches, how many Inches in length must I
have to make a Foot Superficial?
The work is thus; as 16 is to 12, so is 12 to 9, the number of Inches to make
a Foot.

Quest. 4. If to make a Foot Solid, a Base of 144 Inches require i^ Inches in
height, a Base being given of 216 Inches, how much in height makes a Foot
Solid?
The work then is, as 216 is to 144, so is 12 to 8: or otherwise thus, as 12 is
to 216, so is 144 to 8, the height sought.

PROB. VI.
To three numbers given, to find a fourth in a doubled Proportion.

This Problem concerns Questions of proportions between Lines and Superficies:
now if the denominations of the first and second terms be of Lines, then extend
the Compasses from the first term to the second (of the same kind o^
denomination) this done, that extent applied twice, the same way from the third
term, the moveable point will stay upon the fourth term required.

Example. If the Content of a Circle whose Diameter is 14, be 154, what will
the Content of a Circle be, whose Diameter is 28?

Here 14 and 28 having the same denomination, viz. of lines, I extend the
Compasses from 14 to 28, then applying that extent the same way, from 154
twice, the moveable point will fall on 616, the fourth proportional sought,
that ^s, first from 154 to 308, and from ^08 to 616.

But if the first denomination be ^f superficial content, then extend the
Compasses unto the half of the ^istance between the first and second of the
same denomination; of the same extent will reach from the third to the fourth.
Example.

If the content of a Circle, being ^54. have a Diameter that is 14, that shall
the Diameter of a Circle ^e, whose content is 616?

Divide the distance betwixt 154 and 616 into two equal parts, then ^et one
foot in 14, the other shall each to 28, the Diameter required.

The like is for Squares: For if a Square, whose side is 40 foot, contain 1600
foot; how much shall ^ Square contain, whose side is 60 foot.

Take the distance from 40 to 60, and apply it twice from 160^ and the moveable
point will sta^ on 3600, the content sought for.

PROB. VII.
To three numbers given, to find fourth in a triplicated proportion.

The use of this Problem consists in Questions of proportion between Lines
and Solids, wherei^ if the first and second terms ha^ denomination of Lines,
then extend the Compasses from the fir^^ to the second, that extent applye^
thtee times from the third, w^ cause the moveable point to st^^ on the fourth
proportional required. Example.

If an Iron Bullet, whose Diameter is 4 Inches, shall weigh 9 pound what shall
another Iron Bullet weigh whose Diameter is 8 Inches?

Extend the Compasses from 4 to 8, that extent applied the same way three times
from 9, the moveable point will fall at last on 72, the fourth proportional and
weight required, that is in short, thus, as 4 to 8, so 9 to 18, so 18 to 36, so
36 to 72.

But if the two given terms be weight or contents, of solids, and the Diameter
or side of a Square or) a Line is sought for, then divide the space between the
two given terms of the same Denomination into three parts, and that ^^sistance
shall reach from the third ^o the fourth proportional.

Example. Divide the space between 9 and 72 in three parts, that third part
shall reach from 8 to 4, ^or from 4 to 8, as the Question ^as propounded,
either augmenting or diminishing.)

Example. If a Cube whose side is Inches, contains 216 Inches, how many Inches
shall a Cube contain whose side is 12 Inches?

Extend the Compasses from 6 to 12, that extent measured from 2^ in the first
part of the Line of Numbers three times, shall a last fall upon 1728, in the
second part of the Line of Numbers; for note, if y^^ had begun on the second
part, y^^ would at three times turning, hat^ fallen beyond the end of the line
and the contrary, as above, hol^ here in Squares also.

PROB. VIII.
Betwixt two numbers given, to (...) a mean Arithmetically Proportional.

This may be done without ^^ help of the Line of Numbers; (...) vertheless,
because i^ serves to (...) the next following, I shall here (...) sert it,
though I thought to (...) both this and the next over i^^^ lence; yet to set
forth the exc^^ lency of Number, I have set the down. and the Rule is this:

Add half the difference of the ^iven terms to the lesser of them, and that
aggregate (or sum) is the Arithmetical mean required: or add them together,
and the half sum is the same. Example.

Let 20 and 80 be the terms given, now if you substract one out of the other,
their difference is 60, whose half difference 30, added to ^^ the lesser term,
makes 50; and that is the Arithmetical mean ^ought: also 20 and 80 is 100, the
^alf is 50* as before.

PROB. IX.
^etween two numbers given, to find a mean Musically proportional.

Multiply the difference of the ^erms by the lesser term, and add likewise the
same terms together; ^is done, if you divide that product by the sum of the
terms, ^^d to the Quotient add the lesser ^^rm; that last sum is the Musi^^l
mean required. Or shorter, ^^us;

Multiply the terms one by another, and divide the product by their sum, and
the Quotient doubled is the Musical mean required*

Example. The numbers given being 8 and 12, multiplied together, make 96, that
divided by 20* the sum of 8 and 12, the Quotient is 480, which doubled, i^
9-610 s, the Musical mean required. This may be done by the Line of Numbers;
otherwise thus find the Arithmetical mean between 8 and 12, and then the
Analogy or agreement is thus;

As the Arithmetical mean found viz. 10, is to the greater term ^^ so is the
lesser term 8 to the Musical mean required, 9 6/10.

PROB. X.
Betwixt two numbers given, to find mean Geometrically proportional*

Divide the space on the Line ^^ Numbers, between the two e^ tream Numbers,
into two eq^^ parts, and the point will stay at t^^ mean proportional required.
So the extreme numbers being 8 and 32, the middle point between them will be
found to be 16.

PROB. XI.
Betwixt two numbers given, to find two means Geometrically proportional.

Divide the space between the two extreme numbers, into three equal parts, and
the two middle points dividing the space, shall show the two mean
proportionals. As for Example; let 8 and 27 be two extremes, the two means will
be found to be 12 and 18; which are the two means sought for.

PROB. XII.
To find the Square-Root of any number under 1000000.

The Square-Root of every number is always the mean proportional between 1, and
that number for which you would find a Square-root; but yet, with this general
caution, if the figures of the number be even, that is, 2. 4. 6. 8 or 10. etc.
then you must look for the unit (or one) at the beginning of the Line, and the
number in the second part, and the Root in the first part; or rather reckon 10
at the end to be the unit, and then both Root and Square will fall backwards
toward the middle 1 in the second length or part of the line: but if they be
odd, then the middle 1, will be most convenient to be counted the unity, and
both Root and Square will be found from thence forward toward 10. So that
according to this Rule, the square of 9 will be found to be 3, the square of 64
will be found to be 8, the square of 14^ to be 12, the square of 1444 to b^ 38,
the square of 57600 to be 240^ the square of 972196 will be found to be 986:
and so for any other number.

Now to know of how many figures any Root ought to consist, put a prick under
the first figure, the third, the fifth, and the seventh, if there be so many;
and look how many pricks, so many figures there must be in the Root.

PROB. XIII.
To find the Cube-Root of a Number under 1000000000. 1111

The Cube-root is always by the first of two mean proportionals between 1 and
the number given, and therefore to be f^und by dividing the space between ^^em
into three equal parts: so by this means, the Root of 17^8 will be found to be
12, the Root of 17280 is near 26, the Root of 17^800 is almost 56, although the
p^i^^ on the Rule repres^ming all the square numbers, is in one place, y^^ by
altering the unit, it p^oduc^th v^rious points and numbers for t^eir respective
prop^^ Roots. The Rule to find which unit, is i^ this manner: You must set (or
suppose to be set) pricks under the first figure to the left hand, the fourth
figure, the seventh, and the tenth; now, if by this means, the last prick to
the left hand shall fall on the last figure, as it does in 1728, then the unit
will be best placed at 1 in the middle of the line, and the Root, the Square,
and the Cube, will all fall forwards toward the end of the line.

But if it fall on the last but one, as it does in 17280, then the unit may be
placed at 10 in the beginning of the line, and the Cube i^ the second length.
But if the las^ prick fall under the last but two^ as in 172800, it does then
pla^ the unit always at 10 in the end o^ the line; then the Root, the Square
and Cube, will all fall backward and be found in the second part between the
middle 1 and the end of the line. By these Rules it does appear, that the
Cube-root of ^^ is 2, of 27 is 3, of 64 is 4, of 125 is 5, of 216 is 6, of 345
is 7, of 512 is 8, of 729 is 9, of 1000 is 10. As you may see by this Table of
Square and Cube roots.

Thus you have the chief Use of the Line of Numbers in general, and they that
have skill in the Rule of Three, and a lirtle knowledge in Plain Triangles, may
very aptly apply it to their particular purposes; yet for their sakes for whom
it is intended, I shall enlarge, to some more particular applica^ions, in
measuring all sorts of Superficies and Solids; wherein I do judge it will be
most serviceable to them that be unskilful in Arithmetic, as before said.

A Table of the Square and Cubique Roots
Root. Square. Cube. 1 1 1 2 4 8 3 9 27 4 16 64 5 25 125 6 36 216 7 49 343 8 64
512 9 81 729 10 100 1000 12 144 1728 26 676 17576 56 3136 175616 204 41616
8489664 439 192721 84604519 947 896809 849278123 1000 1000000 1000000000

CHAP. III.
The Use of the Line of Numbers, in measuring any Superficial measure, as
Board, Glass, Plaistering, Paving, Painting, Flooring, etc.

THe ordinary measure, and most in use, is a Two-foot Rule divided into 24
Inches, and every Inch in^o 8 parts, that is, Halfs, Quarters, and
Half-quarters; but these parts not agreeing with the parts on the Line of
Numbers, which are Decimals or tenth parts, is bred very much trouble; and
there cannot be exactness without taking of small parts, as Ha^f quarters of
Inches, or else using o^ Reduction; and it is also as troub^esome by
Arithmetic as by the Line of Numbers. To avoid which, I would advise either to
measure altogether by Footmeasure (that is, a Foot divided into 1000 parts (or
rather, as i^ sufficient for ordinary use, 100) and then the divisions on the
numbers will agree fitly to the parts on your Rule, without any trouble for
Fractions; for so doing, Fractions do become whole Numbers as it were, and are
wrought accordingly: But if you use i^ not in measuring, yet you may have it
set for to help you for the ready reducing of such Numbers as shall require it,
thoug^ I shall apply it to Inches also as it is commonly used, that i^ may
appear useful both ways* accordingly as any man shall b^ affected.

The like reason holds for inches, Yards, Else and Perches, o^ any other
measure; for thereb^ the work is made more easy, a^ shall appear anon.

First, by Foot-measure only.

PROB. I.
The breadth of any Oblong Superficies, as a Table, Gravestone, or the like,
given in Foot-measure, to find how much in length makes one Foot.

Extend the Compasses from the ^readth in Foot-measure to 1, the ^ame extent
applied the same way from 1, shall reach to the length ^equired, to make one
Foot Su^erficial in Foot-measure.

Exam. At 8 tenths broad.

Set one point of the Compasses ^n 8, and extend the other point ^o 1; the same
extent being laid ^he same way from 1, shall reach ^o 1.25, the length
required, being 1 Foot, and 25 parts of a hun^red: For 1.25 multiplied by 08,
^^ 100.0, or just one Foot in De^^mals.

PROB. II.
The breadth and length of any Superficies given in Foot-measure, to find the
superficial Content in Foot-measure.

Extend the Compasses from 1 to the breadth, the same extent applied the same
way from the length in Foot-measure, shall reach to the superficial Content in
Foo^^ measure.

Ex. At 8 tenths broad, and 15 f. long

Extend the Compasses from 1 t^ 8, the same extent laid the sam^ way from 15
foot the length, shall reach to 12 foot, the superficia^ content required.

Again, at 1. 75 broad, and 25. 30 lon^^

Set one point of the Compass^^ in 1, and open the other to 1. 7 then the same
extent laid the sam^ way from 25. 30, will reach to 4^ feet 275 parts, the
superficial content required.

Note, the 275 parts coun^ed ^^ foot measure, right against it inches is 3
inches 3 tenths.

PROB. III.
The breadth of any Oblong Superficies being given in inches, to find how many
inches in length makes one foot.

The extent from the inches ^road to 12 being laid the same way from 12, shall
reach to the inches long to make 1 foot.

Examp. At 9 inches broad.

Set one point in 9, open the other to 12, then the same extent said the same
way from 12, reaches to 16 inches, the length required to make 1 foot
superficial: for 9 multiplied by 12 is 144, the number of superficial inches in
one foot.

PROB. IV.
The breadth and length of an Oblong Superficies given in inches, to find the
superficial content in like inches.

Examp. At 30 inches broad, and 83 inches long.

Set one point of the Compasses in 1, and open the other to 183 then the same
extent laid the same way from 30, shall reach to 5490 the true content in
inches.

Now to call this 5490, and no more or less, observe, as 183 is two figures
more than 1, so must 549^ be two figures more than 30, as i^ observed in the
Rule of Multiplication.

PROB. V.
The length and breadth given i^ inches, to find the content in Superficial
Feet.

The extent from 144 (the inches in one foot) to the breadt^ in inches, being
laid the same wa^ from the length in inches, sha^^ reach to the content in feet.

Examp. At 30 inches broad, a^^ 183 long.

Set one point in 144, and op^^ the other to 183, the same exten^ laid the same
way from 30, reache^ to 38 foot 12/000, the near conte^^ in feet required.

BROB. VI.
The breadth given in inches, and the length in feet, to find the content in
Superficial Feet.

The extent from 12 to the breadth in inches, shall reach the same way from the
length in feet to the superficial content in feet required.

Examp. At 30 inches broad, and 15 foot 3 inches long.

Set one point in 12, and open the other to 30, the breadth in inches; then the
same extent laid the same way from 15 foot 3 inches the length, reaches to 38
foot 1 inch and, the true content.

PROB. VII.
The length and breadth being given in feet and inches, to find the superficial
content in feet and inches.

As 1 to the breadth or length in feet and inches, so is the length or breadth
in feet and inches to the superficial content in like feet and inches.

Examp. At 18 foot 9 inches broad, and 30 foot 7 inches long.

Set one point always in 1, open the other to the (length or) breadth 18 foot 9
inches, then the same extent laid the same way from 30 foot 7 inches the length
reaches to 573 foot 5 inches, the superficial content.

Note, if you have the line of Numbers divided into twelves for inches as
before said, you may work this question more readily, and truly as I have
often times made them for my own use and others also.

Note, that how broad soever any superficies is, so much is there in a foot
long of that Superficies.

Examp. If a board be 3 feet 9 inches broad, there is 3 feet 9 inches in every
foot long of that board, therefore (3 feet 9 inches or) the breadth in feet and
parts, multiplied by the length in feet and parts, give the superficial content.

PROB. VIII.
Of a Circle and his parts, as Diameter, Circumference, Squareequal and Square
within, and Area of a Circle.

For the ready finding of any of these, any one being given, there is found out
five numbers, in whose places on the li^e may be set five Center-pins for the
more ready finding of them and readiness to use; which are as follows, Viz.

Diameter -- 10. 000 Circumference -- -- 31. 416 Square equal -- -- 8. 862
Square within -- -- 7. 071 Area or Content -- 78. 538
Thu if the Diameter of a Circle be 10 inches, then the Circumference is near
31 inches and 416 parts of 1000.

The side of the Square-equal is 8 inches 862.

The side of the Square within is 7. 071.

The Area or Content is 78 inches 538 parts.

And any one of these being given, all the other four may be readily found by
the Line of Numbers, as follows.

Any Diameter of a Circle given to find the Circumference, etc.

The extent from 10 a fixed Diameter, to any other Diameter given, shall reach
the same way from 31. 416 the fixed Circumference, to the Circumference
required for the given Diameter And from the fixed side of the Square-equal to
the required sid^ of the Square-equal. And from the fixed side of the
Square-wit^ in to the required side of the Square within, etc.

1. Examp. Let the given Diameter of a Circle be 15, what is t^^ Circumference
answerable to i^ etc.

Set one point of the Compass^ in 10 the fixed Diameter, and t^^ other in 15
the given Diameter; then the same extent applied the same way from 31. 416 the
fixed Circumference, shall reach to 47. 14 the Circumference required.

2. To find the side of a Squareequal to a Circle of 15 inches Diameter.

Also the same extent applied the same way from 8. 862, the fixed number for
the side of the Squareequal, shall reach to 13. 30, the ^ide of the
Square-equal to the Circle required.

To find the side of the Square within.

The same extent from 10 to 15 being laid the same way from 7. 071 the fixed
side of the Square within, shall reach to 10. 61, the ^^de of the Square within
in a Circle of 15 inches Diameter required.

To find the Area or Content of the Circle whose Diameter is 15 inches.

The same extent from 10 to 15 being twice repeated, the same way from 78.538
will reach to 176 inches and 7 tenths, the Area of a Circle of 15 inches
Diameter*

PROB. IX.
The Circumference of any Circle being given, to find the Diameter* the
Square-equal or Squar^ within and the Area.

Examp. If the Circumference give^ be 47.14, what is the Diameter the side of
the Square-equal, ^^ Square within, and Area.

1. Set one point in 31.416 the fixed Circumference, and the other in 47.14 the
given Circumference; then the same extent lai^ from 10 the fixed Diameter,
sha^^ reach to 15 the Diameter required for a Circle of 47*14 Circumference.

2. Also the same extent la^^ from 8.862 the fixed side of t^^ Square-equal,
shall reach the sa^^ way to 13.30, the side of t^^ Square - equal required.

3. Also the same extent laid the same way from 7.071, shall reach to 10.61,
the side of the Square-within in a Circle of 15 inches Diameter required.

4. The same extent from 31. 416 the fixed Circumference, to 47.14 the given
Circumference, being twice repeated the same way from 78.538, the fixed Area
for 10 inches Diameter, shall reach ^o 176 inches and 7 tenths, the Area of a
Circle of 47.14 inches about.

PROB. X.
The Area of any Circle being given, to find the Diameter, Circumference,
Square-equal, or the side of the Square within required.

The exact middle, or half di^tance measured on the Line of Numbers, between
the fixed Area ^8.538 and the given Area, shall reach from the fixed Diameter
to the inquired Diameter; and from the fixed Circumference to the inquired
Circumference, and from the sides of the fixed Square-equal or within to the
inquired side^ of the Squares-equal or within.

Examp. Let the given Area ^^ 176 inches ^^.

The exact middle between 78* 538 the fixed Area, for a Circle o^ 10 inches
Diameter, and 176 inches and 7 tenths the given Area measured on a Line of
Numbers.

1. Then that extenr laid the same way from 10 the fixed Diameter, reaches to
15 the inquire^ Diameter.

2. Also the same extent lai^ the same way from 31.416 the fi^^ ed
Circumference, gives 47. 1^^ the Circumference required.

3. Also the same extent lai^ the same way from 8.862 the fix^^ side of the
Square-equal, reach^ to 13.30, the side of the Squar^^ equal required.

4. Lastly, the same extent l^^^ the same way from 7.071 the fixed Number for
the side of the Square within, shall reach to 10.61 the side of the Square
within required for a Circle whose Area is 176 inches and 7 tenths.

PROB. XI.
Having the Area of any Circle, to find the side of a Square equal so it.

The Square root of the given Area (found by Problem 12 of the 11th. Chapter)
is always the side of the Square-equal to the Circles Area given; thus the
Square-root of a Circle whose Area is 144 is 12, the Square-root of 144.

PROB. XII.
To find the Content of a Circle two ways.

Multiply the Diameter by it self, and multiply that product by 11, and divide
this last product by 14, and the Quotient shall be the content required.

Or else multiply half the Diameter and half the Circumference together, and
the product is the content required.

PROB. XIII.
How to measure a Circle, a Semicircle, or a quarter of a Circle, or any part
that goes to the Center of the supposed Circle.

First for a Circle.
Take half the Diameter and half the Circumference, and measure it then as an
Oblong Square; for the half Circle take half the Diameter and half the
Semicircumference and do likewise. Thirdly, for the quarter of a Circle, take
half the Arch of that quarter, and the Radius or Semidiameter of the whole
Circle, and work as you would d^ with an oblong square piece, and you shall
have your desire.

PROB. XIV.
How to measure a Triangle.

Take half the Base and the whol^ Perpendicular, and work with them two as if
it were an oblong square figure, or you may take the whole Base and half the
Perpendicular.

Or, by the Line of Numbers, the extent from 2 to the Base shall reach from the
Perpendicular to the Content.

PROB. XV.
How to measure a Rhombus, or a Rhomboides.

A Rhombus is a Diamond-like figure, as a quarry of Glass is, containing 4
equal sides, and two equal opposite angles: but a Rhomboides is a figure made
of two equal opposite sides, and two equal opposite angles: and to measure them
you must take any one side, and the nearest distance from that side to its
opposite side for the other side, and then reckon it as an oblong Square.

PROB. XVI.
How to measure a Trapezium.

A Trapezium is a figure comprehended of 4 unequal sides, and of 4 unequal
angles; and before you can measure it, you must reduce it into two Triangles,
by drawing a line from any two opposite corners, then deal with it as two
Triangles; or you may save some work thus, the line you draw from corner to
corner will be the common base to both Triangles: then say, as 1 is to half the
Perpendiculars of both the Triangles put together, so the whole Base to the
Content.

PROB. XVII.
How to measure a many sided irregular figure or Polygon.

You must reduce it into Triangles or to Trapeziums, by drawing of lines from
convenient opposite corners; and then the work is all one with that of the last
Problem.

PROB. XVIII.
How to measure a many sided regular figure, commonly called a regular Polygon.

Measure all the sides, and take the half of the sum of them for one side of a
square, and the nearest distance from the center of the Polygon to the middle
of one of the sides for the other side of a square; and with them two numbers
work as if it were a square oblong figure, and it will give the content of the
Polygon desired.

PROB. XIX.
How to reduce Feet into Yards, Ell^, or other parts.

First for yards, if 9 foot make one yard, how many shall 36 foot make.

The extent from 9 to 2 will reach from 36 to 4, for so many yards is 36 foot.
But if you were to measure any quantity by the yard, as the plaistering or
painting of a House, then I would advise you to have a yard to be divided into
a hundred parts (which is as near as commonly Workmen go to, or else into 1000,
if you do require more exactness) and measure all your lengths and breadths
with that, and set them down thus, 2. 25 (or by 1000, thus 2. 250) and the
length thus 10. 60, and multiply them together, and the product is the true
content of that long square: the like holds for Else, or Poles, Furlongs, or
any other kind of measure. Again, for a yard in length, if 3 foot make one
yard, then what shall 30 make (...) it makes 10: or the contrary, i^ 10 yards
make 30 foot, what shall 12 make? The extent from 10 to 12 will reach from 30
to 36 foot (...) but if it be given in feet or inches* then say, as 9 to the
breadth, so i^ the length in feet and inches (o^ decimal parts) to the content
i^ yards required.

CHAP. IV.
The Use of the Line of Numbers i^ measuring of Land by P^rc^^^ and Acres.

PROB. I.
Having the breadth and length of an Oblong Superficies given in Perches, to
find the content in Perches.

As 1 perch to the breadth in perches, so the length in perches to the content
in perches.

Examp. As 1 is to 30, so is 183 to 5490 perches.

PROB. II.
Having the length and breadth in perches, to find the content in square acres.

As 160 to the breadth in perches so is the length in perches to the content in
acres.

As 160 unto 30, so is 183 to 34. ^1 (in acres and 100 parts.

PROB. III.
Having the length and breadth of an oblong Superficies given in Chains, to
find the content in Acres.

It being troublesome to divide ^he content in perches by 160, we may measure
the length and breadth by Chains, each Chain being 4 perches in length, and
divided into a hundred links, then the work will be more easy in Arithmatick
or by the Rule; for as 10 to the breadth in Chains, so the length in Chains to
the content in Acres.

Examp. As 10 to 7. 50, so is 45. 75 to 34. 81 (100 parts of an Acre.)

PROB. IV.
Having the Base and Perpendicular of a Triangle given in Perches, to find the
content in Acres.

If the Perpendicular go for the length, and the whole Base for the breadth,
then you must take half of the oblong for the content of the Triangle, by the
second Problem, as 160 to 30, so (...) 183 to 34. 31; or else, without halsing,
say, as 320 to the Perpendicular, so is the Base to the content in Acres; as
320 unto 30, so is 183 to 17. 15.

PROB. V.
Having the Perpendicular and Base given in Cains, to find the content in Acres.

As 20 to the perpendicular, so is the Base to the content in Acres.

As 20 to 7. 50, so is 45. 75 to 17. 15 parts.

PROB. VI.
Having the content of a Superficies after one kind of perch, to find the
content of the same Superficies according to another kind of perch.

As the length of the second perch, is to the first, so is the content in Acres
to a fourth number, and that 4th. number to the content in acres required.
Suppose a superficies be measured with a chain 66 feet, or with a perch of 16,
and it contains 34. 31, and it be demanded how many acres it would contain if
it were measured with a perch of 18 foot? These kind of proportions are to be
wrought by the Backward Rule of Three, after a duplicated proportion: wherefore
I extend the Compasses from 16.5 unto 18.0, and the same extent does reach
backward, first from 34.31 to 31.45, and then from 31.45 to 28.84, the content
in those larger acres of 18 foot to a perch.

PROB. VII.
Having the plot of a Field with the content in Acres, to find the Scale by
which it was plotted.

Suppose a plain contained 34 acres 31 centesmes, if I should measure it with a
Scale of 10 in an inch, the length should be 38 chains and 12 centesmes, and
the breadth 6 chains and 25 centesms, and the content according to that
dimension, would by the 3d. Problem of this Chapter be found to be 23, 82.
whereas it should be 34* 31; therefore to gain the truth* I divide the distance
between 23* 82 and 34.31 into two equal parts, then setting one foot of the
Compasses upon 10, the supposed true Scale, I find the other to extend to 12,
which is the length of the Scale required.

PROB. VIII.
Having the length of the Oblong, to find the breadth of the Acre.

As the length in perches to 160 so is one acre to the breadth in perches. As
40 to 160, so is 1 to 4. Again, as 50 to 160, so is 1 to 3.20, so is 2 to 6.40;
or again, if you measure by chains, as the length in chains to 10, so is 1 acre
to his breadth in chains; as 12.50 unto 10, so 1 to 0.80; or if the length be
measured by foot measure, then as the length in feet unto 43560, so is 1 acre
to his breadth in foot measure.

So the length of the oblong being 792 feet, the breadth of one acre will be
found to be 55 foot, the breadth of two acres 110 feet.

The use of this Table is to show you how many inches, centesmes of a chain,
feet, yards, paces, perches, chains, acres, there is in a mile, either long or
square, or consequently any of them all, in any of the other that is less; as
for example, I would know how many inches there is in a long perch, I look on
the uppermos^ row for perches, and in the nex^ row under I find 198 for the
quantity of inches in a long perch. B^^ if I would know how many inches there
is in a square perch, the^ look for perch on the left hand* and in the inch
column you ha^^ 39204, for if you multiply 196 b^ 196, it will produce 39204.

A necessary Table for Mensuration of Superficial Measure.
Inch. Centesme. Feet. Yard. Pace. Perch. Chain Acre. Mile. Inch. (1) 7 92 12
36 60 198 792 792^ 6^360 Centes. 62 7264 (1) 1^515 4 545 7 575 25 (...) (...)
8000 Feit. 144 2 295 (1) 3 5 16 5 66 (...) 5280 Yards. 1296 20 655 9 (1) 1 66 5
50 22 220 1760 Pace. 3600 57 381 25 2 778 (1) 3 30 13^ 1^2 1056 Perch. 39204
625 272.25 30 25 1^.89 (1) 4 40 ^^20 Chain. 627264 10000 4356 484 174. 24 16
(1) 10 ^0 Acre. 6272640 100000 43560 4840 1742. 4 160 10 (1) 8 Mile. 101448960
64000000 27878400 3097^00 1115136 1^2400 6^00 640 (1) Square. Inches.
Centesmes. Feet. Yards. Paces. Perch. Chain Acre. Mil^.

The like is for any other number in the whole Table, and is of very good use
to reduce one number into another, or one sort of measure into another; as
inches into feet, and feet into yards, and yards into perches, and perches to
chains, and chains into acres, and acres into miles, or the contrary, either
long-wise or square-wise; as is well known to them that have occasion for these
measures. Thus much shall suffice for superficial measure, the practice of
which will make it plain to any ordinary capacity.

CHAP. V.
The Use of the Line of Numbers in measuring of solid Measure, as Timber, or
Stone, or such like solids.

PROB. I.
The breadth and thickness of any solid given, to find the side of a square
that shall be equal in area to it.

Divide the space on the Line of Numbers, between the breadth and thickness,
into two equal parts and the Compass point shall stay at the side of the
Square-equal required.

Examp. At 6 inches thick, and 18 inches broad.

The exact middle between 6 and 18 on a true Line of Numbers, will be at
10.39^, which is a Geometrical mean proportion between 6 and 18, and the side
of a Square-equal, to a piece 6 inches thick, and 18 inches broad; for 10.393
squared, viz. multiplied by 10.393, produces 108 very near, being the product
of 6 times 18.

PROB. II.
The side of the square of any solid given, to find how much in length makes a
foot of solid or Timbermeasure, by foot measure or inches.

The extent from the side of the square given in foot-measure to 1, being twice
repeated or laid the same way from 1, shall reach to the length required to
make a foot solid.

Examp. At 2 foot and 20 parts square, how much in length makes on^ foot solid.

The extent from 2.20 to 1 being laid or extended twice the same way from 1,
will stay at o^ 2065, the true length to make ^ foot solid.

For 2.20 the side of the square, multiplied by it self is 4.84, the^ 4.84
multiplied by 2065, the product is 999.46, which is near one foot solid.

2. If the side of the square b^ given in inches, then the exten^ from the
inches square to 12, being twice repeated the same wa^ from 12, shall reach to
the inche^ long to make one* foot.

Examp. At 15 inches square.

Set one point in 15 and the o^^er in 12, the same extent laid ^^ice the same
way from 12, shall ^^ach to 7 inches 68 parts, the true ^^^ngth to make one
foot solid. For ^^5 inches squared is 225.

Then 225 multiplied by 7.68, ^^oduceth 1728, the cube-inches (...) a
foot-solid.

3. For small Timber work thus.

The extent from the inches ^^uare to 12 being laid two times ^^e same way from
1, shall reach ^^ the feet and parts in length to ^^ake one foot solid.

Examp. At 3 inches and a half ^^uare.

The extent from 3 inches and a ^alf to 12 being laid twice the ^^me wa^ from 1
shall stay at ^1 foot 76 par^s, the length in ^eet to make a foot solid.

For 3 squared is 12.25, which ^ultiplied by 11 foot 76 parts, ^roduceth 144,
the number of long inches in a foot solid, for 144 pieces a foot long, and on^
inch square is a true solid foot o^ 1728 cube inches.

PROB. III.
The breadth and thickness of any solid given in inches or foot measure, to
find the length of one for solid.

1. The extent from 12 to the breadth in inches shall reach from the depth in
inches to a fourth.

2. The extent from that fourt^ number to 12 laid the same wa^ from 12, shall
reach to the inch^^ long to make one foot solid.

Examp. At 20 inches broad a^^ 9 inches thick, how many inches lo^ makes one
foot.

1. The extent from 12 to 9 t^^ inches thick, being laid the sa^ w^y from 20,
the inches broa^ gives 14.98 a fourth number.

2. The extent from 1498 t^ 12 being laid the same way from 12, gives 9 inches
and 60 p^r^^ the length to make one foot solid.

But for small Timber work ^hus.

1. The extent from 1 to the breadth, shall reach from the depth to a fourth.

2. The extent from that fourth ^umber to 12, laid the same way from 12, gives
the length in feet and parts to make one foot solid.

Examp. At 3 inches thick and 5 inches broad.

1. The extent from 1 to 3 the ^^ickness, laid the same way from (...) inches
the breadth, reaches to ^4.95 a fourth.

2. The extent from 14.95 the ^ourth to 12, being laid the same ^ay from 12,
gives 9 foot 60 parts ^^e length in feet to make one foot ^^lid.

For the product of 20 multipli^d by 9 is 180, and 180 multiplied ^y 9 inches 6
tenths will produce ^728 the cube-inches in one foot.

So also for the small piece.

The 3 inches multiplied by is 15, then 15 multiplied by 9 for 60 parts, will
produce 144, as b^ fore, the long inches in a foot (...) lid.

PROB. IV.
1. At any squareness, or brea^ and thickness given, to find (...) much is in a
foot long.

The extent from 12 to the (...) ches square, laid the same (...) from the
inches square, gives (...) quantity in one foot long.

Examp. At 4 inches squan^^

Set one point of the Compa^ in 12, and the other point i^ the same extent laid
the same (...) from 4 the inches square, giv^ inch and 33 parts, the quantity
one foot long.

Which being multiplied by (...) length of the Tree, gives the (...) true
content.

2. If the Timber is not sq^^ then thus,

The extent from 12 to the breadth, shall reach the same way from the depth or
thickness to the quantity in one foot long.

Examp. At 14 inches broad, and ^8 inches thick.

The extent from 12 to 14 inches the breadth, shall reach the same way from 8
the inches thick, to 9 inches and 33 parts, the quantity or content in 1 foot
long.

Then if the Tree be 20 foot long, 20 times so much is 15 foot ^7 inches, the
true content.

PROB. V. being most used.
The side of the Square given in inches, and the length in feet, to find the
content in feet and parts required.

The extent of the Compasses from 12 to the inches square, being twice repeated
the same way from the length, gives the true content of the Tree required.

Examp. At 15 inches square, and 2C foot long, how much Timber (...) there.

Set one point in 12, and extend the other to 15, the inches square.

Then the same extent laid twice the same way from 20 the feet long, shall
reach to 31 foot 3 inches, the true content required.

For 15 inches, or 1 foot 3 inches squared (or multiplied by it self is 1. 6.
9 or 1 foot 6 inches, an^ 20 times so much is 31 foot 3 inches.

PROB. VI.
The breadth and thickness of any piece given in inches, and the length in
feet, to find the soll^^ content in feet.

1. The extent from 12 to the breadth in inches, laid the same way from the
depth in inche^ gives a fourth number.

2. The extent from that fourth number to 12 shall reach the same way from the
length to the content required.

Examp. At 8 inches thick an^ 13 inches broad, and 19 foot long what is the
solid content in feet.

1. The extent of the Compasses from 12 to 8 inches the thickness, being laid
the same way from 13 inches the breadth, shall reach to 8.66 a fourth.

2. The extent from 12 to that fourth, being laid the same way from 19 foot the
length, gives 13 foot 73. (or near 9 inches) the true content in feet and parts.

For 8 inches the thickness, multiplied by 1 foot 1 inch the breadth is of. 8
inc. 8.12 pts. then 19 foot the length, multiplied by of. 8. in. 8.12 makes 13
foot 8 inches and 8.12, the exact content of a piece 8 inches thick, 13 inches
broad, and 19 foot long.

PROB. VII.
The length, breadth, and depth of any solid given in inches to find the solid
content in cube-inches.

1. The extent from 1 to the breadth in inches, being laid the same way from
the depth in inches, shall reach to a fourth.

2. The extent from 1 to that fourth, shall reach the same way from the length
in inches to the content in cube-inches required.

Examp. At 9 inches thick, 15 inches broad, and 40 inches long.

1. Set one point of the Compasses in 1, and the other in 9 the inches thick,
then the same extent laid the same way from 15 the breadth in inches, gives
13.50 a fourth.

2. Then the extent from 1 to 13.50 the fourth, laid the same way from 40 the
length in inches, gives 5400 the content in inches.

For 9 multiplied by 15 is 135, and 135 multiplied by 40, is 5400.

PROB. VIII.
The length, breadth, and depth of a great solid given in feet and decimals, or
in feet and inches, to find the content in feet and parts.

1. the extent from 1 to the breadth in feet and parts, shall reach the same
way from the depth in feet and parts to a fourth.

2. The extent from 1 to that fourth being laid the same way from the length in
feet and parts, shall reach to the content in feet and decimal parts required.

Examp. Suppose a Cistern be 3 foot 75 parts (or 3 foot 9 inches) broad, and 4
foot 50 parts (or 4 foot 6 inches) deep, and 7 foot 66 parts, or 8 inches long,
how many solid feet will it hold.

1. The extent from 1 to 3.75 being laid the same way from 4.50 gives 16.875
for a fourth.

2. The extent from 1 to 16.875 the fourth, being laid the same way from 7.666
the length, gives 129 foot 3637 parts, or 4 inches and.

For 3.75 multiplied by 4.50, gives 16.875 the fourth, then 16.875 multiplied
by 7.66 the length, gives 129 foot 364 parts, or 4 inches and, which you may
reduce by a look of your eye on inches and foot measure, laid one by the other
on your Rule.

Note, every 6 foot is a full Beer Barrel, therefore 129 foot is 11 Barrels and.

Note also, if the space on the Line of Numbers between every figure, is
divided into 12 proportional parts by small pricks, they will represent inches,
and be very ready in use, for any Lea^ner especially.

CHAP. VI.
To measure round Timber, by having the Diameter given in footmeasure, or
inches, and the length in feet.

PROB. I.
At any Diameter given in inches, to find how many inches in length will make
one foot solid.

The extent from the Diameter in inches to 13.54 (the Diameter when one foot
long makes 1 foot of Timber) being laid twice the same way from 12, shall reach
to the inches in length ^o make 1 foot.

Examp. At 10 inches Diameter.

The extent from 10 to 13.54, being laid twice the same way from 12, gives 22
inches, the length to make one foot solid.

For 78.54 the area of a Circle of 10 inches diameter, multiplied by 22
produces 1728, the cube-inches in 1 foot solid.

PROB. II.
The Diameter given in foot measure, to find how much in length make one foot
solid.

The extent from the Diameter in foot-measure to 1.128 (the Diameter in
foot-measure, when one foot long makes one foot) being laid two times the same
way from 1, gives the length in foot measure to make 1 foot solid, at that
given Diameter.

Examp. At 0.833 Diameter, how much in length makes 1 foot solid.

The extent from 0.833 the given Diameter to 1.128, laid twice the same way
from 1, gives 1.833 the near length in foot measure to make 1 foot solid.

For 54.56 the area of a circle whose diameter is 0.833, being multiplied by
1.833, the product is 1000.045, the decimals in 1 foot solid.

PROB. III.
The Diameter given in inches, to find how much is in one foot long.

The extent from 13.54, to the Diameter in inches given, being twice repeated
from 12, shall reach to the inches of Timber contained in one foot long.

Or the same extent laid twice the same way from 1, will reach to the feet and
inches contained in one foot long.

Ex. At 8 inches diameter, how much is in one foot long.

Set one point in 13.54, and open the other to 8, the given Diameter in inches.

Then the same extent laid twice the same way from 12, gives 41 inches the long
inches of Timber in one foot long, 144 bebeing one foot. Or the same extent
laid twice the same way from 1, reaches to 0.348, 1000 being 1 foot.

Then 0.348 multiplied by the length of the Tree in feet gives the true content.

Examp. At 15 inches diameter, and 20 foot long.

The extent from 13.54 to 15 being laid twice the same way from 12, gives 14
inches 66 parts, or laid twice from 1, gives 1 foot 223.

Then 20 times so much is 24 foot 56 parts, or 6 inches.

Also 20 times 14.66 inches is 293.20 inches, 12 being one foot, which divided
by 12 makes 24 foot near 7 inches.

PROB. IV.
The Diameter in inches being given of any tree or cillander, and the length in
feet, to find the content in feet.

The extent from 13.54 to the Diameter in inches, being laid twice the same way
from the length, gives the content in feet.

Examp. At 15 inches Diameter, and 20 foot long.

The extent from 13.54 to 15, being laid twice the same way from 20, gives 24
foot and 42 pts. the content in feet.

Note, that right against 42 in feet measure is 5 inches in the inch measure.
For the area of a Circle 15 inches diameter is 177, and 20 times this is 3540,
which divided by 144, has 24 foot 84 cube inches a Quotient (for 7 inches the
near content.)

PROB. V.
The Diameter given in inches, and the length in inches, to find the content in
inches.

The extent from 1.128 to the Diameter in inches, being laid twice the same way
from the length in inches, gives the true content in cube-inches.

Examp. A Well, or a Tubb of 40 inches Diameter, and 50 inches deep.

The extent from 1.128 to 40 the inches Diameter, being laid twice the same way
from 50 the length in inches, gives 62900 inches, the near content in
cubeinches.

Or the extent from 1.128 to 3 foot 33 parts (or 4 inches) the given Diameter
laid twice from 4 foot 166 (or 4 foot 2 inches) gives 36 foot 40 parts, the
content in feet and parts.

For 36 times 1728 inches is 62208 inches, then 692 inches in the 40 part over
being added makes 62900 the cube inches in that Cilander.

PROB. VI.
Having the Circumference given in inches, to find how many inchee long makes
one foot, or how many feet and parts long.

The extent from the Circumference (or girt) about any Cillander given in
inches, to 42.54 (the inches about, when one foot long makes one foot solid)
the same extent laid twice the same way from 12, reaches to the inches long, to
make one foot solid measure.

And the same extent laid twice the same way from 1, gives the feet long to
make one foot solid.

Examp. Suppose a Tree be 30 inches about, how many inches, or feet and inches
long, makes one foot solid measure.

The extent from 30 inches the girt, to 42.54, laid twice the same way from 12,
gives 24 inches 1/10, the inches long to make one foot.

Also the same extent laid twice the same way from 1, gives 2 foot 01 or 1/100
part, the length in feet and parts to make 1 foot.

For 71.7 the area of a Circle of 30 inches about, being multiplied by 24. ^,
produces 1728, the cube inches in a foot solid.

PROB. VII.
The Girt of any Cillander given in inches, to find how many inches, or feet
and inches is in one foot long.

The extent from 42.54 to the girt in inches, laid twice the same way from 12,
gives the number of inches in one foot long.

Or the same extent laid twice from 1 the same way, gives the feet and parts in
a foot long.

Examp. At 40 inches about.

The extent from 40 the inches about to 42.54, being laid twice the same way
from 12, gives 13 inches and 63 parts, the content of one foot long.

Or the same extent laid twice the same way from 1, gives one foot, and 136
parts of 1000, the quantity in feet and parts in one foot long; which 136 parts
is 1 inch, 6 tenths and a half, as is seen presently by the inches and foot
measure laid together on your two foot Rule.

Then this 13 inches 63 parts, multiplied by the length of the Tree, gives the
true content.

PROB. VIII.
The Circumference or Girt given in inches, and the length in feet, to find the
content of any Cillender in feet and parts.

The extent from 42.54 to the inches about, being laid twice the same way from
the length in feet, gives the content in solid feet required.

Examp. At 36 inches about, and 30 foot long.

The extent from 42.54 to 36 the inches girt, being laid twice the same way
from 30 the feet long, gives 21 foot and a half, the near content in solid feet.

For the Area of a Circle 36 inches about, is 103.1 inches, which multiplied by
30 the length of the Cillender in feet, gives 3093 which sum divided by 144,
produces 21 foot 69 cube inches, the near content.

PROB. IX,
Having the Girt and length given in foot measure, to find the content in feet.

The extent from 3.545 (the feet and 100 parts about, when one foot long makes
one foot of Timber) to the Girt in feet and parts.

The same extent laid twice from the length in feet, gives the content in feet.

Examp. A Brewers Tun of 20 foot about, and 4 foot and deep, how many solid
feet is it.

The extent from 3.545 to 20, shall reach the same way at two turnings from 4
foot and to 143 foot and 10 parts, the solid content in feet: and 6 foot being
a full Beer-barrel, it contains 24 barrels, Beer-measure.

For 31 foot 8 parts, the area of a Circle of 20 foot about, being multiplied
by 4 foot 5 parts the depth, gives 143 foot and 10 pts. as before.

PROB. X.
Having the Girt in inches, and the length of a Cillander given in inches, to
find the solid content in cube inches.

The extent from 3.545 to the Girt in inches, being twice repeated the same
way, from the length in inches, gives the content in inches.

Examp. At 48 inches about, and 24 inches in length, how many cube inches is it.

The extent from 3.545 to 48 the inches girt, being twice repeated from 24 the
length in inches, gives 4398 the content in solid inches.

For 183.2 the area of a Circle of 48 inches about, multiplied by 24 the inches
deep, produces 4397 the near content as before.

To insure you the number of places, the Print 11 times repeated, does
certainly direct you.

PROB. XI.
It being an ordinary way in measuring of round Timber, such as Oak, Elm,
Beech, Pear Tree, and the like, (which is sometimes very rugged, uneven, and
knotty) to take a line and girt about the middle of it, and then to take the
fourth part of that for the side of a Square-equal to that Circumference: but
this measure is not exact, but more than it should be. But either because of
allowance for the faults abovesaid, or for Ignorance, the custom is still
used, and Men commonly think themselves wronged, if they have not such measure.
Therefore I have fitted you with a Proportion for it, both for Diameter and
Circumference.

And first for Diameter.

The Diameter given in inches, and the length in feet, to find the content.

As 1.526 to the Diameter, so is the length to a fourth, and that fourth to the
content in feet, according to the rate abovesaid.

The extent from 1.526 to 9.53 being twice repeated from 8, shall reach to
3.12, the content.

PROB. XII.
Having the Circumference in inches to find the content in the abovesaid
measure.

As 48 to the inches about, so is the length to a fourth number, and that
fourth to the content. The extent from 48 to 30 being twice repeated from 8,
shall fall upon 3. 12, the content required.

PROB. XIII.
How to measure Taper Timber, that is, bigger at one end than at the other.

The usual way for doing of this is to take the Circumference of the middle or
mean bigness; but a more exact way, is to find the content of the base of both
ends, and add them together; and then to take the half for the mean, which
multiplied by the length, shall give you the true content.

Examp. A round Pillar is to be measured, whose Diameter at one end is 20
inches, at the other end it is 32 inches Diameter, and in length 16 foot (or
192 inches) the content of the little end is 314. 286, the area or content of
the greater end is 773.142, which put together, make 1087.428, whose half
543.714 multiplied by 192 the length, gives 104393.143 Cubical inches, which
reduced into feet, is 60 feet and 713 cubical inches for the solid content of
the Pillar.

PROB. XIV.
To measure a Cone, such as is a Spire of a Steeple, or the like, by having the
height and Diameter of Base.

Examp. Let a Cone be to be measured, whose Base is 10 foot, and the height
thereof 12 foot, the content of the Base will be found by the 14th. Problem of
superficial measure, to be 78. 54; then this 78. 54 multiplied by 4 a third
part of 12, the perpendicular or height of the Cone will give 314. 4, for the
content of the Cone required. By the numbers work thus; the extent from 1 to 4
will reach from 78. 54 to 314. 4. But because there may be some trouble in
getting the true perpendicular of a Cone, which is its height, take this Rule:
First, take half the Diameter, and multiply it in its self, which here is 25,
then measure the side of the Cone 13, and multiply that by it self which here
is 169, from which take the Square of half the Base, which is 25, your first
number found, and the remain is 144, the Square-root of which is the height of
the Cone, or length of the perpendicular.

PROB. XV.
To measure a Globe or Sphere Arithmetically.

Cube the Diameter, then multiply that by 11, and divide by 21, gives you the
true solid content; let a Sphere be to be measured whose Axis or Diameter is
14, that multiplied by it self, gives 196, and 196 again by 14 gives 2744, this
multiplied by 11 gives 30184, and this last divided by 21 gives 1437. 67, for
the content of the Sphere whose Diameter is 14. But more briefly, by the
Numbers thus, the extent from 1 to the Axis, being twice repeated from 3. 142,
will reach to the superficial content, that is, the superficies round about.
But if the same extent from 1 to the Axis be thrice repeated from 5238, it will
reach to the solid content; as 1 to 14, so 3. 142 to 617 being twice repeated,
as 1 to 14, so 5278 to 1437 being thrice repeated. As for many sided figures,
if they have length, you have sufficient for them in the Chapter of superficial
measure, to find the base, and then the base multiplied by the length, gives
the content. But as for figures of roundish form, they coming very seldom in
use, I shall not in this place trouble you with them, for they may be reduced
to Spheres or Cones, or Trirngles, or Cubes, and then measured by those
Problems accordingly. And so much for the mensuration of Solids.

CHAP. VII.
The Use of the Line of Numbers in Questions that eoncern Military Orders.

PROB. I.
Any number of Soldiers being propounded, to order them into a square Battle
of Men.

Find by the 12th. Problem of the second Chapter, the square-root of the number
given; for so much as that root shall be, so many Soldiers ought you to place
in Rank, and so many likewise in File, to make a square Battle of Men.

Examp. Let it be required to order 625 Soldiers into a square Battle of men;
the square-root of that number is 25; wherefore you are to place 25 in rank,
and as many in file; for Fractions in this practice are not considerable. For
had there been but 3 less, there would have been but 24 in rank and file.

PROB. II.
Any number of Soldiers being propounded, to order them into a double battle
of Men: that is, which may have twice as many in rank as file.

Find out the square-root of half the number given, for that root is the number
of men to be placed in file, and twice as many to be placed in rank, to make up
a double Battle of Men.

Examp. Let 1368 Soldiers be propounded to be put in that order: I find by the
12 aforesaid, that 26, etc. is the square-root of 684 (half the number
propounded) and therefore conclude, that 52 ought to be in rank, and 26 in
file, to order so many Soldiers into a double Battle of men.

PROB. III.
Any number of Soldiers being propounded, to order them into a quadruple
battle of men; that is, four times so many in Rank as File.

Here the Square-root of the fourth part of the number propounded will show the
number to be placed in File, and four times so many are to be placed in Rank.

So 2048 being divided by 4, the quotient is 512, whose root is 22 (6) and so
many are to be placed in file and 88 in Rank, being four times 22, etc.

PROB. IV.
Any number of Soldiers being given, together with their distances in Rank and
File, to order them into a Square battle of ground.

Extend the Compasses from the distance in File to the distance in Rank; this
done, that extent applied the same way from the number of Soldiers propounded,
will cause the moveable point to fall upon a fourth number, whose square-root
is the number of men to be placed in file; by which, if you divide the whole
number of Soldiers, the quotient will show the number of men to be placed in
Rank.

Examp. 2500 men are propounded to be ordered in a Square-battle of ground, in
such sort that their distance in File being seven foot, and their distance in
Rank 3 foot, the ground whereupon they stand may be a just square: To resolve
this question, extend the Compasses upon the Line of Numbers downwards from 7
to 3 (then because the fourth number to be found, will in all likelihood
consist of 4 figures) if you apply that extent the same way from 2500, in the
second part among the smallest divisions, the moveable point will fall upon the
fourth number you look for, whose square-root is the number of men to be placed
in file. By which square-root, if you divide the whole number of Soldiers, you
have the number of men to be placed in Rank.

As 7 to 3, so 2500 to 1072, whose biggest square-root is 32, then as 32 is to
1, so is 2500 to 78.

PROB. V.
Any number of Soldiers being propounded, to order them in Rank and File,
according to the reason of any two numbers given.

This Problem is like the former* for as the proportional number given for the
file, is to that given for the Rank, so is the number of Soldiers to a fourth
number* whose square-root is the number of men to be placed in Rank, by which,
if you divide the whole, you may have the number to be placed in File.

Examp. So if 2500 Soldiers were to be martialled in sueh order, that the
number of men to be placed in File, might bear such proportion to the number of
men to be placed in Rank, as 5 bears to 12, I say then, as 5 is to 12, so is
2500 to 6000, whose square-root is 77 the number in Rank; then as 77 is to ^,
so is 2500 to 32* etc. The number of men to be placed in File.

CHAP. IX.
The use of the Line in questions of Interest and Annuities.

PROB. I.
A sum of Money put out to Use, and the Interest forborne for a certain time,
to know what it comes to at the end of that time, counting Interest upon
Interest at any rate propounded.

Take the distance with your Compasses between 100, and the increase of 100 l.
for one year, (which you must do very exactly) and repeat it so many times from
the principal as it is forborne years and the point of the Compasses will stay
on the Principal with the Interest, and increase according to the rate
propounded.

Examp. I desire to know how much 125 l. being forborne 6 years, will be
increased according to the rate of 6 l. per Cent. reckoning Interest upon
Interest, or Compound Interest.

Extend the Compasses from 100 to 106, that extent being 6 times repeated from
125, shall reach to 177 l. the Principal increased with the Interest at the
term of 6 years at the rate propounded.

But if it were required for any number of months, then first find what 100 is
at one month, then say thus, If 100 gives 10 s. at one month, what shall 125 be
at 6 months end? facit 75 s. And the work is thus:

First say, If 100 gives 10 s. at one months end, what shall 125? and it makes
12 s. 6 d. then say, If one month require 12 s. 6 d. what shall 6 months
require? facit 75 s. that is three pound fifteen shillings, the thing required
to be fonnd.

PROB. II.
A sum of money being due at any time to come, to know what it is worth in
ready money.

This question is only the inverse of the other; for if you take the space
between 106 and 100, and turn it back from the sum proposed as many times as
there are years in the question, it shall fall on the sum required.

Examp. Take the distance between 106 and 100, and repeat it 6 times from 177,
and it will at last fall on 125, the sum sought.

PROB. III.
A yearly Rent, Pension, or Annuity being forborne for a certain term of years,
to find what the Arrears come to at any rate propounded.

First, you must find the Principal that shall answer to that Annuity, then
find to what sum the Principal would be augmented at the rate and term of
years propounded; then if you substract the Principal out of that sum, the
remainder is the Arrears required.

Examp. A Rent, or Annuity, or Pension of 10 pound the year, forborne for 15
years, what will the Arrears thereof come to at the rate of 6 per Cent.
Compound Interest?

The way to find the Principal that does answer to 10 l. is thus: If 6 l. has
100 for his Principal, what shall 10 have? facit 166 l. 16 s. or 166 l. 8 s.
for the extent from 6 to 10 will reach from 100 to 166.8. which is 166 l. 16 s.
Then by the first Problem of this Chapter, 166 l. 16 s. forborne 15 years, will
come to 398 l. then substract 166 l. 16 s. out of 398 l. and the remainder,
viz. 231 l. 4 s. is the sum of the Arrears required. But note, in working this
question, your often turning unless your first extent be most precisely exact*
you may commit a gross error, to avoid which, divide your number of turns into
2, 3, or 4 parts, and when you have turned over one part, as here 5, for 3
times 5 is 15, open the Compasses from thence to the Principal, and then turn
the other two turns, viz. 10 -- 15, and this may avoid much error, or at the
least, much mitigate it; for in these questions, the larger the Line is, the
better.

PROB. IV.
A yearly Rent or Annuity being propounded, to find the worth in ready Money.

First, find by the last what the Arrears come to at the term propounded, and
then what those Arrears are worth in ready Money, and that shall be the value
of it in ready money.

Examp. What may a Lease of 10 l. per annum, having 15 years to come, be worth
in ready money? I find by the last Problem, that the Arrears of 10l. per ann.
forborne 15 years, is worth 231 l. 4 s. And likewise I find by the second
Problem that 231 l. 4 s. is worth in ready money 96 l. 16 s. and so much may a
man give for a Lease of 10 l. per ann. for 15 years to come, at the rate of 6
l. per cent.

But if it were not to begin presently, but to stay a certain term longer, then
you must add that time to the time of forbearance; as suppose that after 5
years it were to begin, then you must say, 231 l. 4 s. forborne 20 years is
worth in ready money, and it is 72 l. 8 s. and that shall be the value of the
Lease required.

PROB. V.
A sum of money being propounded, to find what Annuity to continue any number
of years, at any rate propounded, that sum of Money will purchase.

Take any known Annuity, and find the value of it in ready money; this being
done, the proportion will be thus; as the value found out is to the Annuity
taken, so is the sum propounded to the Annuity required.

Examp. What Annuity to continue 15 years, will 800 l. purchase after the rate
of 6 l. per Cent. Here first I take 10l. per ann. for 15 years and find it to
be worth in ready money 96 l. 16 s. by the last Problem; then I say, as 96 l. 8
s. is to 10, so is 800 to 82-7, which is 82l. 14 s. and so much near do I
conclude will an Annuity of 82 l. 14 s. per ann. be worth for 15 years, after
the rate of 6 l. per Cent. viz. 800 l.

Also in this Impression is added the use of the Line of Pence, which is added
to the Line of Numbers next to it, when it shall be desired by any one, being
very convenient for casting up small sums of Money in any concern whatsoever.

The Line of Numbers and Pence together, do give the Decimal Fraction of any
sum under 20 s. very near, as by the Print to 11 Radixes is most plainly seen.

Where 20 s. or 1 l. in Money, is at 1 in the fourth line, and 2 s. one tenth
of a pound, at 1 right over it in the third Line; 9 farthings and 6 tenths of a
farthing, being one tenth of two shillings, at 001 in the second line right
over 01.

Lastly, 96/100 parts of a farthing at 0001 in the first Line of Numbers
toward the right hand, or the 96/1000 parts, at the 00001 at the left end of
the same Line.

Therefore note, if 20 s. is 1, 15 s. is 075, 12 s. is 06, 10 s. is 05, 5 s. is
at 025, and 2 s. or 24 d. at 01, which on Two-foot Rules is set at *10 at the
end of the Rule, though in this case called but one tenth, when 1 is one pound.

Then if 1 or 10 at the end, be 24 pence, 18 pence is at 75, 12 d. at 5, 6 d.
at 25, 2 d. at 8.33 in the first part, and 1 d. at 4166, and 1 farthing at
1042, a little beyond the first 1 on Two-foot Rules.

From hence you may see that the Print of the eleven Lines of Numbers shows
the right Decimal Fraction of any sum under 1 pound Sterling, and by
consequence, for any sum above, and was purposely made to explain this on
Two-foot Rules.

The Use of the Line of Numbers and Pence laid together on Two-foot Rules, may
be in a brief manner, thus;

1. At any price 100, or 5 score, what cost 1, counting 10 at the end of the
Line, 10 l.

Examp. At 5 l. per 100, counted at 5 in the second part, because 10 is called
10 l. just over or under it in the line of pence, is 12 d. the exact answer,
for 100 s. is 5 l.

2. Examp. At 2 l. 10 s. per 100, right against 2.5 on Numbers representing 2
l. 10 s. right against it on the Line of Pence is 6 d. the Answer, for 100 6 d.
is 2 l. 10 s.

Now observe, if 1 in the middle is called 1 l. then in the first part, 9 is 18
s. 9.5 is 19 s. 5 toward the beginning-end is 10 s. and 1 at the very
beginning end is 2 s.

Then to supply all under 2 s. to 1 farthing, begin again at the upper end at
10, where is set 24 d. the same with 2 s. and back again, 23. 22. 21. 20. 19.
18 pence at 75, then 17. 16. 15. 14. 13. 12 d. and 5, then 11 10. 9. 8. 7. 6 d.
at 25; then 5. 4. 3. 2 d. at 0.834, then 1 penny at 0.4166, then 3 farthings, 2
farthings, 1 farthing at 0.1042, and every 10th. of a farthing in pricks
between the farthings.

3. Examp. At 1 l. per 100, counted at the middle 1, is 2 d. 1 far. 6 tenths of
a far. for 1.

4. Examp. At 10 s. per 100, counted at 5 in the first part, just against it in
the Line of pence is 1 penny (or 4 farthings) and 8 tenths of a farthing, the
true answer.

5. Examp. At 2 s. per 100, counted at 1 at the beginning of the Line of
Numbers is no farthings, but 96 parts of a farthing in 100 pts. the answer for
the half of 96 is 48, the farthings in 2 s.

6. Examp. But for any price under 2 s. per 100, count thus, as 12 d. per 100,
just against 12 d. on the Line of pence is 5 on numbers, for 5 tenths of a
farthing the near answer* for 5 tenths of a farthing is half a farthing, and
100 half farthings is 50 farthings, being two farthings above 48, the farthings
in one shilling.

7. Examp. At 6 d. per 100, right against 6 in the Line of pence is 025, or one
quarter of a tenth of a farthing, on the Line of Numbers, the answer near the
truth. For a hundred quarters of a farthing is 50 half farthings, or 25
farthings, one more than 6 d.

But if you count 1 farthing less for every 6 d. you shall have it right.
Example at 18 d. per 100, count 17* d. and 1 far. 3 far. less than 18 d. and
just against it on Numbers is 12/100 pts. of 1 farthing, the true price of 1.

Again, at 12 d. counted at 11 d. 2 far. just against it on numbers is 48/100
pts. of a farthing, the price of 1.

Again, for 6 d. counted at 5 d. 3 far. just against it is 24/100 pts. of a
farthing, the true answer or price of 1.

I have been large in this, that you might see the reason of it the plainer.

Again, on the contrary upwards, at any price for 1* what cost 100, or 5 score.

At 48/100 pts. of a farthing for 1, the price of 100, is just 12 d. the
contrary to the last example but one.

Again, at 72/100 pts. of a farthing for one, 100 will cost just 18 d. as in
the last but two foregoing.

Again, at 69/100 pts. of a farthing for 1, 100 is just 2 s. Note, the 96 is
just against 23 d. being 4 far. less than 2 s. that is, 4 farthings abated for
the four 6 pence's in 2 s.

But for all sums between 2 s. at 1 at the beginning-end, and 10 l. at the end
of the Line. This in 3 Examples.

1 Ex. At 4 s. per 100 counted at 2 in the first part of the Line of Numbers,
just against it on the Line of Pence, is 1 farthing and 92/100 more for 1.

2 Ex. At 13 s. per 100, counted at 6.5 on the Line of Numbers, just against it
on the Line of Pence, is 6 farthings, 2 tenths and ^, the answer.

3 Ex. At 3 l. per 100, counted at 3 in the second part, is 7 d. o far. ^ of a
farthing, the answer.

But if your 100 be 5 score and 12, then count thus with a pair of Compasses.
The extent from 112 to 3 l. counted as before, laid the same way from the
middle 1, gives 6 d. 1 far. 6/10 of a farthing more for 1 l.

Again, on the contrary, If 1 cost 7 d. farthing, and half a farthing, what
cost 112?

The extent from the middle 1 to 7 d. 1 far. and half a far. (half way beyond
the prick) being laid the same way from 112, will reach to 3.45, or 3 l. 9 s.
the answer. For if every figure in the second part be 1 l. then every 10th. cut
between is 2 s. then 4 and ^ and 45 is 9 s.

Also, if every figure in the first part is 2 s. then 5 cuts or tenths beyond
any figure is 12 d. 2 is 6d. 1 is 2 d. farthing, half farthing.

Just as you see by counting 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. in the second part
on the Numbers, just against it on the pence is the exact reduction to pence
and farthings required.

Ex. Against 3 is 7 d. near a farthing, against 6 is 14 d. near 2 farthings;
against 7.5 is just 18 d. And so for all other.

Again, when the price of 100 costs above 10 l. then count thus.

Ex. At 65 l. 15 s. and 6 d. per 100.

First, 65 doubled is 13 s. then the 15 s. 6 d. counted on the first part of
the Line of Numbers at 7. 75, and just against it on the Line of pence is 7
far. and 44 pts. the true answer is 65 l. 15 s. 1d. 3 far. and 44.100 pts. of 1
farthing.

Again, at 18 s. 7 d. 2 far. for 1, what is the price of 100?

Note, 18 s. is at 9 on the first part of the Numbers, which here stands for 90
l. then seek the odd 7 d. 2 far. on the Line of pence, and just against it on
the Line of Numbers is 3.125, the 3 is 3 l. the 1 more is 2 s. and the 25 more
is 6 d. in all 93 l. 2 s. 6 d. the price of 100.

For 1800 s. is 90 l. 100 times 7 d. is 2 l. 18 s. 4 d. 100 half pence is 4 s.
2 d. in all 93 l. 2 s. 6 d.

Once more for a greater sum at 8l. 5 s. 6 d. for 1, what costs 100.

First, to 8 l. add 2 Ciphers, and it is 800 l. then add 2 ciphers to the 5 s.
and it is 500 s. or 25 l. then just against 6d. in the line of pence in the
line of Numbers is 2 l. 10 s.

In all, 827 l. 10 s. the true price of 100 at 8 l. 5 s. and 6 d. for 1.

A further use of the Lines of Pence and Numbers in several Questions.

If 2 pound and of any Commodity cost 7 d. 3 f. and of a far. what cost 32
pound?

The extent from 2.5 on Numbers to 7 d. 3 f. and on the Line of Pence, being
laid the same way from 32 75, shall reach to 4.27.

Note, the 4 is 8 s. and the 27 more counted on the line of Numbers beyond the
middle 1, gives on the line of Pence near 6 d. 2 f. in all 8 s. 6 d. 2 f. the
true answer.

If 3 yards and of Ribbon cost 3 d. 3 f. and, what cost 17 yards and ^? The
extent from 3.5 on the Line of Numbers to 3 d. 3 f. and half farthing on the
Line of pence, being laid the same way from 17.5 on the Line of Numbers reaches
to 19 d. 1 f. and half on the Line of pence, the true answer.

3. If 1 yard of plaistering cost 8 d. half penny, what cost 142 yards and a
half. The extent from 1 on the Line of Numbers to 8 d. half penny on the Line
of pence, laid the same way from 142 on Numbers, reaches to 5.047; the 5 is 5l.
and the 047 more, counted on Numbers, on the pence, is 11 d. farthing, the true
answer.

4. If 112 l. cost 2 l. 10 s. 6 d. what cost 21 C. 3 q. and 12 lb?

The extent from 112 to 2.525, for 2 l. 10 s. 6 d. laid the same way from 2448,
the pounds in 21 C. 3 q. and 12 lb. shall reach to 55 lb 4 s. the near true
answer.

For if 2.525 the decimal for 2 l. 10 s. 6 d. be multiplied by 2448, the pounds
in 21 C. 3 q. 12 lb, the product is 6181200, which divided by 112, the quotient
is 55 lb. 189, which reduced, is near 4 s. or 3 s. 38 farthings, or 9 d.
halfpenny.

5. If 5 ounces and a half of Nntmegs cost 20 d. 3 far. what shall 1 C. 1 q. 15
lb come to?

The extent from 5 on Numbers to 20 d. 3 q. on the Line of pence, shall reach
from 16 the ounces in 1 lb, to 02518, the 25 is 5 s. and the 18 more is 1 far.
7 tenths, the price of 1 lb.

Then the extent from 1 on Numbers to 2518, laid the same way from 155, the
pounds in 1 C. 1 q. and 15 lb, shall reach to 39 l. 0 s. 10 d. the near true
answer to the Question.

CHAP. X.
The application of the Line of Numbers to use in Domestic Affairs, as in
Coals, Cheese, Butter, and the like.

I have added this Chapter, not that I think it absolutely necessary but only
because I would have the absolute applicableness of the Rule to any thing
behinted at; for it may be the answer of some, Do you come with a Rule to
measure my Commodities which are sold by weight? Yea, so far as there is
proportion, it concerns that and any thing else, the application of which I
leave to the industrious Practitioner; only I here give a hin^; as much as ^o
say, here is a Treasure, if you dig, you may find; for some may be apt to
think, it being a Carpenters-Rule, it is fit but for Carpenters use only: but
know, that in all measures which are either lengths, Superficials or Solids, or
as some call, Longametry, Planametry, and Solidametry: and in all Liquids by
weight or measure: and in all time, either by Years, Months, Weeks, Days,
Hours, Minutes, and Seconds, and almost, (I think, I may say) in all things
number is used, and in many things, proportional numbers; why then may not this
Line put in for a share of use, seeing it is wholly composed of, and fitted for
proportional Numbers, and of so easy an attainment for any ordinary capacity,
and chiefly intended for them that be ignorant of Arithmetic, and have not
time to learn that noble Science, as some have.

And first, for more convenience of Reduction, take these Rules of Reduction.

Rules for English Money.
Note, that 4 farthings make a penny; 16 farthings, 8 half pence, or 4 pence,
make a groat; 48 farthings, 24 half pence, or 12 pence, make a shilling: 40
pence, or 10 groats, is 3 shillings 4 pence; 80 pence, 20 groats, or 6 shilling
8 pence, is a Noble; 160 pence, 40 groats, or 13 shillings 4 pence, is a mark;
20 shillings, 4 crowns, 3 nobles, or 2 angels, is a pound sterling.

Rules for Troy-weight
Note, that 24 grains is a pennyweight; 20 penny-weights, or 24 carrots is an
ounce Troy; 12 ounces is a pound; 25 lib. a quarter of a hundred, 50 lib. half
a hundred, 75 lib. three quarters of a hundred, and 100 lib. is a hundred
weight Troy.

Rules for Aver-du-poize weight.
Note, that 20 grains make a scruple; 3 scruples is a dram; 8 drams is an
ounce; 16 ounces is a pound; 8 pound a stone; 28 lib. a quarter of a hundred;
56 lib. half a C. 84 lib. 3 quarters of a C. and 112 lib. or 14 stone, or 4
quarters of a C. is an hundred weight: 5 C. is a hogshead weight: 19 C. is a
Fother of lead: and 20 C. is a Tun weight. And note, that l. signifies a pound
in money, and lib. signifies a pound in weight, either Troy or Aver-du-poize.

Rules for concave Dry-measure.
Note, that 2 pints is a quart, 2 quarts a pottle, or quarter of a peck; 8
pints 4 quarts; 2 pottles is one gallon, or half a peck; 2 gallons is a peck; 2
pecks make half a bushel; 4 pecks or 56 lib. make a bushel; 2 bushels is a
strike; 2 strikes a coomb or half-quarter; 2 coombs 4 strikes; or 8 bushels,
make a Quarter, or a Seame; 10 Quarters, or 80 bushels make a. Last.

Rules for Concave Wet-measure.
Note, that 2 pints is a quart; 2 quarts a pottle; 2 pottles 4 quarts or 8
pints make a Gallon; 9 Gallons make a Firkin, or half a Kilderkin; 18 Gallons
make 2 Firkins, a Kilderkin, or a Rundlet; 36 Gallons is 2 Kilderkins, or a
Barrel; 42 Gallons make a Terce; 63 Gollons or 3^ Rundlets make a Hogshead; 84
Gallons, or 2 Terces make a Tercion or Punchion; 126 Gallons is 3 Terces, 2
Hogsheads, 1 Pipe, or a But. A Tun is 252 Gallons, 14 Rundlets, 7 Barrels, 6
Terces, 4 Hogsheads, 3 Punchions, 2 Pipes, or Buts. Note, that in sweet Oil,
236 Gallons make a Tun; but of Whale-Oyl 252 goes to the Tun.

Water Measure.
Note, that 5 pecks is a Bushel; 3 Bushels a Sack, 4^ Bushels a Flat, 12 Sacks,
4 Flats, or 36 Bushels, make a Chaldron of Coals.

Rules for Long-Measure.
Note, that 3 barley-corns make an inch; 2 inches make a Nail; 4 Nails, or 9
inches make a quarter of a yard; 12 inches make a Foot; 3 foot, 4 quar. 16
nails, or 36 inches make a yard; 45 inches, or 5 quarters of a yard, make an
Ell; 5 foot is a pace; 6 feet, or 2 yards is a fathom; 5 yards and a half, or
16 feet and a half, is a Pole, Rod, or Perch; 160 perches in length, and 1 in
breadth; or 80 perches in length and 2 in breadth; or 4 in breadth and 40 in
length, make an Acre.

220 Yards, or 40 poles is a furlong; 1760 yards, 320 poles, or 8 furlongs is
an English mile; 3 miles is a League; 20 Leagues, or 60 miles is a degree in
ordinary account, and every mile a minute.

Rules for Motion and Time in Astronomy and Navigation.
Note, that a minute contains 60 seconds, and 60 minutes is 1 degree; and 30
degrees is 1 sign; 2 signs, or 60 degrees is a sextile, 3 signs, or 90 degrees
is a Quadrant, or quartile; 4 signs, or 120 degrees a trine; 6 signs, or 180
degrees is one opposition; or semicircle; 12 signs or 360 degrees. is a
conjunction, and the Suns Annual or Moon's monthly motion. Note also, every
hour of time has in motion 15 degrees: and a minute of time has 15 minutes of
motion, and one degree of motion is 4 minutes of time.

Note further, that every hour of time has 60 minutes, therefore 45 is 3
quarters, 30 is half, 15 is a quarter of an hour; 24 hours a day natural, 7
days a week, 365 days and about 6 hours is a year. Hence it follows, that of a
degree in the Heavens is 5 Leagues on the Earth, or 15 minutes of motion above,
is one minute of time below, therefore a degree or 60 minutes of motion is 4
minutes of time, as before is said.

All these Rules I shall express more largely and in shorter terms, by these
following Tables.

Equation for Motion.
Signs. Degrees. minutes. Seconds. Note, that the twelve Signs is 12 360 21600
1296000 One Sign is 1 30 1800 108000 One Degrees. is 1 60 3600 One Min. is 1 60
Equation for Time.
Mon. Week. Day. Hour. Minute. One Year 13 52 305 8760 52560 Month has 1 4 28
671 40320 Week has 1 7 168 10080 Day natural 1 24 1440 Hour has 1 60 Minute
is 1 Equation for Long-measure.
Mile. Furl. Perch. Yards. Feet. Inches. Leag. 3 24 960 5971 1^4^ 190080 Mil. 1
8 340 1760 5280 63360 Furlong 1 40 220 660 7920 Per. Rod. P^l. 1 5 16 198 Acre
contains of squa. Perc. 160 4840 43560 Acre is in leng 4 20 660 7020 Acre is in
breadth 4 2^ 66 792 1 Rood, or of an acre is in len. 40 1 Rood, or of an acre
is in bread. 1 5 16 198 One Fathom is 6 72 One Ell English is 3 45 One yard is
3 36 One foot is 1 12 One inch is 1 inch 3 grains. 1 Equation of Liquid-measure.
Gall. Pottl. Quarts. Pints. Tun of sweet Oil 236 472 944 1888 Tun of Wine is
252 504 1008 2016 But or Pipe is 126 252 504 1008 Tertian of Wine 84 168 336
672 Hogshead is 63 126 252 504 A Barrel of Beer or 2 Runlets of Wine -- is 36
72 144 288 Kilderkin or one Runlet. is 18 36 72 144 Barrel of Ale is 32 64 128
256 Kilderkin of Ale 16 32 64 128 Firkin of Beer is 9 18 36 72 Firkin of Ale is
8 16 32 64 Equation of small Dry-measure, and then of great measure.
Peck. Gal. Pottl. Qu. Pi. Bushel of water-m. is 5 10 20 40 80 Bushel of
Land-m. is 4 8 16 32 64 One peck is 1 2 4 8 16 One Gallon is 1 2 4 8 One Pottle
is 1 2 4 One Quart is 1 2 Last. weig. Chal. Qu. Bush. Peck. Pints, Last of
Dry-m. 1 2 2 10 80 320 5120 One weight is 1 1 5 40 160 2560 Chaldron of coals 1
4 36 144 2098 Quarter of wheat is 1 8 32 512 One Bushel is 1 4 62 Equation for
Averdupoize-Weight.
Hogsh. C. Stons. Lib. Ounces. Drams. Scruples. Grains. Tun-w. gross is 4 20
280 2240 35840 286720 860160 17203200 One Hogshead is 1 5 70 560 8900 71680
215040 4300800 One C. or hund. is 1 14 112 1792 14336 43008 860160 One half C.
is 7 56 876 7168 21504 430080 One quarter of C. is 3 28 448 4584 10752 213040
One Stone is 1 8 128 1024 3072 61440 One Lib. pound is 1 16 128 384 7680 One
Ounce is 1 8 24 480 One Dram is 1 3 9 One Scruple is 1 3 Equation for
Troy-weight.
Lib. Ounce. Dp. Carrots. Grains C. w. ^00 ^200 ^400^ 2^800 ^^6000. C is 50 600
12000 14400 288000 C. is 29 300 6000 7^00 1440^0 C. is 12 150 3000 ^600 72000
Pound 1 12 340 88 5760 Ounce 1 20 24 480 One penny weight 1 1^ 2^ One Carrot
Troy is 1 20 One Grain is 1 Equation of Money.
Mark. An. Nob Cro. Sh. Groat. Penc. Far. Pound ^^ 1 2 3 4 20 60 240 960 Mark
is 1 1 2 2 13 40 160 640 An Angel is 1 1 2 10 30 120 410 A Noble is 1 1 6 20 80
320 A Crown is 1 5 15 60 240 A Shilling is 1 3 12 48 A Groat is 1 4 16 A Penny
is 1 4

The use of which (to come to our intended purpose) may be thus. There you see
how many farthings, pence, groats, shillings, and the like, is in one, or any
usual piece of Coin, also, how many ounces, scruples, in any kind of weight;
and the like for measure, both liquid and dry; and also in Time: now if you
would know how many there shall be in any greater number than one; then say by
the Rule (or Line of Numbers) thus, If 48 farthings be one shilling, how many
shillings is 144 farthings? facit 3 s. for the extent from 48 to 1, will reach
from 144 to 3. and the contrary.

Again, If a mark and a half be 1 pound, how many pound is 12 marks? the extent
from 1.50 to 1, shall reach from 12 to 8. for reason must help you not to call
it 80 l. Again, If 3 nobles be 1 l. what is 312 nobles. facit 104 l. the extent
from 3 to 1 will reach from 312 to 104.

Further, If a Chaldron of Coals cost 36 s. what shall half a Chaldron cost?
facit 18. (but more to the matter) If 36 bushel cost 30 s. what shall 5 bushels
cost? facit 4. 16. that is by Reduction 4 s. 2 d. near the matter, or penny, or
3 farthings, half farthing, and better: or on the contrary; If 1 bushel cost 8
d. then what cost 36? facit 288 d. which being brought to shillings, is just
24. which you may do thus; If 12 d. be 1 s. how many shall 288 be? facit 24.
for the extent from 12 to 1 shall reach the same way from 288 to 24, as before.
The like may be applied to all the rest of the Rules of weight and measure; of
which take in fine, some Examples in short, and their Answers.

If 14 Stone be 1 C. what is 91 Stone? facit 6 C. and a half.

If 1 ounce be 8 drams, how many drams in 9 ounces? facit 72. The extent from 1
to 8, reaches from 9 to 72.

If 1 bushel of water-measure be 5 pecks, how many pecks is 16 bushels? facit
80 pecks.

If 1 barrel hold 288 pints, how much will a Firkin hold? This being the fourth
part of a barrel, work thus, if 1 give 288, what 25? facit 72, the answer
sought.

If 1 week be 7 days, how many days is 39 weeks? As 1 is to 7, so is 39 to 273.
So many days in 39 weeks.

If 160 perches be 1 acre, how many acres is 395 perches? facit 2. 492, that is
near 2 acres.

If 8 furlongs make 1 mile, how much is 60 furlongs? facit 7 mile. For the
extent from 1 to 8, gives from 60 to 7. 50.

CHAP. XI.
To measure any superficies or solid by inches only (or by foot-measure)
without the help of the line, by multiplication of the two sides.

PROB. I.
Possibly that this little Book may meet with some that are well skilled in
Arithmetic, and being much used to that way, are loath to be weaned from that
way, being so artificial and exact, yet tho they can multiply and divide very
well, yet perhaps they know not this way to save their division, and yet to
take in all the fractions together, as if of one denomination: I shall begin
first with foot measure, being the more easy, and I suppose my Two-foot Rule
to be divided into 200 parts, and figured with 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80,
90, 100. and then so again to 200, as in the 3d. Chap. and then the work is
only thus: set down the measure of one side of the square or oblong, thus, as
for example, 7. 25 and 9. 88, and multiply them as if they were whole numbers,
and from the product cut off 4 figures, and you have the content in feet, and
1000 parts of a foot, or yard, Ell, Perch, or whatsoever else it be. Note the
examples following.

For any kind of flat superficies, this is sufficient instruction to him that
has read the first part; but if it be Timber or Stone, you must thus find the
base, and then another work will give you the other side, as in Chap. 5. Prob.
2. or multiply the length by the product of the breadth and thickness, and that
product shall be the content required.

PROB. II.
To multiply feet, inches, and 8 parts of an inch together without Reduction,
and so to measure superficial (and solid) measure.

First, multiply all the whole feet, then all the feet and inches across, and
right on, then the parts by the feet, and also the inches and parts across and
right on; then add them together, and you shall have the answer in feet, long
inches (that is in pieces of a foot long, and inch broad) square inches, and 8
parts of a square-inch: as for Example.

Let a piece of board be given to be measured that is 3. 3. 5. i. e. 3 foot, 3
inches, and 5 eights one way, and 2. 3. 4. the other way, I set the numbers
down in 3. 3. 5. 2. 3. 4.


this manner, and then right on, first as the line in the Scheme from 2 to 3
leads.

I say thus, 3 times 2 is 6, set 6 right under 2 and 3, as in the example in
the left page: for 6 foot, as is clear, if you consider the Scheme over the
example, viz. the squares noted with f. then for the next, I say cross-wise, 2
times 3 is 6, viz. long inches, as you may percieve by the 2 long squares
marked with 9 L. and 6 L. which 6 I put in the next place to the right hand, as
in the example; then for the next, viz. 3 times 3 is 9 (cross wise, as the
stroke from 3 to ^^ shows) which 9 is also 9 long inches, as the Scheme
shows, and must be put under 6 in the second place toward the right hand, in
the Scheme it is expressed by the 3 long squares marked with L9. Then lastly
for the inches, 3 times 3 is 9, going right up, as the stroke from 2 threes
lead you: but note, this 9 must be set in the next place to the right hand,
because they are but 9 square inches, but had the product been above 12, you
must have subtracted the 12 out, and set them in the long inches place, and
the remainder, where this 9 now stands, and this 9 is expressed in the
Scheme, by the little square in the corner marked with ( 9.)

Then now for the Fractions, or 8 parts of an inch, first say, crosswise, as
the longest prick line does lead you to, 3 times 4 is 12, for which 12 you must
set down 1.6, that is 1 long inch, and 6 square inches; the reason is, a piece
8 half quarters of an inch broad, and 12 inches long, is a long inch, or the
twelfth part of a foot superficial; and if be 12 square inches, then 4 must
needs be 6 square inches: therefore instead of 12 I set down 1.6, as you may
see in the example, and in the least long square of the Diagram or Scheme. Then
do likewise for the other long square, which is also multiplied across, as 2
times 5* is 10, that is, as I said before, 1.3 as the example and Scheme make
manifest, considering what I last said, and it is marked by the 2.00. But if
this or the other had come to a greater number, you must have subtracted 8 as
often as you could, and set down the remainder in the place of square inches, and
the number of 8 in the place of long inches, as here you see.

Then for the two shorter long squares next the corner, say crosswise again, 3
times 5 is 15, that is 1.7, because 8 half quarters an inch long, do make 1
square-inch as well as eight half-quarters a foot long made 1 long inch:
therefore I set 1 in the place of square inches and 7 in the next place to the
right hand, and it is expressed in the diagram by the small long square, and
marked with * 1.7.

Then again for the other little long square, say cross-wise, as the shorter
prick line leads you, three times 4 is 12, that is 1.4; and do by this as the
last: it is noted in the Scheme by 1.4.

Then lastly, for 5 times 4, as the short prick line shows you, is 20: out of
which 20 take the 8 s. and set them down in the last place, and the 4 remaining
you may either neglect (or set it down a place further) for you cannot see it
on the Rule; therefore I thus advise, if it be under 4, neglect it quite, but
if above, increase the next a figure more, if 4, then it is a half, and so may
be added; for note, 64 of these parts make but 1 square inch; of which parts
the little square in the right hand lower corner of the Scheme is 20, for which
I fet down 2.4, that is two half quarters and 4 of 64, which is the last work,
as you may see by the Scheme and example.

Now to add them together, say thus, 4 is 4, which I put furthest to the right
hand, as it were useless, because not to be expres^^; then 472 are 13, from
which take 8, and for it carry 1 on to the next place, or as many times 1 as
you find 8, and set down the remainder, which here is 5, then 1 I carried, and
13619 is 21, from which I take 12 and set down 9, because 12 square inches is 1
long inch; then 1 I carried (or more, had there been more 12 s.) and 1169 is*
18, from which take 12, as before, there remains 6, that is 6 long inches* and
so had there been more 12. so many you must carry to the next place, because 12
long inches is one foot, lastly, 1 I carried and 6 is 7 foot, so that the work
stands thus,

F. Lo. In. Sq. In. 8. 64 7 -- -- 6 -- 9 -- -- 5 -- 4.

And so for any other measure Superficial or Solid.

To multiply feet, inches, and 12 parts of an inch, by feet, inches, and 12
parts of an inch.

Although the usual way of dividing the line of inches, on ordinary Two-foot
Rules, is into 8 parts, according to which counting the former R^^^ is worded,
into feet, inches, and 8 parts of an inch.

Yet if every inch be divided into 12 parts, o^ conceived so to be, which you
may easily count by calling every quarter of an inch 3, every half inch 6,
every three quarters 9.

Then the parts between 3, 6, and 91 may be easily estimated by help of the
halfquarter cut.

Then I say, the Arithmetical multiplication will be much easier, being brought
to one denomination after the way by decimals, and somewhat more exact, as will
appear by this following example.

Suppose a Cedar*board be 2 foot 3 inches, and 7 twelve parts of an inch broad,
and 9 foot 5 inches and 8 twelve parts of an inch long, how many superficial
feet is it?

First, set down the numbers as is usually done in their three denominations of
feet, inches, and 12 parts, as in the example is made apparent by the black
lines and the pricked lines down right and sloping from figure to figure, done
so only for ease and plainness, in wording of it to a Learner.

Then proceed in the multiplication thus;

1. First, 2 times 9 is 18, as the down right black line from 2 to 9 shows,
for which set down 18 foot under the 2 and 9, as in the Example.

2. Secondly, say 9 times 3 is 27 long inches, as the sloping black line from 9
to 3 shows, for which 27 you must set down 2 foot in the place of feet, and 3
in the place of long inches, because 27 long inches is 2 foot 3 inches.

3. Thirdly, Say 2 times 5 is 10 long inches, as the sloping black line from 2
to 5 shows, for which you set down only 10 long inches under 5 and 3 as in
the the example, because it is under 12 long inches, which make 1 foot, as in
the second just before.

4. Fourthly, Say 3 times 5 is 15 square inches, as the short black line from 3
to 5 shows; every 12 whereof makes 1 long inch. Therefore I set down 1 long
inch in the place of long inches, and the 3 square inches over in the place of
square inches right under 7 and 8.

5. Fifthly, Say 9 times 7 is 63 square inches, as the long pricked line from 9
to 7 shows, every 12 whereof makes 1 long inch, and every 144 one foot;
therefore I set down 5 long inches in that place and 3 in the place of square
inches.

6. Sixthly, Say 2 times 8 is 16 square inches, as the other long sloping
pricked line from 2 to 8 shows, for which set down one long inch and 4 square
inches, each in their proper places, as in the fifth last mentioned.

7. Seventhly, Say 5 times 7 is 35, 144 or 12 parts of 1 square inch, as the
shorter sloping pricked line from 5 to 7 shows, every 12 whereof is 1 square
inch; therefore set down 2 in the place of square inches under 7 and 8 and 11,
the parts over in a space beyond, under 144.

8. Eighthly, Say 3 times 8 is 24, 144 or 12 parts of one square inch, as
before, as the other short sloping pricked line shows, every 12 whereof is
one square inch; therefore I set down 2 in the place of square inches under 8
and 7, and no more, because nothing is over 2 halves.

Lastly, Say 7 times 8 is 56, 1728s. as the short down right pricked line from
7 to 8 shows, every 12 whereof makes one 144, or the 12 part of 1 square
inch; therefore I set down 4 in the place of 144 and the 8 parts over in the
place of 1728 s. being a place further, as in the example you see done.

Feet Lon. inc. Sq. inc. 1^4. 1728.

18 3 3 11 8 2 10 3 4 1 4 5 2 1 2 21 9 3 3 8

1. Then add them together, saying, 8 under 1728 is 8 and no more.

2. Then 11 and 4 is 15, set down ^ under 144, and carry 1 to the next place.

3. One I carried and 2. 2. 4. 3, 3, under the square inches, or 12 is 15, for
which I set down 3 and carry 1 to the next place.

4. One I carried and 1. 5. 1. 10. 3 is 21, for which I set down 9 under the
long inches, and carry 1 to the next place.

5. One I carried and 2 and 8 is 11, for which set down 1 and carry 1 to the
next place.

6. One I carried and 1 is 2, in all 21 foot 9 long inches, or 12 parts of a
foot; 3 square inches, or 12 parts of a long inch; 3 144 or 12 parts of a
square inch, and 8. 1728 parts of 1 long inch.

If it be a piece of Timber o^ Stone; then having thus gotten the Area of the
Base, then multiply that Area by the length in feet, inches, and 12 parts, and
the product shall be the solid content required.

As in this Example, 1. 2. 4 thick* 2. 1. 6 broad, and 9 foot 7 inches 6
twelves long.





The Use of the LINE of NUMBERS ON A SLIDING (or GLASIERS) RULE, In Arithmatick
and Geometry. AS ALSO A most excellent contrivance of the Line of Numbers, for
the measuring of Timber, either Round or Square, being the most easy, speedy,
and exact as ever was used. WHEREBY At one setting to the length, all ordinary
pieces of Timber, from 1 inch to 100 Foot, is with a glance of the eye
resolved, without Pen or Compasses. First drawn by Mr. White, and since much
enlarged, and made easy and useful by John Brown.

London, Printed in the Year, 1688.

The Use of the Line of Numbers on a Sliding-Rule, for the measuring of
Superficial or Solid Measures.
CHAP. I.
A Sliding-Rule is only two Rules, or Rule-pieces fitted together, with a brass
socked at each end, that they slip not out of the grove; and the Line of
Numbers thereon, is cut across the moving Joint on each piece, the same
divisions on both sides, only the placing of the Lines differ; for on one side
of the Rule you have 1 set at the beginning, and 10 at the end on each piece;
but on the other side, 1 is set in the middle, and the rest of the figures
answerably both ways, on purpose to make it large, and to take in all numbers;
and the reading of this is the very same with the other; for if you pull out
the Rule, and set 10 at the end, right against 1 at the beginning, then on both
pieces you have the former Line of Numbers complealy; therefore I shall say
nothing as to description, or reading of it, but come straight to the use.

On the edges of the Rule is usually set Foot-measure, being the Foot or 12
inches parted into 100 parts; and on the flat sides next to the foot-measure,
inches in 8 parts, and on the other flat edges on the other side, the Line of
Board-measure, and sometimes Timber-measure, whose use is showed in the first
Chapter of the Book; but note, if the Rule be a just foot when it is shut, as
Glasiers commonly is, then the inches are set alike on both sides, and the
foot-measure alike on both edges; and being pulled out as far as the brasses
will suffer, it wants about one inch of 2 foot just when pulled out, as it is
made for Carpenters use, then the inches on one side, and Foot-measure on the
same reciprocal edge, must be figured otherwise, as 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. etc. to
25 inches, and the Footmeasure with 110, near the end 120, 130, 140, 150, etc.
with 210 at the very end, showing the measure from end to* end, being drawn out
to any distance; as is very easy to conceive of, and need no example to
illustrate it withal.

Note also in using the Line of Numbers, that that side or part of it, on which
you find the first part or term in the question, shall always call the first
side, and then the other must needs be the second, that the Rules and Examples
may be shortened and made easy.

1. Multiplication by the Sliding-rule.
Set the 1 on any side (which being found, I call the first side) to the
Multiplicator on the other (or second) side; then seek the Multiplicand on the
first side where 1 was* and right against it on the second, is the Product
required.

Examp. If I would multiply 25 by 28, set 1 on the first side to 25 on the
second, then just against 28 on the first side on the second is 700: for the
right naming the last figure, and the true number of figures, you have a Rule
in the 2d. Chapter, and 2d. Problem of the Carpenters-Rule, as in page 28.

2. Division by the Rule.
Set the divisor found always on the first side, to 1 on the second side then
right against the Dividend found out on the first side, on the second is the
Quotient required.

Examp. If I divide 156 by 12, the Quotient is 13; note, to find how many
figures shall be in the Quotient, do thus, if the two first figures of the
Divisor be greater than the two first figures of the Dividend, then the
quotient has so many places or figures as there is more in the Dividend than
in the Divisor; but if it be less, that is to say, the Dividends two first
figures greater than the Divisors, then the quotient shall have one place or
figure more: then the Dividend exceeds the Divisor.

Examp. 2964 divided by 39, makes a quotient 76, of 2 figures, but if you
divide the same number by 18, you shall have the figures in the quotient, viz.
164, and 12 remaining, or by the Rule, 2 third parts of one more, for the
reason above said, the two first figures of the dividend being greater than the
Divisor, it must have one place more than the difference of the number of
figures in the Multiplicator and Multiplicand.

3. The Rule of 3 Direct.
Set the first term of the question sought out on the first side, to the second
term of the question on the second (or other) side: then right against the 3d.
term found out on the 1st. side, on the 2d. side is the 4th. proportional term
required.

Examp. If 2 yards of Cl^th cost 8 s. what cost 11 yards ^? The answer is 46 s.
for if you s^t 2 on any one side to 8 on the other, th^n look for 11 on the
first side where 2 was, and right against it on the second you shall find 46,
the number required. Note, that all your fractions on the Line of Numbers are
decimal fractions, and to work them, you must reduce your proper fractions to
them, which for ordinary fractions, you may do it by inches and foot-measure;
but this general Rule by the Numbers will reduce any kind whatsoever, as thus;
suppose I would have the decimal fraction of 9 foot, 7 inch., first note that 9
are integers, for the rest, say thus, as 48 the number of quarters in (12
inches or) 1 foot is 1000, so is 31 the number of quarters in 7 inches 3
quarters to 645 the decimal fraction required, for 9645 is equal to 9 foot 7
inches; and so for any other whatsoever.

4. To work the Rule of 3 Reverse.
Set the first term sought out on the first side, to the second, being of the
same denomination on the 2d. line or side, then seek the third term on the 2d.
side, and on the 1st. you shall have the answer required.

Ex. If 48 men perform a piece of work in 24 hours, how many men may there be
to do the like in 4 hours? Set 24 on the first side, to 4 on the second, then
right against 48 found out on the second, on the first is 288, the number of
men required* 5. To work the double Rule of 3 direct.

To perform this, you must have two workings; as thus, for an

Examp. If the increase of 3 bushels of Wheat in one year, be 36 bushels, what
shall the increase of 8 bushels be for 7 years?

First, set 3 on the first side, to 36 on the second, then against 8 on the
first, on the second you find 96, then set ^on the first side to 96, then
against 7 on the first side on the second you have 612, the increase in 7
years, the answer required.

CHAP. II.
To measure Board or Glass by the Sliding*rule, the length and breadth being
given.

PROB. I.
The breadth given, to find how much makes a foot.

If the breadth be given in inches then set 12 on the first side, to the inches
on the second; then right against 12 on the second, on the first is the number
of inches required.

Examp. At 6 inches broad set 12 to 6, then against 12 on the second on the
first you have 24 But if it be given in foot-measure, then instead of 12 use 1,
and do in like manner as before.

Examp. At 0*50 broad, set 1 to 0.50, then right against the other 1 is 2.00
the answer required.

But to find how much is in a foot long at any breadth, do thus:

First, for foot-measure, just as the Rule stands even look for the breadth on
one side, and the quantity in a foot is on the other side* but for inches set 1
to 12, the^ right against the inches broad i^ the feet and tenths in a foot
long.

Ex. At 6 inches broad is 50 o^ half a foot in a foot long. Again a^ 30 inches
broad is 2 foot and a ha^^ in a foot long.

PROB. II.
The length and breadth given, ^^ find the content.

First, the breadth given in inch^^ and the length in feet and inches set 12 on
the 1st. side to the breadt^ on the second, then right against the length on
the first, on the second is the content required.

Ex. At 16 inches broad and ^^ foot long: Set 12 to 16, then right against 20
you have 26 foot 7 10th. look for the 7 10th. on the footmeasure, and right
against it on the inches you have 8 inches and and quarter, the answer desired.

But if the breadth be given in foot-measure, then set 1 to the breadth; then
right against the length on the first side, on the second you shall have the
content required.

Ex. At 1.20 broad, 20.00 foot long, you shall find 24 foot. For if you set 1
to 1.20, then right against 20 foot, you have on the 2d. 24 as before.

PROB. III.
The breadth given in feet and inches and the length also in the same parts, to
find the content.

Set 1 on the first side to the feet and inches brought to a decimal fraction,
or as near as you can guess (for 6 inches is half, 3 inches is 1 quarter, 9
inches is 3 quarters, 4 inches is one third, 8 inches is two thirds, and 1 inch
is somewhat less than 1 tenth on Rule) on the other or second side; then right
against the length found on the first, on the second is the content required.

Ex. At 3 foot 3 inches broad, and 9 foot 9 inches long, you shall have 31 foot
8 inches near, the very same is for foot-measure (only much easier) because the
divisions on the Line of Numbers, and on the Line of foot-measure on the edge,
do agree together.

This being premised as to the using of it, you may apply all the former
precepts and examples to this Rule as well as the other.

CHAP. III.
To measure Timber by the Sliding-Rule.

PROB. I.
To measure Timber by this Rule, is nothing else but to work the Double Rule of
Three.

Examp. At 8 inches square and 20 foot long, I would know the content. Set 12,
if the side of the square be given in inches (or 1, if in foot me^sure) on the
first side, to 8 the inches square on the second: then right against 12 on the
second side on the first is 18, the fourth proportional part: then for the
second work, set 18, the fourth proportional last found to 8 the inches square
on the second, then right against 20 the length, is 9, the content required. Or
rather thus;

Set 12 against 8, then right against 20 on the same side 12 was, is 13. 5 near
on, then look for 13. 5 fere on the first side, and right against it on the
second is 9 foot the content required.

PROB. II.
To measure a piece that is not square

Set 12 if you use the inches (or 1 if you use foot-measure) on the first side,
to the inches thick on the second; then right against the inches broad on the
first side, on the second is a fourth proportional: then in the second
operation, set 2 on the first side to the fourth proportional on the second,
then right against the length on the first side, on the second is the content
required.

Ex. At 8 inches thick and 16 broad, and 20 foot long, you shall find 18 foot
fere.

PROB. III.
The square given, to find how much makes a foot.

Set the inches square on the first side, to 12 on the second; then right
against 12 on the first, on the second is a fourth proportional number: then in
the second work, as the inches square to the fourth proportional, so is 12 to
the number of inches required, to make a foot of Timber.

Ex. At 6 inches square, set 6 to 12, then against the other 12 is 24: then set
6 to 24, then right against 12 you shall have 48, the length in inches required.

After the same manner are other questions wrought, but the Compasses are
easier and more ready; therefore I shall say no more to this but only refer you
to the former Rules in the third, fourth and fifth Chapters. Only note, that in
those Sliding-rules made for Glasiers use, the one half of the Line of Numbers
is on one side of the Rule, and the other on the other side; and whatsoever leg
or piece of the rule is the first on the one side, the same leg or piece is the
first, when the Rule is turned, on the other side, which must well be observed;
but note, that for measuring of Timber, those that use it may have one side
fitted for that, as I shall more plainly and fully show in the next chapter,
being the easiest, speediest and nearest way that ever yet was used by any man,
resolving any Contents by having the length and the diameter, the circumference
or square given.

A Table of the true size of Glasiers Quarries, both long and square,
calculated by J. B.
Square-Quarries 77. 19 gr.
Quarries. Rang. Sides bread. leng. content in feet content in inc 8 in 100 i.
100 I. p i. pts. F. p ^ts Inc. p. 8 4 20- 4 30 5 36 6 70 0. 1250 1. 50 10 3 76
3 84 4 80 6 00 0. 1000 1. 20 12 3 43 3 51 4 38 5 47 0. 0833 1. 00 15 3 07 3 13
3 92- 4 90 0. 0667 0. 80 18 2 80 2 86 3 57 4 47 0. 0555 0. 666 20 2 66 2 72 3
39 4 24 0, 5000 0. 60 Long Quarries 67. 22
Quarries Rang. Sides bread. leng. content content in pts. I. pts. ^. 100 ^
pts. F. 100 ^. pts. 8 4 09 4 41. 4. 90 7. 34 0. 1250 1. 50 10 3 65 3. 95 4. 38-
6. 57 0. 1000 1. 20 12 3 34 3 61 4. 00 6. 00 0. 0833 1. 00 15 2 98. 3 23 3. 58
5. 37 0. 0667 0. 80 18 2 58 2 79* 3. 10 4. 90 0. 0555 0. 666 20 2 72- 2 94- 3.
27 4. 65 0. 0500 0. 60

Note, that a prick after the 100 parts of an inch, notes a quarter, and a
stroke (-) a half of 100 parts of an inch; to make this Table, work thus by the
Line of Numbers.

Divide the distance between the content of some known size, as square 10s. or
long 12s. and the content of the inquired size, into two equal parts, for that
distance laid the right way (increasing for a bigger, or decreasing for a less)
from the sides of the known size, shall give the reciprocal sides of the
inquired size.

Example for square 12s.

The half distance on the Line of Numbers, between 1000 the content of square
10s. and 0.833 the content of square 12s. shall reach from 6 the length of
square 10s. to 5.47 the length of square 12s. and from 4. 80 the breadth of
square 10s. to 4 38- the breadth of square 12s. and from 3 84- to 3. 51, and
from 3 76 to 3 43; and so for all the rest.

CHAP. IV.
The description of the Line of Numbers on a Sliding-rule, to measure Solid
measure only, according to Mr. White's first contrivance, but much augmented by
J. B.

First, when the figures on the Timber side) stand right toward you, fit to
read, then that half or piece next to your right hand, I call the right side,
the other is of necessity the left.

Secondly, the figures on the right side are, first at the lower end, (where
the brass is pined fast) either 3, or 4, or 5, it matters not much which, yet
to have 3 there is best; then upwards, 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. for so many
inches then 1. 2 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8 9. 10. 11. 12. under the brass at the top,
for so many feet, the divisions between to 1 foot, are quarters of inches, the
next above 1 foot, are only whole inches, as you may plainly see.

Thirdly, at 1 foot you have the word square, at 1 foot, 1 inch is a mark, and
right against it is set TD, noting the true diameter of a ^ound Cylinder; at an
inch further ^s 12 set, which I call small 12, being in small figures. Again at
1 foot 3 inches better, is another mark, and right against it the word
diameter, for the diameter of a piece of timber according to the usual english
allowance. Then again at 3 foot 6 inches near, is TR, for the true
circumference of a round cillander. Lastly, at 4 foot is the word round, noting
the circumference according to the usual allowance, whose use follows. Also
at 13 foot 7 inches is TD, and at 3 inches and is TR.

Note also, if you put on the Gagepoints for Ale or Wine, with the mean
diameter, and length, you may gage any Wine or Beer-vessel, the Wine at 17
inches 15. the Ale or Beer at 18. 95. Also the Gagepoints for a Beer-barrel at
35 inches and 9525 parts; and the gagepoint for a barrel of Ale at 33 inches
and 89645 parts.

Fourthly, the figures on the left side are not much unlike the right, for 1 at
the beginning is one inch, and so it proceeds by quarters of inches to 1 foot;
then by figures at the feet, and the divisions all whole inches to 10 foot,
then every whole foot, and half, and quarter, or 10th. to 100, or 140, or 150
foot; and this I call the left side, the other the right side; so that from 1
inch at the lower end to one foot, every inch has a figure; from 1 foot to 10
foot, every foot has a figure, and from 10 foot to 100, every 10th. foot only
is figured. I have been very plain in explaining this, because I would avoid
vain repetitions in the following uses, wherein you shall have first the most
ordinary and easy questions, and then the more hard and critical, and less
useful. The Uses follow.

PROB. I.
A piece of Timber being not square, to make it square, or to find the
Square-equal.

Set the breadth on the left side, to the breadth on the right, then right
against the inch and quarters thick found on the left side, on the right is the
inches square required.

Examp. At 18 broad and 6 thick you shall find 10 inches, the side of the
square required.

For if you set 6 inches against 6 inches, on the right and left side: then
right against 18 inches, or 1 foot 6 inches on the left, on the right you have
10 inches 1 quarter, and half a quarter; for the side of the square-equal to 18
one way, and 6 the other way.

PROB. II.
The side of the square given, to find how much makes a foot.

For all pieces between 3 or 4 inches and 42 inches square, which are the most
useful: this the best way, set the inches or feet, and inches square, found out
on the right side, to one foot on the left, then right against 1 foot on the
right, on the left is the inches or feet, and inches required to make a foot of
Timber. But when the piece is small, count 1 foot on the right for 1 inch, and
call 12 on the right for 1 foot. Example.

At 8 inches square set 8 on the right, to 1 foot on the left, then right
against 1 foot on the right, on the left is 2 foot 3 inches, the length
required.

To find how much is in a foot long.

Just as the Rule stands even look for the inches the piece is square on the
right, and on the left is the inches or feet, and inches required.

Example. At 17 inches square, there is 2 foot of timber in 1 foot long, which
if you multiply by the length, you shall have the true content. A very good way
for large pieces, and very exact.

PROB. III.
The side of the square, and length given, to find the content.

For all pieces between 1 inch or ^^ part of a foot, and 100 foot, this is the
easiest way. Set the word square or 1 foot to the length on the left, then
right against the inches or feet and inches square on the right, on the left
you have the content.

Examp. At 9 inches square and 20 foot long; set the (long stroke by the) word
square, to 20 foot on the left, then right against 9 inches on the right side,
on the left side you have 11 foot and a quarter, the content required.

But if it be a very great piece, as above 100 foot, then call 1 foot on the
left side 10 foot, and 2 foot 20, etc. then 10 shall be 100, and 100 a 1000,
that will supply to 1500 foot in a piece.

But for all small pieces under 3 inches square, and above 1 quarter of an
inch, do thus: Set 12 on the top (or the small 12 when it is most convenient to
use) to the length on the left side, then right against the inches (or 12s. of
1 inch) squares found on the right side, on the left is the true content
required. Example.

At 2 inches (3 twelves or) 1 quarter square, and 10 foot long, you shall find
4 inches and a quarter fere. But note, when you use the small 12, the answer is
given in decimals of a foot, therefore the top 12 is best.

ROB. IV.
The square of a small piece of Timber given, to find how much makes a Foot.

For all pieces from 12 inches to 1 inch square, do thus; set the inches and (
12s. or) quarters square, counting 1 foot on the right side for 1 inch, and 2
foot for 2 inches, etc. found out on the right side to 100 on the left; then
right against the upper, or small 12 on the right, on the left is the length
required to make a foot of Timber.

Examp. At 2 inches square, you must have 28 foot 4 inches, to make a foot.

PROB. V.
Under 1 inch square, to find the length of a foot.

Set 1 foot 9 inches, 6 inches o^ 3 inches, found on the right side, for 1
inch,, or of an inch, against 10 on the left side, counted for 100: then right
against the small 12 you have the feet in length required.

Examp. At 1 inch square you find 144 feet, at square 256 feet, at an inch
square 576 feet, at or an inch square, you find 2034 feet in length, to make 1
foot of Timber.

Or, if you set the former numbers 12, 9, 6, 1, against 1 inch on the left,
then right against the upper 12 is a number, which multiplied by 12, is the
number of feet required.

PROB. VI.
A great piece above 3 foot square, to find the length of a foot.

Set the feet and inches on the right, to 100 on the left; the^ right against
small 12 is the inche^ and 12s. or 12s. of a 12th. tha^ goes to make a foot.

Examp. At 4 foot square, yo^ have 9. 12ths. or of an inch t^ make a foot of
Timber; at 5 foo^ square, 5. 12ths. and 10. 12ths. ^^ a 12th. to make a foot.

Thus you see the Rule as no^ contrived, resolves from 1 quarte^^ square, to 12
foot square, the content or quantity of a foot of Timber in length at any
squarenes^ without Pen or Compasses.

CHAP. V.
For round Timber.

PROB. I.
The number of inches that a piece ^^ Timber is about, being given, find how
much makes a foot.

First, for all ordinary pieces, s^ 1 foot. on the left, to the inches ^^ feet,
and inches above on the righ^ then right against TR for true measure, or round
for the usual measure, is the feet, or feet and inches required to make a foot
of Timber at that circumference about.

Examp. At 4 inches about, 113 foot 2 inches is for true measure, but for the
usual measure, 142 foot goes to make a foot of Timber.

At 12 foot 3 inches about, 1 inch is a true foot, but for the usual allowance,
as the fourth part of a fine girt about gives: it must be 1 inch long, to make
a foot of Timber at that circumference.

But for very large pieces, count 1 foot on the right for 12 foot, 2. 24, etc.
and set 1 foot on the left, as before; then in the answer, 1 foot on the left
is 1. 12th. of an inch, and 1 inch 1. 14th. of an inch.

Example.

At 144 foot about, 1. 144th. part of an inch, is a foot of Timber.

PROB. II.
For very small wood, to find a foot in length.

But for very small pieces of under 4 inches about, set 1 foot, 2 foot, etc. on
the right (counted for 1 inch, 2 inches, 3 inches, or 4 inches) to 1 foot on
the left, then right against TR or round, you have a number, which multiplied
by 12, is the number of feet required. Example.

At 1 inch round true measure is 151 foot fere, but for the usual allowance
196, which numbers multiplied by 12, is the number of feet required, viz. 1809,
and 2352. But note, you must read the 196, and 151 right, as thus; 1 foot on
the left is 12, 2 is 24, etc. so that 12 foot is 144, and our number by the
same account is 151 near.

To find how much is in a foot in length, set round or TR to 1 foot on the
left, then right against the inches, or feet and inches about, found on the
right, on the left is the answer required.

PROB. III.
The inches, or feet and inches about and length given, to find the content.

Set the word round, or TR for the usual or true measure, to the length on the
left; then right against the inches about on the right, on the left is the
content required. Example.

At 2 foot 3 inches about, and 20 foot long, it is 6 foot 2 inches of the usual
allowance, or 8 foot of true measure.

But if it be a great Tree, then set TR, or round to 1 called 10, or to 10
called 100, then is the content augmented to 1000 foot, as you did in the Rules
for square Timber.

But if you would have it measure bigger still, then set the 4 inches or a TR
set close by the brass on the right side, to the length on the left, either as
it is, or augmented, counting at last according; (the note 1 foot on the right
is 12 foot, and 12 at the top is 144 foot) then right against the feet about on
the right, on the left is the content required.

Examp. A Brewers Tun 3 foot long or deep, and 72 foot about, set the TR by the
brass to 36 inch. (which is thus counted) on the left side; (1 inch is 10
inches, 2 is 20, 3 is 30, 3 is 35, somewhat more is 36; so then 1 foot is 120
inches, o^ 10 foot) then right against 6 times 12 foot on the right (which is
at ^ foot) on the left you have 12 30 foot, as near as the Rule will give it,
which counting 6 foot to a barrel, is 205 barrels, the content required.

PROB. IV.
To find the content of a very smal^ piece.

Set the word round, or TR to the length on the left, as in the third Problem
of this Chapter; the^ right against the inches about o^ the right, (calling 1
foot 1 inch and 6 inches an inch) on the lef^ is the 13s. of 1 inch) or 12s. of
a 12th. required. Example.

At half an inch about, and 10 foot long, it is 2 12s. and a half of 1 12th. of
an inch, or 2 square inches and true measure. Again, 2 inches about, and 10
foot long, is half an inch of true measure, 12 inches to a foot solid, or a
foot superficial of one inch thick.

CHAP. VI.
To measure Timber, having the Diameter and the length given.

PROB. I.
The Diameter given in inches, to find the length of a foot.

Set 1 foot on the left to the inches diameter on the right: then right against
TD for true diameter or the word diameter for the usual allowance (of a string
girt about and doubled 4 times for the side of the square) you have the feet
and inches required. Example.

At 10 inches diameter, 1 foot 10 inches makes a foot.

But for very great pieces, set 1 foot as before, but look for TD beyond the
upper 12, and right against it on the left you have the 12 of 1 inch, or the
12s. of a 12, that makes a foot.

But for very small sticks, set 1, 2, or 3 foot on the right (for 1, 2, or 3
inches) to 1 foot on the left, then right against TD or Diameter, you have a
number, which multiplied by 12, is the number of feet required to make a foot
of Timber.

Examp. At 1 inch Diameter you shall have 15 foot 3 inches and better, which
multiplied by 12 is 123 foot 3 inches. Note, that 1 on the left is reckoned 10
foot, and 2. 20 foot, as before in the same Rule, for the circumference, and
then note 1 inch is 10 inches.

At any diameter, to find how much is in 1 foot long, do thus; set Diam. or TD
to 1 foot, then just against the inches, or feet and inches diameter found on
the right, on the left is the answer. Example.

At 2 foot diameter is 3 foot 2 inches in 1 foot of length, which multiplied by
the length, gives the true content of any round piece, and very exactly.

PROB. II.
The diameter and length given, to find the true content.

For all ordinary pieces, set the word diameter for the usual measure, or TD
for true measure, always to the length on the left; then right against the
inches or feet and inches diameter on the right, on the left is the content
required.

Examp. At 5 inches diameter, and 30 foot long, you shall find 4 foot and an
inch true measure for the content required.

But for very small pieces set TD or Diam. to the length, as before; then
counting 1 foot on the right for 1 inch, and 6 inches for an inch; on the left
you shall have the answer or content required. But note, as the right side is
diminished, so is the left, for 1 foot on the left is a 12th. of an inch of
Timber, whereof 12 makes a foot, or 1 long inch, a foot long, and 1 inch
square, and every ineh on the left is 1 square inch; thus, at 2 foot long, and
half an inch diameter, it is 4 inches, in content.

But for a great piece under 1000 foot, set TD or diameter to 1, 2, or 3 foot,
called 10, 20, or 30 foot: then right against the feet and inches diameter, you
have a content augmented accordingly, as at 30 foot long, and 7 foot diameter,
you have 1140 foot, for the true content using TD.

Note, that in large Taper-timber, whether square or round, when i^ is measured
by the usual way; that is, by the middle square or girt, or the 2 squares or
girts put together, and the half counted for the equal square, or girt; I say,
a square of half the difference of the squares or girts, and one part of the
length is to be added to the former measure, as is proved in the circles of
proportion, page 50.

As thus for Example.

Suppose a Taper piece be at one end 16 inches square, at the other 30 inches
square, and 30 foot long, the square in the middle is like to be 23 inches, the
content then is 110 foot; now half the difference of the two ends square is 7
inches, and 1 third part of the length is 10 foot; a piece 7 inches square, and
10 foot long, is 3 foot 5 inches which added, is 113 foot 5 inches, the true
content of that taper piece abovesaid.

The general way of Gauging by this Rule, is thus.

Set the W. or the A. for Wine or Ale-measure, always to the length of the
Vessel found out on the left. Then right against the mean Diameter found out on
the right side, on the left is the answer required.

Examp. At 30 inches Diameter and 36 long, you shall find about 90 gallons and
a half Ale-measure The Gage-point for a Beer-barrel i^ near 3 foot, and the
Ale-barre^ near 34 inches, which use thus.

Set 3 to the depth of the Tun then right against the mean Diam is the content
in Barrels.

Example.

Set 3 to 36 inches, and then right against 5 foot Diam. is 10 barrel of
Beer-measure, a very good an^ spedy way.

FINIS.

